THE CASE OF THE Afflicted Clergy.
I Now proceed to examine another of the Pamphlets, by which these of the
Episcopal Clergy, who hate, and malign the Presbyterians, do load them with
reproaches, and aggravate their own sufferings, beyond all the bounds of
Modesty and Truth: Its Title is, The Case of the present afflicted Clergy in
Scotland truly represented. Thus we are Treated by Men of a restless Temper,
who are imbittered in their Spirits, by what inconveniency they are fallen
into, from the Ease, and Dominion over their Brethren, that they lately had.
One Book after another we are Lashed with: If they would speak Truth, and
exercise Reason, rather than express Rage and Fury, we would bear it; and clear
our selves in the Consciences of all impartial Men. But we must be content to
take things as they are, and defend the truth, and our selves, from these
assaults that they think fit to make, of whatever sort they be. Before I come
to the Book it self, I shall a little consider the Preface. He commends the
Moderation, and Integrity of the Author, and indeed it was needful: For none
living could gather either of these two good qualities from this Pamphlet. He
tells us of the design of that Book, To procure pity from the most Charitable
Church of England; a begging design as I marked on the other Pamphlet. That Men
may consider the Fatal Consequences of Papal Supremacy in a Protestant Kirk. If
he would have his words understood, or believed, be should show us wherein such
a Supremacy is exercised; But railing does best in general Terms. It is also,
That the Church of England should bethink themselves how to quench the Flames,
lest it destroy themselves. Thus they sow Discord among Brethren, and animate
England to concern themselves in the Affairs of our Church, when we do not
meddle in their matters. He will have all Scots Presbyterians to be
Persecutors, and charge them with thinking that they do God good service when
they kill Bishops. Which Facts, that he aims at, the Generality of
Presbyterians did abhor, as much as he can do. This is an early test of the
Moderation and Integrity that we are to expect from this piece. He further
proves our Persecution, by citing some passages out of B. Burnet. Whom being a
party, we are not to admit as a witness against us. Yet we acknowledge in his
Citations, the truth of some rigor that was used in these times of Broils and
Contentions; which Presbyterians do not Generally allow. If we would
recriminate, we could lessen these excesses almost to nothing, by narrating the
Barbarity used in Scotland by his party against us: But I rather wish that both
may study Sobriety and Moderation, than defend, or practice over again what
has been amiss. I commend what follows: His attempting to narrow the
differences that are between Presbyterians and Episcopal Men in Scotland. In
Doctrine we are professedly one, but really there is a party among them who
differ from us, especially about the Arminian points: In Worship, the
difference is very small: Only (contrary to his design) he wideneth it, when he
falsely says, that some in time of Prayer uncover their heads but by halves.
Was ever this approved by Presbyterians? What he imputes to us of fulsome
Expressions, and vain Repetitions, is a Calumny; if there be some on our side,
there are more on his, who through ignorance, or unseriousness may be charged
with this. It is also false, that at Baptism, we bind the parties to the solemn
League and Covenant: May be some might do it in a time when we had no
Government, but it is thought fit among us to make the Word of God the standard
of what we believe, and bind our selves to practice.

2. He essayeth to make a parallel also betwixt our and their Discipline; but
in that he is not so happy. For though we deny not that they have something that
looks like Parochial Discipline: And also the name of Presbyteries; yet they
have but a shadow of both: For not only all that power that any of their
pretended Judicatories exercise is derived from the Bishop: But the exercise of
it depends on him, and he can supersede it when he pleases: Which if any of
them should deny, I can prove by two Instances in one Presbytery: Viz. That of
Chirnside. One for habitual Drunkenness on the Sabbath day, being cited before
the Session, and for disobedience to them being cited before the Presbytery,
while they were managing the process, a prohibition was procured from the
Bishop of Edinburgh, which stopped the process, and the Man Drank on, in defiance
of both Presbytery and Session. Another accused for living with a Woman as his
Wife, to whom he was never Married, and being processed by the same steps as
the former; by a prohibition from the same Bishop the Presbytery desisted; and
the parties continued in their former course of Life: And yet this Prefacer
has the Forehead to say, that their Discipline is the same with that of
Geneva; and I believe his party will give him little thanks for the
condescentions he has here made, as we dislike them, because not true, nor
ingenuous. But we know the design of such pretended moderation; it is to load
the Presbyterians with the guilt of causless Schism, as appears in the sequel
of his Discourse: But when they debate with us about the difference betwixt a
Presbyter and Bishop, they speak in another strain. It is also false, that they
have Elders who are no Ministers, these among them who are more ingenuous will
not allow them that name; much less do they give them the Power of Ruling
Elders, or own in them the same Authoritative, and decisive Power as the
Ministers have: I know no other design in keeping up Sessions, and Presbyteries
in Scotland, but that the people, who have since the Reformation been used to
Presbyterian Government, and can comply willingly to no other Church way, may
be deceived with the shadow of it, when the thing is cunningly taken away. He
says that in Synods all things are carried by plurality of Votes. It is so
indeed when the Bishop pleases; but dare they Vote any thing, or can any thing
be carried by their Authority, without his Lordships consent? I think none of
them will affirm this. He confesses the Bishop has the power of Ordination in
him; though he uses to take the consent of the Brethren of the Presbytery along
with him (that this is always to be done he affirms; but I am sure it is not
the Principle of Episcopal Men:) All this considered, let any judge, whether he
speaks truth when he says, that the Bishop is but a constant Moderator. A
Moderator has no Power more than the least of the Meeting has; only he
orders the meeting, that all may not speak at once: proposes Matters to
them, pronounces, as their Mouth, what is the Mind of the Meeting: But nothing
is determined by his Authority; nor are the Judicatories of the Church his
Council, as Episcopal Assemblies are to the Bishop. We do then maintain, that
there is such a difference between them and us, as may justify our not owning
of the Bishops Authority, nor the Authority of the Meetings that is derived
from it, and depends on it. We never used such an Argument to justify
Rebellions: It was not the exercising Episcopal power that caused what he so
calls; but their forcing the Consciences of Men, and Barbarous Persecutions,
whereby people were put to the utmost extremities. If the Consciences of his
party could plead not guilty, of the Murders and Butcheries that have
happened, as well as the Sober Presbyterians can, who had no interest in them,
but to Lament them, and the occasions of them, it were well for them. If
Barbarities be committed now against them, we defend them not, nor are they
chargeable on the Presbyterians; but on some few whom their Persecution has
enraged. He tells us of more Histories of the Clergies Sufferings to come
out. Our Work is to Examine these that now he is pleased to offer. If he prove
by his Collection of passages, all that in his Preface he proposes to make out
by them, we shall succumb in the Debate: But I am sure some of them cannot be
proved, other things cannot infer the Consequents that he draws from them:
But I will not anticipate. What remains of his Preface is a renewing of his
begging Address to the Church of England: What they get that way we do not
envy: We wish indeed the Change of Episcopacy (though we will take no
unwarrantable course to effect even that) but not the Ruin of Episcopal Men.

3. The Book it self is odly methodized. We have two leaves called the first
Collection of Papers. Next a Letter, under the Title of the whole Book: Then
the first Collection of Papers begun again: And so to the second, third, and
fourth Collections: But we must follow whither he thinks fit to lead. I must
here refer the Reader to what I have said in Answer to the first Book, and the
second Letter. Sect. 6. Where it is made appear that the Presbyterians are not
accountable for the disorders that are said to have been acted; Tho all the
Stories that are told were true. But because in this Pamphlet we have
Attestations added to the Narratives that are brought, which is not done in the
other, somewhat must be observed concerning that. Which is, that mostly they
are test meipso, the Complainant is the witness, which is not fair. And often
one of these Ministers witnesses for another, and he does him the like
kindness, for requital: Which derogateth much from the Credibility of such
Testimonies. Further, all of his Witnesses are the sworn Enemies of
Presbyterians, and in a Combination to defame them: And we have from the
Pamphlets now under consideration a taste of the veracity of the Men whom we
have to do with. If his Witnesses make no more Conscience of speaking truth,
than the Author, or Authors of these Pamphlets do; few thinking Men will be
moved with what they say. I come now to consider his particular Stories. He
begins with the Minister of Cumnock, with whom he joineth the Minister of
Auchinleck: Whom ninety Armed Men forced into the Churchyard, discharged them
to Preach, and tore their Gowns: And declared, that this they did, not as
Statesmen, nor as Churchmen; but by Violence, and in a Military way of
Reformation. Ans. It is Attested under the hands of George Logan of Logan,
William Crawfurd of Dalegles, John Camphel of Horsecleugh, George Camphel of
Glaisknock, John Beg of Dornal, John Mitchel of Whetstonburn; all of the two
Parishes mentioned: That they who did this were not of either of these
Parishes, nor was it known who they were: Only that they were Cameronians, who
had suffered severely; and were now gathered together on occasion of an Alarm
that then was in the Country: Nor had any in these Parishes any Accession to
that practice. And it is to be observed, that many of these Ministers entered by
a Military Force, as they were so put out: particularly the Minister of
Auchinleck had his Edict served with three Troops of Dragoons: And that People
never submitted to these Men's Ministry, but by the force that was put on them
by Armed Men: And they suffered very hard things; and yet the people of these
Parishes bore it patiently. In the business of Machlin he grossly belyeth them:
They used no violence to the Ministers Wife; only gravely reproved her for
Cursing and Swearing, which she used. He passes page 4. to the Presbytery of
Dumbartoun, where first he tells us, What Mr. Walter Stirling, Minister at
Badernock, met with by a Company of Dissenters. This is a gross Lie: These five
Armed Men who assaulted his House (having done the like to a Gentleman's House,
and a Countreymans House, the same Night, seeking Arms, or Plunder) were no
Dissenters, of any sort or way, but Debauched Men, horrid Swearers, and
Cursers, who were of broken desperate Fortunes; their Names are John Momillan,
Patrick Motarged, George Tomoch, Archibald Ferguson, Archibald Shinning. This
one passage, duly considered, might discredit all that is asserted in his
Book, and expose the Author as a malicious Calumniator, designing to fix all
the Thefts, Robberies, and other Villainies, that are committed in the Country,
not only on some Presbyterian or other; but on the whole party. It is also
witnessed that Mr. Stirling's Parish gave him all the help and succor they
could in this his trouble. This Mr. Stirling was afterward deprived by the
State, for not Reading nor Praying, after which time he behoved to remove from
the Church, and Dwelling House, but to this day lives peaceably in the Parish.
Yea Mr. Stirling himself disowned that account of his Case which is in the
Pamphlet, as what he had no hand in. For the two following Mr. Duncan of
Kilpatrick Easter, and the Minister that was to preach at Boiall: In the
Narration of what concerns Kilpatrick Easter, there is a gross Lie: None
touched Mr. Duncan, nor did any personal hurt to him: Which is affirmed by them
who know that Matter: And may be confirmed by considering, that that parties
Zeal led them no farther than to rid themselves of these Ministers who had been
such a burden to them. For that Man who was to preach at Boiall; the Truth of
the Story is, A great many came with a Burial to the Churchyard; among them,
not above six or seven had Arms, who did always bear Arms: None of them made
any Opposition: Only they sent to the Minister of the Parish to desire him to
give them the Keys of the Church; seeing he himself could not Preach; He
promised to do it, if the Heritors should demand them; which several of them
did; and offered to suffer him to stay in the house forty days, if he would
give up the Keys: He contrary to his promise, refused to give them up; but went
away that day, and carried away his Furniture, except some Lumber which the
People after took out of the House, in presence of his Brother, and
Manservant; without doing the least hurt to them.

4. Let us now consider the Letter, which begins page 1. excluding what has
gone before. He begins with taking notice, that Episcopacy was abolished by
the Parliament, on account of its being contrary to the inclinations of the
People, and so may be restored by another Parliament. But he should have
considered, that whatever motive the Estates went on, it is declared against in
the Claim of Right, as a Grievance; and therefore cannot be restored without
overturning the Foundation of our present Civil Settlement. That Presbytery was
never Settled by Law, except in times of trouble and danger to the State, by the
practices of that Party; I have sufficiently refuted in my former Vindication
on Quest. 2. P. 11. He takes notice of a three fold turning out of Ministers,
By the Rabble, by the Convention of Estates, and by the Council; For the first,
he truly says that it was no wonder, being in the Interval of Government (if
he had added that it was done by a People rendered mad, by the Oppressions of
these Men who suffered from them, he had done well) but he thinks strange
that it was not redressed, when the Government was Settled: This is answered in
answer to Account of Persecutions, etc. Next, he gives us an account of the
disaffection of the Western Shires to Episcopacy, of their compliance when
Persecution grew hot: Which we deny to have been so universal as he would have
it: Though I deny not that many put some force on their Light: Also, their
complyances so far as to hear these men, when they could hear none else, is no
Obligation on them to cleave to them as their Ministers: Especially when
opportunity was put in their Hands to hear others. Wherefore it is no
Imputation, nor blame, that when a Liberty was given for Meeting Houses, they
made use of that opportunity. Neither are their Addresses to be blamed, wherein
they acknowledge the goodness of God, and thank men, for that Liberty, which,
though their due, had been detained from them. Though his Wise men told them that
the Liberty was granted to bring in Popery; Yet as Wise men as they, thought,
that the best way to keep it out was to make use of the Liberty, for setting
people in the right way; and to beware of countenancing, approving of, or
concurring in, any thing that might promote Popery: Such as, owning the
Dispensing Power (which he most injuriously imputes to them) and concurring
for taking away the Penal Laws against Popery, But of these things I have
sufficiently discoursed in my former Vindication; as also of what follows,
that there were few Meeting Houses at first: But that this is a kind of
Demonstration of the Inclinations of the People toward Episcopacy, I see not;
nor understand what kind of Demonstration it is, unlels it be a Paralogysm:
Next he gives account of Two sorts of Presbyterians, viz. Hill men (as he
calls them) and others: And does untruly, and not without Malice against the
Sober Presbyterians, assert, that the former acted more consequentially to
Presbyterian principles: The contrary of which is evident in this, (as in many
more things, that might be mentioned) that two or three Preachers separated
from all the rest of the Church, and refused subjection to their Meetings.

5. In what follows this Author deals more ingenuously than the former that
I dealt with: For he imputed the Rabling work to the Presbyterians in General;
this Man lays it only on the Cameronians; but even them he foully
mis-representeth; while he speaks of their Eating and drinking plentifully at
the expense of them whom they Rabled: All the Reports that we have of them,
give account of their not Laying their hands on the Prey, as it is said of the
Jews after Haman's Persecution, Esth. 9. 15, 16. But what is here asserted
falsely in general, we shall have after more particularly: Where it shall be
Examined. In his Historical account of things that follows, page, 6 th I have
nothing to observe, but that he prevaricateth in alleging the Prince of
Orange's Declaration, Feb. 6. 1689. Which only says that every one shall enjoy
the Opinion and forms of worship, with the same freedom, and in the same manner
as they enjoyed it in October last: But says nothing of restoring any thing
which they lost, as he alleges, but leaves that to be done by regular and
legal Methods. That which follows, is an account of the tumult at Glasgow,
upon the Episcopal Ministers Reassuming the Pulpit, after the Princes
Declaration, that none should disturb one another in matters of Religion: This
is more fully set down in his 2 d Collection of Papers, P. 50. viz. That the
Magistrates and Ministers Assembled, and resolved, that the Ministers should
Preach, Feb. 17. as was usual: In order to this, they, by the chief Magistrate
then in Town, required the Captain of the Guard to lay down Arms, as the
declaration enjoined; He refused: After this, the People that used to meet in
the Hills, and they of the Meeting Houses, whispered together about their
Bloody Designs against the Minister and his People, On the Sunday they hindered
the ringing of some of the Bells: They publicly threatened the People as they
went to Church; they pursued a Minister, who escaped, by going into a House:
The Magistrates going to Church found it Surrounded by a Rabble, whom they
desired to go home in peace; but they Railed at the Magistrates, and assaulted
them with Staves and Battons; gave a blow to John Bell one of the late
Baillies; the Magistrates ordered the Towns Servants and Officers to beat off
the Rabble, and so went into the Church; in time of Sermon the pretended
Captain of the Guard came into the Church, crying aloud that the Town was in
Arms: Toward the end the Rabble, conducted by the Lord of Carsland, fired into
it: A Boy was wounded in the Face; they brake open the Doors searched for the
Parson and found him. They refuse to go home when the Magistrates required
them: They took the People out of Church by fours and fives, and exposed them
to the fury of the Rabble: Many were Wounded, and Rudely treated: and not a few
Persons of some note, This Narrative (which I have abridged but not altered) is
signed by James Gibson Baillie, John Gilhagie, Patrick Bell. For answer to all
this; it is in the 1 st. place to be considered, that little Faith is to be
given to his Assertions; and that on two accounts; one is, the lying Stories
that he had told of the People of Glasgow, Page 39. 40. As, that on Thursday
January 17. 1689. The Minister did not enter into the Church. Also what is said
about Mr. Alexander George is false. They did no more but search for the Keys
of the Church Door and tore his Gown: Which we do not approve. They had been
provoked by his Railing in a Sermon against our Reformers Luther, Calvin, Knox,
etc. Not only so, but abundance of Lies are inter-spersed in the narrative of
the tumult at the high Church, Feb. 17. As that a pernicious Rout surrounded
the Church: It was only a few Women stood in the Church Door. That the
Magistrates went to the Church with the Minister is false: For only Baily
Gibson was there: That these Women or any else assaulted the Minister, or
People, is false; for his party were the first Aggressors: It is also false
that 600 of the best quality in Town entered the Church without Arms: For there
were not in all above 200; and not 40 of such quality; and they (or many of
them) were armed with Pistols, Swords, Clubs with Nails in the ends of them,
etc. It is false, that the Ministers party suffered such things as he says.
For most, and they of the best quality, who were there, do acknowledge that no
such thing was done to them, but that the Presbyterians conveyed them home in
safety. Likewise what is said of their respect to the Prince of Orange's
Declaration, is a lying pretense; for it is well known, they have never showed
any respect to him, nor to his Government, but the contrary is apparent in
their whole Conduct. It is also to be considered that the Witnesses brought to
attest the Story, are not competent: James Gibson was a party, and made a Baily
by the Archbishop, and all knew the Prelates Inclinations toward the present
Civil Government. John Gilhagie is looked on by all as a Foolish and Rash Man,
who little considers what he does: Patrick Bell, and his Brother, were, soon
after, seized for Treasonable practices; were long in Prison, and are now under
Bail. The truth in opposition to his lying Story is this: The Episcopal
Ministers in the Town being thrust from their Churches by the Rabble, before
the Government was settled, the Provost, Walter Gibson, (who had been chosen by
the Archbishop) made a paction with the Presbyterians, (for preventing
Confusion) That the Keys of all the Churches should be deposited in the hands
of two Men till the Convention of Estates should determine in the matter;
instead of this, he being absent (may be of purpose) his Brother, Baily Gibson,
hired a Company of Ruffians, armed as is above expressed; who with one Minister
(a simple Man, whom they prevailed with) went to the Church, and found forty
Women in the Door, fell on them and sadly wounded thirty two of them in a most
Barbarous manner. The noise of this raised some of the Hill-men, who were in
Town, who beat Drums, and got to Arms; this occasioned the scattering of the
Meeting Houses (who were quietly hearing the Word) some of the Sober
Presbyterians dealt with the Hill-men, and endeavored an Accommodation: Only
some of the Friends of the Women who had been Wounded, could not be restrained
from Violence: But what they did was nothing like what the Women had suffered:
The Actors in this Tragedy who beat and wounded the Women, were James Gibson
Bailey, John Bell, Commissar Robertson, George Robertson, and his two Sons,
John Robertson, John Wat, (...) Inglis, Patrick Bell, James Marshel, John
Coats, John Filshill, John Paterson, (...) Horn, John Aitkin, Alexander Aitkin,
James Lies's two Sons, James Robertson. The Names of the Women who were
Wounded, and many of them hardly cured, are, Mrs. Maxwel, Mary Fleckfield,
Marion Ewin, Agnes Rodger, Agnes Allan, Elizabeth Linning, Janet Loudoun,
Margaret Dalgliesh, Bessie Jackson, Janet Castellaw, Janet Fleeming, Janet
Robertson, Margaret Inglis, Marion Finlaw, Janet Kid, Janet Brand, Christian
Lang, Janet Wood, Mrs. Mill, Janet Howie, Margaret Lin, Catherine Lin, Isabel
Paterson, Janet Young, Margaret Anderson, Margaret Corse, Bessie Fleeming,
Grissel Brown, Bessie Marshel, Janet Shearer, Margaret Steven: Some of them are
not recovered to this day, now after two years: They all have suffered
patiently, and wait for a hearing of their Cause, by a competent Judge, as was
promised them all, this was sufficiently attested before John Leckie then
Bailie.

6. In p. 7. and 8, Of the Narrative, he tells us, that instead of calling
these Hill-men to an account for their disorders, these very men coming Armed
to Edinburgh, had the thanks of the House given them for their good service,
and are still a part of the standing Forces of that Kingdom: This he insisteth
farther upon in the fourth Collection of passages page 90, 91. where he sets
down the Act of the Convention. Where he also asserts that they Acted contrary
to the Laws of Religion, Humanity, and of Nations, the Laws of this Kingdom,
and the Princes Declaration, in driving out the Clergy being in number about
800 Overawed and Threatened the Electors of Members for the Convention, rushed
in a tumultuary and hostile manner into Edinburgh, etc. And this before they
were under the Earl of Leven' s Command; hence he is bold to condemn the Acts
of the Estates approving of them. Here I observe a few things (referring the
Reader to the Answer to Account of Persecution, etc. Letter 1. 8.) 1. it cannot
be made appear, That that Body of Men Acted what he imputes to the Rabble, yea
it is evidently false, for he says they were 8000, and in military order: The
Rabble were scattered Companies, sometimes not above ten or twelve, or forty,
or an hundred, and that under no fixed command; if there were some among them
who came to Edinburgh who also were the Rabble, it is not to be wondered at, for
it is often so in Armies that are in hostile opposition one to another. 2. That
they were in Arms against Law, is false: For they were called by the Authority
of the States, as their Guard, when their Enemies had gathered a Formidable
party into Edinburgh. 3. That they hindered the Election of Members, for the
Convention, is also false. Himself and Accomplices, in their accounts of these
Elections, assign causes of such Members being chosen, inconsistent with this
Force; viz. The negligence of their party. But Oportet mendacem esse been
memorem. 4. Though they were together before the Earl of Leven got the Command,
yet not before they were called together by the Estates. 5. That they affronted
either the Bishops, or the Nobility, is more than can be made out: Or that I
have heard from any good hand. 6. That these Men are part of the standing
Forces of the Kingdom (though there were no absurdity if it were so) is false.
They were totally disbanded, a Regiment was indeed raised in that Country, a
long time after: And new Officers were set over them: And if any of the same
Men were listed Soldiers, it was accidental: But it is well known, that that
Regiment has done more Service to the King and Country, than others have
done. What follows page 18. deserves but a little Animadversion; he says
the Clergy suffered patiently without public complaint. This and the other
Pamphlets are witnesses to the contrary: Could Men complain more publicly,
more unjustly, or more pathetically and maliciously than they do. He says
also, that some of them suffered the loss of Children; which is above made
appear to be false, in the only instance that was brought. That they suffered
without any Authority is not denied; because then there was no Authority in the
Nation: It was in a state of Anarchy: For the right that he says they have to
their bypast Stipends; we shall not grudge that they get what was legally due
to them. But if the Authority of the Nation (in the Convention or Parliament)
have determined otherwise, I know not where their Legal right can be founded,
but this I leave to Lawyers to consider.

7. The fulsome and flattering Expressions in the Presbyterian Address to King
James for their Liberty, their approving of the Dispensing Power, which he
taxes, page 9. are his own imaginations, other Men can see no such thing in
that Address. That they never preached against the disorders of the Rabble, is
false: Though we thought not fit to make that our constant Theme. And if but
few did it, it was because they who were Actors in that Scene, little regarded
the preaching of the sober Presbyterians: And they should have lost their sweet
Words. These practices of the Rabble were publicly spoken against by Ministers
both before they were acted, for preventing them, and after, for reproving
them, and preventing the like. That the Presbyterians possessed their places
when called to them, it was their Right; both by their standing Relation to
their people, from whom they had been thrust away in Anno 1662. And also by the
Act of Parliament giving all Ministers then put out, regress to their Charges:
And indeed they who had been by the Bishops put into their places were
Intruders, and if any entered to other places, on the Call of the people, to
which they had not such former Relation, there was no blame; because there
being no probable regress for the former Incumbents, it was not reasonable that
the people should continue destitute of the Gospel. Beside that there was never
a Relation of Pastor and people between them and these Flocks, they never
having consented to such a Relation. For what he says of the Right of Patrons,
I think there were but few Ministers Fixed before it was legally made void: And
if they were, we think that Right was only founded on the Law; but was contrary
to Christ's Institution: And it was known to be about expiring, and therefore it
was not contrary to a good Conscience, to accept of a Call to a people, without
the Patron. It is true, in that Case they could have no Right to the Stipend:
But the Consent of Minister and people, the Authority of a competent Church
Judicatory being interposed, could well fix a Relation between Minister and
People, without the Patron. He does next fall heavily on the Convention of
Estates (for these Men hide not their Treasonable Speeches against the present
Government of the State;) That it is no wonder that many thought that the
Design of some who were zealous for the Revolution, was more to destroy the
Episcopal Clergy, than to settle the Nation, or preserve our Religion,
Liberties and Properties. This I leave to them to Answer who have power to
correct such petulancy: He further lasheth the Convention and the Council, for
their Acts with respect to the Ministers cast out in the Western Shires.
Neither shall I meddle with him on this Head: He has not yet done with our
Rulers: But blames them for the Proclamation for Praying for King William and
Queen Mary. And punishing Men for not obeying it so suddenly. This I have
answered on Letter 2. Sect. 17. All that follows to page 14. is already
answered in the forecited place: Only he has a new Argument in Defense of them
who did not read or pray, viz. That the Proclamation was not sent to them from
the Bishops. As if the Estates could not employ what Officers they pleased to
Authorize, for signifying their Mind to the Ministers, page 14. Even the King
shall not escape his Censure; because, while he extended Clemency to Criminals,
he did not so to the Clergy: Who were neither willing to obey his Commands nor
pray for him; nor so much as own Him for their King. And it is indeed an Act of
Clemency which few Kings ever showed, to allow such to be in public Churches,
and to have the conduct of the Consciences of his Subjects: I am sure this is
not the way to have the people principled with Loyalty; though that was the
main Theme that these Men insisted on in the former Reigns. What follows is
his observation on a Debate in Parliament, about imposing the Oath of
Allegiance, and why it was not imposed on the Clergy: He says, It was out of
respect to the Presbyterian Preachers, lest they should scruple it: They being
unwilling to come under Allegiance to King William till first he had settled
their Church Government: And he thinks some will not take it till the Covenant
be renewed. Here is bold judging and censuring the secret thoughts and purposes
of the Estates: As also most calumnious Imputations on the Presbyterians; Did
ever any of them refuse the Oath of Allegiance? Have not many of them (even as
many as were required on any occasion) cheerfully taken it? And that though the
Covenant be not renewed, Did ever any of them move such a scruple about it? Yea
it is manifest, that it is not their principle so to bargain with their Kings
about Allegiance: For they were ready to swear it (and did when called) to
Kings who unsettled their Church Government; and who enacted the abjuring of the
Covenant. What follows page 15, 16. about Ministers being deprived for not
reading and praying, is answered in Letter 2. Sect. 17. He odiously compares
the States dealing with the Clergy, with that of the French with the
Protestants there, who saved their Life and Fortune if they change their
Religion; but Compliers here are turned out by the Rabble. Ans. If he can show
that this is done here by Authority, as in France the Persecution is acted; or
that the Protestants in France suffered in a time of Anarchy, by a people that
had been so barbarously injured and enraged by them: Then should he speak to
the purpose; otherways his parallel does no ways hold. They had made themselves
justly loathsome, and a burden to the people, who took their opportunity to be
rid of them, without such Barbarous usage of them as they had suffered from
them. And the Estates thought it not fit to impose that burden again, on a
people who had been so crushed by it; what is there here that has any Affinity
with the Case of the Sufferings in France?

8. He pretends page 16, and 17. to remove a Misinformation, given to them
of England: That the Clergy were not deprived by the Council for not reading
and praying, unless they were Immoral in their Conversation: And from this he
labors to vindicate them. Much of which is answered above; only the Reader
may know, that this was never alleged, nor given as the reason of their
deprivation by any of us: Whatever might possibly be talked in England, by them
who knew little of our Affairs. The Council did not consider their Immorality,
nor freedom from it, but only their obedience or disobedience to the Law. His
story about Bishop Lighton will not Vindicate the Western Clergy from gross and
multiplied Immoralities: But that is not now the thing under our consideration.
That Scandals were represented at Court, as the ground of their deprivation by
the Council, is as injurious and false, as any thing that can be said. The
plurality of Episcopal Ministers above the Presbyterians, he seems to brag
of: But is it any wonder, when twenty eight years ago many had complied with
Episcopacy, and all that did not, were driven away, and in that long time many
of them were removed by death. Was it not so at the Reformation from Popery?
How far did the number of Popish Priests exceed that of Protestant Ministers?
But what he hence infers, has no weight; viz. That many of the Episcopal
Ministers must be removed lest they should over-vote the others: For a more
rational and sure course was taken to obviate it; viz. That the Government
should be settled only in the hands of Presbyterians, and such as they shall
receive; which he, or his Fellow Censurer of the State had above complained of,
and we have vindicated. He concludes this Narrative with a warning to the
Church of England of the Enmity of Presbyterians against them, and their hazard
from us. And indeed the strain of these Pamphlets is mostly a complaint against
the King and Parliament, and all the Authority of this Nation, and an Appeal to
the Church of England for deliverance from this Yoke: And I hope our Rulers
will consider them accordingly.

9. We now come to consider the Authors several Collections of Papers; in which
he has been at a great deal of pains, but to little, or bad purpose; as I hope
by Examination of them shall appear. His first Collection is of accounts that
he has had from his Accomplices, a Company of Men avowed and malicious Enemies
of all Presbyterians, concerning their Sufferings from them; and all this
attested by themselves, as I above observed. He begins with the Story of Mr.
Bell of Kilmarnock which I have above answered on Letter second. Next he comes
to the Presbytery of Hamiltoun: Where it seems he finds three: Mr. John
Dalgliesh of Evendal, Mr. James Crichtoun of Kilbryd, Mr. Angus Mackintosh at
Sten-house, whose Gowns were torn, and they discharged to preach: Attested by
Dr. Robert Scot, Mr. George Leslie, and Mr. John Dennistoun. To all which I
give no other Answer but what has been said on the like occasion, That the
Presbyterians are not to answer for such practices, which were done by such as
Sober Presbyterians do not own, nor are owned by them, but rather hated and
opposed: As also that so many lying Stories of this kind have been told by him,
that it is not worth the while to enquire into the truth of these. Men use to
slight what is asserted by a common Liar. We have next a general account of the
Ministers of the Presbytery of Irwin; that all their Houses have been
assaulted, their Gowns torn, and they discharged to preach; many of their Wives
and Children turned out of Doors, like to starve by Hunger and Cold in the
Winter; some forced to fly and lurk, that they cannot meet to make known their
Grievances: Only three or four give these accounts from their own knowledge,
and certain information Signed Charles Littlejohn Minister of Larg, Alexander
Laing Minister at Stewartoun.

One may easily answer all this without particular information: Considering the
veracity that is to be found in this Pamphlet, viz. Here is nothing but
Generals, and that by report: Personal knowledge is pretended but for little of
what is Asserted. And we have cause to think, that these were none of them who
are of our Communion who Acted these things. Then follows the Sufferings of the
Presbytery of Glasgow in the persons of Mr. Russel at Govan, Mr. Finny at
Carthcart; which two Stories are answered and found to be forgeries, (...)
Letter 2. Mr. Blair at Rutherglen, Mr. Gilbert Mushet at Cumern^* Mr. David
Mill at Cumernald; which we may rationally judge (...) be of the same stamp:
Neither have we time to search into all the groundless Tales that he thinks
fit either to invent, or to take up from them that devise them. But that which
he labors to set off by the Circumstances of it, is, that January 17. 1689.
A Rabble, mostly Women, came with a design to drag the Minister out of the
Pulpit; he being warned and forbearing, and returning from the Church, was
assaulted, his Gown and other Clothes torn The same day Mr. Alexander George
had his Doors broken, and he being upon his Sickbed, they had dragged him out
of his Bed, if the Provost with ten Men had not come to his Relief. Next
Sabbath, January 20. there was no Sermon in the City, on the 22 d they sent a
threatening Letter, forbidding all Ministers to preach on the highest peril;
this is attested by Alexander George, John Sage, the Ministers of Glasgow. All
this is answered above.

. 10. Another Paper of History he sets down page 41. of the Sufferings of
the Presbytery of Paislay, upon the Bedele of Paislay; on the Minister there,
on the Minister of Kilbarken, And how Mr. Houstoun usurped the Pulpit of
Eastwood: This attested by Robert Fullertoun Moderator, and John Tailor
Minister at Paislay. The answer of all this we take out of the Accusation it
self. It was done by Mr. Houstoun, and his Party: A man who not only is
disowned by the Soberest sort of Presbyterians, but even by the Cameronians; as
of most unsound Principles, and most immoral practices. Follows a Letter
Signed by four Ministers George Gregory, Francis Fordyce, William Irwine,
Minister at Kirkmichael, John Hog Minister at Ochiltry. What is not repeated
out of the former Stories, and answered before, is, the People of the
Meetinghouse Battering and Bruising the Minister of Kirkmichaels Manservant,
commanding him to remove with what was his Masters from the House. Ans. It is
witnessed under the Hands of David Bell, James Cathcart, Thomas Craig, William
Niven; all of that Parish: That they were present when one Robert Donaldson
with some others, came to the Minister of Kirkmichlaes House, and that they did
not beat, or use any Violence to the Ministers Man servant: But only took the
Communion Cups from him, and that they two drank together, and shook Hands at
Parting: And that the said Servant lived there peaceably a year after, and
disposed of the Crop of his Masters Glebe. It is also witnessed under the Hand
of John Kennedy, and George Monaught; that the forementioned Robert Donaldson
who was said to use Violence in the house of the Minister of Kirkmichael, was a
common Robber, and had Robbed several Houses in Carrick: And that he, nor his
Accomplices did belong to no Meeting House: That they apprehended him and carried
him before the Baily Deputy of Carrick who sent him to Prison. Is it not a
malicious Lie, to impute this Fact to the Presbyterians of the Meeting House?
Follows the possessing of some Churches: Which is above Answered. Then we
have a large History Signed by the Minister of Livingston, Mr. George Honeyman,
and John Park Clerk to the Synod of Edinburgh: How 30 Armed men came to his
House, Frighted his Wife, who had lain but eight days in Childbed, carried
away what they thought fit: Took his Horse and the Beddels Horse (which they
sent back next day) a month after they searched the House for the Minister;
sometime after that they Summoned him to Remove: All this we deny to have been
done by any of our Communion. Yea the Summons given to him and others for
removing (a Copy of which our Author does furnish us with) does show it was
done by a party of People who had been enraged by the cruel Persecutions that
they had suffered from these Men. We are far from approving such
Irregularities, but the World will not think it strange that they, who instead
of feeding their flock, had worried them, should meet with such things from a
People so highly provoked. I can produce a large Paper of the manifold
Sufferings of that Parish, by Mr. Honeymans Malice and influence: Attested by
about thirty Hands, but I forbear, to shun tediousness. Such another story we
have of Mr. Man Minister at Bathgate whose House they searched, also a
Neighbors House, at last found him, and with threatening by drawn Swords, and
Guns presented, demanded of him the Vtensils of the Church, and Records of the
Kirk-Session, Tore his Gown, and Summoned him to remove. This has the like
Attestation with the former, Ans. The People of Bathgate never owned Mr. Man he
being placed there only by the Bishop, without the consent either of Patron or
People, only in time of most severe Persecution, many out of fear came to hear
him; they were highly provoked by his Persecuting of them. Of which there are
clear and great Instances; in his stirring up the Magistrates, and assisting
the Soldiers, to Ruin them. Next Mr. Norman Mokenzie, Minister at Mid Calder,
and John Park, do witness, that January 27. being the Lords day, after Sermon,
Eight Armed Men came to his House, but were repulsed by some Gentlemen, who
were there: In which scuffle three were wounded. That Feb. 1. They broke up the
house, frighted his Wife: Said they would see all his Bonds: One of them Thomas
Livingstoun, said he behoved to have his Fathers Bond, for a Sum that he owed
to the Minister: Finding no Papers they carried away the Church Vtensils, which
they committed to the Custody of one in the Town, they Summoned him to remove:
also they testify (which is also testified in the former Narrative) that none
of these were of the Parish. Ans. As we do not approve any of these things
being Acted without Authority; so we find this to be a Lying accusation: For
the Men who Feb. 1. came to the House, carried civilly: Telling his Wife she
needed not fear: And that they would do no harm to her, or any Person in the
House. The Bond that Thomas Livingstoun sought for, was a Bond that the
Minister had forced his Father to give for a Fine imposed on him for
Nonconformity. Also Mr. George Robertson, Minister at Westcalder, had his
House searched for Arms, and an old Sword taken from him; and was summoned to
remove, Witnessed by himself and John Park, ut supra. Ans. if this was done,
the General answers above given is enough to vindicate the Presbyterians in
General from the blame of it. and the time of confusion, and provocations, that
that poor suffering People had from most of that Party, may make us cease to
wonder at it.

11. In his second Collection of Papers p. 50. we have account of the practice
of the Rabble, after the Princes Declaration, against some Ministers who
afterward were deprived by the Council; by which instances he would make it
appear, how little the Presbyterians regarded Authority, when it tended to
restrain their disorders. A general answer to all that is said under this, may
be gathered from what has been before discoursed: viz, That much of what is
alleged is either Lies, or Truth disguised, and what was really done, was by
Persons whose Actions we are not concerned to defend. He begins with the
Tumult at Glasgow, Feb. 17. 1689. Which is answered, Sect. 5. The next is of
Mr. Gideon Brown Minister at Smalholme, attested by himself alone. But others
are offered as witnesses if need be. Where it is Narrated, that George Dickson
a professed Cameronian (which is afterward said to be a Preacher in a meeting) A
Cotter to the Lord of Smalholme, first summoned Mr. Brown, to remove from the
Church, and desist from Preaching: Afterward forced him out of the Pulpit,
using violence to his Son who offered to defend him. He denies that he
persecuted them as they alleged; but that often he saved them from the Lash of
the Law. This story has its answer in it self: For the man was a Cameronian,
and the Actions of that party we never approved, neither can, nor will we
defend them: besides, the parish do witness that he was a violent persecutor,
and give instances of it under the hands of credible witnesses: Which shall be
showed to any who desires to be informed. Our next instance is of Mr. William
Bullo, Minister at Stobo; whom the Rabble used most Barbarously, all the
Winter, and frighted his Wife and Children into Sickness, and he was forced to
lodge in the Fields in the Winter Weather. About the beginning of April, as he
was riding through a Village in the Parish, there came out of the House of the
Preacher in the Meeting house, his Servant, and a Rabble, who with Swords and
Guns charged him to Stand, he fleeing from them, they fired Guns after him,
they mounting on Horse Back, pursued and took him, they threatened to shoot him,
and bid him Pray before he should Die. When he told them they were in Passion;
They said, you Damned Rogue, do ye admonish us, so they Beat him with their
Swords, and said they would spare him for that Night, and Sentence, and execute
him next Morning, so, they convened many of the Parish, caused tear his Gown,
discharged him to Preach: And on the day that he should have read the
Proclamation, they hindered him by force from entering the Church, yet was he
after deprived by the Council for not Reading and Praying. Ans. In this
Narrative, are many Lies: which is attested by Mr. William Russel, Minister at
Stobo: As that his Wife and Children fell sick by fear: None of them were sick
that year. That he lodged in the Fields; for he never lodged a night in the
Fields, only one night two young men came to his house, he was not within, but
in a Neighbors house hard by. His Wife said to them that he was in Edinburgh,
he withdrew a little and returned as soon as they were gone, and said that he
would not have fled if he had thought they were so few, but have Pistoled them
both; it is also false that any came out of the Preachers house on him as he
Rode; but these two young men being provoked with his speaking of Pistoling
them, came out of another House, and called to speak with him; He fled, the
Preachers man came out to see what the Fray was, one of the young Men followed
him on Horseback, did no harm to him, but reasoned the Case with him: He
alleging that all the Honest men in the Parish owned him: They brought ten or
twelve whom he Named as such, who yet disowned him. It is most false that he
was hindered to read the Proclamation; he did read a part of it: It is true some
moved to hinder him from Preaching, but the Presbyterian Minister restrained
them. It is a gross untruth, that he was willing to read and Pray, and yet
deprived for it; For he said before the Council that he had not Prayed for King
William and Queen Mary: That his Gown was torn, is also a gross Lie.

12. The Story of Mr. Little (which nextfolloweth) is above answered, in Answer
to Account of Persecution Letter 2. Sect. 13 Next we have account of the
Sufferings of Mr. Archibald Ferguson Minister at Kirkpatrick, whom the Rabble,
Men and Women, Assaulted in his House: When he calmly asked the reason, they
knocked him on the Head with a Pistol, so that he fell: His Wife daily
expecting the pains of Childbirth, they knocked down with the Butt-end of a
Musket: He received many merciless Blows, and was sorely bruised: Himself they
dragged into a puddle; the Women cut and tore off his Clothes; even to the
uncovering of his Nakedness; be at him on the Shins with a Club, commanded him
to be gone, and forced him in his Wounds to leave his House, Family, and
Church. Before I examine the matter of this Story, I take notice of the bitter
Sarcasms, and cruel Mockings against all the Presbyterians, with which it is
interspersed, as if this Fact were to be charged on the Party, who yet do abhor
such practices as much as any Men can do. He says these Barbarities were
committed by the pretended Godly Presbyterians: That they have separated
themselves from the Society of the Catholic Church; because they do not
observe Easter with the same superstition as some others do. He adds, that
the Women's Daggers were prepared for a through Reformation: And many such
bitter Reflections he throws out against us all; from the irregularities of a
wild Party, whom persecution from his Party had made mad, and in whom we are no
further concerned than to Lament their Principles and Practices. A further
Answer was delayed when this was written, expecting Information from such as
know the Circumstances of this Story: But that Account not being as yet come to
Hand, when this sheet is printing off (by whose fault I know not) I can only
say, that the many Lying Stories that are in this Book, may derogate from the
Credibility of this: If it be true, we abhor the Fact, and wish that the Actors
may be brought to condign Punishment for such Inhumanity.

13. In his third Collection of Papers (which concerns them who complied, and
yet suffered) he begins with Mr. William Hamilton, who first at Irwin, then
at Kirk-newtoun, was put from his House and Church, by the Rabble, and very
hardly used. Ans. That these things acted against him were not the deed of the
Presbyterians, nor approved by the Church, is evident from this, that Mr.
Hamiltoun is in good esteem among the Presbyterians, and is now received as one
of themselves, into a share of the Government with them: Wherefore if such
things were done against him, it was not by the sober Presbyterians, but by a
sort of Men who are not of our Communion, and who have showed dislike against
us also. For the Truth of what he alleges to have been done, I can meet with
none who can affirm what our Author says; and therefore have cause to suspect
it as of the same strain with others of his Affirmations. He tells us next
how Mr. Samuel Nimmo was hindered to Preach by some of the Earl of Argile' s
Regiment. If this were true, it was the Deed of some Cameronians, not approved
by the Presbyterians. And I hope hindering a man to Preach (tho we allow not
that it be done in a disorderly way) does not amount to so horrid a Persecution
as he cries out of. His next complaint concerns Mr. Selkirk at Glenholm in
Tweddale, who Read and Prayed, was threatened by some of the meanest of the
People, to remove from his Dwelling, obtained from them a fortnight for that
end, some put another Lock on the Church door to keep him out: Of this he had
no Redress. This we are far from allowing; but still here is nothing like the
French Dragooning. He says that he complained and had no Redress: But we
neither know whom to blame, nor how to make enquiry about the Truth of it,
seeing he is not pleased to let us know who did thus deny Justice to him. It is
sufficiently attested that this was done by Strangers: that they took two of
Mr. Selkirks Elders into the House with them, who might witness that they used
no violence, and that he and they parted peaceably: And that afterward he
dimitted his Charge, and the Presbytery gave him a Testimonial. Mr. Burgess (he
does not tell where he was Minister) is the next subject of Complaint: His
Church was possessed by the Rabble, sent by Mr. Walker Preacher in the
Meeting House; by the connivance of Mr. Mowat, who is Old and Infirm: The
Heretors were offended that Mr Walker invaded Mr. Mowats right. The Rabble
hindered Mr. Burgess to Preach; and when he objected King Williams Authority,
they spoke of it with contempt. Ans. Mr. Mowat, and the Parish had called Mr.
Walker to his help: The people hearing of the Act for restoring the old
Ministers (not considering that it was only Voted, but had not the Royal
Assent, which it afterward had) met in the Church; Mr. Walker dissuaded them:
Yet was forced to Preach to them there: There was no Tumult: the whole Parish
was met: Mr. Burgess's Bedle opened the Church door to them. It is false, that
any of the people did contemn King William's Authority: There were indeed three
young Men, who some days after, discharged Mr. Burgess to Preach: But this was
not approved by the rest: nor was ever any violence offered to him: What the
Paper says of Arms, and beating a Drum, is false: The Parish had been at a
Rendezvous; whence they came to a Burial, but that they made use of Arms or
Drum, at or near Mr. Burgess's House, is altogether false. The sufferings of
Mr. David Spence follows, That He was discharged to Preach in January 1689.
by Strangers, yet continuing till April, he was forcibly hindered to Preach and
to Read the Proclamation, on the day appointed for it, though he was willing to
do it: On complaint, he had protection, from the Committee of Estates; yet in
September he was deprived for not Reading. Ans. In the Records of Council I
find him deprived for that he confessed he had neither Read nor Prayed: But not
a word of the Plea he used for his Omission: So that this is to be looked on as
a gross prevarication, and malicious design to defame the Government: For the
Rabble hindering him to Preach before he was deprived: We do not approve it,
nor was it done by any of our Communion. What is said of some Ministers in the
Presbytery of Stranrawer, we shall meet with it in a Pamphlet that peculiarly
insisteth on their sufferings; wherefore I now pass over it. Mr. Francis Scot
of Tweed-mure was cast out by the Rabble. This we do not defend, nor are
obliged to Answer for it. Mr. Alison of Rilbucho was cast out after he had been
cleared by the Council, having given all Obedience, and his Goods were
destroyed by some Women; and a Presbyterian possesses his Church, neither can
he get any redress. What application he has made for redress, and who has
been faulty in denying it to him we cannot enquire, for our Author is not
particular; but thought it safest to Reproach the Presbyterians in general
Terms. All that remains in this third Collection of Papers is some Letters sent
to London to my Lord Elphingston complaining of the injustice done to Mr. Paul
Gelly Minister of Airth: In that he was deprived by the Council on the
Testimony of two perjured Persons, whereas he had given all Obedience, and he
has a good Testimony from most of the Parish. Ans. They that testify for him
are of his own party: They did not testify any thing before the Council in his
Vindication: The Witnesses against him were neither accused before any Court,
nor convicted of any thing that should derogate from the Credibility of their
Testimony: They testified not only that he did not Read and Pray, but that he
prayed for the Restoration of King James, and exhorted the people to pray so in
private: And said, That he expected a Reformation, but they had got a wicked
Tyranny, and Ungodly Rulers: And that people were not secure of Life and
Fortune; all this is attested by the Records of the Council.

14. In his fourth and last Collection of Papers, he has the Proclamations,
Acts of Convention and Council, Addresses, etc. That he thinks may bespatter
the Presbyterians: These Papers need none of my Apology for them. Wherefore I
shall only take notice of his little Remarks on them, whereby he does most
petulantly reproach the Government, as well as the Presbyterians. Some
Observations he makes on the Proclamation of the Estates for praying for King
William and Queen Mary, which are above answered: One I now take notice of,
which is, That the Presbyterian Preachers were not questioned for neglecting to
read the Proclamation, and to pray according to it, though others were. Ans. I
know not that any of them were guilty of this neglect: And if any were, there
was no Information against them; and therefore no punishment could follow. He
next deals with the Addresses of the Presbyterians to King James for the
Liberty granted them by him; and takes notice, that they were ready to comply
with a Popish Prince, and did not keep their promise of Duty and Allegiance to
him. I take no notice of his profane mocking, in the strain of what he says:
But to the thing, I answer, They no farther complied with a Popish Prince, than
to live peaceably under him, and to use the Gospel-priviledge that they had
been violently deprived of, which was now restored to them; and had not his
party their Liberty also secured to them, by the same King? Yea they concurred
to set him up, and to advance his Supremacy and Arbitrary Power, by which he
was put in Capacity to destroy our Religion, which we never did: For promises
of Duty and Allegiance, we kept them so long as he was King, but when the
Nation laid him aside, and chused another, the obligation of our Allegiance was
changed, and we bestowed it where the Nation had placed it: As also did the
Church of England their great Patrons. But this Man and his Accomplices, declare
their dislike of our King, and Civil Government, on all occasions as much as
they do against our Church way. His next effort against the Convention and
Government, is from a Letter written by the Viscount of Dundee, whom he calls
The Great, (which is on the Matter an owning of that Rebellion that he was the
Head of) the Letter and this Authors remark on it, tend to condemn the
Convention of Estates of Injustice. This matter I have above touched. It is
false that he was living in peace, and that he was in hazard of his Life by the
Rabble. He had gathered a formidable party to destroy the Convention of
Estates, and they gathered a force for their security: And on this, he and
others went away in Arms, and gathered a party in the Highlands. But on these
things I insist not, my business being mainly to vindicate the Presbyterian
Church of Scotland, in her Principles and Actings. The Act of Council December
24. 1689. I have vindicated on Letter 2. He is pleased (and reckons it
modesty so to do) to call it a great stretch of Justice: Some Men's Necks have
been made to stretch for a less Crime, than thus to reproach the Government. He
says, page 85. That the Ministers outed by the Rabble are cast out of the
protection of the State. That is no further true, than that they were not
reponed: The Reasons of which are given on Letter 2. It is maliciously
represented, That the Rabble, and all their Enemies, were invited to be
Witnesses against them who yet were in place. For all were invited, but none
were admitted but such as were unexceptionable Witnesses, Boni and legales
homines. Would he have none but his own party to be Witnesses against them who
despised the Government? He would fain say something against the Prince of
Orange's Declaration, page 90. but can find nothing; but that the Rabble grew
strong by it, and they who had taken Arms (who were indeed King James's party)
were forced to Disband: This is that which grieveth him. What follows of the
Conventions thanks to them that had Guarded them against Dundee's Plot, and his
observations on it, is discussed above on Letter 2. He observes nothing on the
Proclamation for the Fast, Aug. 24. 1689. But that he calls it a Canting
Proclamation. A word of contempt that these Men use for any thing that looks
like serious Religion. And that Mr. Ramsay, and Doctor Gardine were deprived
for not Reading it: Which is false: For it was for praying for King James, as
the account which he himself gives does make manifest. All that he observes
on the Proclamation ordering to whom the Bishops Rents should be paid (they
being now laid aside) is, That Alexander Hamiltoun of Kinkel, who was employed
as receiver for St. Andrews, was at Bothwel Bridge, and by the Clemency of the
then Government had his Life spared. If all this were true what does it make
against the Presbyterians. He is known to be a faithful Man, and why might not
the Government employ him, seeing the former Government had spared him: But in
truth, it was not so much the Clemency of the former Government, as no Crime
could be proved against him, that saved his Life. His last Paper, for it
seems that he is now at a Close, and can say no more, is a draught of an Act
for the Establishment of the Government of the Church, given in to the
Parliament by the Kings Commissioner, which, he says, that the Presbyterians
would not admit of, because it restrained them from meddling in State Affairs.
Ans. Many other Acts, as well as this, were given in, being drawn by private
hands, to be considered by the Parliament, and were rejected or amended. That
the Parliament rejected any of them, it was because they saw them, or somewhat
in them, to be inconvenient; but that he will fix on the particular cause, and
lay this on the Presbyterians, is saucy boldness: Not only meddling with the
designs of the Legislators, which is not fit for a private Person, but with the
secret thoughts of Men, which is fit for no Creature.

15. The conclusion of his Book, consisting of five or six pages, I shall not
much be concerned with; he there, more than before (which was needless) venteth
his Spleen against the present Government of the State; And that in very
undecent terms. He deals in most of it, with the Observator, whom I leave to
plead his own cause. Though I have above Asserted, and Vindicated the Truth of
most things for which he challenges the Observator. His note about the Earl of
Crafurd's Letter, is a groundless Cavil. His Lordship does not own that the
Council took probation of Crimes of another Nature, beside not Reading and
Praying; but on the contrary, said, that though they who framed the Libels
against the Episcopal Ministers did ignorantly, in their Libels, accuse them,
either for their Opinion about Church Government, or Immoralities in their
Conversation; yet, no regard was had to these, nor any question made about
them. He next takes to task a Book Entitled, A brief and true account of the
sufferings of the Church of Scotland from the Episcopalians since the year
1660. which he says, is written by a true-paced Presbyterian: And imputes all
the Assertions, and severity of Style in that Book, to the Presbyterians. This
is an unfair, and injurious, and false imputation: Presbyterians disown both
the Style, and many Principles vented in that Book; it was written by a
Cameronian, while that party stood at a distance from the sober Presbyterians,
and from the Generality of them who bear that Name, as much as from the
Prelatists. Though on the other hand; we know that there are many undeniable
truths in it, as to the matter of Fact concerning these Sufferings; which I
wish he, or any of his party, would undertake to disprove. But it is strange
that this Gentleman should quarrel the style of that Book, seeing it is exactly
conform to his own, in the bitterness and ill nature that appears in it: Only
things are not there so foully misrepresented as in his Paper. The Queries
with which he shuts up this his Work, we are the less concerned in, because
most of them are built upon the principles of that Book which we do not own:
And others of them, on some Actings of this Church in a time when both
contending parties run a little too high in the heat of debate: Of which I have
spoken what is sufficient in my Former Vindication: Only a few things, not met
with in that Paper, I now take notice of, That the presbyterians have risen
twice in Arms in King William' s time, is an impudent and false Assertion: For
the first time that he mentions, it was a Rabble of Cameronians, not in a
Body, but here and there, to throw out some of the Clergy who had severely
oppressed them: Of which I have told my Sentiment above. The other, A
formidable number in an Hostile manner, making an Address to the Council,
telling them, That they would not lay down their Arms till the Council had
discharged all Judicatories to pronounce any Sentence in Favor of Episcopal
Ministers. This was never heard of before; and certainly this Gentleman has
either Dreamed it, or Invented it. Page 107. He has amassed a heap of gross
Lies, viz. That they had Voted King William out of the Supremacy: That they
have V^urped it to themselves, having without his leave Convened at Edinburgh,
and Voted themselves into a free General Assembly. That they daily draw up
Instructions for regulating the Parliament: That they Meet and Adjourn at their
pleasure, For the first of these, it was not the Ministers, but the Parliament
(to which the King gave his Royal Assent) which Voted away the Supremacy: And
that, not any Supremacy that is due to any Man on Earth; but such a one as the
Pope had usurped over the Church of God; and which some of our Kings had
assumed, and under the former Government had been scrued up to that height that
the King might overturn our Religion at his pleasure. And it is highly to the
Commendation of our Gracious King, that he was pleased to give to God that
which was his, and to reserve only to himself what was Caesar's. For the second,
the Presbyterians usurp no Supremacy, no Legislative, nor Coercive Power: They
pretend to no more but a Ministerial Power, in declaring the Laws of Christ, by
his Authority, and in executing the Censures which he has appointed for the
breakers of these Laws. Thirdly, It is most false that they convened in the
General Assembly without his leave, they had an express Act of Parliament for
it, neither did the Assembly Meet or Adjourn, without the Kings Commissioner at
any time; other Judicatories are by Law allowed to Meet and Adjourn, as they
think fit; and therefore their so doing is not without the Kings leave. We
think it no small mercy to have the Magistrates Countenance to our Meetings;
though we think to deny any Intrinsic Power in the Church, to meet about the
Affairs of Religion, were to condemn the Apostles and to allow Rulers, if they
should be either open or secret Enemies to the Truth, a power to Ruin all, at
their pleasure. Fourthly, That they either daily, or at all, draw up
Instructions for Regulating the Parliament, is an Assertion so false and
malicious, as none but a Man of this Authors Temper could be capable of: Nor
can I imagine from whence he could take rise for such a Fancy. He has another
foul Untruth; That the Covenant is again Voted the Standard of all pure
Religion I desire to know of him where, when, or by whom, this was done: For
they that live in Scotland know nothing of it. His talk of some holding that
King Charles fell from the Crown, because he brake the Covenant, and King James
had no Right, because he took it not; might perhaps be the principle of some of
the wildest of the Hill-men, but never were the Opinions of sound
Presbyterians. His third Query deserves little Answer. We are far from
thinking King William an Idolater; though we dislike the English Service: And our
principles are known, that we owe Loyalty, and have paid it, even to an
Idolatrous, (that is, a Popish) King. The fourth Query tends to engage the
Rulers to bear down the Presbyterians in the North of Ireland; that Popery
might prevail there; against which they have been the greatest Bulwark of that
Nation. His fifth Query quarrelleth the Dissenters in England for praying for
their Brethren in Scotland; how reasonably this is blamed, let the Reader
judge. I never heard that they prayed for Scotland, as their Mother Church. In
his sixth Query, he shamelesly blames Presbyterians for being against
Toleration, (this I have answered in my former Vindication) whereas his own
party are as rigid that way as any, except Papists, or these in Japan. For his
last Query, which concerns the Moderation of Presbyterians; it is our design
and endeavor to grow in this, and in other Graces; and not to confine our
selves to our own seize, or to what others had attained who went before
us: And to set no bounds to it but what the Scripture sets. I hope all this
considered, the design of his Queries is lost; which is to represent the
Presbyterians as not Loyal, nor firm to King William. Many wise Men think that
he has few in this Nation, beside them, who are Cordially for his Interest.

AN ANSWER To a Pamphlet, Entitled, A late Letter concerning the Sufferings of
the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland, printed 1691.
THE party finding some acceptance with their easy Believers, of their former
Lying and Reproachful prints, thought fit to add this, as a further knock of
the Hammer, to drive the Nail to the head: That it might now be beyond debate
with them who will give them Credit without trying the Truth or Ingenuity of
what is reported; that the Presbyterians are a Cruel party, and have oppressed
the Clergy. And indeed this piece is behind none of the rest in effronted and
bold Lies: And to say this, might be a just Refutation of the whole Book: Though
no more were said. If they who know our Affairs can but read the Book with
impartial Eyes, and if Strangers will give equal Credit to the one party as to
the other: Yet lest they should say, that there is no Answer to it; I shall
with much brevity take notice of such passages in it as are most material. Page
4. There is a notable Lie, viz. He will have it thought that there were no more
Nonconformists in the Presbytery of Stranrawer, but two Women and one Minister
(whom yet he does not own for such, but says he was so reputed) this is an
Untruth so broad-faced, as may disparage the veracity of the Author, and make
all his assertions be disbelieved. For many, if not most, of the Inhabitants of
the Parishes in that Presbytery, were Fined, Imprisoned, and Ruined, for their
Nonconformity: Dragoons were kept there, as a necessary maens to force the
people to com^ (...)* An Account can be showed of above 1000 l. Sterling levied
of the Parish of Glenluce, for Nonconformity: And scarce a Family in Stra^rawer
of any Note, but were Fined and Imprisoned, till they paid their Fines. He who
after such an impudent and broad Lie, will believe any thing that this Author
writes, on the Authority of his Testimony, may also believe that there has
been no Persecution of late years in France. And if any of the distressed
people did at last comply, it does not more follow, that they were Episcopal,
than it can be concluded, that all the French Protestants are Papists who were
forced to be present at Mass: That there was no Presbyterian Preacher in these
parts except Mr. Bell, is not strange; seeing by the fury of the Persecutors
none might be seen: That he had freedom in his mind to hear the Incumbents that
then were, and that when the Liberty was given, he set up a Meeting House, is a
practice not to be blamed: The people generally either could not hear, or did
it renitente Conscientia: And it was but reasonable that a Minister who before
could not edify them, should do it when a liberty was granted for so doing.

2. It is also a gross and malicious Lie, page 5. That William Torbran fled to
Ireland for the Murder that he had committed on a Child of Mr. Hutchison' s.
Mr. Hutchison never charged Mr Torbran with the Murder of his Child; but
William Torbran was forced to flee to Ireland to escape the severe Persecution
that he endured from the Soldiers at the instigation of the Minister of the
Parish, such a bold Calumny might be of dangerous Consequence, if Lex talionis
were put in due Execution. Page 5, 6. He tells a long Story, about Building a
Meeting House, and calling another to be Minister (at Stranrawer) than Mr.
Bell, about which I have no Information; neither is it material, or to our
purpose. But what he says of Lairds and Ladies by Threatenings compelling their
Tennants, and by other indirect means prevailing with others, to concur for
maintaining that Meeting, is a shameless Lie. It Is well known, that the People
of that Country did forwardly, and cheerfully go along in that design; and
generally the meaner sort showed as much Zeal that way as they of better
Fashion did. If he had mentioned who these Gentlemen were who made gain by the
Collection for maintaining the House: Or who the two were who beat their
Tennants first to take the Test, and after to leave the Church and go to the
Meeting: The truth, or falsehood, of these Assertions might have been inquired
into: But since it has not pleased him so to do, I hope it will be no breach
of Charity to look on them as slanderous Forgeries, like unto many passages in
his Book already noted, or to be noted. It is not enough for this Gentleman to
reproach the Presbyterians, but page 7. He most maliciously belieth his Nation,
as if there were neither Law nor Justice in Scotland, nor any remedy for such
as are oppressed: While he says, That they deal no otherwise with their
Farmers than with Slaves; that if the Tennant die Rich, the Lord must be Tutor
to the Children. I know not what this Author has observed, but other Scots men
are unacquainted with these things: And if there be oppression (as alas there
is too much every where) I am sure his own party have a large share of it among
them. What he so Tragically Painteth out, of Preachers and People going through
Parishes, where there were no Meeting Houses; Amounts to no more than this,
that the Ministers were so charitable to People who could not maintain a
Minister for themselves, as to go to them, and help them, by appointing their
Meetings where such destitute People might attend them.

3. He tells a long Story, page 7. Of the Presbyterians Arming themselves,
and inventing false Reports to give countenance for their so doing: and that
the design of it was, to ruin the Clergy: This Allegation is above answered,
being brought in also in some of the former Letters: And himself opposes it,
in acknowledging that most of the Clergy were turned out before this Arming of
the Country. Neither are the Papists in that Country so few as he alleges:
Especially considering them as strengthened by all that owned King James's
Interest, tho nominal Protestants. There was both necessity for Protestants
providing Arms, and it was allowed by Authority, after the Prince of Orange
Landed. That One Troop carried all the Papists to Goal, I know not: but I am
sure, before the Prince and his Interest became formidable (which was the time
when the People provided Arms) and while the Episcopalians were not discouraged
from appearing for the Papists, many Troops would not have done it. The
Persecution that he speaks of was, by his own Confession, mostly (if he had
said only it had been nothing amiss) Acted by the Cameronians: Which leaves it
on them, not on us, to answer for it, page 8. That all the Ministers of that
Presbytery, except one who was absent, obeyed the Proclamation for Reading and
Praying, is a bold Assertion. For it is said by guess: For first, They had few
or none, to hear them, beside their own Families: Who then can witness that
they obeyed the Proclamation, or before whom did they perform this Solemn
Action? Secondly, It was witnessed before the Synod of Wigtoun, April. 18.
1690. That Mr. Cameron Minister at Inch, did the same day pray for King James,
and the young Prince: And that he read not the Proclamation till after the
Blessing, when the Congregation was a Dissolving. The Narrative, page 8, 9. Of
the Two Commissioners treating with Patrick Paterson to make him Provost if he
would put out the Minister, is most false: Mr. Paterson, who is now Provost of
that Town (1691) denies that any of the Commissioners did ever insinuate any
such terms of his being Provost: And these two Commissioners are known to be
Persons of that integrity, that his Lies will not be able to stain them. They
did no more than oversee the Election; which by the Convention was enjoined.
What he maliciously says of William Torbran, we have no more but his word for
it: which of how much value it is, may be judged by what already has been
observed.

4. The falsehood and malice of what he affirms, about the Commissioners from
Stranrawer to the Convention, bringing from Edinburgh with them a part of the
Collection for the Irish Protestants, is so evident as nothing can be more.
That Money was according to order, delivered to the Provost of the Town: Who
distributed it Faithfully, to the Irish Protestants, who were there, according
to their several Necessities. And the names of them who received it, with the
place of their abode in Ireland, and what they received, was returned to Sir
Patrick Murray: And these records can make it appear that it was not bestowed
as he alleges. He cannot forbear to spit his Venom, even on the Irish
Protestants (who had escaped the Bloody rage of the Papists) because they were
not of his way: Which is a Specimen of his Temper and Inclination. He tells a
Story of one Ferguson a Soldier, who, with some others, discharged several
Ministers to Preach: And inlargeth in some Circumstances, not worth our
Transcribing; of the truth or falsehood of this I have no Information: Nor what
sort of man this Ferguson was: I easily believe (tho not on the Credit of this
Author) that there might be a man capable to do such things: But are the Body
of the Presbyterians Countable for every thing that a Person did, whom they
know not, and whose Actions they approve not? The same is to be said concerning
the Irish Preacher, mentioned page 10. Whom we know not, nor can we enquire
into the truth of the Story, nor into the Circumstances of the Person: He not
being named. For what follows from page 11. to page 18. All the Information
that I can find is that the incensed Rabble did indeed turn out these men, and
discharged them to Preach: Which irregular practices we do no ways approve; but
this is not imputeable to the Persbyterians, but to some who had suffered
intolerable Injuries from these Men, and whom oppression had driven out of the
Limits of patience and soberness: Neither have we any ground to believe these
aggravating Circumstances which he mentions, to be^ue; lying and
mis-representation being so Familiar to this Author If the things mentioned be
true, we disown and abhor them, as Barbarous Villainies The Story about Mr.
Sommervel at Leswalt being persecuted by the instigation of the Sheriff of the
County, is disowned by Mr. Sommervel himself; and is incredible to every one
who knows the Gentleman who is thus blamed. The account he gives of several
in the Presbytery of Stranrawer, if all were true, is not strange (tho yet we
are far from approving of what was done) for there it was that the most horrid
Barbarities were practiced on that poor People, by means of these Ministers;
There one might see Bodies hanging on Trees by the way side: Heads, Arms, and
Legs of the poor People who had been Murdered without due course of Law, set
up on Poles, in many places: And is it strange that people should be enraged to
see such sad spectacles of their Relations; or that disorderly passions, and
from them, disorderly actions, should be the consequent of such moving Objects?
But whether what is alleged be true, or not: I cannot tell, not having got
information from that part of the Country.

5. He concludes his particular Instances of this Persecution page 18. With
the account of Mr. Ramsays sufferings who was Minister at Stranrawer. Two
things he complains of: The first is, that Mr. Miller the Presbyterian
Minister there, Hounded out the Rabble to Trouble, and expel Mr. Ramsay, that
himself might get the Tithe Herrings. This is denied as an impudent Forgery.
And Mr. Millar, challenges Mr. Ramsey or any else to adduce one credible
Person, who will Affirm that he had any hand, directly, or indirectly, in the
trouble that Mr. Ramsay met with, The second is Mr. Maxwel (who had been in
Ireland some time) when he returned home, Mr. Ramsay also and others, could not
get their Stipend. Yea the Sheriff encouraged all those to whom they owed any
thing to sue them. Where as he refused to hear them when they sued for their by
past Stipends: By which means they were Starved out of the Country. Ans. It was
little wonder that they had no Stipend paid them, when they did not serve the
Cures: Nor that the Sheriff did not Favor them in their suing for these
Stipends; for the Council had by a Proclamation appointed that no Decrees
should pass, about these Stipends till the Parliament (which soon after was to
fit) should determine in that extraordinary case. That the Sheriff did excite
any to sue these Ministers, is said without any show of proof: Nor can the
Assertion of a Person who has written so many Lies in a few pages, induce any
rational Person to believe it, page 19, 20. He offers to prove all that he
has said, and more, that he might allege: Which we challenge him to do, as he
would not bear the Infamy of that Lying and Slandering that he most unjustly
charge the Presbyterians with, page 20. He classeth the persecuted Clergy,
into four Ranks: The three former I have taken notice of, in answer to the two
Pamphlets above answered. Of the fourth, which is, such as were put out by the
Judicatories of the Church (which this mocker calls the Holy Inquisition of
the Presbyterian Preachers) he gives not one Instance. I deny not but some
(and they were but very few) were deposed, or suspended, by some Presbyteries,
for insufficient causes: And it is no wonder that some Ministers who were not
well experienced in the practical part of Church Government, might commit some
mistakes: But this can no ways be charged on the Presbyterians, not only
because they were but very few that did so; but especially because the Church
of Scotland took special care, both to prevent this practice and to redress the
grievances of such as made complaint, after they had been thus wronged. For in
1689. a general Meeting did enjoin all the Presbyteries to be careful that none
of the late Conformists be censured except for Insufficiency, Scandal, Error,
or supine Negligence in the Ministerial Work; nor unless these were
sufficiently proved against them; and that if there should be any doubt, either
about the relevancy of what should be Libelled against any of them, or about
the clearness of the proof of what any of them should be charged with in that
case, they should not proceed to a sentence, but refer the matter to the
General Assembly, which was to meet. This was what could be done by way of
precaution. And for relief of such as pretended to be grieved; whereas such as
were Censured by Presbyteries (most of them I mean, for some were so guilty in
their own Eyes, and to the conviction of all that knew them; that they
acquiesced in their Sentence) did appeal to the General Assembly, the Assembly
(not having time to do it) did appoint a Commission of the gravest, and most
experienced, of their number, consisting of 40 Ministers and 20 Ruling Elders,
to examine these processes, and to take off such Sentences as they should find
unduely passed against any Person. The Commission has examined some of these
complaints, and are going on with the rest; and have Actually taken off the
Sentences of some: Such as Mr. Spotswood of Abotsrule: Mr. Lion of Kinghorn:
And Mr. Bowis of Abbotshall: Wherefore we are not afraid of the Printed Account
that he says is coming out, (we have as yet heard no more of it) of such as
were censured by the Church: But are willing that the World should know the
whole truth of that matter.

6. He tells us, page 21. What Mr. Douglas Minister at Skirling, suffered: In
which we are little concerned; For himself says that it was the Cameronians
that gave him this trouble: only I take notice of his false and malicious
surmising, That they lay in wait to Murder him: And of his wicked Insinuation
of Murders and Slaughters committed by that Hellish Crew. All the Nation know
that the work of that irregularly zealous party was to deprive those Ministers
who had been their cruel Persecutors from their Churches, and that none of them
were ever Murdered by them. Let him bring Instances, and the full proof that he
promises, for what he most impudently obtrudeth on Peoples Credulity, and he
shall have an Answer. Not only the men whom he accuses may be thus Vindicated
in general, but the whole of the Story about Mr. Douglas is a Forgery: I can
show (attested by the Subscriptions of eighteen Credible persons of the Parish
of Skirling with the Baily of the Town) a true account of Mr. Dowglas's Case,
which he and his Party may be ashamed of: It is to this effect: Never any of
the Dissenters molested him, or gave him the least cause of fear: All that
could be so constructed, even by the most melancholy Fancy, was; two Men, as
they went by his door, stepped in, and asked his Wife, if she had any Monuments
of Idolatry, and so went away. Never any of his Parish did either do, or
threaten any hurt to him. The true cause of his flying into England was, he had
run into so much Debt as he was not safe in the Nation from Captions; he had
lived Intemperately, and Riotously: his Bible was laid in pledge for Ale; which
lies yet unredeemed. His other Books were pledged in Biggar for Banqueting;
his Wifes Bible pledged for Mutton; which she redeemed before she removed: His
Households Goods are under many Arrestments. When he went from Skirling, he
borrowed a Cloak from a Neighbor, and in the way to Edinburgh left the Cloak
in pledge for a Quart of Ale: his Parish (tho Dissenters) did often relieve his
Wife in her Necessity, and what she got that way, she spent in Drinking with
Soldiers and others. Let the Reader now judge whether that be a Persecution
like the French Dragooning. Our Authors complaint that no Redress was given by
the State, to them who complained, is above answered, particularly the Letter
alleged by him, to have been written by a great Person to the Parish of Bogie,
which Letter was produced in the Council by the Duke of Hamiltoun, this, I say,
is cleared Sect. 15, Of the answer to Account of the present Sufferings. What
follows p. 23. is a Vindication of the Episcopal Clergy from provoking the
Presbyterians, or having any hand in their Persecution in the late Reigns:
Where one may observe the man to be perfrictae frontis: And that nothing, tho
never so certainly, and manifestly false, can choke his Conscience. He says,
The Clergy can defy them to give one instance where any Dissenter suffered
death, or was any way injured, by the Information or Instigation of any
Minister in Scotland. The contrary of this is notorious to all who have lived
in Scotland these years last by past; that all do admire the Impudence of this
Assertion: Nothing was more common, than for the Clergy to be Inciters to, and
Abetters of the Persecution: By Informing the Soldiers (who were commonly the
Executors of the Law against Dissenters) and going along with them, and
assisting them in destroying these poor Sufferers: If instances of this be
required, many may be given: For a Taste take these few, Mr. (...) Ramsey
Minister at Torboltoun, Mr. Edmiston Minister at Gargonnock, Mr. John Row
Minister at (...), Pursued their Parishes, each of them; alleging their Houses
were Robbed: The first, got three thousand Marks, the second 6000, the third
3000, from the Parishes Respective; tho it was after found, that Highlanders
had Robbed the second; and they were Hanged for it: And that the third had not
in his House the value of one thousand Marks. And no Evidence could be brought
that any in these Parishes were Accessory to these Acts. To these I add a
fourth; Mr. Mackenzie Minister at Boyal, abovementioned, went to the Garrison
of the Castle of Dumbartoun, and got Soldiers to go with him, and apprehended
Robert Nairn in Napierstoun (the Soldiers affirmed that he procured their
being sent:) This he did several times; so that the very day that the poor man
died, they behoved to remove him to another House; where he died, and Mr.
Mackenzie would not suffer him to be buried in the Churchyard, and caused cast
out his Family: so that his Wife and ten Children were forced to Lodge several
Weeks without doors in Frost and Snow. What he says page 24. does not derogate
from what I have asserted, viz. He affirms, that They were neither Judges nor
Parties, nor Witnesses, nor Accusers: It is true they did not ordinarily appear
so publicly against them before Civil Courts: Yet did they more privately
assist in Military Execution against them; and that most frequently: And gave
Intelligence to Justices of Peace, and others who had Power to Molest them.
Nothing can be more false than to say, That When they were commanded by
Authority to give in the Names of Dissenters they generally declined it, till
they were forced to it. For every one knows, that there were but few who
shunned it: Most of them did forwardly obey this Injunction. Tho I confess
there were some whom no Laws, nor Threats of Men, could prevail with to do a
thing so unbecoming the Character of a Minister of the Gospel; but these were
very few. He does also aver, That no Dissenter suffered purely for Dissenting;
but only in case of open Rebellion, or in the case of Murder: As for Killing
the Archbishop of St. Andrews. This also is a notorious and shameful falsehood.
Did not all the Presbyterian Ministers suffer Deprivation of their Churches and
Benefices (which he and his Party make such outcry about when it is come to the
turn of some of themselves) purely for Dissenting? Did they not suffer
Banishment, some of them into Foreign Lands, others from their Dwellings, that
they might not be within six Miles of their Parishes, or a Cathedral. So as
hardly they could find a place in the Nation where they could reside, without
hazard from the Laws? Were not multitudes Fined, to the ruin of their
Families, for not hearing their parish Ministers, or for Conventicles; and what
is this but pure Dissenting? I hope it is neither open Rebellion, nor Murder.
Was not the Highland Host (a Crew of Savage Robbers) sent into the Western,
Countries while the people were living in Peace: Who almost laid the Country
desolate, and left no Sustenance for Man nor Beast? Were not many Pistolled, or
Hanged, or Drowned, as they were found on the Highway, or about their Work, in
their Houses, or in the Fields, for no other Cause but they would not tell what
were their Thoughts of the Insurrection at Bothwel Bridge; or of the
Archbishops Murder, while they could not be Accused for neither: Or for not
disowning the Sanquhar Declaration (when, may be, they knew not what it was) or
for not disowning the Covenant? And can such people be charged either with open
Rebellion, or Murder? What Jury, could find them Guilty of these Crimes? Among
multitudes of Instances of this kind that can be brought (for it can be made
appear that above Seventy were thus Murdered in Cold Blood, and without any
Legal Trial) I shall mention but three for a Specimen. Some Gentlemen (whose
Names, out of respect to them, I forbear to mention) took two Women, Margaret
Laughland and Margaret Wilson, the one of 60, the other of 20 years; and caused
them to be tied to a Stake, within the Sea mark, at Wigtoun, and left them
there till the Tide overflowed them, and drowned them: And this was done
without any Legal Trial 1685. An Officer of the Army caused shoot to death
Thomas Richard of seventy years, at Cumnock in Kylle, without any Trial, 1685.
The same year, in May, Graham of Claverhouse (who after was Viscount of Dundee,
whom our Author calls, The Great,) took John Brown of Priest hill, in the
Parish of Moorkirk, being at his Work in his own House, and shot him dead, in
presence of his Wife, and that without any shadow of Trial.

7. He takes occasion, page 23, 24. to mention several persons who are
Murdered: As if all this had been done by Presbyterians: As the Archbishop of
St. Andrews and others. But malice it self cannot charge these Crimes on that
party; some of which they generally lamented, because done by Men who took that
Name to themselves: Though others of them were committed by Persons unknown, as
the Murder of Mr. Pearson at Carsfairn: None in these parts can to this day
tell who were the Actors in that Tragedy. Some of them by such as were in a
declared state of War against the King, and all his Adherents, whose principles
and practices we never approved; and who were Enemies to the Sober
Presbyterians, as well as to them whom they called Curates: Some also of these
Murders were committed on private pique, and for revenge of personal injuries
done, or alleged to have been done. If it be true which he asserteth, page 25.
That some of the Presbyterians since this late Revolution, have proved
ungrateful to such of the Clergy, as had done them Kindnesses, when they were
in Trouble, we are far from approving such practices: Neither do we deny that
some persons are to be found amongst us, who are not so good as they should be.
But that either the thing is true in the general, or that the instance that he
brings is a Truth, we have little cause to believe on his Assertion. Nor do I
think it worth the while to enquire into it. He says, He can confidently
affirm, and is able to prove, That the Episcopal Clergy all the time (I suppose
he means while Episcopacy staid in Scotland) were the only persons
persecuted, either in their Names, Goods, or Persons. And all this because some
who by their Severities were driven into Desperation, committed some Acts of
Violence on some of them. But if he would prove this Assertion for his being
confident to affirm it, it is but suitable to the whole strain of his Book, and
though strange, is not rare. He must make it appear, that during the late Reigns,
never any Presbyterian was called Fanatic, Rebel, Seditious, (even while they
lived peaceably) that never any Minister was charged with preaching Rebellion
and Sedition, who yet either spoke nothing of the Differences of the Times; or
taught Loyalty and Obedience in all things Lawful, even to such Rulers as were
of different principles from us. He must also demonstrate, that no
Presbyterians were Fined to the Ruin of their Families, for peaceable Hearing
the Word, in a House or in the Fields: Also he must show that no Presbyterians
were Imprisoned, Banished, or carried Captive, and Sold as Slaves, for not
hearing Episcopal Ministers, or for Hearing Presbyterians; none of which he can
prove: But we can make the contrary of all three evident; and should be at the
pains to do it, but that the whole Nation are Witnesses to the Truth of all
these.

8. He comes page 26. to a purpose (by what course he draws it into his
method, I know not) wherein there is some place for Argument: But I must the
more easily dispatch it, because I have debated that point in my former
Vindication; in answer to the ten Questions. It is, he pretends to take off
the force of a Consideration that was in the Narrative of the Act of
Parliament, whereby the Government of the Church was lately settled in the Hands
of Presbyterians, viz. That the Reformation of this Church from Popery was
managed by Presbyters. To this he seems to answer two things. 1. He denies
the Consequence. Reply, I know not that ever any did make this the Consequent;
Ergo, The Government of this Church should be Presbyterian; for he may know
that Presbyterians fix the Government of the Church on a surer, and immutable
bottom, viz. Divine Institution: And do hold that whoever were the Reformers,
the Church ought to be governed by the Presbyters Acting in a parity. Wherefore
all his talk under this Head, is wide from the purpose. The true Design of
mentioning Presbyters to have been our Reformers, is to show that the
Government of this Church has been Presbyterian, even from the Infancy of
Protestantism among us: They being Presbyters who settled the Protestant Church,
and managed the Affairs of it, from the beginning, and ever till unfaithful and
self-seeking Men, after a tract of time, got that way forcibly suppressed, and
Church Domination set up for some years. His enlargement on this his Answer is
stuffed with Reproaches against the Reformation, and against the Presbyterians:
I shall not rake into that Dunghill, for it smells rankly of a Temper not much
inclined to the Reformation, and of an imbittered Mind. His Citation out of
Basilicon Doron, I have clearly answered in the paper before-cited. His
alleging that the Presbyterians engage Parents, when their Children are
Baptized, to bring them up conform to the Covenant, is a gross falsehood; it is
not enjoined, nor by one of many hundreds practiced, to mention the Covenant on
such occasions. He speaks of Rules, and Prayers to purge England of Prelacy
and Superstition, as used also at Baptism, which I never was Witness to, nor
heard that it was done by any in our Nation: But this Man pleases himself with
whatever he can devise, to expose the Presbyterians. He comes, in the end of
page 27. To another answer to that which he fancieth to be our Argument for
Presbytery, viz. To deny the Antecedent of it; or that Scotland was Reformed by
Presbyters. Here the Gentleman gives us a Specimen of his Argumentative Skill,
which will not make any Man admire the Learning of his party, which they so
much brag of, while their Champions do manage an Argument so sillily. He
asks, Who Ordained these Presbyters? Whether Bishops or not? Ans. It is an
Impertinent Question: For if they were Ordained; the quality of the Ordainers
makes nothing to prove that they were no Presbyters, nor that the Reformation
was not carried on by Presbyters. If the Design of his Question be, to prove
that they were not Ordained, and so had no power to Reform the Church: I refer
him for Answer, to the Learned Claude's Historical Defense of the Reformation.
Who proves that every Christian has power to Reform himself; and that every
Society of Christians has power to Reform themselves, from all principles and
ways that are contrary to the Word of God: And to set up Ordinances among
themselves that Christ has Instituted, see part 2. c. 4. page 166. and part 4.
cap. 1, 3, 4. The same is maintained by Calvin, Instit. lib. 4. c. 3. 4.
Turrit. part 3. loc. 18. quest. 25. But our present Debate needs not that we
should push this Opinion so far as these Learned Authors do. He asks, If they
were not Ordained by Bishops, where are the Miracles that they have wrought to
prove their Mission. I shall not here allege (as some have done, without being
ever Answered by any of his party) that there were not wanting among our
Reformers extraordinary Appearances of God with them, convincing the World of
their being sent of him. I shall first take notice of the conclusion of this
Argument (if it have any force) which will be, that our Reformation was
unwarrantable, as being carried on, A non habentibus potestatem. And it is
pleasant to observe, that this Author can brangle the Presbyterian Interest, by
no other Arguments, than such as will, with equal force, shake our Reformation
from Popery. 2. That Miracles are necessary to show a Man's Mission, which is
not communicated to him in the ordinary way, in respect of the Modes, and
Circumstances, none do maintain but Papists, and such as in too many things
Symbolize with them. John Baptist, and several of the Prophets, wrought no
Miracles, and yet had an extraordinary Mission. It is only to be expected that
they should work Miracles, who pretend to be extraordinarily sent, to preach a
new Doctrine, or bring in a new Office into the Church which is not warranted
in the Scripture. Next he will prove, That if they were Ordained by Bishops, it
cannot be called a pure Presbyterian Reformation: His reason for this is
strange, to drop from the Pen of a pretended Protestant. For (says he) I
suppose, which none deny, they were obliged to preach the Gospel, as the Bishop
who conferred Orders on them, bound them thereunto. Whither will bold Ignorance
carry one? Can none deny this his Assertion? Do not all, except Papists, and a
few Papizing Prelatists, deny it? If this were so, must we not condemn Luther,
and all the Reformers, who preached the Gospel otherwise than the Popish
Bishops, who conferred Orders on them, enjoined. The Inference that he
subjoineth, is none of ours: We think our selves exempted from Episcopal
Jurisdiction, and obliged to abolish that Order; not because the Gospel was at
first preached by Presbyters; but because that Order has no Foundation in the
Word.

9. A Goodly Argument he has, page 28. That Scotland was not Reformed by
Presbyters: viz. Some Bishops Reformed; as Dr. Gordon of Galloway, and Adam
Bishop of Orkney, he brings no proof for the former, but for the latter, he
was Excommunicated for Marrying the Queen to the Earl of Bothwel; which had
been Incongruous, if he had not been of the Protestant Communion. Answ. 1. That
two who had been Bishops joined in the Reformation, is but a small evidence
that the Reformation was not managed by Presbyters, but by Bishops. 2. That the
one of these complied with the Reformation, he barely asserteth, and his proof
for the other is insufficient: Such things have been done; Protestants have
Excommunicated Papists, as Papists daily Excommunicate Protestants: How
congruous this is, I need not now debate. 3. If these Bishops had any hand in
the Reformation, it is nothing to his purpose, unless he can prove that they
exercised Episcopal Jurisdiction in the Protestant Church; which no History can
Countenance; if they Acted as Churchmen at all, they Acted as Presbyters, for
it is certain, that in the beginning of our Reformation, none exercised any
Jurisdiction among the Reformed above that of Presbyter. He says, That where
there had been Popish Bishops, there Protestant ^ishops were appointed in their
places, under the Name of Superintendents. Here is a double mistake: One that
the Super intendent, were Bishops: Another that they were put into the Places
and Revenues of the Popish Bishops. The falsehood of both which, I have showed
in my Former Vindication, upon Query 1. page 10. That the Revenues of the
Popish Bishops were settled on the Superintendents, is an Assertion that
proves, either that this Author is a Stranger to our History or that he
regards not the truth or falsehood of what he affirms. What follows, page
29. Of the late bringing in of Presbytery into the Reformed Church of Scotland,
I have fully disproved in the place last cited, page 3. After the most spiteful
Venom spued out, that could lodge in a humane Breast, against the Presbyteria^*
which it is fit to despise rather than Answer) he concludes his Letter, with
an Assertion no less false than the rest of his Allegations are; viz. That his
party suffer neither for Breach of Divine nor Humane Laws; but only for
Episcopacy. If any honesty remain with him, it would oblige him to give some
instance or proof, that the Presbyterian Church of Scotland, (for he ascribes
their sufferings to their opposition to the Fanatics of the Kirk) did ever
trouble any of them, either for their Opinion about Church Government, or
merely for their compliance with Episcopacy, when it had the Law on its side;
on the contrary, we can show, to the conviction of all unbyassed Men, that such
as have suffered by the State, did suffer for their Breach of the Law of the
Nation, in not owning the King and Queen, as the Law required: And that such as
were Censured by the Church (except two or three whose Sentences were taken off
by Superior Judicatories of the Church) suffered for the Breach of Divine Laws,
viz. For gross Immortalities: One Instance I shall give Ex re praesenti; out of
the Presbytery of Stranrawer, about which his whole Letter is Conversant: Mr.
Ramsay, late Minister at Stranrawer, was by the Synod of Wigtoun put from his
place, on these Grounds: Frequent Drunkenness on the Sabbath day, proved by the
Oaths of Baily Vause, and Andrew Mackennel: Beating his Wife on the Sabbath,
before he went to preach; sworn by Andrew Mackennel and Robert Gordon; the said
Robert Gordon's Wife deponed, that she saw, at that time, Mrs. Ramsay Bleeding:
Frequent Swearing; proved by the Oaths of Provost Row, Baily Vause, and Robert
Gordon: I should not thus have exposed Men who once bare the Character of
Ministers; but the Impudent Accusations of this Scribler, and the obligation
that lies on Persons and Churches to necessary self defense, do constrain me.

ANIMADVERSIONS On a PAMPHLET, called, A Memorial for His Highness the Prince
of Orange, in Relation to the Affairs of Scotland.
HAving proceeded thus far in contributing my poor Mite, for Vindicating the
Presbyterian Church of Scotland, and meeting with this Print, of the same
strain with these others above-answered; that is, full of bitter and
unreasonable invectives, against Presbyterial Government; I could not shun
making some Observations on it, whereby Truth and Innocence may be vindicated,
against Lies and Railing. The design of this Print is manifest to be, to
dispose His Majesty to preserve Episcopacy in Scotland, and to hinder the
Settling of Presbytery: And it is a real and effectual refutation, that our Wise
and Gracious King has not found such weight of reason in it, as to be moved by
it, but has acted quite contrary to the malicious Insinuations of this Author.
This Paper is nothing short of the rest; for most gross Falsehoods, in matters
of Fact, and most injurious Mis-representations of our Way and Principles. It
is said to be done by two Persons of Quality. One Wit might, by a little
labor, have brought forth a more perfect Birth. What is the Quality of the
Author, or Authors, for worldly Dignity, I enquire not, but his, or their Moral
Qualities may, by the Book, be seen. to be none of the best. We have, First, a
parcel of False and Malicious History, as ever was written in so few Lines.
Next some Counsels to his Highness. 3. He refuteth a Paper that he falsely
calls, An Address from the Presbyterians to the Prince of Orange: And then
concludes, as he began, with Lies and Railing.

2. The first passage in his Historical Account, is a foul mistake (to call it
no worse) viz. That the rise of our Animosities, and why they are Warmer here
than in England, is, England was Reformed by the Royal Authority; and therefore
their Church was suited to the Monarchy: But Scotland was Reformed by Force and
Violence, and some of the Reformers, coming from Geneva, and Switzerland,
inspired many of their Converts with an Aversion to Monarchy. A Man who takes
Liberty to slander at this rate of Impudence, deserves rather Chastisement,
than an Answer. For, 1. With what Brow can he say that our Reformers were
averse from Monarchy; or that the Antimonarchical Principle did ever get much
footing in Scotland, as we know it did in England; for all their being Reformed
by Royal Authority? Did ever Scotland set up a Commonwealth, as England once
did? It is known what they Adventured and Suffered for the Monarchy, when
England abjured it. And what yielding there was in Scotland to the
Antimonarchical way, was by Force from England. And it is known to all who
lived in those days, that the Presbyterians did cleave more firmly to their
banished King, and prayed for him with more Constancy and Resolution, than that
party did, who after appeared for Episcopacy. 2. That Scotland was Reformed by
Force and Violence, is false, it was by the States of the Nation, and at last
confirmed by King and Parliament. The chief difference, as to the Original of
the two Reformations, lay in this; that in England, the King (whether from
Light, or Interest I do not judge) begun a half Reformation: And Royal
Authority enlightened the Minds of the people (I speak not of all, but of the
Multitude) but in Scotland, Light from the Word of God did move, first the
People, then the Great Ones, and they prevailed with the King at last,
Zealously to own the Truth of God: Yea, and to defend it in Print. 3. That the
Government of the Church of England was suited to the Monarchy (that is, as I
suppose he means, framed by a suitableness to the Monarchy, as the Standard
of it) is not its commendation: For that is to make it a humane Contrivance, or
worldly Policy, brought into the Church of Christ, over which he is the Head;
and which is to be governed by his Laws: Whereas the Government of the Church
of Scotland was contrived by the Word of God, as the Standard of it; yet was it
as much suited to the Monarchy as that of England could be: That is, it gave,
and gives to the King, all that power in the State that our Laws gave him: And
all that Authority over the Church that is due to any Man on Earth. The
Abettors of it preach and practice as much Obedience and Subjection to Kings,
as others do, and can vie in Loyalty, with their Accusers, as shall after be
observed. 4. I do not understand how our present Animosities, about Church
Government should depend on the one way being suited to the Monarchy, and the
other not, seeing this Author (as well as his opposites really are) does highly
pretend, to be not only for the Monarchy, but for the present Monarch King
William. But either he has a latent Meaning, which has much Truth in it, or
he has hit on the Truth by guess, as Cajaphas did, viz. That our Animosities
about Church Government arise mainly from the different Inclinations that are
in the two parties toward the Monarchy, as now established in the Persons of
our Gracious King William and Queen Mary. The strain, both of their Writings
and Actings, make it evident that with him the Interest of King James, and that
of Prelacy are linked together: And their Zeal for the one fills them with
Spite and Animosity against what is opposite to the other. And whosoever
considers the strain of this Pamphlet, will find that the Zeal that this
Scribler pretends to for King William, is expressed usually under the general
Notion of the Monarchy; which may be understood of either of two Monarchies.
What he says, that, Buchannan, and others, wrote Books that were condemned for
Treason, is no Argument: For that which by one party is condemned for Treason,
by another party, when they have got the Ascendent, has been absolved, as not
guilty of that Crime. That the Puritans vexed King James VI. is no further true
than that they could not yield to the endeavors of some evil Counselors about
him, for overturning the Settled Government of the Church; and encroaching on
its Rights. It is true, He at last got Episcopacy settled by the help of some,
both in State and Church, who were either none of the best Protestants, or had
their worldly Designs in promoting that way; but still our Author owneth (on
the matter) that the Word of God was not consulted in this weighty Concernment
of the Church: But only his fancied suitableness to the Monarchy, and
Conformity to England. The account he gives of putting down Episcopacy
afterward, and setting up of Presbytery, is neither like a Christian, nor like
a Historian: It is perfect railing, while, he calls the Nobles, that had a
hand in it, Ambitious and Factious, the Gentry Priest-ridden, and blind
Zealots, the Preachers Enthusiasticks. The War that he mentions, is by all
Posterity to be lamented, but Men as able to discern as he, have laid the blame
of it on Episcopal Tyranny and Usurpation, and their making many steps toward
Popish Doctrine, as well as Discipline. He next gives account of the Solemn
League and Covenant entered into without the Royal Authority, calling
Parliaments, etc. These things were done by the Body of the Nation, met in the
most orderly representative that the time and case could permit: And I deny
not, but that they were extraordinary Actings, not to consider now the Morality
of them. But let this Gentleman freely tell us, whether his Episcopal party be
capable of Courses parallel to these which he so exposes: The Presbyterians
under the conduct of the Primores Regni, arose against their King, in defense
of their Religion and Laws; did not the Prelatick party the same, and on the
same account? They were indeed all for Loyalty and Non-resistance, while the
Royal Authority supported their greatness and power over their Brethren, but
when seven of their Bishops were touched, it proved another case, like that in
Ployden, if we be guilty in this, they are not the Men who should cast the
first Stone at us. For Barbarities committed by the Presbyterians in these
times, I know of none, but what are the necessary consequents of a War. But
this Man and his Associates, have no other Dialect, whereby to express their
dislike of the Actings of the opposite party. He accuses them with a Bloody
Mouth, of what has been a thousand times refuted as a horrid Lie, That the
Scots Presbyterians did persidiously give up their King to the English, who
Murdered him: He was the King of the English, as well as theirs, and they could
not withhold him from them: And gave him into their hands, on as good security,
as could be, for his safety; and if others dealt perfidiously with him they are
not to be blamed for it. He has a hint, as if Episcopacy had been settled by
King Charles the Second, because the Presbyterians refused all conditions of
peace and pardon: And for the Monarchies sake. The former of these is a great
untruth; they never refused peace nor pardon; but would gladly have embraced
both: Only they could not buy them at the rate of Perjury: Though they never
refused to disown any Principles that were indeed Rebellious. Their preaching
up Rebellion in their Conventicles, is false: They both preached and practiced
Loyalty: Only after many grievous and insupportable hardships, suffered for
their Conscience, some few of them were prevailed upon by that Temptation, to
vent some Principles that the more Sober and Intelligent were not satisfied
with. That punishing them who were taken in Rebellion is all the severity
complained of, is a Notorious Falsehood, as all the Nation know, and I have
above disproved it.

3. From these so well laid Foundations, he proceeds, p. 5. to give His
Highness some Advices; if they may not more properly be called Directions. The
first, That the Prince being come to support our Laws, is in Honor bound to
support Episcopacy, which is confirmed by twenty Parliaments. This is Saucy
enough: As if His Majesty had Acted against his Honor now that Episcopacy is
not supported. That Episcopacy is confirmed by so many Parliaments, I much
doubt: But am not at leisure to cast up the account. But if this Argument be
good, Presbytery should be supported, as being confirmed by many Parliaments;
and now by this Current Parliament: Besides its Authority from Scripture, which
he does not pretend to for Prelacy. His second Inference from his Historical
Narrative (or rather Railing Accusation) is, That Episcopacy is necessary for
support of the Government: And that they oppose Scots Presbytery, only as it
has in it many horrid Principles. Both these are denied, and cannot be proved,
unless we take malicious railing for proof. His 3 d. That what the late Rulers
did was done by Law: And that these Laws were made for preserving the
Protestant Religion, Monarchy, Humane Society, and Self Defense. It is an easy
thing to make Sanguinary Laws, and then Murder and Destroy Mankind according to
these Laws: But I have showed in my former Vindication, in answer to Query 5.
That they exceeded the bounds, even of their own Laws: In the Horrid Murders
that were, in cold Blood, committed by Soldiers, with allowance, on Persons
living in peace. But that these Laws were made on such necessary grounds as he
affirms, is an Assertion beyond what Jesuitical impudence it self, has as
yet arrived at: But I shall not wonder, if he should assert, that the world
could not subsist, except Laws be made for extirpating out of it, all who own
the Christian Religion. Cannot the Protestant Religion, Monarchy, etc. be safe
unless People be forced to wound their Consciences by hearing men who had
invaded the Pulpits of their Faithful Pastors? Unless Families be ruined who
live in peace, and pray for their Rulers, who hear a Sermon in a Chamber, and
not in the Church? He affirms also, under this head, that we value our Church
Government more than the Protestant Religion. A most false Imputation: But he
proves it, by three notable Lies: One is, That we complied with the Papists,
upon getting an Indulgence. We neither sought it, nor approved the Papists
being Indulged, nor did we join with them in any thing: We indeed had our
Meetings at the same time when they had theirs, and so had the Episcopal men.
The other is, the Church of England, and their Party, hazarded all rather than
comply, I gladly would know, wherein did we comply, and they did not. They had
the exercise of their Religion under the same Government with us. A third is,
We magnify the dispensing power, which they opposed. All this I have touched
before. This Assertion is false and injurious: We never approved it, we made
use of the Liberty granted, because it was our due: But never approved of the
power that the Giver of it did acclaim. How they opposed it, may be judged by
considering whether the Contrivers and Promoters of these courses, who were
about the King, were Presbyterians or Prelatists.

4. The fourth thing (he is now falling from his Inferences and Counsels to the
King, to proofs of his Accusations against the Presbyterians) that their
Principles prove what he would say: And their Principles he proves in that he
is informed that many of them own, that Subjects may force their King to do
justice; that they are his Judges, and may Dethrone him: that they approve of
former Rebellions that the Monarch being forfeited, Kings have no more Power
than the People will give them. I observe first, That all the Grounds that he
has for these Accusations, is, He has heard it, but from whom, or what cause
his Informers had to say so, we must not know. If this be a sufficient Ground
to move a Prince against his People (as this man designeth) let any Judge. 2.
That he, and they who have whispered this to him, do not impute those to the
Presbyterians, as the Principles of the Party; but to many of them: And no body
knows how many. It may be there are, or have been, some who call themselves
Presbyterians, who hold these, or as bad things: But the Presbyterians did
never approve of all that had gone from among them. 3. What he says about
forfeiting of the Monarchy (tho I do not meddle with things so far above me)
has obtained with the Church of England, as well as Scotland. And his
quarrelling at this, has a further tendency against the present Establishment,
than may be he is willing that every one should observe. His fifth effort
against us is, He takes notice of Peoples threatening Ministers (he adds
also, Magistrates, which I never heard of before) and thrusting them from their
places. This was the practice of the Rabble, in some places, I have in answer
to the above mentioned Pamphlets, sufficiently vindicated the Presbyterians,
both from abetting, and from approving of these practices: And therefore they
ought not to be charged with them. In the sixth place he would persuade the
Prince, that our numbers are not so great as theirs, this I have also above
Discoursed, but I shall a little consider his proofs; one is, 27 Parliaments
under four Kings, have condemned Presbytery. Ans. If that prove, that they were
the greatest number, the like Argument will prove, that we are more numerous
now: For the Parliament has very unanimously condemned their way. Next he will
prove it, because they were always easily overcome in their Rebellions. Sure it
was not so in King Charles the I. time: And in King Charles the II. time it was
not the Presbyterians, but a few of them, that appeared. He says that the
reason why they appear more numerous here (at London, 1689) is they are all
here: That is manifestly false: neither all the Nobility, nor the Tenth man of
the Gentry, beside the Vulgar, who are the greatest number, were then at
London. His judging of their designs of being there, is his groundless Fancy;
suggested by his hatred and ill will. His party (forsooth) are so modest that
they trusted to the Laws, the interest of the Monarchy, and his Highnesses just
sense of things: But others thought that they trusted more to King James's
Interest, and were more moved by their aversion from his Highness: Let the
Reader judge whether of the two conjectures has the more probable Foundation.
He alleges, that the Presbyterians have raised tumults to fright Honestmen.
This is denied, his party raised ( or endeavored it at least) more fearful
Tumults. And hence he would move the Prince, to send down Forces, under well
Principled Officers. That is, Jacobites: But the Prince was wiser than to
Listen to such Counsel.

. 5. He next would represent us as Persons who would submit to no Laws
inconsistent with Presbytery; on the account of the Divine right of Presbytery,
and our obligation to it by Oaths: Whereas his Party are readier to comply with
any thing that his Highness and a Parliament shall think fit, for the good of
the Kingdom, and so pleads for a hearing before his Highness, or any to be
named by Him. This last we shall never decline. On the former part of this
Paragraph, I make a few Remarks. 1. If he mean that we cannot so submit to Laws
inconsistent with Presbytery, as to give active Obedience to them, or that we
should do what is inconsistent with it; he makes a right conjecture: But it
imports no more than this, that we Act by a Principle, and are not so
Unconscientious as to do what is contrary to our Sentiments; if other men glory
either in their having no Principle, in the matter of Church Government, or
that they can yield over the Belly of Conscience, to promote their Interest, or
to gain the favor of Men; we think such Glorying is not good. But if he mean
that we cannot so submit to Laws contrary to Presbytery, as to live quietly
under them: To suffer patiently by them, when we cannot obey them. It is a
manifest slander: For we gave sufficient proof of that, under the late Reigns:
And if any were unquiet under their sufferings, the rest, who were the far
greatest part, are not to be blamed. 2. Our Author, and his Party, have very
generous Consciences, which it seems are influenced by no other Law but the
King and Parliaments Opinion, that such a thing is for the good of the Monarchy
and the Kingdom: Men of such Principles can easily save their Interest, what
ever side be uppermost. 3. Seeing they pretend to so supple Consciences, I fain
would know why they do not comply with Presbytery; seeing now the King and
Parliament have owned, and enacted it, as that which is for the good of the
Monarchy, and the Kingdom. Here is a plain declaration, that those men can have
no plea for a Toleration to be granted them, or any Exemption from the
Government now by Law established; for their Consciences cannot be straightened in
this matter: And therefore there can be no Imaginable reason for a Toleration;
But either Humor, or a design to carry on an Interest contrary to the present
Establishment: which I hope our Rulers will consider. 4 ly. He argues with his
Highness, from The aversion that England must have to unite with Scotland, if
Presbytery be set up there. To this I answer two things. 1 st. If the interest
of Religion have more weight with us than that of the State (as surely it will
when that promise is fulfilled, that the Mountain of the Lords house shall be
set on the top of the Mountains) this reason will be of no force: It is better
that England and Scotland be two different Nations, yet living as Sisters, in
concord; than that the Institutions of Christ should be thwarted, that they be
made one. 2 dly. It may be thought strange, that England should refuse to unite
with Scotland in their Civil concernment, because Scotland cannot yield to them
in that which concerns God, and their Consciences: may not two Nations trade
together, and be Governed by the same Laws, and yet bear with one another as to
their Church ways? But he enforces this his Argument, by two considerations;
one is, Episcopacy is acknowledged to be the best Bulwark against Popery. I
know this is the Fancy of some, who are Bigoted to that way, but on what
ground, or who acknowledges this, beside themselves I know not. The other is,
Scotland is Sworn by the Covenant, to extirpate Episcopacy in England. Answ.
The Covenant obliges to no such thing, unless England call them to their
Assistance. The Covenant sets Limits to men's Actings, by their Station: If
Scotland should meddle with Englands Church Government without their call, they
should Act beyond their Station.

6. He next p. 8. gives a Testimony to the Moderation of some Presbyterians
(which some of his party will not own, and the strain in the whole of his
discourse seems to contradict) He is willing that they should have an
Indulgence, but that they have prepared an address for the extinction of
Prelacy: This we own: But his Inference is strange, viz. Therefore they can be
subject to no Law, and the Covenant, tho Illegal and Irreligious, must be their
Rule. This is strange Logic, from the Mouth of a Champion of that party which
pretends to have monopolized learning to it self. If Prelacy be extirpated by
a Law, and Presbytery be by Law established (as through the mercy of God now it
is) cannot Presbyterians be subject to that Law? And I have already showed, how
we can be subject even to other Laws. It is also an unaccountable Inference,
that the Covenant (which he most wickedly reproacheth) must be the Rule, if
Presbytery be settled: He may know that Presbyterians have no other Rule in
their Church Administrations, than the Scripture. And if any thing in the
Covenant can be made appear contrary to that, they are ready to disown it. For
what he says of our Address, it shall be after considered. The last thing that
he represents to the Prince is, That the difference betwixt the Episcopal men
in Scotland, and the Presbyterians, is but small: They having neither Liturgy
nor Ceremonies, more than the Presbyterians have. We are not for widening the
difference; but would bring it to as narrow a compass as may be. Yet we must
not tell untruths (as this Author does) to deceive them who know not our
affairs; by representing Agreement, where really it is not. For the difference
betwixt us and them is irreconcilable, without the yielding of one Party,
while they are for the Jurisdiction of one Minister over the rest, and we are
for a Parity among them. He says, Their Bishops are in the place of our
Moderators; whom we have sometimes confessed may be constant. Ans. This we
cannot yield: Our Moderator has no Jurisdiction, yea no Vote; unless where
there is an equality. The Bishop has a negative Vote. For our Moderator being
constant, it is contrary to our practice, yea our Opinion is, that whatever
Lawfulness be in it, it is so highly inexpedient, that we can never yield to
it. He says, the Presbyters have a free Vote in the Bishops Election. Nothing
can be more false. Is not the Bishop named by the King? And was it ever
allowed, that the Person whom the King had named should be passed by and
another chosen? where is then the freedom of Vote? He says, the Bishops Govern
only by Presbyteries and Synods: The contrary is known to every one: The Bishop
takes their Counsel when he pleases, not else. The grounds for complaint and
separation from them (such as we made) I have above discoursed.

7. He brings as a Foundation of most of his discourse against us, a Paper
that he calls the Presbyterians Address from Scotland to the Prince of
Orange. On most passages of it he has some quibling observes, more like a
Bouffoon than a Disputant. If the paper were ours, I should not think his
reparties worthy of an answer: They are so purely, either trifling or railing:
but the best of it is, he has picked up a paper, to which either he, or some
Body else, has given that Title: But it is none of ours, nor was it agreed to
by the Presbyterians, or presented to his Highness. We did indeed present an
Address, if he has any thing to say against that, we shall consider the
strength of what he shall say: But for this paper, it is not only not our
Address, but hardly can two papers aiming at the same thing, and on the same
subject, have less agreement in matter, or words, than it has with our
Address. What he says to fix this paper on us, p. 23. Is a heap of lies: viz.
That this Address was agreed to and subscribed in our public Meeting at
Edinburgh: That hearing that the Prince had Communicated with the Church of
England, we demurred sending of it. Not one word of all this is true: These men
have taught their tongues, and their pens too, to speak and write Lies. Whence
this Paper came I cannot conjecture, unless it was drawn by some member of the
Meeting, and presented to them, but not approved: For I know, that several
Draughts were privately made, and out of them was that taken which was sent,
and which we own. Upon this consideration, I shall wholly pass over all that he
says on that pretended Address, and suffer him to fight with his own shadow.
Another most impudent untruth he asserteth also, p. 23. that at London our
Commissioners desired some Persons of Quality to subscribe our Address, and
would not allow them to read it, till they should Sacredly promise to
subscribe: and this, he says, some of these Persons themselves told him. We
were so far from that, that we never refused a reading of it to any who desired
it. Yea we gave it to be read by several Persons of quality of whose
subscribing it we had no hope.

8. He next gives the Presbyterians a few good Words: He would not be Cruel to
them, but pity them as deluded. He shall have a meeting from us, in both
these; He would allow them Indulgence, but yet he requires, That they should
let other Protestants live too: That they should yield to such Accommodation as
the Learned Protestants abroad are not against: That they should not abhor the
Communion and practices of the other Reformed Churches: That they think
themselves not bound to Persecute those of the Church of England. We can easily
yield to all these postulata, sano Sensu. For the 1 st. We not only let other
Protestants live; but the People we admit to our Communion in all Ordinances;
the Ministers we suffer to Preach and enjoy their livings, where there are no
personal Scandals to hinder it. Yea, such of the Ministers as will secure the
Church Government, we admit to manage it with us, and to all Ministerial
Communion. For the second, we know there are Learned Protestants abroad who are
for toleration to Arminians, Socinians, and what not: We cannot be for such
Accommodation: but we differ not from the Generality of the Churches, and
Learned Men abroad, in this Matter. For the third, We do not abhor the
Communion of any of the Churches abroad, in their Administrating the Ordinances
of Christ: But we know that some Reformed Churches have practices that we
cannot approve; and in these practices we can have no Communion with them. For
the fourth, we look on our selves under no tie (nor Capacity neither) to
persecute those of the Church of England: Nor do we persecute any of them: We
leave them to stand or fall to their own Master. He now p. 26. comes very
magisterially, to require security from us, that we will not by our Sentences,
counter-act the Decrees of the Supreme Civil Judicatories; and that we disclaim
that absolute Supremacy, or Papacy, that the Kirk has always claimed over
Kings and Civil Power. Ans. Tho we owe no such subjection to this Author, as to
give him Security in this: Yet when ever our Rulers shall demand it of us, we
are willing to give all Security: And we disown any power to counteract the
Decrees of our Rulers: And all Supremacy or Papacy over Kings, further than,
that the Church, and every Minister in Her, has a Ministerial power to declare
the Laws of Christ (not to make new ones of their own) and that all men, High
and Low, ought to submit to these Laws, and obey them: And whoever will not
obey them, fall under the Displeasure of our great Lord and Master: Yet that we
do not withdraw Subjection, nor due respect, nor obedience in all things
Lawful, from these Rulers who do break the Laws of Christ: According to our
Confession of Faith, Chap. 23. Sect. 4. For the instance he gives of a sad
difference that fell in between the King and the Church: It was in a time when
the People, and their Representatives did also contend with the King: And that
in a Bloody War: And things run to an undue height, on all hands. The
Presbyterians maintain no such Principle as he alleges, of the Infallibility
of the General Assembly, as he says, p. 29. Nor of a Supremacy over Kings.
Charity will Bury what is past (but spite and malice endeavors to dig it out
of its Grave, and present it in the most odious dress) and every one should,
for time to come, Labor to serve God in the Station that he has set him in.
The outrages against his Party, that he charge us with, cannot be made out,
except what was done by the Rabble, in an Interregnum; and the Actors were none
of our Communion. If he had mentioned in particular the Libels against the
Government, which he blames in General; we could have enquired into them, and
told our thoughts of them. But I may adventure to say, that nothing ever came
out from among us, that contained either so heavy, or so unjust complaints
against the Government in the late Reigns, nor did so tend to raise the very
Foundations of that settlement, as the multiplied Libels of his Party do by the
Government which now is. What remains is so pure Railing, that it admits of
no other answer, but to brand the whole of it with this motto, that it is void
of Truth and Honesty. And to his hopes that he expresses of the Worlds judging
and the Princes Acting; we oppose our confidence of the contrary of both; and
our Experience of the Latter to the Immortal Praise of the wisdom and goodness
of our Gracious Monarch, whose heart God has inclined to favor our righteous
Cause.

An Examination of the Historical Relation of the late General Assembly, holden
at Edinburgh, from October, 16th to November 13th, 1690.
SEveral wise men who have Read this Pamphlet, think that the most fit
refutation of it were (as I said of another such piece) to write on the Margin
of every page, Lies and Calumnies. It is mafestly so unanswerable to its Title,
that no man can have a true Idea of that Venerable Assembly, by Reading this
Pamphlet. The Author confesses that he was not Eye or Ear Witness to what
passed, and all that he has is at second Hand: And that as it seems from
such as neither understood what they pretend to give account of, nor had the
Honesty to make a true and fair Relation of what was obvious to every man's
Observation. For, tho he calls them discreet and intelligent Persont, yet not
only the horrid lies with which, by their report he abuses the World, do
Witness the contrary; but we do more than guess who they were, and know them to
be very unintelligent in Church affairs, what ever knowledge they may have in
other things: And that they are Persons highly enraged against Presbyterians,
because they imagine that some of them had a hand in their being deprived of
lucrative places. Even the keeping of the door of the House where the Assembly
sat, he mis-representeth. It was not to keep out Conformists; but to keep out
others as well as them, that there might be room for the Members of the
Assembly: And for all the care that could be used, there was a very great Crowd
constantly in the House. That ever any were thrust out of the House because
they were Conformists, is more than I know: Neither did I ever hear such a Cry,
as he mentions; tho I was daily there: Tho I confess it was not very fit to
suffer them to be present, who, it might be rationally thought, came to mock,
or to pick up what they might improve to our disadvantage. There were in the
Assembly, very often, some Persons known to be Episcopal, who because of their
quality, and discretion, were not only allowed to be present; but had all
respect given them that could be expected. And some of them, of Eminent ability
to judge of things, observing the reasonings of the Members, and actings of the
Assembly, said, If the Presbyterians went on at that rate, they would gain all
Scotland to favor them. And I am sure, that this was said by such as are
incomparably beyond his discreet Persons, in every thing that is commendable.
It is an assertion like to these of his gang, which he has page 2. That the
Presbyterians exalt the Antho^ity of their Assemblies above that of King or
Parliament. This is a broad Lie. What he says to support it, of Acts of
Asse^blies against Acts of Parliament; I have answered in my former
Vindication. ^ He next accuses us, that we desired an Assembly after the
Parliament had settled our Government: That is, we are to blame, that we would
think of ordering the Affairs of the House of God, seeing the Parliament had
allowed us so to do. Is the Church of England to blame, because they desired a
Convocation to which he makes our Assembly parallel? We desired to meet for
other ends than settling the Presbyterian Government: We know it was settled by
Christ long before, as his institution, and that now it had the Civil Sanction
by King and Parliament, for its settlement.

2. Our Historian has quickly forgot his work: for instead of telling us what
the Assembly did, he gives us account of what the Parliament Acted: And p. 2,
3. He severely Lasheth the Parliament, for settling the Government of the Church
in the hands of the Presbyterians alone, and such as they should admit, This
conduct I have elsewhere vindicated as most rational: And surely this was so
necessary, that either Episcopacy must be continued, or this must be done: Now
the Convention had voted Episcopacy to be a Grievance to the Nation, and in the
Claim of Right made it a Fundamental Article in the Government, that it should
be abolished: and the Presbyterians being the smaller number (many of them
being removed by Death, through the course of about 30 years, and the hardships
they endured through Episcopal fury; and few coming in their places, being
hindered by a severe Persecution) it had been very incongruous, and inconsistent
with the standing of the Government which they designed to establish, that the
plurality of them who should Govern the Presbyterian Church, should be
Episcopal. Yet it was allowed by by the State, and determined by the Church,
that as many of the Episcopal men as were qualified to be Ministers, and would
submit, to concur with, and act nothing against Presbyterial Government, should
be received into a share of the Government: And such as had Ministerial
qualifications should enjoy their places and benefices, tho they should not so
far own Presbytery as has been mentioned. What is then the injury that he
complains of, done to the Episcopal Clergy? None of them are deprived of
their places, yea none excluded from Ministerial Communion, but of their own
choice; that they will not submit to terms so reasonable, and necessary. They
would have thought us (in the former Reigns) very unreasonable, if we had been
suffered to enjoy our Churches and Stipends, if we were not Drunkards or
Swearers, etc. and yet complained of hard usage; or if we should have demanded
a share in Governing the Episcopal Church, and yet would not submit to the
Bishop. He says, the Public Faith (for even that must abide his severe
censure) promised them protection, upon their Submission to the Civil
Government. Ans. Can he say, That they are not protected in all their. Civil
Rights: But it was never promised, that whoever would submit to the Civil
Government, should be put in Capacity to overturn the Church. To enjoy a place
in the Ministry is no Civil Right. The Stipend is a Civil thing: but a man's
Right to it depends upon his being in the Office, and having the Charge of such
a People: But it was never dreamed that a man should be protected to continue a
Minister, tho he be Ignorant, Scandalous, Erroneous, or supinely Negligent. He
(according to the Modesty of his Party, and their respect to Authority) says,
Their Petition ( viz. which was given in to the Parliament that they might have
a share in the Church Government) was disdainfully rejected, and the Act
continued as it was. Ans. Their Petition was indeed rejected, on the grounds
that I have mentioned; but without any show of disdain, and with as much
respect to them as was due.

3. He comes now, page 3. to reason the Case against the King and Parliament,
because of their settling the Government of the Church in the Hands of
Presbyterians. What is Argumentative in his Discourse I shall consider:
Neglecting the railing that he intermixeth with it, such as, A Presbyterian
Tyranny is established: That they, the Presbyterians, Lord it over their
Brethren, more than ever the Bishops did, or pretended to do: His Reasons, so
far as I can pick them out of his loose Discourse; are first, instead of
fourteen Bishops now sixty are set up; by which he intends, as I suppose,
that the Government of the Church was now settled in so few Hands as sixty. Ans.
The falsehood of this is manifest: The General Assembly consisted of an hundred
and sixteen Ministers, and forty seven Ruling Elders; and they were but
Delegates from the several Presbyteries, in which there were ordinarily a
greater number that sent them, than they that were sent. Now the Government was
not (by the Act of Parliament) settled in the persons of Ministers only, but of
Ruling Elders also: Many of whom are Noblemen, and Gentlemen of good Abilities:
Neither can it be said, that they were set up as Bishops; or acted with their
Lordly domination, as will appear from answering his following Objections. He
next says, Presbyters were subject to them who were no more but Presbyters;
which has no President in the Catholic Church. Ans. It is true, it is not
presidented in the Catholic Church, that one, or more Presbyters, should be
subject to one who is no more but a Presbyter; which is not our Constitution
nor practice: But it has often been, that Presbyters in their single Capacity,
were subject to them who were no more but Presbyters, acting jointly, in a
Church Judicatory; and this is all that is now done. The Presbyterian Church
does not subject the Episcopal Church to them: Nor does one Presbyter among us
judge one Presbyter among them: But the Presbyterian Church combined, judges
every single Presbyter in this National Church. And when he shall demonstrate
the Absurdity of that, we shall yield to his Argument. Again, he argues thus,
They who could not be denied to be lawful Ministers were excluded from any
share in the Discipline and Government of the Church; which is contrary to
Presbyterian Principles. Ans. The Presbyterians never held a Principle, so
universal as what he hinteth, about the privilege of Lawful Ministers to
govern the Church: They never held that a Popish Minister should be a Ruler in
the Protestant Church: And they deny not such to be lawful Ministers: They
maintain, that though it belong to all Ministers generally, to have a share in
the Government of the Church; yet there might be some Cases in which ( pro
praesenti Ecclesiae Statu) they may be restrained from that privilege: Though
they are not to be restrained perpetually, nor in the settled State of the
Church. The Presbyterian Church had long been born down, and almost exhausted;
they are now, through the Mercy of God, restored; they find a great many
Ministers in Charges, who may be useful in preaching the Gospel, but disposed
to overturn the Government of the Church, if it should be put in their Hands;
is it not rational, that they should suffer these to preach, for the Church
needs their help: And yet not suffer them to rule the Church, lest they
overturn her Settlement? They refuse none of them who will secure the
Government, and are otherwise qualified for the Ministry. Again, though we own
them as lawful Ministers; yet we cannot own them as Ministers of the
Presbyterian Church: They have a right to govern the Episcopal Church, to which
they had betaken themselves, and left the Presbyterian Church (though their
Bishops, even in it, did not allow them that privilege) yet that they have a
right to rule the Presbyterian Church we deny. They and we agree in Doctrine,
and therefore we may teach the Church together: But we disagree in Government,
and therefore we cannot rule together. He says, That Presbyterians hold, that
it is unlawful for a Minister to part with his Right of Governing. Ans. But the
Church may deny him the exercise of that privilege, if she find him inhabile
for the exercise of it. He pleads also, That we blamed Bishops that they took
this Power generally to themselves. Ans. We did so, because they excluded the
rest; not on account of any special inhability, but as having no right to such
a power, which we maintain to be in all Presbyters alike. If any say, that
Ministerial power is quid indivisum, and the exercise of teaching cannot be
allowed, where that of Ruling power is restrained: I answer, this is true with
respect to the ordinary and settled State of the Church; but such an
extraordinary case of necessity as this may warrant such a restraint for a
time. But if this Argument has any force, it proves that neither Preaching
nor Ruling should be allowed: and it commends the moderation of the
Presbyterian Church, which will allow them to serve the Lord as they can, when
they cannot do it as they should.

4. He proposes (though not heartily) but does not answer our Reasons for this
conduct. One is, We could not otherwise make our Government sure. And is it not
reasonable that that Government which Christ has settled in his Church (as we
think) and which the Authority of the Nation has settled, should not be rendered
unsafe, by putting it in the hands of the avowed Enemies thereof; when we could
exclude them on such rational grounds as have have been mentioned. Another
Argument he maintains as ours, The Episcopal Men deserved to be thus treated,
for their Apostasy. Ans. I know not who ever brought this Argument: We go not
to the rigor of all the Censure, that that wrong step deserved; we would
rather consider what the present state of the Church, and the promoting of
Truth and Holiness, and Unity, does require; than what Men deserve. We are for
moderation, maugre all the reproaches that he, and such as he cast upon us:
Though at the same time, we think that the Rigor of Church Discipline might put
more force in this Argument than he is aware of. He infers from what he had
discoursed, That Presbyterians juggle with God and Man; because they hold their
Government to be so of Divine Right, that they can make no composition with Men
about it; but when it makes for the Interest, they can make Essential
Alterations. Ans. We hold Parity to be of Divine Right, and cannot yield to
Imparity: But this Parity is not taken away (as he alleges) by excluding them
who have rendered themselves inhabile; more than it is taken away by suspending
a Minister for any Immorality, or Negligence in his Work. Neither is there here
any essential alteration in the Government, more than there is in that Case.
Here is no Juggling, but fair and plain dealing. What he talks of nine hundred
Ministers excluded, is a mistake. We exclude none of them, but such as persist
in their Principles, and Inclinations, to overturn the Government. Neither is
there Inconsistency (as he would make us believe) between making Ruling Power
Essential to a Minister, and susspending the exercise of it for a time. We
hold, that Rationality is essential to a Man, though some Scriblers be now and
then Delirous.

5. From this digression, he returns to his History, page 4. And gives an
account of the meeting of the Ministers and Elders, antecedent to the General
Assembly, indicted by the King and Parliament, to be held October 16. 1690. In
which Narrative, he does in several things, mis-inform his Readers, and
represent things to the disadvantage of truth, and of the Presbyterians. It is
a misrepresentation, That the Act of Parliament Committed the Care and
Management of the Government to these few surviving Presbyterian Ministers who
had not complied with Episcopacy. For it was to them, and the Elders, and such
Ministers and Elders as they had received, or should receive. Another mistake
is, That the Meeting that preceded the forementioned Assembly was called, to
lay down methods how a General Assembly should be called, and constituted,
because one could not be had, according to their minds, after the old manner,
and standing Rules of General Assemblies. Ans. This Meeting was not called for
that end, nor did act any thing to that purpose, nor needed they do so: For the
Act of Parliament had excluded all the Episcopal Ministers from sitting in the
General Assembly, unless they were taken in by the Presbyterians. All that they
did, that could any way concern the Constitution of the Assembly, was, that
Presbyteries should send three, or four of their number to the Assembly, where
they had sent but two, when there were more Ministers in each Presbytery; which
could no way alter the Constitution of the Assembly. He gives a false account
of the Act of Parliament, by which Presbyterian Government was settled; when he
says, That by it none had a share of the Government, but such Ministers as had
been removed by the restoration of Episcopacy. For both Ruling Elders are
expressly mentioned, and such Ministers as the Presbyterians had received, or
should receive. Hence follows another mistake; viz. That they were over-seen
when they admitted others into the Government, and were by that means
over-voted. None were admitted but such as the Act of Parliament reached; nor
was there any over-voting in the Case; for both they who had been turned out by
the Bishops, and they who were after taken in, did generally agree in the same
Votes. He would revive the old forgotten, and Fatal Division, that rent and
ruined this Church, about the Protestation and Remonstrance: But, through the
Mercy of God, it is not so much as mentioned among us. That some of the
Remonstrators, who had been, under that woeful Schism in the Church, deposed by
the opposite party, sat among us, is true; and we know no reason why it should
not be so; for their Sentences were taken off, long before: And what was moved,
and done in that meeting was, that the revoking of these Sentences should be
now confirmed by this Meeting, as being of more extensive Authority than these
which had recalled them. That any of them who sat there, were deposed for
scandalous and gross Crimes: Or for any thing but their Opinion in that
controverted point, and their practice according to it; is more than we know,
and unless he can make it appear, he ought to be reputed a Slanderer; if he or
any else shall prove it, we shall acknowledge our Error, at least our
Ignorance, and shall rectify what we have done amiss. What he says of Mr.
Pitcairn's protesting against their sitting there, is a gross mistake: That
Reverend Brother was dissatisfied with the way of wording the Determination of
the Meeting in that Affair, which some proposed; and was a little hot about it;
but he was soon satisfied: Neither did he enter any Protestation; though he spoke
of it: Nor did he object against the recalling of their Sentences. In all this
our Author gives his Readers a most false and unfair Idea of our Affairs.

6. Which he does yet more in what follows, he tells us of a Debate betwixt
the old and the young Men, which of the two should Rule. A Controversy that
never was so much as named in any of our meetings, nor for what I know in
private Discourse. Nothing can be more false than the story that he tells;
for instance in this matter, of a Contest between Mr. Rule and Mr. Webster. No
such words were ever spoken: And if they had, there had been no truth in them.
For what he talks (in his Marginal Note) of the Contribution of the Sisters,
savoureth more of Spite than Wit. Some of the Nonconformists lived on their own
Estates, others by their Industry in Lawful Callings, yet diligently preaching
the Gospel, others by the Charity of good Women, and good Men too; as our Lord
and his Apostles did: And his own party are now brought to that Mortification,
that I suppose the Contributions of the Sisters are not despised by them. He
quarrelleth with the Name of the General Meeting that preceded the Assembly, as
being none of the Names of the Church Judicatories known since the Reformation.
What if we should say, it was an extraordinary Meeting, such as that
extraordinary Case of the Church did allow: And yet it wanted not Authority
neither from God, it being made up of the Officers that Christ has appointed
to Rule his Church: Nor from Man, we have then a Liberty granted fot the
exercise of our Ministry, in all the parts of it. We may also defend it to be a
General Assembly of this Presbyterian Church; which differed in nothing from
that which followed, but that the one had the countenance of the King and
Parliament; this other only that of the King directly, and of the Parliament
indirectly: The Parliament having allowed the King a power of granting
Indulgence to Dissenters ^om the Established way, as was noted on Letter 2.
Sect. 16. In his account of the Work done by this meeting, he does grossly
prevaricate, while he says, They prescribed Rules for trying Episcopal
Ministers. They did indeed suppose that Presbyteries have an Intrinsic power
of judging the Life and Doctrine of all the Ministers within their bounds, and
of excluding the unfit, and receiving them that are qualified; but considering
the present paucity of Presbyterian Ministers (which yet was not such as he
would have us believe.) They were so far from directing them to try these men,
that they did wisely caution them, and some way restrain them, in this Trial:
For their appointment was, that if, in trying these men, the Presbyteries
should meet with any Libel the Relevancy of which was doubtful, or if the
sufficiency of the proof were not clear; in such Cases they should not proceed
to a Sentence, but refer the Case to the General Assembly; which was soon after
to sit. What could they do more to prevent Injury to these Men; without denying
that power of Presbyteries which is their due? He instanceth in some
Presbyteries where were very few Ministers; we deny it not; but that was but in
some few places, and at first: There are more now, even in these places; and in
other parts of the Country there were even then a competent number in
Presbyteries, and in some places few or none wanting: As in all the
Presbyteries of the Synod of Glasgow. That there were so few, is not to be
wondered at: The whole Nation being but the other day under Episcopacy: The Youth
having been generally so bred; and the Presbyterians being almost worn out by a
long tract of time, and heavy Persecution. There were fewer Protestant
Ministers in the beginning of the Reformation from Popery, and yet it was not
thought fit that either the Church should be without all Government, or that it
should be put into the hands of Popish Priests while they continued such. He is
also displeased with appointing greater Presbyteries to send more Ministers; as
being an unequal Representation of the Church. Others will think that this was
most equal: For the General Assembly is the Representative of the Presbyteries
immediately (though more remotely they represent the whole Church.) And therefore
where Presbyteries are unequal, their Representation should be so too. But by
this means some part of the Nation were not at all represented. Ans. It could
not be otherwise, where there were no Presbyterian Ministers; that place of the
Church could not be represented by Episcopalians; for they neither had by Law,
nor could claim in Reason, a share of the Presbyterian Government: Neither can
this Argument derogate from the Authority of the General Assembly over the
whole Church; more than the vacancy of a Parish can warrant them to plead
exemption from the power of the Presbytery, because they have not a Minister to
represent them in it.

7. The next fault that he finds is, The Meeting appointed a Fast on the
Lords Day; and says, That it was the Custom of the Old Presbyterians to
appoint all their Fasts on the Lords Day. This last is notoriously false. The
reason why that Fast was on the Lords Day, it was the time of Harvest, when it
could not be observed on a Week day, without high Inconveniency: Neither do we
think Fasting inconsistent with the Nature of the Lords Day, Religious Joy and
Religious Sorrow do very well agree. His story about the Licensing the Treatise
of Ruling Elders and Deacons, is a gross Calumny; and has several Lies in it.
1. The Licensing of that Book was not the deed of the Meeting, but of the
Clerk, without their appointment or knowledge: And he also alleged, that the
Printer added the words which imported a Monopoly of it. As soon as the Book
came out, the Meeting were highly offended with the Clerk for this presumption;
not only because he had done it in their Name, without their appointment; but
because (as was said publicly in the Meeting, Nemine Contradicente) it
belonged to the State to License Books, and to Monopolize the Printing of them.
For this the Clerk was severely rebuked, and hardly escaped being deposed. 2.
That the Privy Council checked this, or called in the Books, is false: For their
Lordships understood that it was not the deed of the Meeting; and that the
Meeting took care to get the License taken from the Copies, as soon as they
understood it. Here then we have an Evidence, how gladly the Author would pick
quarrels with us, and make us odious; though at the rate of telling lying
Stories, which every one can contradict. He now begins, page 7. to give an
Account of the Actings of the Presbyteries against the Prelatick Incumbents,
between the General Meeting and the General Assembly, which sat in October
1690. He blames them, That they were more careful to Empty Churches, than to
Fill them. This is not true, they endeavored both to purge out the Scandalous,
and such as were like to do more Hurt than Good; and to plant the Churches with
qualified Persons; and something was done both ways: Though we confess,
planting Work went more slowly on than was wished; partly because of the
paucity of qualified Men; but mainly through the opposition that some Men of
this Authors Temper made, Viis and modis to discourage people from Calling
Ministers: And to perplex that Affair, when ever it was attempted. It is false,
That none were sent to the West, where there was most need: And that they
rather seated themselves in Lothian, as being a better Country. There is
neither Truth nor Candor in this Assertion: Even Galloway (which therefore was
most destitute, because the Incumbents had generally either been driven away,
or deserted) is now tolerably supplied; though not so well as it should be, or as
I hope in a little more time it may be. He gives a false and malicious Cause,
of the ejecting of Ministers in the end of page 8. viz. They were conscious of
their own Inabilities, and thought it not their Interest to tolerate such as
accustomed the people to Sense and solid Discourses. No other Answer is here
fit, but to tell the Reader, That nothing but a fancy, tinctured with Malice
and Prejudice, can make one so compare them who were cast out, with them who
were put in. His Stories of what this Man or the other said, when a reason was
asked of their putting out of Ministers, and of their Preaching in Meeting
Houses where Episcopal Men were in the Church. These, I say, are not worth our
notice. We will not defend what every private person says in Discourse; yea,
not what every particular Minister says in the Pulpit, (though some Notes of
Sermons he talks of that I never heard of before, nor am at leisure to
enquire about them.) We can give better Reasons for both these practices, viz.
We put out Men, because they are Scandalous, and unfit to Edify the People,
and do rather harden them in Wickedness: And we Preached in Meeting Houses
because many, often the most part, of the Parishes, would not hear the
Prelatical Incumbents.

8. There follows a whole Fardel of Lies and Malicious Representations, of the
procedure of the Presbyteries: Few Lines in pages nine and ten that do not
contain some Falsehood or other; as, That Presbyteries sent out Spies to observe
Men's public and private Discourses and Practices. Let them give one instance
of this, as the act of any one Presbytery: If any private person did make such
enquiry, we know not, nor can we in all Cases condemn it: That they received
Libels of old Crimes, is not so absurd as he would make us believe: If the
Church have not been satisfied, nor the Scandal of them taken off. That a
Design was formed to disgrace the Clergy: That there was little or nothing made
out against them; are a couple of falsehoods. The former no man can prove: The
latter I have before disproved; and could give abundance of Instances. That the
Scandals of one, or a few was charged on the whole party; is an impudent and
false Assertion: He says, That the least defects of Behavior were heightened
to gross Crimes: And what was no fault we made one by uncharitable
Construction. Whether some private persons, who had more Zeal than
Understanding, might not do so, I cannot tell: But he is now speaking of the
Actings of the Judicatories; and that any of them did so, is false. That
insignificant Articles were accumulated to a great height; Is also said, but
cannot be proved. That some Ministers were charged with Admitting to the Office
of Elders, or not Censuring Men of Immoral Conversations; Is not to be blamed:
The Apostle gives express Directions about the Qualifications that should be
required of Elders: And it is certainly culpable to overlook Scandals in any,
and more especially in Church Officers: That whatever was offered in a Libel,
by any Bigot, was admitted: Is no further true, than that they considered it,
but what was found to be irrelevant, (as many things were) was rejected: And no
man was Censured for it. The Libels of Mr. Graham, and Mr. Cooper ought not to
have been mentioned by him; for the one had never any effect; nor was the man
Censured. The other is before the Commission, and the Sentence will be taken
off, if it be found to be unjust. And I hope Presbyterians are not to be
blamed, because some less Intelligent people do, sometimes, complain of men,
where there is little Cause. It is next to ridiculous, that our Author (having
no more that he can devise against us) blotteth Paper, with what was designed
to be Libelled against some; when it was not done; And with some frivolous
Accusations, that he says, were made; when he cannot tell by whom, or against
whom: I am weary of Transcribing these impertinent Recitals, of irrelevant
Libels, that were not used by Judicatories, as the ground of Sentences: About
which he spends also page 11, and part of 12. Besides what I have said, let
it be considered, that some of the Processes on the Libels that he mentions,
are yet depending and not discussed: As that of Mr. Crawford, and Mr. Wood:
Others of them are discussed, and the Sentence revoked by the Commission of the
General Assembly, as that of Mr. Bows of Abotshall.

9. He takes notice page 12. That in their Libels they would never give any of
the Episcopal Clergy the Title of Minister; but only of Incumbent. If this be
true (which I much doubt) it is but what they do to us, in all these Pamphlets
that I have under consideration; and on all occasions: But I know no
Presbyterian Minister who denies them to be Ministers. The Story that he
tells of what past between Mr. Graham and an unnamed person, I neither know
nor do believe it to be true: And if any said so, we disown it. That the
Ministers always had a hand in drawing the Libels: That they were all of the
same strain, or that all was concerted among them to disgrace the Clergy; are
Assertions as remote from Truth as any thing can be, if this were true, how
came it that some Libels were wholly rejected, in others some things were
judged not Relevant: If what he alleges was done, sometimes, by some one
Minister, it is not chargeable on the Presbytery: Far less does it follow, that
it was always practiced. He complains likewise of the manner of Processes
against the Clergy: That seldom the Accuser was mentioned to the Accused: They
always received the Libel, and sustained the Validity of it, before the Accused
was heard; nor was he suffered to be present at the Examination of the
Witnesses, and the Witnesses were all allowed to be present at the Examination
of every one of them: And the most professed Enemies were received as
Witnesses. Ans. For the former two, It is questionable whether these things be
required in a Process about Scandal before an Ecclesiastic Judicatory; but
whether it be so or not, I am sure it was otherwise done (for the most part)
than he affirms. For the other two, it is so far from being always so as he
says, that if any ^ocess was found to be so managed; and if Complaint was
made, the Sentence was declared void and null; of which after. He brings two
instances of such Irregular Proceedings, viz. Against Mr. Heriot of Dalkeith,
whose Case is extant in Print: And an Answer to it daily expected (for it is
now in the Press) to which I refer the Reader. And against Mr. Purvess of
Glencorse, who accused the Witnesses of Malice, as having assaulted him in the
Pulpit, and that they were admitted to give Evidence against him: And he
mentions what Mr. Selkirk Minister at Crightoun said, in Defense of that
Conduct: This were certainly blameworthy, if it were true, but indeed there is
no truth in it, for neither did they ever pull him out of the Pulpit, nor take
him by the Throat (as is alleged) only he having promised them to Preach no
more among them, and yet attempting to falfify his Promise, they did, without
such Violence, hinder him: Neither were such words, or words to that effect,
spoken by Mr. Selkirk: And some of the Witnesses were rejected; and they who
were admitted were purged from Malice, or partial Counsel, by their Solemn
Oath. Another mismanagement he mentions is, That if one part of the
Deposition of the Witnesses seemed to prove the Libel, tho the other did
exculpate the Minister, or extenuate his fault; the one part was marked, and
the other not: And he tells us of an Instance of this, in one who is since
dead: But does not tell who did so, nor against whom; and therefore not being
able to enquire into it, we pass it as one of his many Forgeries. However such
practices we disown, as far from our way. I am sure it was not so done, but the
contrary, in any Judicatory where I have been a Member. He says, Accusing
Witnesses were encouraged, and clearing Witnesses not noticed: But gives no
Instances, wherefore I give the same reply to it, as to the former. He also
accuses us, That when a Sentence was read against a Minister at his own
Church, the whole Libel was read, tho some Articles were frivolous, and others
not proved. This also is but his Assertion, and no way proved. It is our way to
read the Sentences, and to put no Article of the Libel in the Sentence. But
such as are of weight to bear such a Sentence, and are sufficiently proved.

10. After all this, I do not deny that some of the Presbyteries passed
Sentence on some Incumbents, on slender grounds: but I have already showed (
Ans. to the late letter, Sect 5.) That the Church did what they could to have
prevented this: And I must now tell you that instances of this were very few:
most of the sentences and proceedings will abide the most rigorous examination
of unbyassed men, who have zeal against gross immoralities: And I must further
inform the Reader, that where complaint has been made, the General Assembly
has referred to their Commission, to examine such processes, and to take off
all Sentences that were ill grounded; which the Commission has done to three
of them, which are all that have as yet come before them. Wherefore such
proceedings are not to be imputed to the Presbyterians, but to some few among
them, who through want of experience in Church Discipline, have mistaken, and
are ready to learn more Skill and Warriness. P. 14. He gives account of the
carriage of the Episcopal Clergy toward the Presbyterians, who dealt with them
as is above mentioned: But because he makes no remarks on it, neither shall I.
But what follows I must not pass: It is a malicious reproach of Presbyterians
as men of Little Sense or Learning. Tho he has the impudence to assert this,
when ever it shall be tried, he will be found unable to stand before their
Arguments, And I am sure he has given no proof of either Sense or Learning, in
his Book; but many Demonstrations of Spite and Railing. He says they have lost
their Interest in the Nation, are deserted: That men are ashamed of them, they
are Dreaded as the plague of Mankind; What may be expected from a Tongue set on
fire of Hell? They are not so looked on by any, but such as he is; whose kind
respects to any man, were indeed a reproach to him: Or by a debauched crew,
whom his faction indulged in their Immoralities; to which Presbyterial
Discipline is a terror. He says p. 15. That the most bigoted and hotheaded
were chosen for the Assembly: And instanceth in two learned men who were not
chosen. But it was evident to all beholders, who were capable to judge, and
even to the conviction of some of his own Party, who had not abandoned all
Reason, and good Nature, (as this man has done) That the Assembly was made up
of many Grave, Learned, and Sober men: And their Actings will prove it in
despite of his reproaches and obloquy against them. The two whom he mentions
are learned and worthy men: But all could not be chosen: And I know some very
fit Persons, out of an excess of Modesty, shunned it, and got others chosen.
That it was concluded that Mr. George Campbel should be shuffled out of the
Assembly, is an Assertion Demonstrative of a Brazen Forehead, in the Asserter:
By whom was this concluded? Yea, or wished? For my part, I know them not: Nor
never heard of any such motion. His going so near to be chosen Moderator (which
this Pamphlet takes notice of) shows, how acceptable he was to most of the
Ministers: But there is a sort of men who should have good Memories; which our
Author here wanted. His base Reflections on some others, that were chosen, do
show his own Character: viz. Irreconcilable spite against all that bear the
name of Presbyterians. We could tell of hundreds of his party, for one of ours,
guilty of gross immoralities: And even some who were in highest places in their
Church; of whose repentance we have not heard much. But that we should not have
mentioned, if it had not been in defense of the Interest that he sets
himself to disparage. Nothing can escape the Lash of this Authors virulent pen:
P. 16. He most unmannerly takes upon him to discourse of the Kings Choice of a
Commissioner, to represent his Royal Person in the Assembly: And to tell who
was the fittest Person. Where he takes occasion to Calumniate the Earl of
Crawford; by telling several gross Lies about his Lordship: As that he rejoiced
in the expectation of being Commissioner: And showed a grudge at the
disappointment: Such malapart abusing of any man, by judging his inward
thoughts, (for I am sure nothing of that kind ever appeared in his Lordships
words or behavior, but much to the contrary) but especially, to deal so by so
noble a Peer of the Nation, and who is so deservedly honored by all good men;
this I say, deserves a more severe Reprimand, than my pen can give: His
Lordship did what in him lay to shun that difficult Post: As also the Noble
Lord on whom it was cast, was far from designing it. That the Earl sat in the
Assembly house before he was a Member, does not prove what is intended by it:
For so did many others, both Noblemen, and of inferior quality: Some out of
Satisfaction they had to see the Church again settled on her ancient
foundations; others out of Curiosity. That his Lordship did officiously meddle
in all the concerns of the Assemblies, before he was a Member; is as remote
from truth as East is from West. The contrary appeared in his Lordships often
refusing to give advice when the Moderator desired it. That letters were
written to procure a Commission to my Lord, is likewise false. It was
voluntarily sent to him from the Town of St. Andrews: He being Lord Provost of
that Corporatin. We have a further false Imputation upon that Noble Earl. That
at the Visitation of the University at St. Andrews, he used the Masters
Roughly, particularly refused to suffer Mr. Weems, Infirm through age, to lean
on the step of a Stair. Ans. That Noble Earl dealt no otherwise with such as
appeared before the Commission, than did become his Character: His Lordship and
the rest of the Commission, sat there by Authority of King and Parliament: And
therefore disrespect to them could not but reflect on the Authority which they
represented: When Mr. Weems complained that he could not stand, he was allowed
to remove that he might refresh himself.

11. He comes now at last, p. 17. to his purpose, to give account of the
Assembly: And begins with the Sermons that were Preached at the opening of
it. He quarrelleth that there were two Sermons: Saying, the Presbyterians can
never have their full of Preaching. But the Reader may know that it has been
Customary in the Church of Scotland (and none but such mockers will reproach
them for it) to make the first Day of the Assembly a Day of Fasting and Prayer;
and two Sermons were no superfluity in that case. The Sermons he also finds
fault with Mr. Cunningham's Sermon, that it was borrowed from Mr. Oliver
Bowlis, being a Sermon that he Preached, Anno. 1643. The reverend and worthy
Mr. Cunningham, being now at his rest, cannot answer for himself; nor tell us
what to say for him in this particular: But this I can say in general (and will
be believed by all that knew him, and are capable to judge) that few Ministers
of the Gospel did outstrip him in Ministerial Qualifications: And he needed be
beholding to no Man for a Sermon. The other Sermon by Mr. Patrick Symson, he
says, was course Presbyterian stuff; but as Wise Men as he, thought it a Solid
Pertinent, and Useful Discourse, to be preferred to hundreds of the Jingling,
Py-bald Orations that many of his party do spend the short Glass with. What
Supremacy or Authority he ascribed to the Assembly, our Author would fain tell
us, but shows by his Expressions, that either his Ignorant Informers did not
understand what was spoken. or he did not comprehend what they told him. What
was said on that Head, I do not remember; but we ascribe no absolute power to
the General Assembly: That their power is immediately from Christ; that is,
that no Man gives it, we own: He falls p. 18. on the choosing of the
Moderator. Where he takes occasion to spit all his Venom against the four
Ministers who were put on the List, out of which the Moderator was to be
chosen: All this I might pass over; for my business is not to vindicate
persons, but things: And all who have read thus far in this Book, will be
convinced that his Tongue is no slander; and the credit of those Brethren is
such as he will not be able to Ruin, by his Lies and Reproaches. Wherefore I
shall touch this part of his Satyr but lightly. Mr. Camphel, he says nothing
against, and indeed his praise is in the Churches: And our Author had met with
him before, page 15. And had told only of him, That to please his Brethren he
had been more severe against the Episcopal Clergy than was his Wont. Nothing
can be more false: He is no Man-pleaser, and he always had a true Zeal against
that way, and against the Immoralities of some of them: And now shows no more
of Zeal than is consistent with Wisdom and Moderation. Mr. Rule comes next on
the Stage, He is called Doctor Rule, because he did practice Medicine, and took
the Degree of Doctor in it likewise, when he had no other way to maintain his
Family; yet never giving over the Work of the Ministry; but preaching
frequently. He was once Independent: That is absolutely false. At Aberdeen, he
withstood the Temptation, when he had great Offers to take the Charge of an
Independent Congregation: And in Northumberland (where he had his first Charge)
he suffered no small Loss because he would not fall in with that way. His want
of Latin, and sp^aking false Latin, is false. He is ready, as he has done,
to give proof to the contrary, and to compete with this Pretender, when he
will: For His Prayers in Latin; they are longer, or shorter, as the occasion
requires; but never so short as he alleges; neither does he use to pray very
long in public, even in English. For the Ignorance discovered in the things he
has written; I wish this Sciolist would make it appear by a solid Refutation:
The passage that he brings for instance, he is ready to defend, with all the
probability the subject Matter is capable of. And if it were a mistake, it is
no proof of Ignorance, to have a different Notion about a passage in an Author,
from them who follow, as they lead, who have gone before them. If this Momus
will make his Censure on the True Representation of Presbyterian Government, it
is like Mr. Rule, or some for him, will give him a fair Answer. But lest all
this be not enough to disparage him, and his Ministry, He often venteth himself
bitterly against the Episcopal Party: Others think quite contrary, few
Presbyterians do more seldom mention them, and an Argumentative way, rather
than bitterness, is his strain. If it can be made appear that he has done
otherwise, none shall blame him more than I shall do. The many particulars he
is accused of, have obliged me to say more in his Vindication than I intended.
In the next place he gives a Character of Mr. Meldrum. He spends a great
many words about him: But the whole matter is in short, That once he complied
with Episcopacy, took the Oath of Canonical Obedience (which our Author is
told, That he denies;) That going out for the Test, he left the Episcopal
Party; because when the Test was taken away, he was not permitted to return to
his Ministry at Aberdeen. The Worth and Integrity of this Man is known to all
in Scotland; and acknowledged by all, except them who prize no Man but for
being like themselves. That he complied once, was a Token of Humane Infirmity:
That he has now left that way, is commendable; though it stir the Choler of this
Scribler. His fourth Man is Mr. Kennedy, who was chosen Moderator, he is called
Mr. Kennedy by his own party, and if any familiarly call him Father Kennedy,
his Age may bear such a Designation; but they who call him Bitter-Beard, do
mistake his Temper. That he was with the Army at Newcastle, or received 6000
Marks, is most false: He was never in England till 1690. when he was sent, with
others to London, with an Address to the King. The Causes of his Deposition
1660. are foully misrepresented. It was only for his Opinion in the matters
that then divided the Church. That his Deposition was never taken off till the
Penult day of the Assembly, is not the least of the Lies that this Paper is
laden with: It, with others, was taken off several years before, and this was
ratified by the General Meeting some Months before the Assembly; and all that
had been done in this matter was confirmed by the Assembly, a day before it was
dissolved.

12. The Moderator being chosen: He tells of a Competition for the Clerkship:
It may be, some of these persons, that he names, might be mentioned in private
Discourses; but never any such competition appeared before the Assembly: And
most of them were so far from either petition or competition, that they rather
declined it when it was mentioned to them by their Friends. He accuses the
Assembly as insufficient to represent the Church of Scotland, as that of Trent
was to represent the Catholic Church: But he cannot deny that it represented
the Presbyterian Church; and was all that could be had of a Presbyterian
Assembly: And we deny not that the Council of Trent represented the Popish,
though not the Catholic Christian Church, as was pretended. And indeed there
were some from all parts of the Nation, even from the Northern Counties of
Ross, Murray, Aberdeen. That there wanted from one or two Counties, makes
nothing against the Authority of the Assembly: For there are places in the
Highlands from which seldom or never there have been Commissioners at any
Church Assembly. What Spirit ruled in this Assembly, he determines, with the
same malice that has hitherto appeared in his Book; and mocketh at the Prayers
that were put up for another Spirit. By this, and such like passages, it
appears what Spirit acts this Scribler. It is false, That the Presbyterians
in Scotland have always contested with their Kings about the Power of Calling
Assemblies. Their Kings never denied their Intrinsic Power in this, except
when they were influenced by a Prelatical, Erastian Crew about them: But on the
contrary have settled it by their Laws, as the Churches privilege: As in the
Act 1592. which is ratified by an Act of this current Parliament; neither did
they deny to the King a Power of Calling Assemblies, nor have ever refused to
meet when called by him: We think it most desirable when the King and the
Church agree about this; and it moves this Man's spite, that Affairs were so
managed in this Assembly. The ridiculous Expression in Prayer that he imputes
to Mr. Cunningham, calling it a pleasant passage, is a mere Forgery: That
Reverend and Wise Man, understood well what he said. He is not ashamed to tell
Lies in the Face of the Sun, and to impose upon our Senses; when he not only
denies the Kings Letter and the Assemblies Answer to it to be published (both
which are extant in the printed Acts of the General Assembly) but he falsifieth
the Kings Letter most palpably, in making the King say, That he settled the
Government, because it was agreeable to the Inclinations of the People. Whereas
it is, That Government which was judged to be so. And that He would have them
do nothing that might displease their Neighbor Church: Whereas the Letter
says, That Moderation is expected from them by their Neighbor Churches. He
makes no Churches their Standard; far less the Church of England; who His
Majesty well knew, were dissatisfied with the very Being of that Assembly; and
with all that they could Act, in managing of Presbyterian Government. He does
also mis-represent the Assemblies Answer to His Majesty's Letter; as affirming,
That their Government was not only agreeable to the Inclinations of the People,
but most agreeable to the Word of God Whatever be our Opinion in that (which we
neither deny nor: conceal) it is not so expressed: The words are, We are
persuaded that it is not more agreeable to the Inclinations and Conscientious
Persuasions, of all within this Kingdom, who are best affected to Your
Majesty's Person and Government; than it is acceptable to God. He talks next
of an Act designed, but never concluded, for asserting the Divine Right of
Presbyterial Government: And that it was the Legal Government of this Church: I
think indeed that all the Assembly did concur in this Sentiment, but some
thought it fit to express it by an Act, and others thought is not expedient at
this time; and it is like had regard to his Majesty's satisfaction, to whom it
might have been uneasy, in his present Circumstances. What harm was there in
all this? Praecepta positiva non obligant ad semper? He says, It is clear from
our Histories, That Presbytery was never settled but in Times of Rebellion: And
that this is declared in a late Discourse: But if he had pleased to read what
is written on both sides, he might have seen the contrary cleared in a late
Vindication, in Answer to that Discourse, what a Member said in Parliament,
That Presbytery was the only (or the best) Security against the Encroachments
of Kings; was much disrelished by all that heard it, and suspected to proceed
from no good will to Presbyterian Government; nor are Presbyterians obliged to
Answer for it: The Assembly did indeed promise Moderation in their Answer to
the Kings Letter: and nothing to the contrary was seen among them; and we know
His Majesty does expect it from them; Whatever malign Insinuations this Man use
to the contrary.

13. He comes to give the account of the Sermons Preached in time of the
Assembly, especially before my Lord Commissioner. And he is so ridiculous, as
to take notice of the least word that escaped any in the Assembly: By which he
shows both his Malice, and how little it has to work upon; when he must pick
up such things to fill up his pages, as that one moved, that some might be
employed to preach in the Churches of Conformists in Edinburgh: Which was not
seconded by any in the Assembly. His General, account of Mr. Meldrum's Sermon
cannot be answered: It was satisfying to Intelligent, and Serious, Unbyassed
Hearers, tho may be, not to profane Mockers. What one Hamilton said, of want
of the Gospel for 38 Years; I never before heard of; and look on it as invented
by our Author, or some of his Informers. The rest of the Sermons (except these
of Mr. Carstairs, and Mr. Wily whose praises as eminent Preachers of the
Gospel, their Brethren do not envy) he Treats with that Bitterness, Malice,
and contempt, that is suitable to the Historical Talent of many of his party.
If he had mentioned any evidences of such faultiness in these Sermons, they
should have been considered: But his Railing Declamations are to be despised.
If the Debauchery of his party did not more tempt People to count all Religion
a sham, than the Preaching of Presbyterians does, it were well. His bitter
taunting of the Prayers of the Servants of God (which is his work. p. 35.) Is
neither like to bring Credit to Religion, nor to his Cause: Was it ever heard
of before, among Christians, that when so weighty affairs were in hand,
spending time in Prayer was fit to be ridiculed: If this be to be vile, we will
be yet more vile: And will contemn what may be the sentiment about it, of such
as he mentions. I am sure they whom he thus ridiculeth, minded nothing but to
seek help of God to manage his work right; and the Lord was pleased to help
them to pray, and a return of their Prayers was not wanting. An unsavory
expression he mentions, to have been used in Prayer ( p. 36.) Which I do not
remember to have heard; but it is not unusual for this Historian to Coin, where
he wants wherewith to reproach us. He blames The slow proceedings of the
Assembly: And if more haste had been made, he would certainly called it
Rashness, and precipitation: For he has a mind to find Fault. He talks of
differences among us which were smoothered. Was ever so many men met, where
there was no different apprehensions of either the matters, or the way of
managing them, or the wording of things? and was it not prudence to compromise
what might tend to a difference? but let his malice prompt his Critical Skill
to its utmost Capacity, I hope he cannot show that we did not agree in what was
material, or that we could not bear with one another in what was of less
moment. Our receiving them who had broken the Unity of the Church, and were
called Cameronians, he endeavors to turn to our reproach. It is true they
gave in a Paper that we were not pleased with, to satisfy their own mistking
Consciences, and to quiet the People whom they had led aside: We were far from
approving that Paper, but did expressly condemn it: And accepted them on another
which they gave in, which contained nothing but their Submission to the Church,
and their promise of endeavoring to preserve the Unity of it. Who can blame
this? and is it not the exercise of that moderation which becomes the Gospel?
But that they were told, that they had done us good service, or that any
insinuation was made of approving of their former way, is among the rest of his
false Representations which his Book is stuffed with. For what end he takes
notice of the competition about Mr. Semple, I know not: For here is no matter
of reproach: Only he misrepresenteth the debate about allowing some Ministers
to go to Northumberland, at the desire of the People there: Much more was said
for it, than he mentions; and what was of more weight: And what he does
notice is falsely narrated: There was no mention made of planting the Gospel in
England: He whom our Author imputes this to, never thought that they of the
Church of England had not the Gospel: Nor was it said that between Berwick and
Newcastle they wanted the word of God; but, that the Presbyterians wanted the
Ordinances of the Gospel; not being allowed to enjoy them with the Church,
unless they would comply with humane Ceremonies in the Worship of God; which
they could not do with a good Conscience. What was said of the Practice of
Piety in those parts, I do not remember; I know there are not a few in that
place of the Country, who may be in the Judgment of Charity, thought to fear
the Lord: And there are also many, yea, a far greater number, of whom the
Assertion he mentions is true. The truth is, this Author has inured himself
to the foulest Lies and Calumnies, that he can hardly speak or write Truth. A
further instance of this is, p. 39. That when before Voting it was desired that
the Moderator might pray (not for drowning the Noise of the Assembly, but for
direction from the Lord in a case that was doubtful and of moment to the
Church) Mr. Kirtoun should have said, What needs all this fool praying? Mr.
Kirtoun uses not to speak of prayer with such contempt, and if he had so said,
it had not past in the Assembly without a check, and indeed he is in this be^ed.

14. The account he gives of Mr. Campbels transportation from Drumfries, to be
Minister at Edinburgh, and Professor of Divinity in the College there, needs
little Animadversion, save that by giving so lame an account of the Debate
about the Inward Call, he would represent us as having little knowledge in
these things. The Inward Call was not said to consist in the things he
mentions; but, in being qualified by a sufficiency of gifts for the Work, and
in the inclination of the Mind to serve God in that Work; both which are from
the Lord. It was said, that the Church was Judge of the former; and that when
one had these qualifications, and also the Outward Call from the Church; if he
pretended aversion, or want of the other part of the Inward Call; viz.
Inclination, he must give some reason for that aversion: For the Lord uses not
to work Inclinations, or Aversions in men, which are without reason: And of
these Reasons the Church is also Judge: For the Spirit of the Prophets is
subject to the Prophets. It will now appear, that either the Author, or his
Informers did not understand what was spoken on this Subject: Or that they did
prevaricate in representing it. About the Earl of Crawford's receiving a
Commission from the Town of St. Andrews to represent them as Ruling Elder in
the Assembly; I have said enough above to stop his mouth, and to refel what he
here says; only he adds, that Joy might be seen in my Lords Countenance when
be received it; which none could perceive, except such as can fancy any thing
that their ill will suggesteth to them. For my Lords seeking time of
Deliberation till Lammas, as Mr. Campbel had; it was not intended as what he
sought with expectation, but as an expression of his wish; and of his dislike
of allowing so much time to Mr. Camphel, to the great detriment of the
College; at which others also were dissatisfied, though they quietly acquiesced
in the determination of the Assembly. For the Petition from Dundie, it was not
said, They had not the Gospel; for they had one Minister. What is recorded of
that passage is, that the Presbyterian Congregation in Dundie, made Application
to the Assembly, complaining that they wanted two Ministers, and desiring that
the Assembly would take care to supply those Vacancies. But that the Moderator,
or any else, said, that there was no true Minister in Angus, is a falsehood,
like most of his other Assertions: For none of us deny the Episcopal Ministers
to be truly Ministers; though we think a Bishop alone should not Ordain. It is
also false, that any such expression was used by the Assembly, as, offering the
Gospel to the people of Angus: The words are, that they should go to Angus, and
travel in the Work of the Gospel, in Vacant Churches, and where they should be
called. This is far from supposing that the Gospel was not in that County; or
that there were no Ministers there. It is of the same stamp, that he makes the
Moderator tell two young men, who had been preaching in Angus, and had ill
reception there; That as they had offered the Gospel to that people in the name
of the General Meeting, so they should now offer it in the name of the
Assembly. We offer the Gospel to all whom we preach to, in the name of Christ,
and not in the name of men. Another Imputation of the same kind is, that the
Moderator said, We will plant Ministers in Dundie, whether the Town-Council
will or not. I do not remember that such words were spoken, or words to that
effect: But if they were, what the Moderator says, is not always the mind of
the Assembly; but only when a thing is proposed, and assented to, either by
Vote, or by Silence. He tells us, p. 34. Of Mr. William Spence, who conformed,
but fell off from the Bishops, because denied an Augmentation of Stipend: He
spread Papers against them; they deposed, and excommunicated him. This man was
sent by the Assembly, to preach in Angus. Ans. That Mr. William Spence fell off
from the Episcopal party on the account mentioned, is utterly false: But it is
the way of these men, when any fall from their way, from conviction of
Conscience (as many have done) to ascribe it to some other Cause: And it is but
suitable to their temper, who know not what it is to concern their own
Consciences in such matters. Their Deposing and Excommunicating him, was for
his breaking off from their Communion, and his expressing his Reasons, and for
speaking against some of their practices, which galled them: And therefore the
General Meeting, October. 11. 1687. After exact search into the grounds of his
Sentence, did find and declare it to be void: and this was ratified by the
General Assembly, Nov. 12. 1690.

15. He tells us of a Letter from Aberdeen, Desiring Ministers to be sent to
them, and complaining that the Gospel had not been preached among them for
thirty years. And Mr. Meldrum heard this read in the Assembly, and did not
Contradict it. which the Author heavily agggravateth. This is another Gross
mis-representation; like the former: Neither they who desired Ministers, nor
they who sent them, did any way suppose that Aberdeen had not the Gospel, or
Ministers; bur that the Presbyterians there wanted a Minister, and desired to
be supplied: Which was accordingly taken care of. That Mr. Meldrum was not sent
to Aberdeen, was no neglect of him; the Church of Scotland intending him for
other Work: For the City of Edinburgh, and College of Glasgow, are Competitors
for him, before the Commission of the Assembly. The former malevolent
Representation he renews, p. 36. (in the second numbering; for from p. 33. to
40. the pages are twice numbered) viz. That some were sent to the North to offer
the Gospel to the Northern Shires. The words are as the former, That they
should travel in the Work of the Gospel in Vacant Churches, or where they
should be called: So that it is an Impudent Assertion (which follows) that It
was proposed, stated, voted, and determined, in these terms, that they should
go and preach, and make offer of the Gospel. It seems this Author has his
Design, if for a little time he can persuade some in England of these things:
Though he knows his Lies can be discovered by us who are Ear-witnesses; and
that his Villainy would come abroad at last. This he not only asserteth, but
lays weight on it, as sufficient ground for separating from us, as persons
who teach another Gospel, p. 37. He pretends to give an account of the
Assemblies dealing with them who had appealed to them from Presbyteries, as
being injured by them: And here he cannot find matter of reproach in the Letter
sent to the King, to satisfy His Majesty in this matter; but he mentions a
draught of that Letter proposed, which was appointed to be amended: This is to
pick Quarrels. A draught of a Letter so worded, as he says, or of that
importance, I do not remember of, but seeing he confesses it did not please
the Assembly, why should it be brought to their Reproach? It is a gross Lie,
That they were referred back to the Presbyteries and Synods from which they had
appealed, (that I confess had been absurd:) They were all referred to the
Commission, except such as the Assembly discussed; and that of Mr. Heriot,
which was referred to the Synod. In which Synod, when his Case was tried, the
Presbytery of Dalkeith, as a Party, was removed, although Mr. Heriot in his
printed Paper has the Impudence to deny that they were removed. That it was
thought grievous to Presbyteries to question the Justice and Legality of their
Proceedings, is also false; for then no Appeal could be received from them, nor
any Process re-examined by a Superior Judicatory; which yet that was done. The
Affair of Peebles (that he next mentions) is so far from being proof of their
unwillingness to canvass the Actings of a Presbytery, that it is an evidence to
the contrary; seeing they did take that business into consideration, and not
having time to discuss it, did refer it to the Commission, who did so determine
in it, as both parties did quietly submit. It is true, when it was brought into
the Assembly, some moved that it might be first ripened in the Committee, which
was readily complied with. Neither was there any contest about it between my
Lord Commissioner and the Assembly; as he falsely insinuates. The printed
Information that he mentions, had a printed Answer by Mr. Vetch: They were
both considered by the Assembly. There were a great many Heretors on both
sides; it is true, none who were of the Duke of Queensbury's Quality; but his
Grace had not his Residence in the Parish. The passage in Mr. Vetch's Answer,
from which he thinks he has so much advantage, makes nothing for his
Design. For it was not said, That a Call from the greatest part of the Parish,
could not be had to a Presbyterian Minister; But that a Call from all could not
be had (though even so it was too general an Assertion, for many Parishes there
are in Scotland, where Presbyterians are called without a dissenting Vote) and
does it hence fellow, that the people are not generally for Presbytery; because
in many Parishes (yea if it were in all Parishes) there are some of another
mind; or because in some Parishes, most are against it: I do not intend to dip
in that Affair; nor to consider the Merits of that Cause; but do refer the
Reader to the Papers that are printed on both sides; only I affirm, that the
General Assembly, nor their Commission, cannot be blamed in this matter, seeing
both parties acquiesced in their Sentence. Mr. Meldrum's resolution (against
Obtruding himself on a people against their will) is consonant to the
Sentiments of his Brethren, and yet the Nation may enjoy Presbyterian
Ministers: For there are many more places willing to receive them, than there
are men to occupy such places. If there was a Laick (as he speaks) who either
Lectured to the Neighborhood, or said, That the people of God may sin, but the
wicked must not sin; we disown both his Usurpation, and his Doctrine. But the
Truth of the matter of Fact we must take from him on trust; though it is like he
has either invented it, or it has been told him, by no body knows who.

16. That the Assembly was so puzzled, as he says, about the Appeals of tth
Episcopal Clergy, is false: And the Comparison that he uses is Odious, and
Malicious: They were no other way straitened about them, but that they wanted
time to examine them all: And on that Account alone referred them to the
Commission: Some of them, he confesses, they ventured upon: And these he
quarrelleth with. And, First he gives acoount of the Case of Mr. Mitchel and
Mr. Lesk: But not with that Candor that becomes. He mis-representeth the Act
of Parliament that gave rise to this debate, It was not to repossess such as
were put out for not compiying with Episcopacy alone; but such as were put out
in, or since 1661. for Nonconformity, or not complying with the courses of the
Time. All that the Assembly had to judge was, whether Mr. Mitchel was legal
Minister at Turriff in 1661. And they found that clearly proved, whence it
followed; that Mr. Mitchel by the Act of Parliament, had right now to return to
his place, which had been possessed by Mr. Lesk: It was proved that Mr. Mitchel
was legally settled in Turriff: That he was unjustly Deposed by the Presbytery
about 1655. That this Sentence was taken off by the Synod of Aberdeen, in which
the presbytery of Turriff is; and that in July 1661. he was Deposed by the
Synod of Aberdeen, for Noncompliance with the Courses of that time. Whence they
concluded, that he was Rightful Minister of Turriff, and the Act of Parliament
allowing such as were put out in 1661. did allow him to return to Turriff. It
is false, that the Reasons of the Sentence were refused to be given him, (Mr.
Lesk) for he demanded an extract of the process, and Sentence, and the Clerk
was appointed to give it. He complains that That the Act of Parliament gave
access to the Presbyterians who had been possessed of places, tho the Episcopal
men had complied with the Civil Government: And was it rational that they
should possess the Rights of other Men, because they comply with the time? was
not the same done in England 1660; If Mr. Kirtoun had used his privilege, in
emptying his Church for a fitter person than it was possessed by, it was not
against Law: Mertoun was his Charge till he was transported to Edinburgh. But
the Truth is Mr. Kirtoun went not to Mertoun, till the Episcopal Minister had
left it, as knowing he had no legal Right: And when Mr. Kirtoun went thither,
and got right to the Stipend of a year and half: He gave the years Stipend to
the Episcopal Minister, who had left the place; and the half year to the poor.
Mr. Sleerie's Case comes next, which is not truly narrated: It is false that
he was deprived of his Church, for he was never orderly settled in it; neither
in the Episcopal, nor the Presbyterian way: It is also false, That he was
discharged the exercise of his Ministry: He may preach wherever he has an
orderly Call: Only he is discharged to exercise it at Fawkirk: and in the
bounds of the Presbytery of Lithgow, unless he be allowed by the Presbytery:
And indeed it is not allowed that any man should Preach within the bounds of
any Presbytery, without their allowonce: Mr. Sleerie acknowledged his Fault in
continuing to Preach there, having no orderly Call, nor being permitted by the
Presbytery; and declared (before the Sentence) his willingness to forbear
Preaching there: And the Assembly, upon his desire represented his want to my
Lord Commissioner, and the Earl of Crawford; and they promised to deal for some
Relief to him, from the Council, For asking him about the Doxology, and whether
he repented of his conformity. I do not remember it, I am sure it was not
appointed by the Assembly to be done. The following process against Mr.
Forsyth, our Author approves, as the only justifiable Act of the Assembly. It
is well they please him in one thing at least. Mr. John Mackenzies case he
narrateth very unfairly; hardly any came to hear him: And he had no due Title
to that charge, because his Edict (which even by the Episcopal way, should have
been served at Kirklistoun) was served at St. Andrews; So that the people of
Kirklistoun had no occasion either to object against him, or to consent to his
being their Minister: And he seldom preaching to that Congregation, the
Presbytery removed him from that Church, but did not take away his Ministry; he
appealed to the Assembly, but did not prosecute the Appeal: Wherefore the
Assembly could not shun confirming the Sentence of the Presbytery. What is said
to have been spoken about the matter, by this and other persons, I am not
concerned to enquire, nor do I know, or believe to be true, what he confidently
sets down. As to what he says of Mr. Heriot, I have above told why he was
referred to the Synod: About Mr. Wood, he does not tell the truth, he was
neither referred to the Presbytery nor Synod; but to the Commission of the
Assembly, who have taken his Case into consideration.

17. His invective wit stops very low, having little to work upon; when he
takes notice, that among the Ministers who were to be called from abroad, as
having Relation to this Church, one was mentioned who was dead, and another who
was prisoner in Dunkirk: As if every Member of the Assembly were obliged to
know the History of every private person. That the Presbyterians set light by
Learning and Knowledge, and do often run it down: And that Zeal for the good
Cause is the chief Qualification, and instead of these, is an Assertion so
notoriously false, that nothing but Malice could prompt him to it. Our Intrants
to the Ministry are able to vie Learning with the Episcopal Candidates, and are
far before them. That Brewers and Illiterate Tradesmen are set up to be
Ministers, is false, and slanderous. I deny not but some who in the late
Persecution were forced to follow other Employments for a livelihood, have now
resumed their former Studies: But they are not admitted, without giving good
proof of a Competency, at least, of knowledge in the Scriptures, and in the
Controversies in Divinity. And the same fate has befallen his own Party, that
he reproacheth us with. Some of them now follow other Employments; particularly
some are turned Brewers; as Mr. Norman Mackenzie late Minister at Midcalder,
and Mr. George Henry late Minister at Corstorfine, have set up a Brewery in the
Suburbs of Edinburgh; which I mention not to reproach them (for it is
commendable to follow a Lawful Calling rather than to be Idle, or to be
chargeable to others) but to stop the mouth of this Reviler. The Instance he
gives of Mr. Russel in his Trials, that he denied the Major of an Enthymem,
that he desired the terms of the Minor of a Hypothetick Syllogism to be
explained, which was, Sed verum prius: That the Presbytery said, that he wanted
Learning, yet he had Grace; and upon that admitted him: Every word of this is
false. Every Minister in that Presbytery is ready to witness the contrary: And
I have what I affirm under the hand of one of them who was present at all his
Trials; whose understanding and veracity, none who knows him will question.
Mr. Russel has the Testimony, that he has a measure of Learning which is no
ways despicable: That he has a very good gift of Preaching and Praying. His
complaint, p. 48. Of the Desolation of the Colleges, and the insufficiency of
these who are placed in them, is surely not from Knowledge, but from Malice,
and a resolution to reproach; it is a Foolish contest, who are the more
Learned: Till it can be put to the Trial. Not only the esteem of knowing, and
impartial men (neither of which properties this Author has given proof of in
his Book) and the Judicia of Learning that any have given, must carry it: To
both which, men of our side can appeal, when they are compared with their
Predecessors; whether in knowledge of Books in any part of good and useful
Learning, or in Capableness to direct the Studies of the youth: Yea in Grammar
and knowledge of any of the learned Languages: Though I think neither party has
much cause to brag of their Abilities: Except in comparison. It is a base
Calumny, to call the Presbyterian Spirit, Narrow, and an Enemy to Knowledge;
much more is it so, to Assert, that we count it impiety to call commonly
received Principles into question: Or that we reckon a free and Rational
inquiry into the Reasons of them to be Dangerous. It is the bent of our studies
to search the Scripture, and to consult sound Reason, both that we may know
what is Truth, and how it appears to be so. It is an Ignorant mistake, to
say, that we count the Cartesians and other Systems of new Philosophy, to be
gross and Damnable Heresy. there are among us who have opposed many of the
old, commonly received, Aristotelian Principles, more early and, may be, with
more strength of Reason, then such as he are capable to do. For the Cartesian
System, he might know (but that his knowledge is so narrow as to be confined to
his own Party) that there are Presbyterian Cartesians, as well as Episcopal
Cartesians. For mine own part, I very much value many things in that Learned
and Thinking Author; but I durst never swallow down all his Notions, as I see
some men do. I averr and will maintain it; that some of them lead to Atheism,
others to unhinge some of the Truths of the Gospel; others are without ground
or reason, though they be of no dangerous Consequence. But his impertinency has
led me into this Digression. I wish he had told us who are Enemies to Mr.
Gregory, whom we (as he does) do esteem the Learned Professor of the
Mathematics in Edinburgh. They of Edinburgh are so far from being his Enemies,
that they have adventured to keep him in his place, which some think to be
against Law. Who they are that say, the Mathematical Sciences are useless, or
dangerous; I know not: If I shall meet with any such, I will contradict him to
his Face. It is another Calumny, that we slight the Hebrew, and other Oriental
Tongues: We do highly prize them, and wish they were much more common than they
are, both among his party and ours. For thrusting out Mr. Douglass, the
Professor of them: Himself and others can bear witness, that the Commission of
Parliament for visitation of Colleges, did, with much reluctance, remove him
from his place, and were earnest that he should have qualified himself. He
knows also, that the Magistrates of Edinburgh, who are Patrons of the
College, have offered to readmit him to that Office, If he will qualify
himself, as the Law requires, and that some of the Masters of that College,
who are Presbyterian, have often, and earnestly dealt with him that he would
not refuse the proffer that the City has made to him, and that the place has
been now a year kept Vacant, and a door left open for him to return: So much do
we value men of Learning. But Presbyterians have no dispensing power: And the
Law is plain. The Favorable aspect that the Jewish Synagogue casts on
Episcopacy, we deny not: But it looks as broadly toward a Papacy. That the
Trade of Books is fallen on the occasion of this Revolution, is his groundless
Fancy. For in Edinburgh there are of late more Booksellers than were before,
but I am sure in 1661. and 1662. I have heard Booksellers sadly complain of it.
The Books that he mentions as The standard of Presbyterian Learning, We do
not despise: But it is known that there are no Books truly valuable, among his
Party, but such as we use, and that diligently; when many who Brag of their
Books are worse Employed. The Sermons of Presbyterians, he takes some pains to
disparage: The Sermons that were Printed here, were so appointed by Authority;
and are able to endure the Censure of rational Men; not of railing Scriblers,
who resolve to Censure, and to condemn all on that side, without Wit or
Discretion, the Collection of Sermon Notes that he speaks of, if it be of
what was indeed spoken, and heartily represented; we fear it not (though neither
his Party, nor ours, can answer for all that is spoken) if it be of the strain
of this Pamphlet; that is, a heap of Lies and Railing, We will despise it. Mr.
Clerks Sermon, that he speaks of, I have not Read: He is able to answer for
himself: His speaking with contempt of Mr. Gray's Sermons, shows his skill in
the things that concern the Actings of Grace in the Soul. Ye know of whom it is
said, that they cannot discern the things of the Spirit of God.

. 18. He had thus far digressed, wanting matter to fill up his History. He now
returns to the Assembly p. 51. A Debate about an Act against private
Administration of the Sacraments, he represents as he uses to do, that is,
falsely and without Ingenuity. That the private Administration of Baptism was,
by Mr. Rule, or any else, called Sorcery and Charming, is grossly false. He
professes he never said nor thought so, and I who heard all that he said on
that Subject, heard no such Words; nor Words to that effect. But here is an
Evidence of the Learning, and Judiciousness of this Pretender to Learning, or
of his Wife Informers: May be, he might say, that many who were bent for
private Baptism, are so ignorant, as to look on Baptism to have its effects ex
opere operato, or as a Charm, and this is taken for saying, that private
Baptism is a Charm. He does falsely represent Mr. Kirtons Words: He did indeed
plead against that Act, but his Discourse was neither so unpolished, nor so
peremptory, as our Author makes it. It is false, that Baptism in the Country
cannot be had but on Sundays. A Minister may Baptize every day of the Week, if
notice be given to the Congregation to meet for hearing the Word: If any
Minister do refuse to Baptize a Week day, so as in no case he will do it, he
has no Countenance from this Act. I know not why a Minister may not call the
Congregation together to hear the Word, on occasion of Baptism to be
Administered: If few come, it is their own blame; and needs not hinder that
Ordinance. We did not scruple to Baptize in private, when we, with all the
Ordinances Administered by us, were driven into corners; but we always held that
this Solemn Ordinance of God should be as public as the other Ordinances are;
it being a Seal of that Covenant, which is held forth by Preaching of the
Gospel, we think it should not be done in a Corner, when the other is publicly
dispensed. But I shall not now fully dispute this point: If any of our
Opponents please to let us hear their Arguments against it, we shall consider
them. The Story that he tells; of a Child sent away from the Church
unbaptized, because it was not brought to Church till about the close of the
Sermon: This Story, I say, is not true, nothing is more ordinary with us, than
that the Children come late, even when the Sermon is almost ended: Yea, some of
us have Baptized Children whom we knew not of till the other Children were
already Baptized: The Child that he speaks of, was not presented to be
Baptized, till after Prayer, and Psalms, and the Blessing; and the People were
dismissed, and the Minister was gone out of the Pulpit. It is false, that the
People are Displeased with this: It is but some of them, and these either the
less Intelligent, or such as are inclined to the Episcopal way. That Mr.
Kirtoun did Preach against the Superstition of the Ceremony (viz. of Baptism)
is not only false, but so consistent with his way, and Principles, that it is a
wonder that this Author could allege such a thing; or be so forgetful of what
Mr. Kirtoun had said, as himself relates it, but in the former page. The
Assembly appointed a List of Acts to be drawn which were fit to be observed:
And this Authors malevolent pen represents this, as if They durst not approve
of some Acts, and yet would not censure them. Whereas they intended no more,
but that there being many Acts suited to the time when they were made, but might
be inconvenient for this time: Others that were fit for our Circumstances,
might be distinguished from these; and is not this a common practice in
Parliaments, without having such malicious Reflections made on it. That We
receive all the Acts of Assemblies as if they were Scripture; and pay no less
regard to them; Is an Assertion as false as any thing can be said.

. 19. He gives account of the Commission of the General Assembly, page 53. but
as he does of other things; that is, without Truth or Honesty: About the manner
of Election he prevaricateth; but it is not worth the while to examine these
Circumstances: It is a gross untruth, that They were to have full and supreme
Power, to Act in all things that relate to the Church: The contrary is evident
from the Instructions given to them by the Assembly, which himself sets
down: For the seventh and eighth Articles of them are; 7ly, That this
Commission do not meddle in public Affairs; or in any thing not expressed in
their Commission: Which is hereby declared to be given them in Hunc finem only:
And pro praesenti Ecclesiae Statu. 8ly. They shall be answerable to, and
censurable by the next General Assembly; and shall continue till November next:
If there be no General Assembly before that time. Is it not evident from this,
That our Author either understands not the meaning of plain words; or that he
is not careful to speak Truth? Their Moderation or Rigidity (which he very
positively, and confidently determines about) must be judged of by their
Actings: I am sure the plurality of them are looked upon as Men of very
Moderate Principles! But no Presbyterian can be moderate in this man's Opinion.
In the List of them he also mistaketh; for many were on both Commissions:
Whereas he makes the two to consist wholly of different persons; but that is
not material. His account of the Debate about the Instructions to the
Commission, I need not examine: What was concluded, is that which we are
concerned in. His Account of the Instructions is most false and absurd. It is
strange prevarication so to corrupt and falsify a Paper in the Transcribing of
it. Take for example, the 2 d Article (which he makes the first) He has it,
That they shall take into their Cognizance all References and Appeals, not
discussed in the Assembly, and such matters as have been tabled before the
Assembly. Where he makes two sorts of things to fall under their
consideration: Whereas in the true Copy nothing but what is expressly referred
to them is mentioned: It is thus, To take into their Cognizance all References
and Appeals, and other things, which being stated before this Assembly shall by
them be specially referred to the said Commission, to determine the same. The
Debate that was in the Assembly about the sixth Article; about taking in the
late Conformists to Ministerial Communion, he does also Misrepresent; it is
false that it was said, That by these Instructions, Repentance for Conformity,
is required as a Condition. For that ws debated in the Committee; and it was
determined to be left out; because the worst of them would be readiest to
profess Repentance: Which they who acted from a Principle could not do. He
observes from the Instructions, page 57. That the Commission was mainly
designed against the Episcopal Clergy. I deny not that it was designed against
such of them as were unqualified for the Ministry, to cast them out: And
against such of them as were Enemies to the Established Church Government, to
keep them from a Capacity to overturn it. But it was rather designed for them
who fall not under these Characters, to take them in among us. That
Presbyterians had Malice agaenst them, or such Designs to ruin them, as he
alleges, is evil surmising: And in this he judges of others by the temper of
his own mind.

. 20. He looks on all the Facts appointed by Presbyterians as designed to
ensnare the Episcopal Men; and says, that they Fasted for Strife and Debate.
Their Witness is on high, who knows that other Motives engaged them to Fast
and Pray: Even such things as are of common concernment to all who have true
Zeal for Religion. But this Gentleman, and others of his Stamp, did not use to
keep Solemn Fasts for the concernments of the Gospel: Only sometimes they had
Fasts with the respect to the Weather; or when there was like to be a bad
Harvest; which we condemn not: But think there are greater things that should
move us to such Duties. It seems he knows no other ground of Fasting, but
either averting of some outward Judgment; or some politic design. He mainly
challenges the Fast appointed by the Assembly, because in the causes of it,
mention is made of Episcopacy; the setting up of which is complained of; on
account that it was always grievous to this Nation, and that it was done
without the Churches consent, and contrary to Acts of National Assemblies. As
also, that a great decay of Piety was visible under it. This is all that was
said of Episcopacy in these causes of the Fast. This Fast, he says, Episcopal
Men could not observe, without looking on Episcopacy as unlawful: As the cause
of much Impiety; as defection from God and his truth: Nor without blameing the
Church of England, and other Protestant Churches; yea the Catholic Churches
from the Apostles to Calvin' s time. Ans. 1 st. What ever be our Sentiments
about Episcopacy, nothing is here expressed that needs to stumble them who
think it a lawful Government in the Church; and there are some of that
Principle, who will say as much as is here said. Norhing is here said of its
unlawfulness, nothing of its influence on Impiety: But only of its observed
unsutableness to this Nation, and of ungodliness having been de facto its
concomitant. 2. If any did conscientiously scruple the Observation of the Fast,
on the grounds mentioned, I ask who of them have been Punished by the State, or
Censured by the Church, for this omission: The Church thought fit to lay
Peoples duty before them, yet using all lenity toward them who cannot see their
duty. It was quite otherwise in former times, when his party had the Rule. 3.
The setting up of Episcopacy was more sinful in this Nation, than it could be
elsewhere, because of the Oath of God that the Nation is under against it: Not
in later times only; but in the time of King James the 6th, who caused the
whole Nation swear the Shorter Confession of Faith called also the National
Covenant; where it is Abjured. 4. All this shows, that we do not meddle with
the Church of England, in this matter; but keep within our own bounds: And
therefore she has no cause to be offended with us, more than we have to blame
her, for setting up Episcopacy. 5. His big words of other Protestant Churches,
and the Catholic Church to Calvin' s time, are the Dialect of his Party: Whose
confidence of Assertion, and strength of Argument, in this matter, bear no
proportion: Which we are ready to try with him, when he pleases. The Councils
Act for Observation of this Fast, he does also most causelessly, and petulantly
ridicule: What is more congruous than when the fear of God does not persuade
men to their Duty, that a civil Court should deal with them by a civil Penalty?
The contest about the Printer to the Assembly he cannot let pass; though he can
get no advantage there against the Presbyterians: But that they must have a
Printer distinct from the Kings Printer. It has always been the Custom; and
our Kings never disallowed it. We are far from contending with the King about
it, nor do we plead a Divine Right for it. The Debate between the two Printers
before the Council we are not concerned in. Only I observe his Malicious Lie,
That the Earl of Crawford maintained, that the King should yield to the
Assembly. His Lordship is far from so owning the Church, as to deny to the King
any respect that is due.

. 21. After Apology for the length (he should have rather excused the
Dishonesty and Impertinency) of this Epistle; He ventureth yet upon two or
three things. The 1 st. is, the Assemblies appointing an answer to be made to
these Pamphlets of the opposite Party (which this Paper contains) where he is
much misinformed: Mr. Meldrum was never enjoined this task: Mr. Pitcarne had it
laid on him, but after many Months, it was not done: And so they laid it on
another; Not on him with the Assistance of others; as this Author says. That
Mr. Meldrum justified the Rabble in a Sermon, is so far from his Temper and
Inclination, that none will Affirm it, but such an one as this Historian. He
says, we will never prove any material Circumstance, in matter of Fact to be
false; I affirm and have made it appear that few, if any of them are true. His
next particular is the most Notorious falsehood that can be expressed by Tongue
or Pen. viz. That the taking off the Sentence of Deposition against some
Ministers, especially Remonstrators was proposed, but laid aside in the General
meeting, and now done in the end of the Assembly. It was done in a meeting of
the Brethren of the Synod of Lothian (for them within that bounds) and in the
General Meeting for them, and all others in Scotland: And what the Assembly did
was a Ratification of what had already been effectually done: What he alleged
Mr. Gilbert Rule to have said, in the Assembly, on this head, is a wide
mistake; he only pleaded, that the Act should not be so General, as to
comprehend all who were censured in the times of these differences, because
some might, at that time, be censured for uncontroverted Scandals (though he did
not pretend to give Instances of any who were so Censured) but that the Act
should only reach them who were Censured on account of the Differences, Hinc
inde. That this revocation of these Sentences was not proposed in any of their
avowed meetings, till the general Meetings; is not strange, for indeed they had
no avowed meetings before: Though we think their meetings might be avowed before
God; but not so before his party, who were their cruel Persecutors. It was
done, as is above expressed, and confirmed by the General Meeting: And Ex
abundanti, Ratified by the Assembly. Whence it is evident that no derogation
could be inferred thence, either from the Ministry of any who sat in the
Assembly, or on the Assembly it self, as he malevolently suggesteth. His last
particular is about the two Commissioners, whom the Assembly sent to the King:
Where he has some Malign Reflections, both on them who were not sent, and on
them who were sent. That any were Jealous of Mr. Carstairs, is a base Calumny.
His Integrity and Skill in the conduct of such Affairs, is known, and valued by
all his Brethren who know him. It is as foul a Calumny that they who were sent
were gratified by it; or had designs of their own, nothing but Malice could
suggest such a thought; For what could they expect: Or what could they obtain
by it? Had they Ambition (one of them being past 60.) to ride post to London in
the beginning of December, they could expect no higher Post in the Church, than
they now are in. He will Characterize them also: One of them he had before
exposed as far as his Malice and Wit could invent: The other he can find
nothing against; and therefore his spite prompteth him to reproach his reverend
and worthy Father; whose praise is in the Gospel, whose name is precious in the
Church, and is above the snarling of such a Curr: Nor one word of what he says
in that matter is true: And the contrary is declared by some of the Courtiers
that attended the King when he went to visit Mr. Blair, when he was sick, and
on his Bed. When his Majesty came into the Room. they who were present told,
that though they had been long about Court, they never heard a more Handsome
Complement, then Mr. Blair gave unto the King; nor more becoming a Divine. A
Chair was set at the Bed side, for the King, in which his Majesty sat down;
after he had talked a little with Mr. Blair, his Majesty drew the Chair nearer
while he sat on it; But that such words were spoken by Mr. Blair, as is
alleged, is most false. I should not have stayed so much on this, but that the
Reader may take notice, what a Spirit of Lying has possessed this
Phamphleteer; and what ill will he bears to the Living and to the Dead, who
have born the name of Presbyterians. He is now at last come to the Dissolution
of this Assembly: Where he would have it thought, that the Assembly did design
to call another without the Kings Commissioner, who was sitting among them,
which was never thought nor designed. As his Book is full of Lies and Slanders;
so his Epilogue is an abridgment of them all; does amass them in one; while he
says, That no material Falsehood can be charged upon him: The Reader will
easily judge of this assertion by what has been said; of his Ingenuity also,
and of his hating to tell a Lie. I leave what has been said on both sides to
the Candid Judgment of the Impartial Reader, and to his Judgment who is a God
of truth, and hates the Lying Lips; and do join with him in his concluding
Prayer (as I could do with little that he has hitherto said,) That the Lord
would pour out his Spirit on us (and on the other party too,) That our Land may
have peace, that the Divisions of our Church may be healed, and our Confusions
may be wholly removed, and Order and Government may continue among us.

POSTSCRIPT.
AFter these Sheets were Printed, some Informations were sent me, which could
not be inserted in their proper places, and therefore are here subjoyned.
Concerning Mr. Ferguson of Kilpatrick, (who is mentioned, Case of Afflicted
Clergy, etc. Sect. 12.) is no further true, than that five Men and fix Women
came to his House (being provoked by his continuing to Preach and Pray for King
James after he had been discharged so to do by the people) and when he refused
to come out to them, they beat him on the Head, and on the Legs, and tore his
Clothes: But the Blows were such, as one that was his Friend did testify, that
he was more feared than hurt by them: For his Wife, it is false that they beat
her. Only one of them held her while they so dealt with her Husband as
abovesaid. Whence it is evident, that though their practices are no way to be
defended, yet they are grossly belyed by this Pamphleteer.

I have also further Instances of the Clergies accession to the Persecutions of
the Presbyterians under the late Reigns (which is so impudently denied Late
Letter, etc. Sect. 6.) As that Mr. Graham Minister at Lochmabane, Mr. Brown
Minister at Drysdale, and Mr. Thompson Minister at Applegirth, used to stand by
Graham of Claverhouse (after Viscount of Dundee) while on the Bench to judge
the persecuted Presbyterians for Noncompliance with the courses of that time;
and whisper in his Ear, the effect of which was observed to be the greatest
Severity against such as they were most displeased with on that account. Also,
Mr. Andrew Hamiltoun, when a poor Man, with his numerous Family, having fled
from his Dwelling, took shelter in another poor Man's House in Midleby, caused
him to be cast out thence, so that he was forced to lodge by a Dyke-side with
his Family, while two of his Children were sick of the Small Pox. Likewise Mr.
Vallance Minister at Johnstoun, having persecuted Robert Dunwoody, so as he was
forced to flee to England; when he returned, would not suffer him to live in
the Parish, unless he would go to Church; so he fled to Applegirth. where Mr.
Thompson would not let him stay, unless he would hear him Preach, and the Man's
Wife being ready to bring forth her Child, the poor Man, against his Light, was
forced to hear: This is attested under the man's own Hand. One who had time, and
would be at pains to collect such Instances, might find thousands: But this is
designed to be done by it self.

In Vindicating the Ministers whom he reproacheth in the History of the General
Assembly; I designed Brevity, especially not finding that what was laid to
their Charge was of much moment; and that malice was obvious and observable to
every unbyassed Reader, in all that he says of them: Only the things that he
says against Mr. Meldrum, are of more weight; but that Reverend Brother being
at a great distance, I had not opportunity to be informed of the Truth of
matter of Fact: But he having heard he was Reproached, sent me the following
Vindication; which I give you in his own Words, which are sufficient to show
what a Lying Spirit does possess the men with whom we have to do.

Reverend and Dear Brother,
SOme Months are past, since I heard of a Pamphlet published on design to
expose our late General Assembly to contempt; for which end, I am told, the
Author of it does impudently misrepresent the Actings thereof, and injuriously
reflect on diverse of the Members of it, among the rest, they say he bedaubeth
me; I have diligently sought for a sight of it, but hitherto could not obtain
it, nec prece, nec pretio. It seems these Men resolve (though you told them
of it before) to hold on their way, of spreading these reflective Pamphlets in
England, keeping them as secret as they can here in Scotland. where the
falsehood of the matters of Fact are known, and they might soon have their shame
and lying discovered; but they know that bold calumniating, especially where
there is no contradiction; nor knowledge of the contrary will make some blot
cleave to a Man's Fame.

I was glad to hear you intended to give a just reproof to the Author of that
Pamphlet, and an Answer to the Calumnies contained in it. And a Friend having
(when he could not obtain for me the use of the Book (transcribed, and sent to
me some part of it relating to me, I judged it duty to offer to you my
Animadversions thereon, which, if it come not too late, you may cause to
publish: This I do not so much for my own Vindication, as for the Truth and
Churches sake, which he endeavors to wrong and wound through my Sides.

I profess I do freely forgive him any personal Injury done to me, and in some
Conformity to my Savior, Luke 23. 34. Pray Father, forgive him, for he knows
not what he does. Yet I think I can not be blamed if in Obedience to the
Apostolical precept. Tit. 1. 13. I rebuke him sharply, seeing he is so guilty
of the first part of the Character given to the Cretians there, Verse 12. For I
do ingenuously declare that Narrative concerning me is full of Lies, and where
he touches at Truth, he so disguiseth it, that it appears a quite other
thing than it was.

I find no less than ten or eleven Lies in a few Lines, for he Asserts; 1. That
I with Mr. Meinzies did at St. Andrews upon a Conference with the Bishop of
that See, subscribe the Oath of Canonical Obedience. 2. That the Bishop of St.
Andrews did by a Letter under his hand, assure the Bishop of Aberdeen of this.
3. That Mr. Meldrum himself was the Bearer of it. 4. That Dr. Keith did make
Intimation of our aforesaid Subscriptions in the Old Church of New Aberdeen. 5.
That we our selves were present. 6. That I so far deserted the Principles of
the Covenant and Scottish Presbyterians, that I did Swear and Subscribed the
Declaration when I was admitted Rector of the Marshall College of Aberdeen.
7. That I struck in with the Presbyterians out of pique, because I was not
permitted to return to the Exercise of my Ministry in Aberdeen. 8. That I broke
off all Correspondency, with those of the Episcopal party, even my most
intimate Acquaintance. 9. That I vented my self, as bitterly, and severely
against them, as any Presbyterian whatsoever. 10. That Pique, Interest and
Popularity, were my Temptation. 11. That at first I pretended, I would only
attempt to reclaim the deluded people of the West, from their Errors and
Extravagancies, all which I confidently averr are gross Untruths and Lies.


I am not sensible that I have given these Men, any cause or occasion so to
abuse me, nor can I see any great advantage to their cause thereby, and though
there were Truth in these charges, wherewith he endeavors to defame me, yet
of all Men in the World, the Prelates and Prelatists in Scotland, should be
most ashamed to upbraid me therewith: The most of their Bishops and Clergy
having contrary to most solemn and sacred Oaths, received the abjured Prelacy,
and renounced and abjured their former Oaths, and some of their Bishops having
submitted to Reordination, to the great Scandal not only of this but other
Reformed Churches, and contrary to the example of their Predecessors, in the
days of King James the VIth. Yet I judge no Man for his Principle or Motives,
but leave that to God and their own Consciences, though this Author Intruding in
Gods Throne, is bold to judge of my Heart, and to say, It was Pique, Interest
and Popularity that moved me.

The Falsehood of his Assertions will appear by a true Narrative of the things
to which he seems to relate, which I shall give with due Candor and
Simplicity, not being afraid humbly to Appeal not only to the Judgment of all
Men who know the things; but to the All-seeing God of Truth, to judge betwixt
Him and Me in this Matter.

I was Ordained Minister of the Gospel in the Honorable City of Aberdeen, Anno
1659. by the laying one of the Hands of the Presbytery. And when Prelacy was
reintroduced in this Land, Anno 1662. I was stopped in the Exercise of my
Ministry, before the first of October by that same Act of Council, which laid
aside diverse Hundreds of worthy Ministers of this Church, and obliged us to
retire twenty Miles distant from our own Parishes, because we had not received
Presentation from the Patron and Collation from the Bishop, The condition of
which, was the Oath of Canonical Obedience.

It Is false which this Author says (and may be reckoned as the twelfth of his
Lies) that Mr. Meinzies and I did only hesitate at first, upon the Oath of
Canonical Obedience, for we never had any hesitation, or doubt upon it, but
were clear and positive in our Judgment against it, and expressed it as we had
occasion. It Is true we did at the first offer Submission, and to join in
Presbyteries and Synods, thinking this was but the same, which worthy men had
done before the year 1638. Not discerning, as others who suffered did, the
difference betwixt the State of things, Anno 1662. And before the year, 1638.

Tho this stop in the exercise of my Ministry, was fourteen days before the
Bishops Synod, yet at that Synod when he did pass Sentence of Deposition,
against Learned and Pious Mr. Meinzies, for not Subscribing the Oath of
Canonical Obedience; tho he offered Submission: The Bishop was pleased to join
me in the Sentence, tho neither present nor cited to be present. Whether Bishop
Mitchel did Vindicate this his Illegalk and Unjust procedure by that lovely
Proverb our Author mentions, Fides sit penes Authorem, But I was nothing
moved with this Sentence.

Sometime after this, I retired to the Country twenty eight Miles beyond
Aberdeen, yet in the beginning of December, there comes to me a Summons before
the secret Council, as was said by the procurement of the Bishop of Aberdeen,
alleging he could not appear on the Streets of that City for fear of the
People Irritated, as was alleged, by their Pastors whom they had lost. At that
time were cited, also the famous and worthy, old Mr. Cant, and his Son Mr.
Alexander, and Mr. Meinzies. The good old man got a Testificat that he was not
able to Travel. The rest of us went South with no less hazard than our Lives,
it beign a grievous Storm and Tempest. Mr. Alexander Cant falling unwell
compeared not. When Mr. Meinzes and I compeared, the Earl of Midletoun then
Lord Commissioner, and the Earl of Glencarn Lord Chancellor, and others of the
Council, finding that there was nothing to lay to our charge, and hearing from
us, that we were willing to join in Presbyteries and Synods, did by Act of
secret Council recommend us to the Bishop of St. Andrews, to be restored to our
places.

When this was presented to the Bishop of St. Andrews, he readily promised to
obey it, but never spoke to us one word of the Oath of Canonical Obedience. Yea
I would ask any judicious Person, if it was probable that (knowing our
peremptory declared Resolutions against it) either the Bishop of St. Andrews
would have insisted to require, or we consented to Subscribe that Oath, when we
had an Act of Council in our Favors, and at the same time they had published a
Treatise, entitled, a Plea for Submission to the present Government, wherein
they made offer of diverse Concessions to them who would submit. But the Bishop
of St. Andrews, being then ready to go from Edinburgh to St. Andrews, desired
us in our return for Aberdeen, to call for his Letter, which he promised should
be ready for us. But neither when we came to St. Andrews, did he speak to us of
Subscribing the Oath of Canonical Obedience, nor did we subscribe any Paper to
him, nor stay with him one quarter of an hour, it being late, and he studying
his Christmas Sermon, and we to go over the Ferry. Nor did his Letter to the
Bishop of Aberdeen bear any thing of our Subscribing that Oath, neither would I
have been the bearer of so mauifest an untruth. Yea when in his Letter he had
written, that we were willing to own the Government, I refused to receive it,
unless he added this Qualification ( so far as to join in Presbyteries and
Synods) to which he agreed, when we would take it on no other terms.

Neither did Bishop Mitchel after our Return, insist any more on our
Subscribing the Oath of Canonical Obedience; but having called together some
Ministers, there was a paper drawn out of the words of the abovementioned
Letter, which Paper indeed we did Subscribe, and I hear some of that Party,
whether out of Curiosity or ill will at me, have searched for it among Bishop
Mitchel's Papers. But I value not what use they make of it. That Paper the
Bishop ordered Doctor Keith to read publicly in Aberdeen, Thinking thereby to
lessen our esteem among the People, but that design failed, none of us were
present at the reading of it. But the next Lords day when I appeared first to
Preach, I told publicly (Mr. J. P. then Bishop of Ross, being present) that I
conceived that I had yielded to nothing, but what I first offered.

But seeing this Author is not only injurious to me, but to learned and Pious
Mr. Meinzies; whose memory is precious to me, beside all that I have said for
his Honor, I add that not only the Test, but the Subscribing of this Paper,
was grievous to that good man before his death, and although I was then at
South, I had it afterward, from a worthy Person and Friend of his who had it
from himself. And I can say of my self, I did lament because of it several
years before that, and although this Author design me no favor, yet as sometimes
we are more obliged to our Enemies, than to our friends so here he gives me
opportunity to tell the World, that I repent for the Subscribing of that Paper.
Although I never Subscribed the Oath of Canonical Obedience. But being then young
and paying too much deference and respect to a friend who drew it; I did the
less seriously consider either the Words or matter of it.

I confess I afterward was in Friendship with Bishop Scougal who was a Learned
and moderate Man, I did also sit in Presbyteries and Synods, thinking my self
free to join in these Duties to which I was Authorized by my office, although
there had been no Bishop in the World, nor do I think that by this I paid
formal Canonical Obedience, so that the asserting of this, may be reputed a
thirteenth of this Authors lies Yet if he or any else can show me wherein I
have complied contrary to my Principles, or to the just offense of others,
which I have not confessed already, I am ready to acknowledge it was my fault,
but this I can say, the Bishops themselves did not judge me a favourer of
Prelacy, and my intimates knew me to be Presbyterian in my Principles, and I
did never wittingly desert these Principles. For it is a manifest untruth which
this Author asserts, that I swore and subscribed the Declaration when I was
admitted Rector, in the Mareschall College in Aberdeen. I neither took it
then, nor at any other time, anent which I appeal to all records. Nor indeed
was it required of me, nor did the Act mention Rectors.

It was not the least Cause of my refusing the Test, that I was obliged thereby
to declare, that there lay no Obligation on me, to endeavor any Alteration in
the Government of the Church. For I profess I did judge it Duty in my Station,
and according to my power, did endeavor to promote the Alteration, and the
removal of Prelacy. And do not deny, I did Bless God, and Call the people of
Aberdeen to Bless him for the removal of it, and pray that it may never return.
But that ever I used Bitterness or Severity against any of that party, this
Author cannot prove: And all who know me, do know these are things which I
abhor, and my desire is to promote Meekness and Charity among Men:

These also, who were of the Prelatical way, and Intimately acquainted with me,
know the Falsehood of what he says of my breaking off all Correspondence with
them in any thing which Civility and Friendship obliges me unto. Yea, I am
confident not only they, but all of that way, who know me, will allow me this
Testimony that whenever they desired, yea, on all occasions according to my
p[ower, I was ready to do them Acts of Kindness. And when I was last in
Aberdeen, the present Incumbents of that place and I did Friendly Visit one
another. It Is true one of them being occasionally in a Neighbors House, came
to me as I lighted from my Horse, and desired me to preach for him the next
Lords day (but neither he nor any else did it afterward:) And I hope he will
not say, but I gave him a Civil, and as I conceive an Answer which might have
satisfied him.

As for what this Author says, That it was Pique which moved Me to strike in
with the Presbyterians, because I was not permitted to return to the Exercise
of my Ministry at Aberdeen. This is a presumptuous ascending Gods Throne, to
judge my Heart, and Motives. As also what he says afterward. That Pique,
Interest and Popularity, were my Temptation: I can comfortably say, He that
knows all Things, knows this is false. It was Conscience, and not such base
Motives that moved Me: And I think I may obtain Testimony from these who know
me both in the North and West, that they have other Thoughts of me than that I
am led by such base Motives. It Is true the Town of Aberdeen, to whose kindness
I always was, and am on all occasions, much obliged, when they conceived any
hopes of obtaining my regress to them without any Obligation or Oath, did move
for it. But neither this Author, nor any else can prove that I did desire it,
or made any Applicatiom to the Bishops for it. How far some of the Bishops
complied with a great person of the Popish persuasion, to obstruct that design
(tho it was known that it was difference of Religion that engaged him against
it) the Town of Aberdeen know in part, and I leave it to the Bishops own
Consciences to judge. For ingenuously profess I never had any Pique at them on
that account, nor was it Pique, but Conscience, which moved me; to join with
the Presbyterians, for I being such in my judgment, and about a year after the
time, he speaks of, by an unexpected Providence, receiving an Unanimous Call,
from a Noble Person (who also was Patron of the Parish) and other Heretors and
Body of the people of the Parish of Kilwinning, an united Parish, which for
diverse years had been vacant; I did by the Approbation of the Presbytery of
Irwin, come and Labor among them in the Work of the Gospel. Yet there is more
than one falsehood insinuated by this Author, in that which he says in the
beginning of this Paragraph, concerning Me, that ever since King James's
Indulgence I did Preach in a Meeting House, for it was a year after that
Liberty was given, that I entered here, and for these two years without the
Reluctance of any, have Preached in the Church. It is true in the year 1688.
the Congregation Assembled in another House than the Church, the Law not
allowing us the same; though all that time it was empty, except that Mr. Bell,
being after my coming here presented by the Bishop, came and Preached to his
opwn Servant, and two or three more (who were solicited to hear him) at two
several times in the Forenoon, and went off in the Afternoon; and having for
that obtained half a years Stipend, was presented to another Church, where he
had little better Reception.

It is also false which he says, in the end of this Paragraph, that at first,
I pretended that I would only attempt to reclaim the deluded people of the
West, from their Errors and Extravagancies. Perhaps he designeth by this, to
breed in the people a dislike of me. But I hope they will not believe him. And
it is most false that ever I expressed my self so concerning the people of the
West, or my design in going among them. My design was to Preach the Gospel of
Christ, and to advance Truth and Holiness, and Peace and Love among Men. I
acknowledge, if a Minister find any Errors, or Extravagancies among a people,
his endeavor should be to reclaim them, but I bless God this Author cannot
justly charge this Congregation with these things.

As for what he says, was foretold by a Person of Quality, and great Worth; I
neither know of whom he means, nor yet the prediction, and perhaps this is of
the same kind, with the rest of our Authors Assertions. Sure I am diverse
Persons of Quality and Worth, to whom I did show my Call, did approve my
Acceptance of it, though in their Affection, they regrated my going from the
North.

In fine, though this Author has said that it could not be denied that I carried
my self well, and gained the good Opinion of all, while I kept my place at
Aberdeen; and instanceth me as a judicious Person, though under Temptation: Yet
he is so discreet in the end, as to represent both this people and me as
ensnared in extravagant Fooleries; but I forgive him. It is a small thing for
me to be judged of Men; better than I have been rated as Fools. But in love to
his Soul I commend to his Meditation, Mat. 5. 22. and Rev. 22. 15.

I am really weary in insisting so long on things relating to my Person. I do
acknowledge the World would be at no great loss though I were buried in the Dust,
and my Name in Oblivion, and were it not for my respect to the public
Interest, which this Author endeavors to hurt by exposing me, I should not
have troubled my self, and the Reader with this Vindication, being hopeful that
his defaming of me cannot hinder my acceptance, nor the success of my Labors,
where I am known.

I hear, there are some other things, in that Pamphlet, which relate to me, but
my Friend gave me no transcript of them, nor have I seen the Book, and I am
told they are of no great Moment, and but By-blows to me, while he is
reflecting on other Persons and Things, and perhaps you may sufficiently
Vindicate them without my help.

I am told he acknowledges I preached a Sermon for Moderation, but added such
Cautions as made all ineffectual. To which I shall only say, I know none that
deny, but there is need of Caution, lest Men under the Name of Moderation
degenerate to Lukewarmness, and excluding of Zeal; but I know no Caution I gave
which had not a Scripture warrant. And if this Author had heard it, I think he
has good will enough to represent it, could he catch at any shadow of ground
for it.

I am also told, he reflects on me about a Paper said to be given in to the
General Assembly, wherein it should have been said the Gospel had not been
preached in Aberdeen these 30 years, but not having seen the Book, nor any
Transcript of that matter I can give no distinct Answer. But as it is related to
me, it seems of a Piece with the rest of his Assertions; only to satisfy any
sober person, who may be stumbled at such an Expression, I do publicly
profess, I am so far from thinking so, or approving any who should think or
speak it, that I Assert and Declare, I have in that time often heard, to my
great Comfort and Edification, the Gospel both plainly and powerfully preached
at Aberdeen.

But I fear I have wearied you, and shall only add that I shall not cease to
pray the Lord would preserve you long to do him service in his Church, and
shall continue,

Your Brother, and Servant, in the Lord, G. M.
Kilwinning, September 28. 1691.

FINIS.

