Marcus Minucius Felix HIS OCTAVIUS; OR, A Vindication OF CHRISTIANITY AGAINST
Paganism.

Translated by P. LORRAIN Gent.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for R Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty,
1682.

TO THE REVEREND JOHN TILLOTSON D.D. DEAN of CANTERBURY, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His MAJESTY.
REVEREND SIR,
WHEREAS other Dedications are grounded merely upon Respect and Honor, or upon
the prospect of some Advantage to the Book, or Author; this is more immediately
an Effect of Justice: since it is by Your Encouragement that this Translation
appears in Public, You having been pleased to peruse and approve it. Yet this,
SIR, is not all I have to allege for this Dedication: For whether I consider
You as a Zealous Defender of our Christian Religion against Atheism; or of our
Reformed Religion against the Romish Superstion, which is the old Paganism
revived and varnished over; I cannot make a fitter Choice of a Patron, either
for MINVCIVS FELIX, or myself, who am,

REVEREND SIR, Your most obliged, and Most devoted Servant,PAUL LORRAIN.
London, July 10. 1682.
THE PREFACE.
THOUGH a Preface to so small a Treatise as this is, may by some be judged
needless and superfluous, yet having reason to believe, that the READER will
not be unwilling to understand something concerning the Book it self, its
Author, and the End of publishing it in English, I shall endeavor, as briefly
as may be, to give him all the satisfaction I can.

AS for the Treatise it self (which contains a Conference or Dispute between a
Heathen and a Christian, in defense of their respective Religions) it has been
always accounted one of the most Eloquent and Curious Pieces, that Antiquity
has transmitted to us; and in which so many Excellencies shine forth, as it is
hard to determine whether it be more eloquent or pithy; more florid or sound
and convincing. The Relations are succinct and clear; the Arguments strong and
persuasive; the Allegations pertinent and delightful, and the Whole decked with
so comely a grace, and such lively figures of Rhetoric, as makes it truly
admirable. The Heathen enters the Lists first, and alleges all that can be
thought of, in favor of Pagan Idolatry, and all that the Hell-born Malice of
those times, had invented against the Christians, pressing it home with all the
advantages that Art and Learning can afford. The Christian on the other side,
with a great deal of soundness and address, overthrows all his Reasonings in
defense of Heathen Superstition; beats him with his own Weapon; demonstrates to
the eye the palpable falseness of those Scandals raised against the Christians,
and asserts their Religion with so much vigor and truth, and represents it so
lively (as it was all beautiful in its primitive Purity and Simplicity) that it
cannot but greatly affect and delight the Devout READER, who must needs rejoice
to see the Natural amiableness and Charms of that Religion, which (alas!) the
Superstitious inventions and the unsuitable lives of its Professors have so
miserably disguised. Besides all this, the Discourse contains such an immense
variety of Instances and Histories of great Antiquity, suited to the Dispute in
hand, as makes the reading of it very pleasant and agreeable; insomuch, that I
dare say, that never more Matter was crowded into so small a Volume. But I
should be too tedious, should I endeavor but to touch the Heads of those
peculiar Excellencies it is adorned with; wherefore I shall break off here, and
add a few words concerning the Author MINUCIUS FELIX, whom we find to have been
a Roman Knight, and by Profession a Lawyer or Advocate, who were commonly
called Orators: And as to the Reputation he was in, St JEROME's Testimony may
suffice for all, who calls him a Great Roman Orator. And indeed he who peruses
the Book in Latin, shall find that he was no less. As touching the Parties
introduced to maintain the Dispute, we have no further account to give of them,
what they were, besides what is here expressed; though some suppose, that the
CAECILIUS here mentioned, was that Great CAECILIUS, who was afterward so
Famous amongst the Christians, and in remembrance of whom St CYPRIAN took the
Name of CAECILIANUS.

THE End of my Translating this Great Orator, was chiefly that this rare and
useful Piece might no longer walk up and down as a Stranger amongst us, but
become of our familiar acquaintance, by appearing in an English Garb; though I
cannot but confess, that the hopes I conceived that my Name might exempt it self
from common Oblivion, by being seen in the Title Page with the Famous MINUCIUS
FELIX, was no small inducement to me, to undertake this Labor. But besides all
this, I thought this Treatise would be of special use in this Atheistical and
Apostatizing Age, to represent to our unthinking Godless Crew, the
unreasonableness of what they would so fain make themselves and others believe,
viz. That this Universe is an Effect of Chance, and not of Wisdom; and that the
Glorious Fabric of Heaven and Earth, had no Architect, but was at all
adventures jumbled together into this Excellent Order, by a fortuitous
Concourse of Atoms: An Opinion so grossly contradictory to Sense and Reason,
that it cannot be admitted by any, but those who have shaken hands with their
own Nature, and by their Vices and Debaucheries have degraded themselves
beneath the Beasts that perish; for they know and acknowledge their Masters and
Benefactors: But these more Brutish than the Beasts, know neither their own,
nor the World's Great Lord and Maker. Neither will it (as I hope) prove less
seasonable in this dark night of Apostasy, to hold forth to our nominal
Christians, but practical Heathens, the genuine Luster and Brightness of that
Holy Profession, which once shone so gloriously in the Countenances and Lives
of its Primitive Embracers, that it made all the World to be in love with, or
to admire it; if by this means they might be brought to bethink themselves, and
at length to return into the Way of Truth and Holiness, from whence they are
gone astray.

AS to this Translation, the READER may be pleased to take notice, that I have
all along made great use of the French of Monsieur D' ABLANCOURT, so worthily
esteemed by Ingenious Men; yet not without having an eye to, and continual
comparing of it with the Original Latin; though I never thought it fitting to
tie my self too superstitiously to the Authors Words, but deemed it sufficient
to express his Sense; which I have been very careful not to vary from in the
least. For I conceived it my duty where I could not attain his Graces and
Ornaments, at least to speak his Mind; and to give the Substance of his
Arguments, where my poor ability could not reach to clothe them in so rich a
Dress. For all which I challenge nothing but the READER's Acceptance, and where
it needs, his Pardon; which might perhaps be an Encouragement to me, to attempt
something further in the like kind hereafter.

FAREWELL.

Marcus Minucius Felix HIS OCTAVIUS; OR, A Vindication of CHRISTIANITY against
PAGANISM.
WHEN I think of my dear Octavius, and reflect on those delightful minutes we
have spent together, I feel such a pleasure, as if I were still enjoying those
happy days; so deep an impression has his Idea left in my Mind, since my Eyes
have lost the sight of him. And indeed it is not without cause, that I am so
sensibly affected with the loss of so Excellent and Holy a Person, as he was;
seeing he always expressed so great a love for me, that in our pastimes, as
well as most weighty Affairs, we ever willed and disliked the same things, as
if one heart had been divided between us. And as he had formerly been the
intimate Friend of my youthful Loves, and Companion with me in my Errors, so
when those clouds were dispelled, and I came out of the darkness of Ignorance
into the light of Truth, he did not disdain to accept of my company, though
indeed (which was the more glorious for him) he far outwent me. I say, as I was
lately reflecting on all these things, I fixed my thoughts on that serious and
important Discourse which he entertained, in my presence, with Caecilius, whom
by means thereof he brought from his vain Superstitions to the knowledge of the
true Religion of JESUS CHRIST.

OCTAVIUS was come to Rome, partly upon account of business, chiefly, perhaps,
to see me, for whose sake he made no difficulty of leaving his Family and
Children in that tender age when they are the most lovely; I mean, by reason of
their Innocence; when they begin to speak half words, and when their broken and
faltring speech makes whatever they say extremely delightful. It is not to be
expressed with what a joy I was transported at this unexpected felicity, of
meeting so good a Friend, whom of a long time I had not seen.

WHEN the first motions of this joyful surprisal were a little over, after our
being some days together, and telling one another our adventures, we determined
to go to Ostia; the Baths there, near the Sea, being very good for me, to dry
up my humors, and the Vacation of the Vintage affording me leisure for that
retirement. It was at the time when the greatest heats of the Summer begin to
abate, and the ripening Fruits give notice that the Harvest is at hand. Being
arrived in this fair City, we went early in the morning to take a walk upon the
Seashore, to enjoy the fresh air, which quickens the spirits, and imparts
liveliness to the whole body, and where the Sands, in which the footsteps make
so slight an impression, do not tire the Walker, but suffer him without
weariness to receive the benefit of a pleasant and healthful Recreation. As we
were thus walking on, Caecilius who was in company with us, seeing an Image of
Serapis, as we passed by, did according to the Superstition of the Vulgar, kiss
his hand to it, in token of worship and reverence. Whereupon Octavius turning
to me, said; Brother Marcus, you do not like a good man to suffer one, whom you
daily converse with, to remain in such gross blindness, as to stumble at stones
in broad daylight, which though they be shaped into some figure, and are
perfumed and crowned, yet still are nothing but stones. Indeed it concerns you,
as well as him, not to let him go on in this Error.

WITH this kind of discourse we passed through the middle of the City, and drew
toward the Seaside, near a wide and open place, where we saw the waves gently
beating the shore, and smoothly spreading the sand, as if they had been fitting
it on purpose for a walk. And as the Sea is never quite calm, even when the
winds are still, so though the waves were neither high nor foaming, yet in
great curles they came rolling toward the shore. Thus we delightfully wandered
by the Seaside, and beheld the waves coming and breaking themselves at our
feet, and then returning to be swallowed up again in that vast Element, and
keeping along the edge of the gently bending shore, with pleasant stories we
deceived the tediousness of our journey: For Octavius entertained us with a
Discourse of Navigation, in so pleasant a manner, that we could not grow weary
either of walking, or hearing him. And that we might not go too far, we
returned back the same way we came; and being arrived at a place where Vessels
are dry-dock'd, we saw some little Boys vying with one another at an exercise
of making shells to graze, as it were, upon the water. The Sport is this: They
gather small shells on the shore, picking up such as are the most smooth and
round; then stooping to the ground, with all their strength deliver them, so as
they may but just raze the surface of the water; and he that makes them glide
furthest, and gives the most bounds, does win the Game. Whilst Octavius and my
self were looking on these Children, Caecilius taking no diversion in their
sport, nor any notice of the activity of these Youths, kept aloof thoughtful
and melancholic, showing by his clouded countenance that he had something in
his mind that troubled him, insomuch that it prompted me to accost him with
this discourse. How now? What is become of that gay and charming temper, which
you are wont to have even amidst your most serious Affairs? Whereupon he
replied, I will not conceal from you, that Octavius has affronted and vexed me
to the heart; for it seems that he does blame you, only to offend me, and
accuse you of negligence, only to expose me as an ignorant and blockish Fellow.
I am resolved to seek my amends for this injury, and to have this matter
discussed between us in good earnest. It Is like he will see then, that it is a
more easy thing to talk of these matters with those of his own Party, than
fairly and orderly to debate them with Learned Men. Let us go and sit down upon
yonder stones that jet out into the Sea, and secure the Baths from the raging
waves, where we may rest our selves, and argue the Case more at leisure. We
went therefore and sat down, they placing me between them both, not out of
complement or respect to my Quality, (for Friendship either finds or makes all
equal) but as a Judge and Moderator of their dispute, that I might the better
hear the reasons of both Parties; and keep the two Disputants asunder. Then
Caecilius began thus: Brother Marcus, though you be already resolved about the
Things which are now controverted between us, since upon careful examination
and trial of both, you have left the Service of our Gods, and embraced
Christianity; yet at present your mind should be so disposed, that you may hold
the scales even, like an equal Judge inclining to neither Party; that so your
Sentence may rather appear to be the effect of the force of our Arguments, than
of your own preconceiv'd Opinion. Therefore if you will sit down as a Stranger,
who has no acquaintance or interest on either side, it will be no hard task to
demonstrate to you, that all the things of this World are uncertain and
doubtful, and that the knowledge we have of 'em, is rather Opinion than
Certainty; so that I cannot but wonder when I see some Men so lazy, as rather
inconsiderately to yield to the first Opinion that presents it self, than to be
at the pains to search things to the bottom. It is indeed a thing to be
lamented (and which puts one into a passion to think on it) to see some ignorant
men, who have no manner of Learning, and do scarce thoroughly understand any of
the ordinary Mechanic Arts, boldly to decide the highest and most important
Matters in the World, which have exercised the Wits of the Philosophers of all
Ages, and who after all, have never been able to come to a final determination
of them. For Man's understanding is so little capable of such transcendent
knowledge, that we cannot apprehend even things that lie at our feet. And it
seems to me a kind of impiety, to be so curious, as to sound the secrets of
Providence, and in our inquiries to reach after the heights of Heaven above, or
to rifle the bowels of the Earth beneath. Happy therefore, and wise enough
should we be, if according to the ancient Oracle of Wisdom, we could but know
our selves, and keep our mind from this vexatious and unprofitable labor, and
confine it within the bounds of Reason and its own mediocrity. And if
notwithstanding our creeping on the ground, as we do, we cannot hinder our
selves from attempting to mount up to the Heavens, and to soar above the Stars;
let us not at least add this second Error to the former, and fill the World
with vain Opinions and Fancies, on purpose to affright men. For whether the
Principles of Things be certain Seeds, which by a Natural propensity have
joined and united themselves together; or that the Members of all this spacious
Universe, have merely by Chance been framed and settled in the orderly manner
in which they now are; What reason is there why men should fancy a God Creator
of the World? What, if we suppose the Fire to have kindled the Stars; and the
matter whereof the Heavens are made, to have spread and sustained it self; that
the Earth was poised by its own weight, and the Sea made out of the moisture
which was drained from that heavy lump; What ground is there in all this for
this Religion? for these Fears? What means all this Superstition? Pray what is
Man, and all other Creatures in the World, but a mixture of Elements, which in
a short time dissolve themselves, and return into their first Being, without
the help of an overseer, workman, or disposer of all these Changes? Thus by a
continual confluence of the fiery parts of matter, of which the Celestial
Lights are made, we daily behold new Suns to shine: And by a like cause the
Vapors and Exhalations of the Earth produce Clouds, which afterward being
condensed, and by degrees carried upwards, do at last dissolve themselves into
Rain, or else cause blustering Winds, rattling Hail, roaring Thunder, and dazzling
Lightning. Which is the reason also why these Meteors do casually and
indifferently discharge themselves, sometimes on the top of a Hill, sometimes
on a Tree, sometimes upon Temples and Consecrated places, sometimes upon
Palaces, sometimes on such as fear God, and sometimes upon those that contemn
him. Shall I speak of the variety and uncertainty of Storms and tempestuous
weather, wherein it is easy to be observed, that without any choice or
exception, all things here below are turned topsy-turvy? Don't we see both good
and bad involved in the self same shipwreck, without any distinction of Vice
and Virtue; the guilty and innocent consumed in one fire; and almost all
confusedly perish in time of Plague, and in War the best many times are the
first cut off? Nay, in time of Peace, Wickedness is not only upon equal terms
with Virtue, but preferred and adored: So that when a man considers the
prosperity of the Wicked, he is at a loss what to think of them, and does not
know whether he has more reason to detest their Crimes, or desire their
happiness. Now if the World were governed by a Divine Providence, and the
authority of a wise and powerful Being, surely Phalaris and Dionysius the
Tyrant had never mounted a Throne; nor Rutilius and Camillus ever been
banished, nor Socrates forced to take down the deadly draught. We see here
Trees laden with Fruits, Fields well stored with Corn, and Hills with Grapes,
ready for Vintage, which promise a plentiful Harvest; and all on a sudden,
this may be utterly spoiled with rain, or destroyed by a tempest. Surely it
must be owned, that either Truth lies deep buried, and the secret springs and
wheels of Providence are altogether unknown, or (which is the most probable)
that Chance only governs the World without any Law or Order. And therefore
since either the vicissitudes and motions of Nature are uncertain, or we our
selves certainly under the Dominion of Fortune, how much more reasonable and
just is it to retain the Doctrine of our Ancestors, and adore the Gods which
our Fathers have worshipped, and in whose Service we have been brought up from
our infancy, than to go about to judge of Things so far above our reach as the
Deity is? And is it not better and safer to believe our first Forefathers. who
living in an Age of great simplicity, and in the very infancy of the World,
deserved to have their Gods either easy and propitious, or exercising a gentle
government like that of Kings? For indeed we see all the Towns, Provinces and
Kingdoms of the World have some Religion or other, and peculiar Ceremonies,
each worshipping their own Country-Gods; as the Eleusinians do Ceres; the
Phrygians, Cybele; the Epidaurians, Aesculapius; the Chaldeans, Bell; the
Assyrians and Sydonians, Astarte; the Scythians, Diana; the Gauls, Mercurius;
and the Romans, all of them together; which is the reason why their Power is so
greatly increased, and themselves become Masters of the whole World, having
carried their Dominion almost beyond the course of the Sun, and the bounds of
the Ocean: For by the Religion and Valor of their Arms; by guarding their City
with the Service of the Gods, Nunneries of Vestals, and other Chaste Votaries,
with a vast number of Priests and Ceremonies; by appeasing their angry Gods,
when other Nations would have Blasphemed them, and even at that time when Rome
was sacked, and had nothing left her but the Capitol; by adventuring (in
celebrating their Mysteries) to pass unarmed through the Camp of their Enemies,
whom they astonished and daunted with the bold daringness of their Zeal; by
continuing still to worship their vanquished Gods, even at the very instant
when their Enemies having taken their City, made 'em feel the insolence which
their Victory prompted them to; by searching for Deities throughout the World,
to adore them and give them Temples at Rome; nay, besides all this, by erecting
Altars to unknown Deities, and the Souls of departed Heroes; And in a word, by
worshipping the Gods of all Nations, they are deservedly become the Masters of,
and have given Laws to all Nations. Which Devotion of theirs has ever been
kept up amongst 'em, and increased more and more in process of time: For age
confers I don't know what of Sacredness upon Temples and Holy Things; insomuch
as the more ancient and unknown their Original is, the more are they
reverenced. It is not therefore without reason, I confess (though I may be
mistaken) that our Forefathers did so much betake themselves to Divination, by
observing the flying and chattering of Birds, and by consulting the entrails of
Beasts; and did institute the Service of their Gods, and dedicate Temples to
them. Do but look into the Histories and Records of past times, and you will
find that all these Mysterious Ceremonies were ordained either to return thanks
to the Divine Bounty, or to divert the stroke of his Wrath, or to appease the
fury of it. Witness the Mother of the Gods, who at her coming into the City,
made known the Chastity of a Lady, and delivered Rome from the fears of her
Enemies. Witness the Statues of those two Brothers on Horseback, which were
erected in the same place where they showed themselves, when returning from the
defeat of Perses, with their Horses out of breath and all in a foame, brought
the news of the Victory, the very same day they had got it. Witness those Games
which were set up anew, upon a Dream which an ordinary man had, that Jupiter
was offended. Witness the Decii, who won the Battle by sacrificing their lives
for the Service of their Country. In fine, witness Curtius, that noble Youth,
who leapt on Horseback into that yawning Deep, which opened it self in the
midst of Rome; and by devoting himself to appease the Anger of the Gods, closed
up that dreadful Abyss. And indeed the contempt of Divine Bodings has
occasioned the presence of the Gods more often than we could have wished for;
which the River Allia (that unfortunate Name) sufficiently teaches us, as well
as the Battle of Claudius and Junius against the Carthaginians, which was not
so much a Fight, as a miserable Shipwreck. The Lake Thrasimenus has seen its
waters stained and swollen with Roman Blood, because a Consul made light of the
Verdict of the Augurs; as likewise at another time for some just imprecations
which we slighted, we were made a Prey to the Parthians. But passing by things
more remote, concerning the Birth of the Gods, and the Gifts and Presents made
to them; and omitting also the relations of the Poets, and those Oracles that
have foretold things to come, lest Antiquity should seem too fabulous, do but
cast your Eyes upon these Temples, which at once are the City's Ornament and
Defense, and you shall find them more August and Glorious, by reason of the
Divinities which inhabit them, and are there adored, than by all the pomp of
their Embellishments, or riches of their Gifts and Offerings. From thence it is
that the Priests are inspired with the knowledge of future Events, and teach us
how to prevent dangers to come. Here they are instructed to heal the sick, to
give hope to the afflicted, succor to the needy, comfort to the unhappy, and
ease to all our pains. And whilst we are taking our rest, we often see, hear, and
acknowledge those very Gods, whom in the daytime we impiously deny, disown and
forswear. Since therefore it is agreed by all Nations, that there are Gods,
though their Nature and Original be unknown, why should we suffer those bold
and impudent men, who being puffed up with I don't know what impious wisdom,
endeavor to weaken and destroy a belief which is no less useful and
comfortable, than it is ancient and venerable? And though Theodorus the
Cyrenian, or he that was before him (viz. Diagoras Melius) to whom Antiquity
gave the Surname of Atheist, have strove to overthrow this Opinion, that they
might extinguish all manner of Religion and Reverence of the Gods, and dissolve
the strongest bond of Humane Society; yet shall their counterfeit Wisdom, never
pass for Philosophy in the esteem and approbation of Wise and thinking Men. If
the Athenians banished from their Country one Protagoras, because he raised
disputes about the Gods (though he did it rather in a Philosophical and
inquisitive, than profane way) and caused his Writings to be publicly burnt;
shall we suffer men (pray give me leave in the heat of discourse to speak out
my mind freely) I say, shall we suffer men of an unlawful, infamous and
desperate Faction, without fear of punishment to attempt against the Gods; and
gathering together a company of silly and ignorant people, especially Women,
who by reason of the weakness and credulity of their Sex, are easily deceived
and imposed upon; train them up to a wicked Confederacy, or rather Conspiracy;
into which they are not initiated by any holy Rites, but by impious Crimes
practiced in their Night-Conventicles, Solemn Fasts, and horrid and inhumane
Feasts? These are the people that sculk in the dark, and flee the light, who
are mute in public, and full of chat in their private Assemblies. They with
horror and disdain look upon our Temples as polluted Graves; They spit at our
Gods, deride our Ceremonies, and pity others, whilst themselves are most of all
to be pitied. They slight the Dignities of Priesthood, and contemn the Sacred
Purple, whilst themselves have scarce clothes to cover their own nakedness; and
out of a strange madness and unheard of boldness, they make nothing of present
torments, whilst they are strangely fearful of uncertain future miseries; Nay,
the very fear of dying after Death makes them fearless of Death, so powerful an
ascendant groundless fears, and the false hopes wherewith they flatter and
comfort themselves, have got over their Spirits. And in the mean time, as Weeds
spring fastest, and ill habits daily increase more and more; so this pernicious
and accursed Sect every day waxing stronger and spreading it self throughout
the World, it is but reason that a timely care be taken for its total
extirpation and suppression. By secret signs and tokens they know one another,
and their mutual love almost anticipates their knowledge. They make their Lust
a part of their Religion; and so much does the foolish and mad Superstition of
these People glory in their crimes, that they promiscuously call one another
Brothers and Sisters, and by this seeming holy Compellation make filthy Incest
of that which otherwise were but simple Fornication: Which Wickedness of theirs
is so much noised abroad in the World, that the truth thereof cannot well be
questioned; no more than that other report which goes of them, viz. That by a
mad Superstition they worship the Head of that vile Animal [an Ass]: Which
indeed is a sort of Worship very suitable to their Lives and Manners. They are
also said to pay a great veneration to the Privy parts of their Priests, as if
they meant to adore the Genitals of their Ghostly Fathers. Now whether these
Reports be true or false, I will not take upon me absolutely to determine. But
their Nocturnal Ceremonies and concealed Devotions seem to be sufficient
Arguments to persuade the truth of them; and they who tell us that they worship
a Man who was crucified for his Villainies, and that the Wood of a Cross
constitutes a great part of their Devotion, do worthily attribute to them
Altars suitable to their Crimes, by making them to adore what they deserve.
Moreover the Ceremony they observe upon admitting any to their Religion is no
less horrible than notorious. A Child covered all over with Paste (to conceal
the Murder he is designed for) is set before the new Proselyte, who, by their
command, strikes his knife many times into it, until the blood run down apace
from all parts, which by them is as greedily sucked up; and this common Crime is
made the Pledge and Surety for their Silence and Secrecy. These are their
Sacrifices, which are worse than all Sacriledges. As to their Feasts, they are
but too well known; concerning which our Cirthensian Orator tells us in his
Speech, that on a certain day (solemnly appointed for that purpose) they
assemble themselves all together, both Men, Women, Children, Brothers, Sisters,
and in a word, people of all Ages, Conditions and Sexes; and after they have
eaten and drunk to excess, and that the heat of the Wine and Meats begins to
kindle their blood and provoke their lust, they cast a morsel to a Dog, who is
tied to a Candlestick, so far out of his reach, that in striving to leap at it,
he overthrows the Candlestick, and puts out the Light. So that having thus rid
themselves of the only Witness of their infamous actions, and taking boldness
from shameless Darkness, they confusedly mix themselves together, as it
happens; and therefore though it may chance so, that they are not all
Incestuous in deed, yet they are all of 'em so in will and design; since the
Sin acted by any one of them is not only consented to, but wished by the whole
Company. Several other things of this nature there are, which I purposely omit,
I having already produced but too many instances of their Errors. And indeed
were there nothing else against them but that of their endeavoring to conceal
so much their Mysteries in obscurity, it would be an evident proof of the truth
of all we say, or at least of the greatest part thereof. For why do they so
industriously strive to hide that which they worship? Men are not afraid to
publish their honest actions; but such as are unjust they seek to cover with
silence and privacy. Why have they neither Altars nor Temples, nor any Images,
at least which are known? Why don't they speak but in private holes and
corners, whither they repair by stealth, if this their concealed Religion be
not infamous and criminal? But pray, from whence, who, and where is this one
only solitary and forsaken God of theirs, whom not one free Nation, no Kingdoms
do worship, no not the Romans themselves who have worshipped all the Gods of
the whole Universe? Among all the people in the World there is but that one
miserable Nation of the Jews, who have served one God alone; and yet they did
it too in a public manner, with Temples, Altars, Rites and Sacrifices; and
notwithstanding the power of this God is so inconsiderable, that both himself
and his People are now Captives to the Romans. But what strange and wonderful
things don't they invent? They assert, That to this God, whom they neither see,
nor can demonstrate, men's Lives and Actions are particularly known; That he
hears their words, searches their most secret thoughts, and is present every
where; thereby making him troublesome, restless and curious, even to impudence;
for he has a hand in, or at least a knowledge of every thing; He is present
every where, and leaves nothing unpried into. But how can this be? How can he
possibly have an eye to every thing in particular, who has business in all
places at once? Or how can he be sufficient for all, whilst he applies himself
to every particular? Nor do they content themselves with all this; but they
threaten all the World, and the Stars themselves with an universal
Conflagration; as if any thing could alter that Eternal Order, which Nature her
self has established; the Elements break their Alliance, or the Divine Harmony
of the Spheres be dissolved, for to destroy this wonderful Fabric, which
contains and surrounds us. To these they add several other Old Wives Fables:
They tell us, That after Death their ashes and dust shall rise again; and (by I
don't know what strange kind of persuasion) they steadfastly believe those
Errors they have invented, and fancy themselves already risen and born again:
Which is a double madness and folly, to believe that the Heavens and Stars
which we leave as we found them, shall perish; and that Men, whom we see hourly
dye and have an End, as they have had a Beginning, shall for ever abide. And as
if Dead Bodies being kept from the flames, should not by length and process of
time be turned into dust and ashes, they will not burn their Dead, and blame us
because we burn ours. Do you think that it matters any thing, whether they be
consumed in the Earth or in the Sea, or devoured by Fire or wild Beasts? For if
Dead Bodies have any sense, any manner of Burial must needs be a torment to
them; but if they have none, that way whereby they are soonest consumed, is the
best. Nevertheless being prepossest with this ridiculous opinion, they promise
themselves (as the Godly Party) an everlasting happiness after this Life; and
threaten others (as being the Rebel Rout) with torments that shall have no end.
I have many things to say here, to prove them worse than others; but I will not
take pains to make it out, since I think it sufficiently done already. But were
it granted that they are as righteous as others, is it not as a certain truth
believed by most, That Destiny is the cause both of the good and evil, that we
see in the World? Which is your judgment also. For as some impute all humane
Actions to Fate and Fortune, so do you to God. Which is in effect to say, that
you have not voluntarily embraced this Sect, but God has Elected you thereunto;
So that thereby you make your God an unjust Judge, who does not punish the
sinful, but the unfortunate. Pray tell me, shall you rise again without, or
with a Body? and shall that Body be the same you have now, or another? If you
say without a Body: For my part I don't believe there is either Life, Soul, or
Sense without a Body. And how with a Body? It cannot be your own; for that is
already wasted. Shall it be another? Then it will be a new body, and not the
old one repaired. Besides, so many Ages are past and gone; and yet who has ever
been seen to rise and come to Life again, though but for a small time (as the
Poets feign Protesilaus did) that we might have some ground to believe this
Paradox? Indeed these Stories are but Chimaeras of a cracked brain, and the
vain comforts which Poets have invented and pleasantly expressed for their own
and others diversion. And these old Fables new vamp'd, your credulity
entertains and applies them to your God. Why don't you suffer the experience of
things present to teach you, at least, how vain these your promises and hopes
of the future are? Poor wretches! You might learn what will be your Fate after
Death, by the miseries of Life which you now endure. The most and the best of
you (as you say your selves) are ready to starve, being in want of all things
necessary for this mortal Life, and under great troubles and miseries; which
God suffers and takes no notice of; An evident proof, that he either will not,
or cannot afford you any relief; and by consequence is either impotent or
unjust. Thou who flatterest thy self with an immortality after this Life, art
thou not sensible of thy condition? Can thou deny thy weakness, when thou
tremblest at dangers, when thou burnest in a Fever, when thou art racked with
pain? Miserable delusion! Not to own one's misery, even when one feels it! But
to leave these common Matters; behold there are executions, punishments and
torments that await you, and crosses, not to be adored by you, but endured;
with fires and flames, which you own your selves afraid of, whilst you foretell
and threaten them to others. Where is that God that can raise the Dead, but not
relieve the Living? Are not the Romans, without the assistance of your God,
become the Masters of the World, and of your selves too, whilst you in the mean
time refrain from lawful pleasures, and entertain your sullen humor with
troublesome fears and anxious thoughts? You are never seen at any public
Spectacles and Triumphs; nor do you ever frequent our solemn Feasts and Combats
in honor of our Gods. You abhor the Meats which Priests have touched, and are
afraid to taste the Wine that has been presented on our Altars; So that it
seems you stand in some awe of those very Gods, whom you deny. You wear no
Garlands on your Heads, and reserve your Ointments and Perfumes for the Dead;
Nor do you so much as adorn the Graves of your deceased Friends with Chaplets.
You look pale and trembling, and are indeed real Objects of pity; but it must
be of the pity of our Gods, for yours take no notice of you. Miserable
Wretches! who deprive your selves of the enjoyments of this Life, and deceive
your selves in the expectation of another. Therefore if you have any wisdom or
modesty left, give over gazing upon the Stars, and searching into the Destiny
of the World; And think it enough to look to your own feet; especially for such
rude and unlearned People as you are, who hardly understand matters of a Civil
concernment, much less are able to discourse of Divine and Heavenly things. But
if you have such an itch of Philosophizing, follow the Example of Socrates (you
who think so highly of your selves) that was the Prince of Wisdom: All know the
answer he was wont to make to those that asked him any Questions about Matters
of DIVINITY. What Is above us (said he) does not concern us. For which he
merited the Praise of extraordinary Wisdom, from the mouth of the Oracle it
self; and he himself was sensible, that it was not for his knowing all things,
that Apollo had pronounced him the Wisest of all Greece; but because he had
learned this one thing, That he knew nothing. This therefore is the greatest
Wisdom of all, for a Man to confess his own ignorance. Upon this bottom were
founded the Opinions of Arcesilas, Carneades and several other Philosphers of
the Ancient Academy, who thought it safest not to determine any thing in
Matters of any difficulty. And indeed this modest and doubtful way of
Philosophizing is the best, seeing it is wariness in the Ignorant, and wisdom
in the Learned. It was this, which gained so much admiration and esteem to
Simonides, whose admirable slowness and caution deserves to be proposed as an
Example to be imitated by all Posterity. For being asked of Hiero what his
belief and opinion was concerning the Gods, he at first demanded a day to
consider of it: The next day after being questioned about the same thing, he
desired two days more; the third time he craved as many more; and so from that
time forth he still doubled the number: At which the King standing amazed (not
being able to guess the reason of so many delays) and pressing him to answer
the Question without any further put-offs; The more (said he) O King, that I
study and meditate of the Thing you inquired of me, the more obscure it grows.
Thus (methinks) we ought to leave such things as are intricate and uncertain,
undetermined, and not boldly give our Verdict in a Matter, wherein the Wisest
Men are at a great loss, and use to suspend their Judgments; nor be too forward
to resolve and decide Controversies, whilst the ablest and most Learned are yet
in doubtful deliberation about them; seeing this is the ready way either to
destroy all manner of Religion, or to introduce the most fulsome Superstition
and intolerable Slavery.

WHEN Caecilius had thus made an end, Well (said he, with a smiling
countenance; for the earnestness of his Discourse had appeased his Anger) what
to all this says our Octavius of the Race Plautus speaks of, the chief of
Bakers, and the meanest of Philosophers? Soft (said I to him) you had better
spare your braggs, and not begin your triumph till you have got the Victory;
nor please your self too much with the fine Speech you have made. Remember that
Truth, and not Vainglory, is the Thing we contend for. And indeed it is not
your Discourse that gives me the greatest trouble (though I must confess that I
was extremely taken with it, because it was both very witty and graced with
admirable variety) but I am sorry to see, that the probability of Things does
change face, according to the abilities and eloquence of those that discourse
them, and that the most evident truth often is obscured by the weakness of
those who manage it. Men are apt to be carried away with an Eloquent Speech,
and to assent to every thing that is plausibly said, and to be diverted from
the consideration of what is treated of, without discerning Truth from Falsehood,
or considering that as a Paradox may sometimes be true, so a likely thing often
is false: And therefore the easier they are to believe the assertions of
others, the oft'ner are they reproved and convinced by those who look nearer
into the Matter: So that being nettled at last to see themselves deceived at
every turn, they cast the blame of their own rashness upon the doubtfulness and
uncertainty of all things, and had rather condemn every thing and believe
nothing at all, than concern themselves in Matters that are so doubtful, and
liable to mistake. It Is therefore our interest to have a care, lest this should
make us have an aversion for all manner of Discourse and Conferences, or (which
is worse) make us distaste and hate the company of Men. For those who easily
believe any thing, finding themselves frequently deceived, by persons whom they
before esteemed homest and good Men, fall into another extreme, which is, That
they suspect all the World, and mistrust even those in whom they have reason to
repose the greatest confidence. Wherefore since it is so natural for every one
to employ all their might in the vindication of their own Opinions, and since
also in such Disputes as these, the one has commonly more Truth on his side,
though obscure and unperceived, and the other more Wit and Eloquence, even so
far as sometimes to persuade things that are not; it is our Duty to ponder and
consider of the Whole, with all the strictness and exactness imaginable, that
we may pick out, approve and receive what is good in it, contenting our selves
to commend what is wittily said, without believing it.

YOU transgress the bounds, and keep not the measures of an equal Judge (replied
Caecilius) by interrupting our Dispute with a Discourse that endeavors to
weaken the strength, and take away the credit of what I have said; especially
seeing Octavius has all the Particulars of my Reasoning whole and entire before
him, and may answer and refute them, if he can: And for all your reflecting on
my Discourse, if I be not mistaken, I have done nothing but what is for the
interest of us both; having endeavored only to exhibit a Compendium of the
Matters in Question between us, to the end that what I have delivered, might be
examined, rather by the force and soundness of Reason, than by any high and
pompous Eloquence. And we ought not any more take off our attention from
considering the Things themselves (as you well observe) since our Januarius is
now preparing and raising himself to take his turn, if we can but have the
patience to hear him with silence.

I SHALL speak (said Octavius) as much to the purpose as I can. But we must
first endeavor to wipe off all injuries, calumnies and reflections, and to
dispel those clouds with the light of Truth. To begin therefore, I must first
of all tell you plainly, That you have expressed so great an uncertainty about
the things you spoke of, that I doubted whether you failed in point of Learning
or Knowledge, or were blinded by Error. For sometimes you said that you
believed there were Gods; and sometimes again, that you did not know, what to
believe of 'em; as if you had a design by your ambiguous Expressions to avoid
the dint of my Answer. But I cannot think this of Caecilius; These crafty tricks
are beneath the greatness of his Wit, and the simplicity of his temper. But he
does like those, who knowing not the way, stop when it divides into many, and
are at a loss which to take, because they cannot believe them all right, and
dare not choose any one: In like manner he who has no firm judgment of Truth,
is doubtful and divided in his Opinion about it, according as the reasons on
either side do incline and sway him by turns. Therefore it is no wonder if
Caecilius also be tossed to and fro by contrary Opinions. Which that he may no
longer be, I will convince him of the Variety of his Errors, by representing
Truth to him which is but one, and so settle and establish him for ever. And
because he takes it so heinously, that unlearned and poor ignorant people (as
he calls us) should maintain any Dispute about Divine Matters; he must
understand, that all Men are born reasonable Creatures, without any distinction
of Age, Quality or Sex, and owe not their Wisdom to Fortune, but to Nature.
Besides, that Philosophers and other renowned Inventors of Arts and Sciences,
were accounted but mean people, illiterate and poor, till their wisdom made
them Famous; So true it is, that the Rich who idolize their Treasures, make
more account of their Gold, than of Heaven; whereas such poor Fellows as we,
have always been the Searchers-out of Wisdom and Teachers of it to others.
Whereby we may plainly see, that Wit and Wealth do not always go together;
neither is it so much the Effect of great Study and Industry, as an advantage
of Nature. Men ought not therefore to quarrel, or be angry, when they see
others make it their business to inquire into the truth of Divine Mysteries,
and declare the understanding they have of them; seeing we ought not to regard
so much the Authority or Quality of the Disputer, as the Weight and Truth of
what is said. The strength of Reason appears most clearly, when the Discourse
is stripped of all external Ornaments and Flourishes, not painted and set off
with an artificial Grace and Eloquence, but supported by Truth, which is the
Rule of Right and Wrong. Not that I deny, for all that, what Caecilius has
given himself so much trouble to prove, viz. That Man ought to know himself,
what he is, from whence, and for what end; Whether he be compounded of the
Elements, or made up of Atoms; or rather framed, fashioned, and animated by GOD
himself. But this we cannot resolve without inquiring into the nature of the
Universe, seeing both these things have so near a relation, and are so straightly
linked to one another, that we cannot rightly apprehend what Man is, without a
diligent enquiry into the nature of the Deity; nor be able to manage the civil
Affairs of this World, without being acquainted with the constitution of this
great City of the Universe. And indeed it being this especially, that makes us
differ from Brutes, that whereas they are continually stooping downwards to the
ground, looking no higher than their Food; we on the contrary, who have our
Faces raised upwards to behold Heaven, and are endued with the use of Speech
and Reason, which teaches us to acknowledge GOD, to perceive and imitate Him;
we cannot without guilt shut our Eyes against this clear Light, which
continually glares upon our Senses; it being the highest kind of Sacrilege to
seek that on Earth, which is not to be found but in Heaven. And to speak the
truth, one must be blind and senseless, to fancy all this great and admirable
Fabric of the World, to have been formed by a fortuitous concourse of blind,
senseless, and unthinking Atoms, rather than by the unsearchable Wisdom and
immense Power of a God. For what can be more plain, evident or conspicuous
(whether we lift up our Eyes to Heaven, or cast them down to the Earth) than
that there is an inconceivably-powerful and wise Spirit, which does inspire,
influence, move, cherish, and conduct whole Nature, and every part of it? Do
but behold the Heavens; Let your thoughts out into the vastness of their
Extension; consider the swiftness of their course; view them by night, when
they sparkle, and are all bespangl'd with Stars; or by day, when they are all
bright and resplendent from the Sun; and you will easily discern the wonderful
and Divine skill of the Supreme Governor in the ordering and poizing of all
these. Again, consider how the Sun by his course through the Zodiac measures
out the Year, and distinguishes its Seasons, as the Moon does the Months by her
increase and decrease. What shall I say of this continual vicissitude of Light
and Darkness, which affords us the agreeable and necessary enterchange of
Labor and Rest? But I must leave the further discourse of the Stars to the
Astrologers, whose proper business it is to inquire into their Virtues and
influences, and who teach us, which of them rule the Winds, and inform the wary
Mariner in the Art of Navigation; and which of them determine the time for
Plowing and Reaping, and are the perpetual Almanac of the laborious
Husbandman. From all which it is undeniably evident, that these Wonders could
never have been created, framed and disposed in that excellent Order, without
the perfect Wisdom of the Supreme Artist; seeing we cannot so much as know or
understand them, without a great sagacity of mind and reason. What shall we say
of that exact Disposal of Time and Seasons, wherein we do not know which we are
to admire most, their Constancy or their Variety? How loudly do they proclaim
their Divine Author, and Wise Director! The Spring is not more pleasant by its
fair Days and Flowers, than the heat of Summer is useful and advantageous to
ripen the Fruits of the Earth; and the liberal Plenty of Autumn is not more
joyful, than the wet and frost of Winter is needful. Which Order might easily
be disturbed, if it were not dispensed by the steady Hand of Power and Wisdom.
Oh! the Wonders of Providence! which has allayed the nipping frosts of Winter,
and scorching heats of Summer, with the intervening temperature of the Spring
and Autumn; and that with such exactness, that the change of these extremes of
heat and cold, is so far from being intolerable, that it is even easy and
delightful, giving us the pleasure of variety, and yet sliding gently and
insensibly from one extremity to another. Cast your eye upon the Sea, and to
your amazement you shall see how the loose Banks of Sand give a check to its
proud and raging Waves. Consider the wonderful ebbings and flowings of the
Ocean; Behold the Springs whose waters flow continually; View the Rivers which
pursue their uninterrupted course without ceasing, and ever returning to that
vast Deep, which is the Center of their Emanation: Take a prospect of those
vast Woods and Forests, which deck and grace the face of the Earth; they are
all fed from its bowels, and yet the Earth is never the less. What shall I say
of that pleasant and useful disposal of the steepness of Mountains, the risings
of Hills, the vast extension of Plains? Or what shall I say of such numberless
numbers of Creatures, who are (each of them) severally furnished with their
peculiar Weapons of defense; some are armed with horns, others fenced with
teeth; some strengthened with hoofs, others sharp'ned and edged with claws;
some appointed with stings and spurs, others defended with a prickly and
unaccessible skin; whilst others again secure themselves by the lightness of
their heels, or swiftness of their wings; Nature having bestowed on every one
of them either strength or cunning for their own defense? But above all, the
perfection and beauty of the Shape of Man, proclaims and owns GOD to have been
the Artist that framed it. His upright Stature, his raised Countenance, in the
upper part whereof the eyes are posted as on a Watchtower, and where all the
other Senses have their several Stations and Quarters allotted them, as in a
Castle or Citadel. We should never have done in going about to treat in
particular of all these Wonders: There is not one part in Man, which is not
ornamental and graceful, as well as necessary: And what is yet more admirable
is, That the same Figure which is common to us all, is diversified by such an
infinite variety of Features in each of us, that as there is a likeness in all,
so there is in every one something that makes him unlike to another. Besides,
how wonderful is the manner of our Birth? How strong and prevalent the desire
of begetting our Like? Upon whom can you father these Wonders but upon GOD
alone, who swells the breasts with milk, against the time the Infant breaks his
Prison, and comes to breath the free and open Air, suiting their nice
tenderness with a proportionate delicate nourishment? Nor does this bountiful
GOD content himself to take a general care of the Universe, but provides also
for each part of it. What Great Britain wants of the heat of the Sun, is made
up by the warm Vapors which arise from the Sea that surrounds it. The
overflowing of the River Nilus serves Egypt instead of Rain. Euphrates makes
Mesopotamia fruitful, and the River Indus is said both to sow and water those
Eastern Parts. If perchance you should come into a house, and there find all
the Rooms richly furnished, beautified and adorned, would you not without the
least hesitancy conclude, That there is some Lord and Owner of it, who is far
better than all this rich and glorious Furniture; so likewise in this stately
Palace of the World, when you take a view of Heaven and Earth, and that
Providence, Order and Law, which dispenses and directs all things in them,
doubt, if you can, that there is a Lord and Father of this great Family, whose
Glory far transcends that of the Sun, Moon and Stars, and who is more beautiful
than the most lovely part of it. But perhaps, since there is no doubt whether
there be a Providence or not, you may think it a Question whether there be but
one or many, that have a hand in the administration of this Celestial
Government, it will not be a hard matter to fix this your incertainty, if you
will but attentively consider the Kingdoms of the Earth, which are but so many
Copies of the One Heavenly Original Empire. When did ever a Monarch either
admit of a Partner in his Sovereignty, in full trust and confidence, or lay him
aside without blood? I omit speaking of the Persians, who referred the choice of
their Prince to the neighing of an Horse; and purposely pass-by that old Story
of the Theban Brothers. All the World knows what dissension there arose between
two Twins, which of them should be King over a Company of Shepherds, and their
poor Cottages. The Wars of Caesar and Pompey have spread themselves over the
whole World, and the Fortune of so vast an Empire was not big enough to
satisfy theambition of two so nearly allied, as Father and Son-in-Law: You may
from these instances easily judge of the rest. The Bees can suffer no more than
one King; Flocks follow one Leader, and every Herd has its own Ruler: And can
you imagine the Supreme Power of Heaven to be divided, and that the Sovereignty
of that only true and Divine Monarchy is shared amongst many? Especially when
you consider, that GOD, the Father of all things, has neither Beginning nor
End; and as he gives Beginning to all other things, so an Eternity and
perpetuity of Being to himself. Who before this World was made, was a World to
Himself; who by his Word commanded all things into Being, governs them by his
Wisdom, and perfects them by his Power. He cannot be seen, because he is more
bright and glorious than our sight can endure to behold: Neither can He be
comprehended, being greater than our minds, infinite, immense and only known to
Himself; what He is indeed, our breasts are too narrow to conceive; and we can
never form a worthy notion of Him, but when we own Him Inestimable and
Incomprehensible. May I speak what I think: Whosoever fancies he knows the
Greatness of GOD, has already lessened it; and therefore he who would not
lessen it, must not pretend to know it. Neither do thou enquire after his Name;
His Name is GOD. It Is then we stand in need of Names, when we are to divide a
multitude into particulars, by their distinguishing Titles, and proper
appellations. But GOD being alone and by himself, the Name of GOD must wholly
belong to Him, and to none else: For if I call Him Father, you will be apt to
think Him an Earthly One; if I call Him King, you will fancy Him a Worldly Prince;
if I call Him Lord, you will apprehend Him Mortal. Abstract but these additions of
Names from our gross imagination, and you will see Him in his own Brightness and
Glory. Besides, in this I have the general assent of all Men, concurring with
me. Mind the Common People; When they lift up their hands to Heaven, whom have
they in their mouths but GOD? Their ordinary Saying is, GOD is great, GOD is
true; and ever and anon [If it pleases GOD:] Which Words, though they contain
the Confession of a Christian, yet are as well the Voice of Nature in the
Common People. Yea those who will have Jupiter to be the Sovereign of the
Universe, do only mistake in the Name; but agree with us in the Thing it self,
That there is but One only Power. The Poets also in their Verses celebrate One
Father both of the Gods and Men; and say, That the Minds and Thoughts of Men
are such as GOD every day puts into them. And what shall we say of Virgil? Does
not he speak yet more clearly and more near to Truth, when he says, That in
the beginning there was a Spirit, which inwardly cherished and fostered both
Heaven and Earth; and that all the Parts of them were actuated by a Mind
infused throughout the Whole; and that from thence, Men and all other Creatures
derive their Original? The same Prince of Poets calls in another place this
Mind and Spirit GOD, as where he says, that GOD is diffused throughout the
vast Extent of the Earth and Seas, and of the high Heaven; and that from Him,
Men and Beasts, Rain and Lightning do proceed. And what do we say else, but
that GOD is an Eternal Mind, Reason and Spirit? Let us take a view, if you
please, of the Opinions of Philosophers, and you will find that though they
seem diverse, yet they all agree in this Matter. And omitting those rude and
primitive Men, who by their Sayings purchased the Name of Sages; Thales the
Milesian, who was before them all, and who first maintained any Dispute
concerning Celestial Things, held that Water was the Original Matter of all
things, and that GOD was that Mind, or Understanding Spirit, who framed them
out of it: Which is certainly a more profound and sublime Account concerning
the Water, and its actuating Spirit, than could proceed from the understanding
of Man, without the assistance of Divine Revelation. Thus you plainly see that
the Opinion of the first of Philosophers, does entirely concur with ours. After
him Anaximenes and Diogenes Apolloniates make God to be Air, but Immense and
Infinite, and in ascribing these perfections to the Divinity, they also consent
with us. Anaxagoras was of opinion, that GOD was an Infinite Spirit, containing
and moving all things. Pythagoras calls Him a Mind penetrating all things and
diffused through the Universe, taking care of, and giving Life to all the
Creatures therein. Zenophanes affirms, That GOD is an Animated Infinity, or a
Spirit joined with Infinite Matter. Antisthenes declared, That there were
several Gods, belonging to several Countries; but that there was but One
Principal and Sovereign amongst them all, who was GOD by Nature. Speusippus was
of opinion that GOD was nothing else but a Natural Power, quickening and
governing all things. Yea, and does not Democritus himself (though he was the
first Inventor of Atoms) often call Nature, which is the Former of all Ideas
and Understanding, GOD; Strato calls Him Nature; And even Epicurus, who either
believed that there were no Gods; or if there were, that they were idle, and
without any concern about the things of this World; yet sets Nature above them.
As for Aristotle, though he seem sometimes divided in his thoughts, about this
Matter; yet he positively asserts One Sovereign Power: For sometimes he says,
That an Understanding Spirit is GOD; sometimes, that the World is GOD; and then
again, he will have GOD to govern the World. Heraclides of Pontus asserts GOD
to be a Divine Spirit, but with some incertainty; For sometimes he attributes
the Supremacy to the Divine Spirit, and sometimes to the World it self.
Theophrastus, Zeno, Chrysippus and Cleanthes do likewise vary in their
Opinions; Yet all of them at last agree in One Providence, which superintends
the Whole. For Cleanthes sometimes affirms GOD to be a Spirit; sometimes, that
He is an Ethereal Fire; but most frequently calls Him, Reason. His Master Zeno
holds a Natural and Eternal Law, and sometimes Fire, and sometimes Reason, to
be the first Cause of all things. He also evidently reproves and convinces the
common Error about the Gods, by showing that Juno is nothing but the Air,
Jupiter Heaven, Neptune the Sea, and Vulcan the Fire; And that many of their
other Gods are but the Elements dressed up in other Names. Chrysippus is much
of the same Opinion; for with him, sometimes a Divine Power and a Rational
Nature is GOD, and at other times the World, and a fatal Necessity; and
imitates Zeno in his interpreting the Fables of the Gods, which are found in
Homer, Hesiod, and Orpheus. In like manner Diogenes the Babylonian was used in
his Discourses to declare, That Jupiter's Brain being with child and delivered
of Minerva, and other like Stories, were not an account of the true Original of
their Gods, but of some other things couched under those Fables. Xenophon the
Disciple of Socrates, holds, That the shape of the true GOD cannot be seen, and
consequently is not to be searched after. Aristo of the Isle of Chios, says,
That he is altogether incomprehensible: Both which Philosophers, had doubtless
a right sense of the Divine Majesty, in that they despaired of ever fully
understanding Him. As for Plato, he does more openly and clearly speak of GOD,
and does less mistake, both as to the Name and the Thing it self; and his
Discourses might have been accounted altogether Heavenly, but that they are
here and there blemished and tainted with his Politics. In his Timaeus he
calls GOD by his Own Name, and declares Him to be the Father of this Universe,
the Creator of the Soul, and the Architect of Heaven and Earth; who by reason
of his superlative and incomprehensible Power and Majesty, is hard to be found,
and when found, cannot possibly be expressed and declared: Which are, in a
manner, the very same things which we say; for we also know GOD, and own Him to
be the Parent of the World; but unless we be demanded, we do not speak
publicly of Him.

THUS I have rehearsed the Opinions of almost all the Philosophers, whose glory
it is, that they have all pointed at One and the same GOD, though under various
Names; insomuch as it would make a Man think, either that our Christians now
are Philosophers, or that the ancient Philosophers were Christians. Now if it
be granted that Providence rules the World, and is governed by the Will and
Counsel of the One only GOD; then ought not we to suffer our selves to be
imposed upon with the silly Fables of Antiquity, which are both repugnant to
Reason, and condemned by the Philosophers of ancient Times. Our Fathers indeed
were so credulous, as to believe things altogether monstrous and inconsistant,
as a Scylla with several Bodies, a Chimaera with many shapes, an Hydra that
received a new life from his happy Wounds, and Centaures, which were Horse and
Man united and growing together. In short, they very readily believed whatever
any one was pleased to feign or fancy; as Men's being metamorphos'd into Birds;
Beasts into Men, and again Men into Flowers and Trees; with so many other
fabulous things, which, had they ever been, would happen still; but because
they cannot be, are hereby sufficiently demonstrated never to have been. Their
Opinions concerning the Gods were likewise full of inconsiderate credulity and
ignorant simplicity; for by giving Religious Worship to their Kings, and
desiring by Pictures and Statues to preseve their memory, after their Death,
they at last made a Religious Ceremony of that which at first was only intended
to comfort themselves for the loss of them. For before the World was opened by
Commerce and Trade, and that Nations had mixed their Customs and Ceremonies
together, every one of them adored their first Founder, or Famous Leader, or
some Queen Chaste, and valiant above her Sex; or an Inventor of some useful and
necessary Art or Calling; as considering that the Memory of such Renowned
Persons, well-deserved to be preserved by them; since by this means they at
once gave a reward to the Virtue of the Deceased, and an example to Posterity.
Read the Writings of Wisemen, and particularly of the Stoics, and you will
acknowledge with me, that Men have been worshipped as Gods, either for their
good Deeds, or their Dignity. Euhemerus gives us an exact account of their
Birth, Countries and Names, as also the several Places where they were buried;
particularly he instanceth in Jupiter called Dictaeus, from the Mountain Dictae
in Candia, where he was nursed; and Apollo named Delphicus, from the City
Delphos in Phocis, a Province of Greece; and Isis, who had the Surname of
Pharia, from the Island Pharos in Egypt; and Ceres, who was styled Eleusina,
from the City Eleusis in Achaia, where she was more particularly worshipped.
Prodicus tells us, that they were reckoned among the Gods, who by rambling
through the World, were the first Inventors of Husbandry, and by this means
became useful to Mankind. And Perseus discourses much at the same rate;
adding, that it was from this ground, that the Names of the Inventors were
bestowed upon the things invented by them, as appears by that Comical
Expression [ Without Ceres and Bacchus, Venus is a cold] Which in other terms
is no more than this, That without good Meat and Drink Lust languisheth.
Alexander the Great in a famous Treatise which he writes to his Mother, tells
her, That the dread of his Power had so far wrought upon a Priest, as to make
him discover to him this great Secret and Mystery, that the Gods were but Men.
In which Discourse he makes Vulcan the first of all the Gods, and after him the
Race of Jupiter. Consider the Story of Isis, and the scattered members and
empty Tomb of thy Serapis or Osiris; and lastly, their Religious Rites and
Mysteries, and you will find them made up of the dismal Events, Deaths, Funerals,
Mourning and Wailings of these caitive Gods Isis in company of the
Dog's-Head-Idol, and her bald Priests, mourns for, laments and seeks her lost
Son, and her miserable Worshippers beat their breasts, to express and imitate
the sorrow of this unhappy Mother; and soon after you see Isis by and by
overjoyed for having found her Little-One; her Priests are merry, and the Dog's
snout triumphs for the feat he has done in finding him. Thus they fail not
punctually every year to lose what they have found, and then to find again what
they have lost. Now I pray you, what can be more ridiculous, than to bewail
that which we worship, or to worship that which we bewail? And yet such
fopperies as these, which formerly were the Religion of the Egyptians, are now
(forsooth) become the Devotions of the Romans. Ceres with lighted torches in
her hands, and Serpents twisting about them, seeks her Daughter Proserpina,
full of languishing care and trouble, who having strayed too far, was stolen
away and ravished by Pluto. This is the sum and substance of the Eleusinian
Mysteries: And the Rites used in the Worship of Jupiter, are no less
ridiculous. He is suckled by a She goat, for want of a better Nurse, and the
poor Infant is stolen away from his Father, for fear he should devour him; the
Corybantes in the mean while soundly plying their Cymbals, to drown the cries
of the Bantling, from coming to the ears of his more than inhumane Father. I am
ashamed to relate the Account they give of Cybele, how she gelded Atys, and
made him an Eunuch-God, because she could not tempt him to commit Adultery with
her, who was old and ugly, having been the Mother of so many Gods. And
therefore, answerably to this Story, her Priests voluntarily geld themselves,
to the end they might be capable of that Dignity. I leave you to judge, whether
these be not real miseries, rather than Religious Mysteries. Come we now to
speak of the goodly form, mien and accoutrements of your Gods; than which, what
can be more shameful and ridiculous? Vulcan is a limping crazy God. Apollo,
though he has lived so many Ages, is still a beardless Boy; whereas his Son
Aesculapius has a fair and comely Beard. Neptune's Eyes are blue; Minerva's
gray; Juno has Ox-Eyes; Pan's Feet are garnished with claws; Saturn's are
charged with fetters, and Mercury's fledged with Wings. Janus has two faces, as
if he would go backward and forward at once. Diana the Huntress has her
Garments tucked up to her thighs; but She at Ephesus, is in a manner made up
all of paps: As she is the Goddess of Hell, they give her three Heads, and good
store of Arms and Hands. Yea, your Jupiter himself sometimes has a Beard of
much gravity, and at other times has a Chin as bare as my hand. When he has the
Surname of Hammon, he wears horns; when that of Capitolinus, he is armed with
Thunderbolts; when that of Latiaris, he is all besmeared with blood; and when
that of Feretrius, he is very still and quiet. And not to go over the many
several Jupiters, there being as many Monsters of him, as there are Names.
Erigone hangs her self; and the Merit of Self-murder has advanced her to
shine a perpetual Virgin among the Stars. Castor and Pollux dye and live by
turns. Aesculapius is struck down with a Thunderbolt, that with the greater
Ceremony he may rise up a God: And Hercules must burn himself upon Mount Octa,
to get rid of his Humanity. These are the fine Stories, which we learn from our
ignorant Forefathers; and, what is worse, make them the subject of our
Studies, and a great piece of Learning. In these the Poets excel all others,
and have by their Authority done vast prejudice to the Truth; So that Plato was
much in the right, when he banished Homer (that renowned, celebrated and
crowned Poet) out of his Commonwealth. For it is he chiefly, who in his Poem of
the Trojan Wars, has made a mock of the Gods, by mingling them so familiarly in
the actions and affairs of Men. He brings them in fighting together; He wounds
Venus; He fetters and binds Mars, wounds him and puts him to flight: He make
Briareus to rescue Jupiter out of the hands of the rest of the Gods, when they
were conspiring to bind him to his good behavior; and represents him lamenting
the death of his Son Sarpedon, as not being able to prevent it. He describes
him embracing his Juno with more heat, than he used to do his beloved
Mistresses, being inflamed with Venus's Girdle. Hercules is made a Scavenger,
and cleanses Stables. Apollo turns Cow-herd to Admetus. Neptune binds himself
as a Daylabourer to Laomedon, to build up the Walls of Troy, and is so unhappy
withal, as not to be paid for his drudgery. Aeneas's Armor, and Jupiter's
Thunderbolt are both hammered out upon one and the same Anvil; as if Heaven
and its Thunders had not been long before Jupiter was born in Crete; or as if
the Cyclopses could have made those affrighting flashes, which Jupiter himself
could not choose but be afraid of. What shall I say of Mars and Venus, being
caught in the very Fact of Adultery; or of Jupiter's abominable filthiness with
Ganymedes, whom he translated into Heaven? All which Fables were invented on
purpose to authorize the faults and vices of Men. And it is with those and such
like pleasing Fictions and Lies, that the Minds of Youth are corrupted; and
being instilled into them in their tender years, grow up with them to Manhood;
So that (which is to be lamented) in their very old Age their Minds continue
tainted with these sottish Fancies; And yet the truth of these Matters, is most
plain and evident to those who will take the pains to enquire into it. All the
Ancient Writers (whether Greek or Roman) do unanimously assert, that Saturn,
the first of the goodly Generation of Gods, was but a Man. This, Nepos and
Crassus do affirm in their History; and Thallus and Diodorus relate the same
thing; viz. That this Saturn for fear of falling into his Son's hands, fled out
of Greece into Italy, where Janus received him into his house; and being a
Grecian, full of ingenuity, and instructed in Arts and Sciences, taught those
barbarous people several things; as the forming of the Letters of the Alphabet;
coining of Money, and making diverse sorts of useful Instruments: He called the
Country Latium, as if he had said, an Hiding Place, because he had found there
a safe retreat to hide and conceal himself from the attempts of his Son; and to
the end he might have his Memory preserved, he called the City from his own
Name Saturnia; as Janus called the City built upon the Hill Janniculus, by that
Name, to rescue his own from oblivion. You see then plainly, that Saturn was a
Man; for he was fain to flee and hide himself; and was the Father, as well as
the Son, of a Man. And whereas they called him the Son of Heaven and Earth, it
was only because his Original and Parentage were unknown to the Italians; as we
are wont to say of those that come unexpectedly upon us, that they are dropped
from the Skies; and of such whose birth is mean and obscure, that they are the
Sons of the Earth. As for Jupiter, he Reigned in Crete, after he had banished
his Father from that Island; there he begot Children, and there he was buried:
And at this very day they show the Cave which bears his Name, and point you to
the Grave where he was interred; yea, and the very Ceremonies they use in his
Worship, declare him to have been a Man. It would be to no purpose to insist on
particulars, and to recount his whole Genealogy: It is enough that we have
proved the Father was Mortal, to convince that the same Quality was conveyed
to all his Posterity; except you suppose that they became Gods after their
Death; as by the Perjury of Proculus, Romulus was ranked among the Number of
the Gods; or as Juba, by the unanimous consent and desire of the Africans, was
made a God; and as other Kings were Deifi'd by their Subjects, not because they
really believed them to be Gods, but to give them a more honorable discharge
from their Sovereignty. Besides, this extravagant Honor is conferred upon them
against their Wills; they desire to continue Men as they are, and are afraid of
being Deify'd; and though old, are not at all ambitious of that Glory.
Wherefore we are not to look for Gods among those that dye, because the Gods
are Immortal; nor among those who are born, because they are likewise obnoxious
to Death. That only deserves the Name of a Deity which has neither Beginning
nor End. For if Gods were ever born, why are they not so still, except you will
say, that now Jupiter is too old, and Juno past Childbearing; or that they are
of the humor of Minerva, who chose to be an old Maid, rather than a Mother? Or
indeed have not those pretended Deities ceased to procreate, because Men have
ceased to believe such Stories? Moreover, if the Gods could beget Children, and
those Children must needs be Immortal, we should already have had more Gods
than Men; So that by this time the Heavens would not contain them, nor the Air
hold them, nor the Earth bear the vast increase of them. Let us therefore make
no difficulty to affirm them to have been Men, of whose Birth and Death we are
so fully assured. Neither need any be far to seek for a reason why the common
people, notwithstanding all this, do adore and worship these Consecrated
Images; their foolish Minds being decoyed and allured by the Curiosity of those
Masterpieces of Art, their Eyes dazzled with the luster of the Gold, and the
brightness of the Silver, and polished whiteness of the Ivory. But if any body
will take time to consider how these Figures are made, and with what
Instruments they are carved and framed, he will blush at his standing in awe of
a Material, that has been so abused, cut and mangled by the Workman, before he
could make a God of it. For if this God be of Wood, it may be it is the remnant
of a funeral Pile, or Gallows; which they under-prop, cut, plane and make
smooth. If it be of Silver or Brass, it may possibly be made of an old Kettle,
or something worse; (as it has often happened to one of the Kings of Egypt)
and then it is molten, beaten, hammered and fashioned on an Anvil; and if of
Stone, hewed, wrought and polished (it may be) by some debauched and wicked
Fellow. Yet is not the God, in the least, sensible of all these tortures and
indignities, offered to him at his Birth, no more than he is afterward of the
Honor, which accrues to him by your Consecration and Worship; except you will
say, that this Stone, Wood or Silver is not yet a God. But pray when is it,
that the Divinity of it commences? Behold! it is melted, fashioned and engraved;
but it is not a God yet: It is solder'd, put together and set up; yet still it
is no God: At last it is adorned, consecrated and worshipped; and then at last
with much ado it is a God, when it has pleased vain Man thus to dedicate it.
But how much more truly do the most contemptible of Animals and Infects, judge
your Gods! The Mice, Swallows and Kites know very well, that they have no sense
at all; they tread and perch upon them, and were they not driven away by you,
they would build their Nests in their very Mouths; the Spiders cover their
faces with their Cobwebs, and make use of their heads to fasten their threads
at. You wipe, cleanse and brush them, and protect the Gods, which your selves
have made, and yet pretend to fear them. And all this while you don't consider
that GOD must be known by you, before you can worship Him, and inconsiderately
comply with your Fathers Opinions, and choose rather to follow others in their
Errors, than credit your own Judgments; and in a word, know not what that is
for which you have such an awe and reverence. Thus by hallowing of Gold and
Silver, you have consecrated Avarice; thus your vain Images come to be stamped
with the imaginary shape of a Deity; thus the Roman Superstition had its rise,
and that vast number of Rites and Ceremonies, wherein there are so many which
are silly and ridiculous, and so many which deserve pity and compassion. Some
run about the Streets stark naked in the sharpest cold of Winter; others wear
foolscaps, and carry about antic shields in their hands; others lance their
own skins, and lead their blind Gods a begging about the streets. They have
some Temples which they may not visit but once a year, and others which none
may ever enter but the Priests alone: Again, they have some that are shut up
from Women, and others prohibited to Men. They have some Ceremonies, at which a
Slave is not permitted to assist, without a great crime. Some of your Statues
may not be crowned but by the hands of a Woman, who has known but one Man;
others again, only by such as have had to do with many; and with great devotion
you search for the most lewd and common Harlot that is to be found, to
officiate at your Holythings. What shall we say of those, who shed their own
blood for a Drink Offering, and by wounding themselves, think to procure the
favor of the Gods. Were it not better for them to be Profane, than to be thus
Religious? And do not they also offend GOD, instead of appeasing Him, who from
a strange Superstition geld themselves; since if GOD delighted in Eunuchs, he
could have made them so, without the assistance of Man's cruelty? But indeed,
who does not see that they are poor distracted and crack-brain'd men, who act
these follies; which have nothing to plead for them, but the multitude of those
who are engaged in the same Error; as if because this madness is Epidemical, it
were therefore lawful and just too? But you object, that this, which I call
Superstition, has given the Romans so vast an Empire; founded it at first, and
afterward raised it to that high pitch; they having been always, rather more
famous for their Religion and Piety, than for Prowess and Valor. Well may they
boast of the remarkable instances of their Virtue and Justice, from the very
Cradle and first beginnings of their Empire! Was it not their Crimes that
associated them at first, and their Cruelty afterward, that made them dreadful
to their Neighbors, and laid the first Foundation of their Government? For
their Country being a Sanctuary and Place of Refuge for all sorts of Criminals,
a great number of Thieves, Traitors, Murderers, Sacrilegious and Incestuous
persons were soon gathered together; and to the end, that he who was their
great Captain General, might excel them all in Villainy, as he did in Dignity,
he killed his own Brother. These were the auspicious beginnings of this Holy
City. Soon after, contrary to the Law of Nature, they steal away Maids already
promised, yea betrothed, and Married Women too, from their own Husbands, and
force and abuse them; and defend their Crime by warring against their
Fathers-in-law, and shedding the blood of their nearest Allies: Than which,
what can be thought of more prodigious, more barbarous and as, they presumed,
safe in the confidence of their wickedness? Their next work is, to drive their
Neighbors out of their own Countries; to destroy their Cities, rob their
Churches, and defile their Altars; carry them into Captivity, and enrich
themselves by Crimes, and the spoils and ruin of others. These were the Maxims
and Practice both of Romulus and his Successors; So that whatever they have,
possess, and worship, is all the purchase of bold Robbery. Their Temples are
built and adorned with the spoils they have taken in War, that is, with the
ruin of Cities, pillage of Gods and Temples, and slaughter of their Priests.
What an insolent piece of mockery is this, to establish those Religious Rites,
you have so horribly profaned, and to worship those Gods, who were once your
Captives? For to pay Adoration to that which you have taken in War, is not so
much a consecrating of Deities, as an hallowing of Sacrilege. Indeed all the
Triumphs of the Romans were but so many horrid Impieties, and all their
Trophies, so many Sacriledges. It is not therefore the Religion of the Romans,
that has made them so great, as the impunity of their Villainies. For how can it
be thought, that those Gods should favor them in their Wars, against whom they
took Arms; and which they did not worship, till they had first led them in
Triumph? Besides, what could those Gods do for the Romans, who had not been
able to do any thing against them, either in defense of themselves, or their
people? For as for their own Country-Gods, they are well known what they were.
Romulus, Picus, Tiberinus, Consus, Pilumnus and Picunnus, were all Worshipful
Roman Gods; And besides these, Tatius was the first that made and worshipped
Cloacina (with reverence be it spoken) for a Goddess. Hostilius built Temples
to Fear and Paleness; and soon after, I don't know who reared an Altar to the
Goddess Ague. In these Superstitions was Rome nursed up, and taught to worship
Diseases and Indispotions of health! And those two prostitute Harlots, Flora
and Acca Laurentia, whom they rank among their Divinities, may very well be
reckoned also among their Maladies. And yet these forsooth are the Gods, that
have enlarged the Roman Empire, and vanquished the Gods of other Nations; for
it would be madness to suppose, that Mars the God of Thracia, Jupiter of Crete,
Juno the Goddess of Argos, Samos and Carthage; Diana of Ephesus and Scythia,
the Mother of the Gods, and the Deities, or rather Monsters, of Egypt, should
ever help the Romans against their own people, who for so many years had been
their constant Worshippers. But it may be they were willing to make this
Change, because at Rome the Priests are more Holy, and the Sacred Virgins more
Chaste than any where else? Very likely; when for the most part those have
suffered the punishment of Incest, who committed it less cautiously; whereas
the rest escaped, not by their being less criminal, but by having better hap in
the concealing of their lewdness. And as for the Priests, where do they play
the Whore-masters more, than in the Temples and before the Altars? Here they
exercise the function of Pimps and Panders, and design and contrive Adulteries:
Neither does Lust and Debauchery abound so much in the public Stews, as in
their Vestries and Cells. But besides, were there not other great Empires and
States flourishing before these Superstitions were invented, or so much as
thought-of? As the Assyrians, Medes and Persians, Grecians and Egyptians,
though they had no Pontifs, nor that rabble of Arvales and Salii, Vestals and
Augurs; nor no Chickens religiously penned up, from whose feeding, or refusing
their Meat, all measures were taken, and the greatest Affairs of state
determined. But let us come now to those Auguries and Divinations by the flight
or chattering of Birds, which the Romans so religiously observed, and the
neglect or contempt of which (as you took notice) has proved as fatal, as the
heeding of the same has been fortunate Was it because the most solemn dancing
of the Barley peckt by the Chickens, was not waited for, that the Armies of
Clodius, Junius and Flaminius were defeated? But what shall we say then of
Regulus, who religiously observed all these, and yet was taken by the Enemy?
and so did Mancinus; and for all that, was forced to surrender himself upon
dishonorable terms. Paulus's Chickens fed heartily at the Battle of Cannae,
yet he perished, and the greatest part of the Commonwealth with him. And though
Caesar made slight of the Auguries that forbad him to go into Africa before
Winter, yet had he a successful Voyage, and returned Conqueror; so that his
contempt of these fopperies did but seem to favor his Passage and Victory. Now
as to the Oracles, how many things might not I have to say concerning them?
Amphiaraus after his death foretells future events to others, who when alive
could not foresee the treachery of his Wife against him, for a Bracelet of
Gold. Tiresias the blindman prophesies things to come, and yet is not aware of
what is present. Ennius in behalf of Pyrrhus counterfeits the Answers of
Apollo, seeing he was become speechless; whose wary and ambiguous Oracle was
silenced as soon as Men began to be more wise and less credulous. Thus
Demosthenes was not afraid to accuse the She-Priests of Apollo of giving such
answers as Philip would have her, being well acquainted with those Holy
jugglings. But what? Will you then deny that Oracles and Auguries ever hit the
truth? Well, suppose we grant it: Pray what will it avail to the Credit of
Oracles, if among so many lies one true word has, at a venture, been delivered;
or that Chance has, sometimes, imitated Design. But give me leave to go back to
the Spring, from whence these Errors flow, and discover the Deep, from which
such gross darknesses do issue forth. There are certain impure and vagrant
Spirits, who being laden with Earthly pollutions and desires have sunk
themselves down to this lower Orb, from their Original Station: and those
miserable wretches having thus lost the Natural advantages wherewith they were
created, and having given up themselves to all manner of Vices, they endeavor
to comfort themselves under this calamity, by bringing others into the same
misery; for as they have corrupted themselves, so do they delight in nothing
more than to corrupt others; and as they have separated themselves from GOD, so
do they their utmost endeavors by false ways, Religions and Superstition, to
keep Mankind estranged from Him. These Spirits, the Poets acknowledge to be
Demons; concerning whose Nature the Philosophers maintain several Disputes;
and they were very well known to Socrates, who had one of them always attending
him, according to whose intimations, he either undertook or declined all
business. The Magicians also are very well acquainted with this sort of
Spirits, by whose help they do all those strange Feats, and Juggling tricks, by
which they make us believe, we see that which is not, or not to see, that which
really is; and in a word atchieve to our great amazement all those
extraordinary and astonishing Wonders that are spoken of. Nevertheless
Hostanes, who was the Chiefest of all these Magicians, both in word and deed,
gives GOD the Honor due to Him, and says that the Angels are his Ministers and
Messengers, who adore Him with fear and trembling; To which he adds, that the
Demons are Earthly and Vagabond Spirits, that hate Mankind. And Plato, who
found it a hard matter to know GOD, did not find it so, to know them. He speaks
both of Demons and Angels, and in his Dialogue called the BANQVET, he
endeavors to explain the Nature of the former; saying, That they are of a
Middle substance between Mortal and Immortal, that is, between a Body and
Spirit; being made of a mixture of Terrestrial grosness, and Celestial purity.
By which means they have an easy access to us, to stir up our desires, and by
conveighing themselves into our hearts, to affect our Senses, raise our
Passions, and kindle in our Souls the flames of Lust. These Demons then, who
are mixed and impure Spirits, as we have plainly demonstrated by the Authority
of Wisemen, Philosophers, and Plato himself, lurk privately in those Statues
and Images, which are consecrated unto them; and by their Enthusiasms get so
great an Authority over the minds of men, as of present Deities; and this, by
inspiring their Prophets, dwelling in their Temples; by animating and acting
the Entrails of Beasts; by directing the flying of Birds, determining of Lots,
and uttering Oracles, which are generally obscure, and mixed with abundance of
lies; for they both deceive others, and are deceived themselves; who as they do
not know the Truth fully, so they often conceal, and will not confess that which
they do know, because it tends to their own shame and confusion. Thus they make
it their business to depress, and sink us downwards from Heaven to Earth, and
to estrange us from GOD, by immersing us into Matter; They trouble and disquiet
our life, molest us with Dreams; and this by the advantage they have, as
Spirits, to convey themselves into our Bodies; where they counterfeit Diseases,
terrify our Minds, distort our Members, thereby to oblige us to adore them;
and that after they are glutted with the reaking steam of Altars, and the blood
of slain Beasts, by undoing their own Charms, the honor of Healing might be
attributed to them. They are these very Spirits, which act those raging mad
folks, whom you see running along the streets, and who are every whit as much
Prophets, as those who give answers in your Temples; for they both foame, rage,
and are whirled about alike: Indeed they are Demons which possess the one, as
well as the other, with this only difference, that the object of their madness
does vary. From the same also proceed all those delusions, you even now
rehearsed, as that of Jupiter's commanding in a Dream that his Games should be
restored; the appearance of Castor and Pollux, on Horseback, and that of a Ship
being towed along by the girdle of a Roman Matron. The most now adays, and
among them many of your own Party, know very well, that the Devils themselves
do often confess all these things, when by the torture of our Words, and the Fire
of our Prayers, they are driven out and dispossessed. Then it is that Saturn,
Serapis and Jupiter with all the Crew of Gods you worship, being overcome with
anguish, do declare plainly what they are; nor have they the power by lying, to
conceal their own shame (as you may be sure they fain would) though some of
their deluded Adorers be present. Sure you will credit the testimony of your
own Gods, when they witness the Truth against themselves, and confess they are
Devils. For when those Wretches are conjured to come forth by the Name of the
True and Only GOD, they tremble and quake within the Bodies they have
possessed, and either leap forth presently, or vanish by degrees, according as
the Faith of the Patient, and Grace of the Ghostly Physician are stronger or
weaker; So that they dread the nearness of those Christians, whom at a
distance, by your means, they trouble and disturb in their Assemblies; and to
that end insinuate themselves into the hearts of the simple and ignorant, and
there sow the seeds of hatred against our Religion: For nothing is more
natural, than to hate those whom we dread, and give all the trouble we can, to
those of whom we stand in awe. So they prepossess and prejudice the hearts of
men against us, that they begin to hate us, before they know us; lest knowing
us, without this prejudice, they might desire to imitate, or at least not be
able to condemn us. Now how unjust it is to pass a Judgment upon things which
one knows not, as you do in condemning us, you may take warning from us, who do
so heartily repent for having committed the same fault; for we were once as you
are, and had the same Sentiments, being involved in the same blindness and
stupidity of Error, when we believed that the Christans worshipped Monsters,
devoured Children, defiled their Feasts with Incests; without considering, that
though such things were commonly reported, yet they never were proved, and that
none all this while has ever confessed the least tittle of any one of these
Crimes, though besides the assurance of Pardon, the ^eward of such a discovery
might have been a great temptation thereunto. ^ndeed to be a Christian, is so
far from ^mplying any thing that is evil or criminal, that they who are
convict, ne^^her blush at it, nor fear the punishment which attends it: No, you
see them ^lory in it, and troubled at nothing but that they were so no sooner.
Never^heless we our selves, at the same time when we undertook the Defense of
Parricides, and persons guilty of Sacriledges and Incest, would not so much as
hear the Plea that Christians were ready to make for themselves, whom we
sometimes made endure a cruel corture, not out of hatred, but pity, forsooth,
that by constraining them through the greatness of torments to renounce their
Religion, we might save their lives: Oh! perverse Inquisition, to make use of
the Rack, not to force the sufferer to declare the Truth, but to deny it. Now
if it so happened that any one, less constant, being overcome with the pains of
those tortures, did renounce his Religion, he was received into favor, as if
by such an abjuration, he had made atonement for all the Crimes, which are
commonly charged upon them. By which you may plainly see, that we formerly were
of the same mind and persuasion with you, doing the very same things as you do
now. But indeed, had you been governed by Reason, and not by the instigation of
Evil Spirits, your business would have been to have urged the Christians not to
renounce their Religion; but to confess their Incests, Whoredoms, impious
Ceremonies, and their Sacrificing of Infants; which are the fabulous Stories
wherewith the same Demons have filled the silly people's Minds, to make them
detest and abhor us. But no wonder if all these horrid lies and Fictions do
vanish away before the appearance of Truth, which those Monsters so much
oppose, making it their business to spread and foment false reports. From these
also that Fable had its rise, That we worship an Asse's Head. But, I pray you,
who can be conceived so much a fool, to worship such a thing; or rather, who is
so much a fool as to believe we do it, except those who are guilty of as
extravagant and impious Devotions themselves? For indeed it is you make both
Asses and Stables Holy, by having consecrated your Goddess Hippona, and given
her the Charge over them; and when you celebrate the solemn Rites of your
Goddess Isis, you, with a great deal of Ceremony, adorn that Animal: Yea, you
pay Adoration to the heads of Oxen and Rams; so that you Worship the same
Beasts, which you Sacrifice. Some of your Gods are made up of a mixed shape of
Goats and Men, and others of them have the Heads half of Dogs and half of
Lions. Don't you with the Egytians worship and feed an Ox under the Name of
Apis? Neither do you disavow the worship of their other goodly Deities; as
Serpents, Crocodiles, and other Beasts, Birds and Fishes; so that it is
accounted Capital, to kill any one of these Gods. Are there not a great many
amongst you, who with the Egyptians, stand as much in awe of the biting
sharpness of an Onion, as of their Goddess Isis, and are as much afraid of the
noise of breaking wind backward, as of their God Serapis? As for such as accuse
us of adoring the privy Parts of our Priests, they do but charge us with their
own Villainies; for such filthy Devotions are very suitable to those debauched
and lewd people, among whom it is but too common for both Sexes, to prostitute
all their Members, and who give the name of Courtesy and kindness to the most
extravagant Obscenity and Lasciviousness; who envy the liberty of Strumpets,
and commit such unnatural filthiness with one another, as no modest Tongue can
express, or Pen set down; and who sooner grow weary, than ashamed of their
impudent lasciviousness. Oh horrible lewdness! They willingly suffer those
things to be committed upon themselves, which neither tender age is able to
bear, nor the basest of slaves will yield to. As for our part, we are so far
from being guilty of such filthithy actions, that we do even blush at the bare
recital of them; and indeed, I should think my self to transgress the bounds of
Civility, should I insist any longer upon this Matter, though it be in order to
defend our Religion. For really you accuse us, who are Chaste and Modest, of
such Crimes, as we could not have believed there had been such, had there not
been the proofs of them from among your selves. As to that which you say, that
we worship a wicked Person and his Cross, you are greatly mistaken; for how
could he have deserved to be worshipped, had he been an Evil-doer; or to be
believed a GOD, had he been only Earthly? He is surely very miserable, who
reposes all his confidence in a mortal man, since all hopes of his help dye
with him. The Egyptians indeed are guilty of this folly, who choose a Man for
the Object of their Worship, whom they pray unto; consult upon all occasions,
and to whom they offer Sacrifice. But all this while, whether he will or no, he
that is a God to others, is but a Man to himself, and though he may deceive
others, he cannot deceive his own Conscience. Upon Kings and great Persons also
base flattery has bestowed the Title of Gods; whereas it had been enough to
have paid them their due honors; though to speak the truth, Honor is properly
due only to those who are eminently deserving, as Love is to excellently good
Men. Thus they invoke these Divine Powers, they pray before their Images,
implore the help of their Genii, that is, their Demons, and hold it a less
Crime for a Man to be perjured when he swears by Jupiter, than when he swears
by the Emperor's Genius. We neither worship Crosses, nor wish to be nailed to
them. You your selves are more likely to adore them, who worship Wooden Gods,
that are made of the same Matter. And what are your Banners and Standards, but
gilt and beautified Crosses? Nay, the very Trophies of your Victories do not
only bear the figure of a Cross, but of a Crucified Man. Indeed the Sign of the
Cross is naturally represented in many things, as in a Ship, when under Sail,
or when rowed with Oars; also when a Man prays to GOD with his hands stretched
forth, he makes the same Figure; So that the Figure of the Cross, has both a
ground in Natural Reason, and in your Religion, as being formed in the most
Solemn action of it, Prayer.

NOW I would fain meet with that Man, that says, or believes, that the blood of
a murdered Infant, is the initiating Ceremony of our Religion. First, who
could have the heart to shed the blood of a young Innocent, that is but newly
born? Surely none can imagine or believe such a Crime, but he who can commit
it. It Is you that expose your Children, newborn, to wild Beasts and Birds, and
strangle them at their coming into the World: Nay, there are some among you,
who by taking Potions, to cause abortion, destroy them in the Womb, and are
guilty of their death, even before they are born. Which cruelty you have
learned of your Gods; For Saturn was not contented to expose his own Children,
but devoured them himself: Upon which account they were used in some parts of
Africa to offer him such little Infants, whom they prevented from crying, by
stopping their mouths with kisses, that they might not sacrifice sad and
mournful Victims to their Gods. It was also a Custom among the Scythians, to
sacrifice Strangers that lodged with them; which a King of Egypt also
practiced. The Gauls sacrificed humane, or rather inhumane, Offerings to
Mercury. The Roman Priests have upon some occasions overwhelmed and buried a
Grecian Man and Woman, as likewise a Man and Woman of Gaul, alive: And at this
day the solemn Worship paid to Jupiter Latiaris, is cutting of a Man's throat;
which, indeed, very well becomes Saturn's Son, thus to gorge himself with the
blood of a Criminal. From whence, I suppose, it was, that Catiline learned to
ratify his Conspiracy with humane blood; and that Bellona does still oblige
those to drink a draught of it, who consecrate themselves to her service. With
which bloody Medicine, a thousand times worse than the Disease, the
Falling Sickness is also cured. Nor are they much less barbarous, who from the
Amphitheatre take and eat wild Beasts, all besmeared with blood, and newly fed
with the flesh and entrails of Men. For our part, it is not lawful for us,
either to see or hear of Murders committed; and so much do we abhor Humane
blood, that we eat not even that of Beasts. As for our incestuous and
promiscuous Feasts, it is a Calumny invented at a consultation of Devils, on
purpose to obscure the glory of our Chastity, and deter Men from our Religion,
before they had tried it, by the horror of so great a Crime; and what your
Orator Fronto has said concerning it, is rather an Invective than an Evidence.
But, really, it is your selves, that are guilty of Incests, and not we. The
Persians marry their own Mothers; the Egyptians and the Athenians, their
Sisters. Your Stories and Tragedies, wherein you take so much delight, boast of
Incests; and so you worship Gods, who have committed Incest with their own
Mothers, Daughters, and Sisters. It Is therefore no wonder that that Vice is so
frequent and fashionable amongst you, since your very Gods are your encouraging
Examples and Accomplices. And indeed, it is no strange thing, if often at unawares
you commit Incest, by your whoring indifferently every where, and by exposing
your Children to the mercy of others; so that it cannot well be supposed, but
that you sometimes light upon them. Thus you see that whilst you accuse us of
feigned Incests, you are guilty of real ones your selves. But Christians are
not wont to make an outward show of their Chastity; but enshrine it in their
Minds, and do not study so much to seem chaste, as to be really so. All of us
have either one only wedded Wife, or no Woman at all. As for our Feasts, they
are not only Chaste, but Sober; for we do not spend our time in over-charging
our stomachs with Meat and Drink; but we temper the joys of our Feasts with the
gravity and seriousness of our Conversation. And as we are thus Chaste in our
Assemblies, so are we no less such every where else. There are many amongst us,
who keep themselves undefiled and holy in an unmarried state, without boasting
of it; and we are so far from being incestuous persons, that some of us are
even ashamed of lawful pleasures. As for what concerns Honors, it does not
follow, that because we decline your Purple and Dignities, that therefore we
are of the dregs of the people; nor are we to be accounted Factious, if we all
aspiring after the same felicity keep company with one another, and all meet
together as peaceably as we behave our selves singly and alone. Nor ought we to
be accused for prating in corners, if you be either ashamed or afraid to hear
us in public. And if our Number daily increases, it is not our Crime, but our
Commendation; an excellent course of life, is not only apt to engage those who
are entered into it to persevere and continue in it, but to invite and allure
others to it. We do not know one another by any marks we have on our bodies, as
you fancy; but by our modesty and innocence. That we love one another so
entirely, as you are troubled to see it, is, because we know not how to hate.
And that we call one another Brethren, which you envy us for, is, because we
have all One and the same Father, one and the same Faith, and one and the same
Hope. But for your part, you do not own one another; you rage with envy and
hatred against one another; and the only sign of your Brotherhood is Parricide,
and your frequent imbruing your hands in the blood of your nearest Relations.
But you suppose, that we conceal That which we worship, because we have neither
Temples nor Altars. To what purpose should we make any form or representation
of GOD, whose living Image, Man himself is? Or what Temple should we raise to
Him, since this whole World, which was made by Him, is not able to contain Him?
Or shall we Mortals, who live in great Palaces, confine the Incomprehensible
Glory of HIS MAJESTY, to the narrow compass of some Temple or Chapel? Were it
not much better to dedicate our Mind for the place of his Abode; and consecrate
our Heart for his Altar? Shall we offer to GOD Sacrifices and Oblations of such
Creatures, as he has made for our use? Would not this look indeed as if we had
a mind to reject his Bounty, and to throw back his Gifts into his own Hands;
which speaks the greatest ingratitude, especially since the only acceptable
Offering to him, is a good Mind and a pure Heart, with a sincere Conscience. So
that he that lives innocently, prays to GOD acceptably; he that deals justly,
presents Him with an Offering of a sweet savor; he who abstains from fraud,
does most effectually propitiate and atone the Deity; and he that rescues a Man
that is in danger of his life, does kill the fattest Sacrifice. These are our
Sacrifices; these are our Mysteries; and with us, he is most Devout and
Religious, who is most Just. But you wonder, that we neither can show to others
the GOD whom we Worship, nor see him our selves. Does this seem strange to you?
Why, for this very reason we do most assuredly believe Him to be GOD, because
we can perceive Him, but cannot see Him. For his omnipotent Virtue and Power is
always present before our eyes, in the Works which he has made, and in the
whole course of Nature; when it thunders, when it lightens, when it is fair;
all his works proclaim Him: Let it not therefore seem strange to you, that you
do not see GOD. All things are moved and driven by the Wind, and yet you see it
not; And the Sun it self, that makes all things to be seen, is in a manner
invisible, by reason of its superlative and dazzling brightness; insomuch as
should we gaze long, and steadfastly fix our eyes on it, it would blind them,
and put them out. And can thou think thy self able to bear the sight of his
Glory, who made the Sun, and is the Fountain of all Light, when thou art afraid
of his Lightnings, and hidest thy self from his Thunder? Besides, would thou
see GOD with thy Eyes of flesh, when thou can neither see nor take hold of
thine own Soul, by which thou do live and speak? But perhaps you will say,
GOD is ignorant of what we do, and He being in Heaven, can neither consider
all, nor take knowledge of every particular person and his concernments. How
greatly are you mistaken? For how can He be far from any of us, when all things
in Heaven and Earth, and in the immense space beyond them, are full of Him, and
known to Him. He is not only with us, but within us; And as the Sun, though
fixed in the Heavens, yet diffuses it self through the whole Universe, is
present every where, and mingles its light with every thing, without staining
its brightness; so with much more reason, can nothing be hid from, or secret to
GOD, the Author and Beholder of all things; the Darkness hides not from Him,
for He is there also; nor the thoughts of Men, which are the truer Darkness of
the two. We live not only under His Governance, but, as I may say, with Him.
Neither ought we to presume upon our great Numbers, as supposing that one may
easily escape unseen among so vast a Multitude; For though we may seem to our
selves a great many, yet are we but a few with respect to GOD. We, indeed,
divide and distinguish the Earth into Countries and Nations; but to GOD this
whole World is but one House. Kings cannot acquaint themselves with the State
and Concerns of their own Kingdoms, without the Eyes of many Ministers; but the
MONARCH of the whole World needs none to inform Him; we being not only under
his Eye, but even in his Bosom. You say, it availed nothing to the Jews, that
they worshipped One Only GOD, with Temples, Altars, and a vast Number of
Ceremonies; but in this you mistake through ignorance, if either not
remembering, or not knowing the History of former times, you take notice only of
some latter Events: For whilst they adored our GOD holily, religiously and
innocently. (I say Our GOD, for the same is the GOD of the whole World) whilst
they obeyed his Just Commands and wholesome Laws, they became of a small
Number, a mighty Nation; of poor, they were made rich, and from a state of
Slavery, arrived to a most puissant Monarchy: A few of them, and unarmed, put
to flight great Armies and overthrew them, the Elements at God's command
fighting for them. Look into their own Writings, or if it like you better, into
those of the Romans; read what Josephus and Antonius Julianus (not to mention
those Historians that were before them) write of that People, and you will find,
that their Sins drew down Calamities upon them, and whatever Evils befell them,
were long before prophesied would overtake 'em, in case they should still
continue in their Rebellion: So that indeed they forsook GOD, before they were
forsaken of Him, and were not (as you impiously say) taken Captives with their
GOD, but given up by Him, as deserters of his Discipline and Law.

AS to what concerns the general Conflagration of the Universe, it is a vulgar
Error, to think it a thing difficult or impossible that the World should all on
the sudden be set on fire, and consumed by that means. There is no man doubts,
but that which has a Beginning must have an End, and that that which is made,
must finally perish; That the Heavens themselves, and all things therein
contained, as they had a Beginning, must likewise have an End; and that ceasing
to be nourished by the exhalations of fresh and salt-waters, they will be
inflamed; for so the Stoics steadfastly believe, that all the moisture of
Nature being spent, the whole World will presently take fire: And the
Epicureans are likewise of the same Opinion, as touching the ruin of the
Universe, and the Conflagration of the Elements. As for Plato, he says, That
some parts of the World are at times drowned with floods and inundations,
others consumed by fire; and though he said that it was made so at the first,
as that it might continue for ever; yet he adds, that GOD, Who is the Maker of
it, may destroy it when He pleases. Which is not at all to be wondered at, that
a Workman can, and may take to pieces his own Work. So that herein you see the
Philosophers do fully agree with us; not that we do follow their steps, but
they have taken some shadow of this Truth out of the predictions of our
Prophets, and have fourbish'd and dressed it up after their own way. Thus also
the most renowned amongst them, first Pythagoras, and especially Plato, have
delivered down to us, though very much corrupted and maimed, the Doctrine of
another Life after this; for they assert, That the Souls of Men after the
dissolution of their bodies, do perpetually remain, and are continually passing
into new Bodies; and perverting the Truth still more, they add, That the Souls
of Men do return into the bodies of Beasts and Birds; an Opinion which does
more beseem a Mountebank or Juggler, than a grave Philosopher. But it is enough
for us, that your Wisemen themselves do in some sort agree with us. And who is
so much a fool, as to deny, that He who at first made Man, can as easily
restore and renew him? For as he is nothing after Death, so neither was he any
thing before Life; And therefore why should we think it strange, that he who at
the beginning was made of nothing, should of nothing (as to us) be repaired and
recovered to a new Life; especially since it is much more difficult to create a
thing which never was, than to restore that to its former Being, which has
already been? Or do you believe, that every thing which disappears to our dull
sight, does perish in the sight of GOD? Whether the Body moulder into dust, or
be dissolved into water, or be reduced to ashes, or be attenuated into Steam
and Air, it is only withdrawn out of our sight, but to GOD it is preserved in
the several Elements into which it is changed. Neither do we fear, as you
fancy, that any manner of prejudice comes to our Bodies by Burial; only we
observe the Custom of interring Dead Bodies, as the best. Do but look about
you, and you will see how, to our comfort, whole Nature is a lively Pourtraicture
and Representation of our Resurrection. The Sun rises and sets, and so do the
Stars; Flowers dye and spring up again; Trees renew their green Vesture every
year; and Seeds, unless they dye and putrify in the Earth, do not return to a
new life. And why may not our Bodies, like Trees in Winter, hide and preserve
their life and vigor, under a seeming withering and deadness? Indeed, you
cannot expect to see this in the depth of Winter, but must stay till that great
Spring comes, which shall make our Bodies to flourish and live again. Nor am I
ignorant that there are very many, who being sensible of their own demerits, do
rather wish, than believe, that they shall not be after Death; choosing of the
two, rather utterly to be extinguished, than to be restored to life again, only
to be punished; which Error increases daily, by reason of the extreme
licentiousness of the Age, and the long forbearance of GOD, whose Judgments the
slower they are, by so much the more justly and heavily are they laid on at
last. And yet Men are told both by the Writings of Wisemen and Poets, that
there is a Stygian Lake, and an ever-burning River, prepared for the Eternal
punishment of the Wicked, according to the Oracles of true Prophets, as well as
the discoveries of the Demons themselves. Hence it is the Poets make Jupiter
to swear by the burning Rivers, and dark Deep; for as he foresees the torments
designed both for himself and his worshippers, so does he fear and tremble at
them, as being without measure, and without end. For in wonderful wise this
Fire does both consume our Bodies and repair them, devour and nourish them at
once; like the flashes of Lightning, which blast and kill the body without
consuming it; or those Vulcano's of Aetna and Vesuvius, and others that burn
continually, without wasting or going out. Thus this infernal penal Fire is
strangely fed, without diminution of its Fuel, and preys for ever upon the
Bodies of the Damned without wasting them. Now, that GOD does deservedly punish
them that know him not, impious and wicked men, none but profane Wretches can
deny, since it is scarce a less heinous Crime, not to know the Father and Lord
of all things, than to provoke and affront Him. And although the Ignorance of
GOD, is enough to make Men liable to punishment, as the true Knowledge of Him,
does avail for their Pardon and Indemnity; yet if we Christians be compared
with you, notwithstanding that upon some of us our Discipline has less effect,
we shall be found much the Better Men. For you forbid Adulteries, and commit
them; whereas we are known as Men, to our Wives alone. You content your selves
only to punish the outward Act; whereas with us the very Thought of Evil is a
Crime. You are afraid that other men should be conscious of your faults, but we
stand in awe even of our own Consciences, because we cannot fly nor hide our
selves from them. The Prisons are crowded with numbers of your own, but you
find not one Christian there, except he be either a Confessor, or an Apostate?
Neither let any think to comfort himself with this, That all Humane Actions are
subject to unavoidable Fate and Destiny: For though we attribute some Events to
Chance, yet it is undeniably certain, that the Mind of Man is free in the
choice of his Actions, which are therefore only punishable and not his
Condition. What is Fate, but what GOD has spoken and decreed concerning every
one of us, who being able to foresee the Matter of His own Decrees, suits them
to every ones deserts and circumstances; so he punishes in us, not the Destiny
of our Nativity, but the ill disposition of our Minds? But no more of this
Matter for the present; which if it be not sufficient, we may have occasion to
treat of it more amply another time. Only let me observe to you now, that if we
are poor (which you are continually upbraiding to us) this is not a reproach,
but an Honor to us; for as the Mind is apt to grow dissolute by Luxury and
Excess, so is it many times confirmed in Virtue, by Frugality and a mean
Estate. And yet how can he be poor who lacks nothing, who covets nothing that
others have, and who is rich toward GOD? He indeed is rather poor, who having
much, still covets more: And to speak my mind freely, no man is so poor by
Fortune, as we are all by Nature. The Birds have no Patrimony to live upon, and
the Cattle upon a thousand hills are provided for only from day to day; and we
live upon these who have nothing certain to live upon, for they are all made
for us, and we possess them all, if we covet them not. Therefore as he that
travels on the road, is most easy when he carries least about him; so in this
journey of life he is happiest who being eased by Poverty, does not go sighing
under the weight and burden of Riches, which if we thought needful for us, we
might lawfully beg them of GOD, who, no doubt, would not deny us something of
that ALL which is His: But we choose rather to despise riches, than possess
them. Our most earnest Wishes are for Innocence; our most fervent Prayers for
Patience; we had much rather live well and virtuously with a little, than
prodigally and luxuriously with a great Estate. When we undergo the troubles of
this Life, and suffer the infirmities of our Nature, we don't so much account
them pains and punishments, as a warfare in which we are engaged: For we find
that our courage gains strength from our infirmities, and that calamities and
afflictions are the usual Discipline of Virtue; it being certain that the
vigor of our Bodies, as well as our Minds, is apt to decay for want of
exercise. Thus all those great Men, whom you magnify as such Examples of
Virtue, became Famous no other way, but by the miseries and calamities they
were exercised withal. Neither is it therefore a good consequence from our
seeming forlorn condition, to say that GOD neglects us, or is unable to relieve
us; He who is the great Governor of all, and the most compassionate Lover of
his Own. But He proves us by adversities; He makes trial of our temper and
disposition by dangers and sufferings; He sifts our most hidden thoughts and
inclinations; and to discover the bent of our wills to the utmost, He calls us
to suffer death for Him, being well assured that nothing can perish in his
hands, and miscarry under his care. In short, as men try Gold by fire, so does
he refine us by afflictions. And indeed how delightful a Spectacle must it be
to GOD, to see a Christian courageously encountering his pains, and undauntedly
preparing himself for all manner of threats, punishments and torments; to see
him boldly look Death and the Executioner of it in the face, and without the
least alteration, to throw himself into the devouring flames; to see him assert
his liberty against Kings and Princes, and to yield to none but GOD, whose He
is; in a word, like a Conqueror, to triumph over his Judge; for he is really
victorious, who has obtained what he strives for? Where is the Soldier that
would not boldly provoke and challenge dangers in the presence of his General,
knowing that none but such as give good proof of themselves, shall be rewarded?
And yet a General cannot give what he has not; I mean, he cannot lengthen our
days, though he may bestow Honors upon us for our Courage and brave Exploits.
But the Soldier of JESUS CHRIST is so far from being abandoned, even in Death
it self, that he triumphs over it, and leads it Captive: So that though he may
seem to be miserable, yet he cannot be so. You your selves exalt, even to the
Skies, such as have courageously suffered for their Country: Witness Mutius
Scaevola, who being mistaken in his attempt upon the King, had certainly been
put to death by his Enemies, had he not, by a most undaunted courage, burnt off
his own right hand before their eyes, upon the Altar. And how many are there
amongst us, who without the least shreaking or crying out, have endured, not
only to have their right hands, but their whole bodies consumed to ashes, when
they might with one word have delivered themselves from those extreme tortures?
But why do I compare our Men with Mutius and Aquilius and Regulus? Our very
Women and Children make slight of crosses and tortures, are unconcerned at the
sight of wild and ravenous Beasts; and in a word, by a Patience divinely
inspired, make a mock of torment in all its frightful shapes. And yet so
miserably blind are you, as not to consider that there are none who will either
endure torments without cause, or can be so courageous under them, without a
supernatural and Divine Assistance. But this is that which perhaps deceives
you, That you see those who know not GOD to abound in Riches, flourish in Honor
and excel in Power and Dignity. Poor Wretches! They are lifted up on high, that
they may have the greater fall; They are Beasts fatten'd for Sacrifice, and so
many Victims crowned before their Slaughter; so that one would think, seeing
their lewd Lives, that they are set upon Thrones, only to abuse their Power,
and to sin with more licentiousness. Besides, without the knowledge of GOD
there can be no solid Felicity, since all the things of this World are like a
Dream, which vanishes before we can lay hold of it. Kings feel as many feats in
themselves, as they cause in others, and though they are guarded with a great
retinue, yet they are alone in dangers. You are rich (it is true) but it is not
well to trust inconstant Fortune. Besides, if things be rightly considered, so
much Luggage, for so short a Journey is more cumbersome than useful. You glory
in your Purple and Dignities; but without cause, since Scarlet and rich
Vestments are but a pitiful Ornament to you, if your Souls be tainted with Sin
and polluted with Vice. You pretend to be of a great Family and of Noble
Parentage: But don't you know that we are all Equal by our Birth, and that
Virtue only ought to make the difference among Men. It is therefore with good
reason that Christians, who aim at being esteemed only upon the account of
their Virtuous Manners and Modest Behaviors, despise your Shows and Pomps, and
fly from them as delightful Inticers and Corrupters of men; and with the same
reason also they abstain from your Religious Worship and Ceremonies, as well
knowing what was their Beginning and Original. For who can but abhor to hear
and see those confused Contests and Shouts of the Multitude at your
Chariot-races? What sober Mind is not astonished to see the Art of killing Men,
publicly professed in your Gladiators Games? And for your Theaters, as the
madness there is no less, so they exceed in all manner of infamous lewdness and
filthiness; where a bold and shameless Actor represents or relates Adulteries,
and the lascivious Jester by making Love, incites to Lust and Lasciviousness;
where they dishonor your Gods by ascribing sighs and hatred, and Whoredoms, the
Passions and the Vices of men to them. With feigned griefs they draw real tears
from your eyes; so that you can lament personated Murders, and take delight in
true ones. If we abhor the remainders of your Sacrifices, and of the Wine that
has been presented upon your Altars, this is not to be interpreted as an
acknowledgment of our fear, but an asserting of our just liberty. For though
nothing can corrupt the Gifts of GOD, which Nature has produced for our use,
yet we willingly abstain from those profane Oblations, lest we might be
thought either to acknowledge the Demons, to whom they are consecrated, or to
be ashamed of our own Religion.

But how come you to fancy that we have an Antipathy to Flowers? Don't we
gather the Lilly and the Rose, and whatever the Spring affords, and is esteemed
either for its beauty or fragrancy? We both strew them, and tie them up into
Nose-gays, and make them into Garlands, which we hang about our necks. But I
hope you will excuse us, if we don't wear Garlands on our Heads, and are of
opinion that Flowers ought to be smelt by the Nose, and not by the hair or
hinder part of the Head. Neither do we think it necessary to crown the Dead
with Garlands; but wonder at you for doing of it. For what good can Flowers do
them, if they have no sense? Or if they have any, why do you expose them to the
funeral flames? Besides, if they be happy, they do not need them; and if they
be miserable, Flowers will be but a small comfort to them. As for us, we
celebrate the Funerals of our Dead Friends with the same Modesty and
Composedness that appears in our whole Life. We don't crown them with Garlands
that fade away, they being crowned with such as are made of immortal and
never-dying Flowers, by the hand of GOD himself. We are moderate in our
desires, being assured of the Bounty of our good GOD; and freed from all fear,
by the certain hopes of a future Felicity; and animated to do and suffer for
Him, by the Faith of his Glorious presence with us: Insomuch as we have not
only a Happiness in reversion at the resurrection of the Just; but are happy
already in the contemplation and prospect of our future Blessedness. Therefore
let that Athenian Droll, Socrates, enjoy the comfort of his own confession,
that he knows nothing, and glory in the deceitful Testimony given him by the
Oracle, upon that account; Let Arcesilas and Carneades, Pyrrho, and the rest of
the Academicks be continually deliberating and doubting; Let Simonides for ever
ask a longer day for the giving his Answer; for our part we do not value those
Philosophers, whom we know to have been Tyrants, Corrupters, and Adulterers,
and who were never more Eloquent, than when they declaimed against their own
Vices. We don't endeavor to make a show of Wisdom in our Garb, but to have it
shine forth in the disposition of our Minds and Manners. We don't talk of great
things, but live and do them. In short, we make it our glory to have attained
that which they so earnestly sought for, but could never find. Why are we so
unthankful to God? Why do we envy our selves our own happiness, that it should
be our lot to see the Divine Truth come to its full ripeness in our days? Let
us enjoy this great Blessing and advantage of being in the right, and having
the Truth on our side, with that temper and modesty which becomes us. Let
Superstition be controlled; let all impiety be purged away, and let the true
Religion be preserved and continue for ever.

WHEN Octavius had thus ended his Discourse, we remained a good while in a kind
of amazement, looking earnestly upon one another, without speaking one word.
For my part I was almost transported with admiration, that he had both by
Arguments, and Examples, and the Authority of Testimonies, which his reading
furnished him withal, adorned so good a Cause, and so clearly made out those
things which are more easily felt than expressed; being most of all pleased to
see that he had both fought and soiled them at their own Weapons, and clearly
demonstrated, that Truth is not only easy, but has many favorable advantages
on its side. Whilst I was thus silently musing with my self, Caecilius breaks
out into these words; I congratulate Octavius most heartily, and my own
happiness also, upon this occasion: Neither do I expect your Sentence; We are
both Conquerors; nor am I unjust in challenging the Victory; for if Octavius
has had the better of me, I at the same time do triumph over my own Errors.
Therefore, as to what concerns the main Question, I both own a Providence, and
believe in GOD; and for the rest, I agree with you touching the sincerity and
truth of your, or (to speak more properly) Our RELIGION. Nevertheless there
remain some few things (not in opposition to Truth, but needful for my fuller
information) of which I desire we may entertain some further Discourse. But we
will put off this till to morrow (the Sun being now near setting) that at our
leisure, and with more convenience we may thoroughly discuss this whole Matter.

WHEN Caecilius had thus freely uttered his Mind, As for me (said I) I am
overjoyed upon the account of us all, and in particular, that Octavius has done
me so great a pleasure by his Victory, as to deliver me from the envy of
judging between my Friends. Nevertheless I shall not launch forth into the
Praises of Octavius, because I am sensible that I can never give him the
Commendations he deserves. Besides, the Testimony of a man, and of one only, is
too little: The Great GOD is his Reward, who has inspired him with so
persuasive a Speech, and enabled him to overcome.

THUS we all departed joyfully, Caecilius, because he had believed; Octavius,
because he had overcome; and my self, both for the Faith of the One, and
Victory of the Other.

THE END.
THE Translator of this Book, teaches the French Tongue according to an exact
and easy Method. He is to be heard of at Mrs Gates's House in Bow-Lane, over
against Basing-Lane-end, London.


