(...) To the Right Honorable Sr William Ashurst, Knight. LORD MAYOR of the City
of LONDON; The Right Worshipful Sir Robert Clayton, Sir John Houbland, Sir
William Hedges, Sir Stephen Evans, Sir William Cooper, Sir Thomas Littleton,
Sir William Scawen, Sir Edward Abney, Sir Henry Furnesse, Sir James Sheen,
[Knights;] And the Worshipful Michael Godfrey, John Ward, Theodore Johnson,
James Bateman, Obadiah Sedgwick, Nathanael Herne, William Pateson, John
Holland, Richard Burton, and John Bellamy, [Esquires:] Commissioners for the
said BANK.

SIRS,
GREAT Britain is acknowledged by all the World, to be Queen of the Isles, and
as capable to live within it self, as any Nation; having not only all things
necessary for the Life of Man, but also Abundance, Materials, and Stores; of
Manufactures and Commodities to a Superfluity for Transportation; and is
comparably situated for a Royal Bank of Credit, that all Trade offers it self
to all its Ports and Harbors. The Soil of our Country being exceeding rich,
abounding with all things necessary for Peace and War; as Grain, Horses,
Beeves, Sheep, Flax, Wool, and other Trafficks; Also Mines of Tinn, Copper,
Lead, Iron, Coals inexhaustible; and no Nation in the Universe but partakes of
its Woollen Manufacture more or less, and of its Linen: Paper of all Sorts, and
Silk now made in England to great Perfection; and our Seas every where filled
with Shoals of Fish, as good as Ready Money, to fetch in all Foreign
Commodities. Now shall the God of Nature give us such great Blessings, and we
be wanting on our Parts to improve them? Doubtless we may aggrandize our Trade
with an inestimable Account, if we would our selves, and make our Territories
as Rich and Populous as we please, under so Wise, Glorious, Valiant, and Good
King and Queen, and Government as we have; had we public Spirits (as we ought)
to give Countenance to Brave Actions of Industrious Men, and did truly mind the
Business of Trade and Populacy as much as we do Pleasures and Luxury.

Your Banks will beget Trade and People, and they will beget Riches; and then
honest Pleasures will come of course. Riches are the Conveniences of a Nation;
but Trade and People are the Glory and Strength of the Kingdom. If we once come
to be good and industrious, in Fearing and Serving God, in being obedient to
our Good King and Queen, loving and charitable to one another; we may expect
God's Blessing upon our Forces by Land and Sea; and no Nation can exceed us
either at home, or in foreign Parts; we having so many Materials to employ our
People, and our Nation hardy and ingenious enough to work and raise all sorts
of Manufactures within our selves, which now we have from abroad.

If we did but take care to catch our own Fish, work up our own Growths,
perfect our own Manufactures, as Linen, Woollen, Paper of all sorts, thus doing
will make us infinitely Rich to Eternity. Our Country being surrounded with our
Neighbour-Natives, and of most Concern and near them, we are designed for all
manner of Riches, and to be the Seat of Empire, being a Land so pleasant, and
London so Great and Glorious that it invites all People to come over and stay
here.

Our Country thus accomplished with all Blessings, as to Fertility and
Ingenuity, a little help will make it the most Glorious Place in the World, and
His Majesty the most Potent Prince in Christendom.

I have hinted here at the chiefest Advantages we are capable of: these, I am
sure, will do England and Ireland's Work effectually, if truly encouraged; and
we shall be ten times Richer in the third Part of an Age, by the Help of these
Banks, if you employ your Time, and the Money of the Bank to Public Uses and
Accounts; as may be directed in such Contrivances, as may tend to the General
Good of all.

I beseech you, Imitate His most Sacred Majesty, and his Royal Consort, who are
never weary in doing Good, but are ready at all times to encourage Trade,
Ingenuity, and Discoveries, beyond any former Princes: And let Their great
Wisdom and Goodness be your Example.

To conclude; If you should happen to read this little Brat, if you think it
not for the Public, cast it from you; but if persuaded, from the Reason of the
thing, that it will, in some measure, accomplish the End after mentioned; then
you are as much sound, and perchance more, to promote the thing, than my self.
All Men are satisfied (...) Bank will be very advantageous to a Nation,
especially to a trading People, situate as (...) are: But the Great Question
has formerly been, How to raise a Stock or Fund that shall be credited by all;
but now this Grand and Old Obstacle is removed, as has been fully manifested,
and made visibly apparent to all Gainsayers, by some Thousands of Persons, in
their voluntary and ready subscribing near Eight hundred thousand Pounds in
four Days. I hope the Thing will suit most Men's Interests; but if I am mistaken
in my Measures, I humbly crave Your Pardons, and subscribe,

Yours in all Humility, H. M.

England's Glory, BY A ROYAL BANK.
Anno Quinto and Sexto Gulielmi and Mariae, 1694.
WHEREAS it is Enacted, That if Twelve Hundred Thousand Pounds, or Six Hundred
Thousand Pounds (a half Moiety thereof) or more, be Subscribed, and one Fourth
part of such Subscriptions paid into the Exchequer by the First of August next,
and the remaining part of the Subscriptions paid by the First of January next;
All Persons, Natives and Foreigners, so doing, are to be Members of the
Corporation for a Royal Bank in England, to be Obtained under the Great Seal of
England: And that One Hundred Thousand Pounds shall be paid out of the
Exchequer yearly to the Government of such Corporation to answer Eight per
Cent. per Annum for ever; The said One hundred thousand Pounds to be applied by
the Corporation to such Uses as by the Charter to be directed. And forasmuch as
so great and public an Undertaking as i^ thereby intended, cannot so
effectually be performed and carried on otherwise, than by a Body Politic or
Corporate: For the speedy furtherance hereof these several Honorable and
Worthy Persons of most considerable Quality and Ability hereafter named; Viz.
Sir Patient Ward, Sir William Gore, Sir John Morden, Sir Benjamin Newland, Sir
John Bucknall.

Francis Parey, George Boddington, John Dubois, Samuel Ongeley, Peter Hublon,
[Esquires.] With many others (out of their constant Zeal to the Public Good of
the Kingdom, and its Trade, and a firm Assurance that the Benefits and
Advantages of a Royal Bank, are such as will advance the Wealth of their
Majesty's Kingdoms, and mainly supply all Defects in Trade; and also be greatly
Destructive to the French King's Interest. Now for the Encouraging and better
Establishing so great a Blessing, and t^ satisfy all to whom it may seen
doubtful, what are the Advantages of a Royal Bank, and what a Bill of Credit
from this Bank and its Uses are:

Observe First, A Bill of Credi^ from this Bank-Office is transferrable from
one Man to another toties quoties, and cannot fail, and is as good as Money in
ones possession, and better, as is plainly set forth in my Discourse of the
Nature of Foreign Banks, and their Uses, at the latter end of this Book.

By a Bill of Credit, I mean, a Bill from this Office, owning that (...) have
paid in so much Money or Goods to them, and they to be answerable to me or my
Assigns on Returns, and may be sued for in the Name of the Possessor; this
being a Privilege appropriated to Bank-Bills only, and surpasses all other
Bonds and Bills that are sued in the Name of him or them to whom first made.
Now Money is but a medium of Commerce, a Security which we part with, to en^oy
the like in Value, and is the Standard of all Commodities, and esteemed so by
the World. And such is a Bank-Bill, it will obtain what we want, and satisfy
where we are indebted, and may be turned into Money again when the Possessor
pleases, and will be the Standard of Trade at last.

There is created in this Royal Bank by Act of Parliament, such a Fund as may
give out Bills of Exchange or Credit Current, that shall always be answered
with Money upon Demand: How acceptable these Bills will be, may appear by those
taken upon the Oxford-Act many Years since, when the Assessments to be raised
were Security, and the Bills made transferrable. We may make an Estimate of the
Value of Credit upon a good Fund, by the Bills accepted upon late Assessments
instead of Money. Lumbardstreet Bills that had so bad a Fund, were accepted out
of Choice by most Men, instead of Money, whilst their Credit was current, being
no other Security, but the honesty of the Man, and a Shadow of an Estate, both
which may fail. But this Royal Bank cannot. I have heard of a Gentleman that
had seen the same Money transmitted Nine times in one Morning, by writing off
the Credit from one to another, and the Money in specie left untouched at last.
Much more may be done by this Bank-Credit, their Fund being such as cannot
fail, unless the Nation be destroyed; for that all men's Interests are secured
by Act of Parliament.

This Royal Bank of Credit will be able to issue out Bills of Credit to a vast
Extent, that Merchants will accept of, rather than Money. Most Merchants in
Europe when they know the manner how the Security of this Fund is settled by
Act of Parliament, (it not being in the Power of the Bank-Corporation to injure
any Foreigner or Native:) It will encourage them to accept of these Bills
rather than Money; the Fund being unquestionable, and no Security in Nature
better; their Bills being more safe, portable, and transferrable than Money,
and better than Cash in the Chest, as Gold is better than Silver: Men may be
robbed of Money in specie, and there is great trouble in the carrying and
recarrying it. Now a Bank-Bill is free from all these troubles, and has
advantages beyond Gold or Silver.

This may be done by the Corporation without any hazard or much trouble to any
Body, and Profit to every body.

If Six hundred thousand pounds or more be paid into the Exchequer, a
Corporation obtained, there will be no great trouble in setting up a Fund or
Office in proper Places or Precincts; the Nation being divided already into
Counties and Hundreds: The stated Officers, if they understand the Nature of
these Banks, may be contented with me to put in Two or three hundred pounds
each, and to act upon this Score, No Purchase no Pay; seeing there is so great
a probability even next Door to a certainty, that all things will succeed well,
and will advance and increase the Riches of the Nation, beyond any thing the
Spanish Indies could do, if we had possessed our selves of them. If it should
happen to miscarry, there will be little Labor lost, and little or no Money
spent, in a probable expectation of such a Vast Advantage. Every Merchant that
sets out a Cargo to the East or West Indies, is at more trouble pro Rato, and
runs a greater hazard for less Benefit. I must confess the Brokers, and
Griping, Usurers will have little Benefit or Advantage by this Bank, neither is
it like to be profitable to them: But I think I may confideritly say, a Million
of People, Men, Women, and Children, Natives and Foreigners, shall be one way
or other advantaged, to be sure they shall have no loss.

The manner how it may be done is thus. Divide the Nation into Precincts,
suppose many Hundreds in a Precinct, as the Nature of the place, and the Reason
of the thing shall require; A County is too big, a Hundred is too little;
therefore cast so many Hundreds into a Precinct as is convenient: London,
Westminster, Southwark, and the Adjacent Suburbs, may be divided into several
Precincts, as the nature of this thing will bear; and Offices may be erected in
most of the said Precincts, in convenient places, to return money to any parts
of the Cities of London and Westminster, and what is done here may be practiced
through the whole Nation, where it is proper and desired. As thus: If a Person
at London desires money to be returned to Coventry or York, he pays it in at
the Office in London, and receives a Bill of Credit after their Form, written
upon Marble-Paper Indenture-wise, or upon other Paper, as may be contrived to
prevent counterfeiting.

To receive it at Coventry or York, so that none need to carry any more money
than just to defray his Expenses upon the Road; this will prevent manifold
Evils as to Highway Robbing; and money in a Nation in motion in Trade, is like
Blood in the Veins, if it circulates in all parts, the Body is in health; if it
be wanting in any parts, it languisheth, as by Experience we find.

These Methods in returning Money will supply remote Parts, and greatly enliven
Trade and secure it; and in time will give occasion to most in Authority to
Repeal the Act or Statute of Edward the First, Chap. 9. By which the Hundred is
bound to repay Men robbed; No Men need carry their own Money: if any Man do,
let it be at their own peril; and the Lives of many Men lost in the Defense of
their money, will be preserved.

Now every Man's Money is as safe in this Bank, as his Cash in his own Chest,
where it lies and pays him no Interest, 'till he lends it out or lays it out;
This he may do with his Money and Credit in the Bank, as soon as he can: If any
desires to leave his Money in this Office, it may be upon such Terms, as the
Office shall propose; None are forced to it, nor urged to it, unless they think
that they can get by it.

These Bills of Credit will be transferrable; Men may transferr their Credit
from one to another at the Office, and also at a Distance, if they will run the
risk of Counterfeiting the Bill. They may Assign their Interest in the Office,
so far as the Bill goes, to whom they please, who shall have the same right of
receiving the Money, as the Party had to whom it was first given. And for the
Security of all who shall lodge Money in the Bank, the whole Estate of the
Corporation, payable out of the Exchequer, as the Act directs, is liable to
make good all the Acts and Miscarriages of the Office of Bank, which is an
unquestionable Security to all that deposite Money in these Banks.

What the Benefits of these Banks may be, with the Objections Answered.
1. It Is evident the National Cash in time will pass through these Banks, the
Money being there; No Natives or Foreigners will take it out, unless for
smaller Expenses; For money in the Bank will be better than Cash in the Chest,
more portable, more transferrable, and of more value by Two in the Hundred than
Cash in the Chest.

2. No Person will have cause to question the Safety of his Money, or the
Credit of the Banks; for the Government will have Effects in their Hands to
answer all Credit given out, being obliged never to answer any Credit, unless
he receive a Debtor to balance it.

3. The Government must make good their Losses, so far as their Security goes,
which will not easily be exceeded.

To be sure the Corporations Creditors are at no Loss, for every Man's Interest
in the Corporation is liable to make good, the Creditor safe unless the Kingdom
be destroyed, which will rarely be.

Obj. 1. Men will take their Money out, some men will keep it to lock up.

Ans. I do not intend to give a Reason for the Actions of Children or Fools;
they may if they please, no wise man will make his Money worse than it is;
being taken out, it is not so safe, so portable as before, and every way worse.
These Things being admitted, that a great part of the running Cash of the
Nation will be brought into these Banks; and when there, will keep there: All
Persons will take a Bill of Credit rather than Money, the Bank will have great
Credit, and be in a Condition to lend Money at a low Interest, and great will
be the Gain. I need say no more, let all men make their Deductions, concerning
what their Advantage may be, the Concern is general, affecting the whole
Nation; many cannot see where the Advantage lies. For a general Satisfaction, I
will show wherein these Banks will be profitable to the Nation, to the Crown,
to the People. The Nation is one great Family; if a particular Person gets, the
Nation gets.

1. The Riches of the Nation will increase, and England may become the Empory
of the World in Trade.

2. The Fishery, the Linen, and Paper-Manufactures, with others, may be
encouraged to a perfection, and reformed from manifold Imperfections and
Neglects. By the help of these Banks, and the aforesaid Manufactures, Three
hundred thousand pair of lazy Hands may be Employed to get Six Pence per Diem
all the Year round, which will not be less than Ten hundred thousand Pounds per
Annum saved to the Kingdom; the Poor being employed will consume no more
Clothes or Victuals when they work, than they do now being Idle.

Obj. 2. We make more Goods than we can consume, or the World will utter.

Ans. People will increase, for Trade will bring in People as well as Riches to
the Nation: Where Trade is, there will be Employment; where Employment is,
there will People resort; where People are, there will be Consumption of all
Commodities. These Banks being once settled, Trade will flourish; the Dutch,
French, and Flemish, and people from all Parts of Europe that have Estates, or
can raise Money, will resort hither to enjoy themselves and their Estates,
under so Gracious and Indulgent a King and Queen. It is not a contemptible
Consideration, that these Banks will be great Satisfaction and Security to the
Nation, whilst all the World that Trades with us, will have a kindness for us;
especially when these Banks keep their Money. They will do all they can to
preserve their Cashiers, lest they should lose their Estates, having nothing
but a Bill of Credit for it. I appeal for the Confirmation of this to all those
that had Credit upon the Bank of Amsterdam, what thoughts they had, when the
French King was near those Gates? And whether they would not have diverted him,
had it been in their power. Pray God he come not there again.

Obj. 3. We have too many people already.

Ans. It is evident that the Riches of a Kingdom, are the people of the Nation;
Lands are at a greater Rate, where people are numerous, as about London; but in
America, where people are few, they are little worth: And this is true, that
people unimployed are as Catterpillers to Plants, and Worms to Woods, that only
waste the Product of Industrious Hands.

I propose Employment, and there is no doubt, that the Consumption of the
People is not so much, as the Product of their Labors, which is the real
Riches and Strength of the Nation; And the more the merrier, like Bees in a
Hive, and better Cheer too.

The Crown may be supplied with whatsoever is necessary, and the Prince may
have whatsoever Humane Nature is capable of. In this great Abundance, nothing
will be reasonably denied to the King; only his Hands will be tied with these
silken Cords, to keep that Station the Constitution of this Government has set
him in.

A considerable Share may, if the Parliament please, be ascertained to the
Crown out of the clear Profits. The Prince and People ought to grow together,
else the Body Politic will be monstrous. Upon a sudden Emergency here will be
ready Money to equip Armado's, provide Armies, levy Soldiers. And when there
is Leisure for Deliberation, and that the Parliament and King judge it
requisite, these Banks may be in a Capacity to supply the Crown with whatever
Money it needs at a reasonable Rate: Suppose it should be a Million, if the
Bank be certainly repaid, this Million in Ten Years, that is One hundred
thousand Pounds a Year; the Credit of the Bank is not impaired, and so in
proportion any Sum over or under this. How easily will Taxes be born;
Impositions are heavy when People are poor. But when Rents rise, Trade
flourishes, and Money is plentiful, a Man that gets a Hundred pounds a Year,
can better pay ten pounds, than he that gets but ten pounds a a Year, can pay
ten shillings.

The Benefits that Accrue to the Crown in these and many more Particulars, are
very pleasant to reflect upon. O that Reverence that all persons will have for
such a Prince, that puts them into such a Condition; and by his Prudent
Management, keeps them in such a flourishing Estate. When the People's Yoke is
lined with Peace and Plenty, it will make them Cheerful under it, and not
desirous to shake it off. If some few should Surfeit and grow Wanton, the
generality of the people (being content in their Condition) would certainly
keep them in awe. Methinks the Bees, by all possible means preserving their
King, because their very Being depends upon him; are a perfect Emblem of a
People honoring such a Prince.

The People shall have Advantages.

1. The Poor.

2. The middle Sort.

3. The Rich.

4. The Mariner.

5. The Merchant, as has been fully showed already.

1. The Poor have most need; I do not mean all shall be Rich, but the able Poor
may be employed, and well paid for their Work, their Children brought up to
Learning and Labor, and the Nation freed from those Rates (made in every
Parish to relieve the Poor) which in many Places begin to grow greatly
burdensome, and which amounts to Seven hundred thousand pounds per Annum. But
the honest ingenious Poor will find Friends to be Security for them at the Bank.

2. The middle sort of People may be benefitted; I mean small Freeholders,
Farmers, and Tradesmen; these will quickly increase their Stocks by their
honest Industry; had they Tools to work with, I mean, a Plentiful Stock to
drive their Trades with, and husband their Lands, and keep their Commodities
for a Market; All their Defects may be supplied by the Bank, supposing them
Ingenious and Industrious. The middle Tradesmen so soon as they have made a
Piece or two of Cloth or Stuff, are forced to sell it at any Rates, to put them
in a Capacity to provide new Materials to keep themselves and Dependants in
Action. At these Banks they may take up Money upon their Goods, at the Market
price, till better times come.

3. Further, the Gentry that in a Frollick run themselves in Debt, and in
danger of ruining their Families, and extirpating their Names, and who formerly
could not borrow four thousand pounds upon one thousand a year, without
Personal Security of Friends, besides Mortgaging of their Lands, may now borrow
Four thousand pounds upon three hundred a year.

4. By the help of these Banks Timber will be preserved for Shipping, and the
Seamen will not want Ships; If a Person has but one or two hundred pounds to
lay the Keel, the Bank may supply him with the rest upon the Security of the
Ship.

5. Infinite are the Advantages of Merchandising in general: A Merchant has
three Thousand Pounds Stock, and brings a Cargo of Goods of that Value into
England, immediately he may have three thousand pounds at the Bank upon these
Goods, and pay the Office as he sells them; and this he may do again and again,
as often as he pleases; and with three thousand pound Stock lay in Fifteen
thousand pounds worth of Commodities, or Goods. So that the Stocks our
Merchants now use in England, may drive eight times the Trade they now do.
Between them and the Bank, if the Parliament will admit, they may Engross the
greatest part of the Merchandise in Europe; and the carrying and recarrying
their Goods and Merchandise, will employ our Ships; I might enlarge here to a
Volume; but my design is only to give a hint of the great Advantages these
Banks will bring to the Nation.

I shall now compare our Royal Bank with Foreign Banks, especially with those
two Famous ones (viz.) of Amsterdam and Venice. Amsterdam Bank had its first
rise from Money left in Bankers hands, without Interest: The States of Holland
observing Money was transmitted from one to another, by writing off the Credit
from the Debtor to the Creditor, and is seldom paid in specie, as practiced in
London by several wealthy Citizens: The States undertake to be Security for all
moneys left in such Officers hands as they appointed, to all Persons that
should deposite their money with them, which proved better than any private
Security; hence plenty of money came in without Interest, to the value of Two
Millions Sterling; which was by Experience found sufficient to drive their
whole Trade, with ten times less trouble than Five Millions in private Chests:
A thousand pounds may be transmitted twenty or thirty times in one day, if
there be occasion (which is equivalent to thirty thousand pounds) with as much
ease as two or three thousand pounds can be told or retold. They put a stop to
their Banks, and forbad any more money to be made Bank-money, because no more
money should lie dead than was needful for their occasions; the residue of
their Money remains as a running Cash in private hands, pretending they have
always two Millions in Bank in specie, and that they use one Million as they
please for their best advantage, though many think otherwise. The Creditor in
Holland has only the honesty and courtesy of the Burgomaster, that he shall be
justly dealt withal: I cannot understand the Creditor has any way to force the
Bank to pay him his money, if the Effects should be expended any other way; but
every Creditor may be in the same condition as the Creditors of the African
Company were in, when the Hamburgh Company and Grocers failed, they must all
lose their money. If the French King, when he was so near Amsterdam, had taken
it, and rifled the Bank, what would have become of the Creditors? Now compare
our Banks with this; If our Nation should be put hard upon by any Foreign
Power, the King may have from these enough to supply his Wants, the Parliament
consenting and approving; and may tend to the overthrowing of our Enemies by
Sea and Land.

And in so great a Necessity, should our Banks be drained, if our Country be
saved, and our Enemies defeated, the Land will remain, and most of the Money
will be in the Nation, and all Creditors may have Satisfaction by their Bills
of Credit, being as useful as Money, and may be gradually satisfied with Money
in specie, as it can be raised and paid into the Bank by the Exchequer: The
Bank at Hamburgh is much of the same nature with that at Amsterdam; only they
keep their whole Fund in specie, and so it is much worse, their Money lying
dead. Consider how Money will abound in England, if Five Millions, or Ten
Millions of ready Money, and Credit Current (equivalent to Money) should in a
little time be added to the present Stock of the Nation. These Banks probably
will do all this and much more.

As to the Bank at Venice, it is not of any long standing; It had its Rise from
the Dishonesty of the Bankers: The Bankers of Venice did just as some of our
Bankers in England have done; they got men's Moneys into their Hands at
Interest, and used it as was necessary to their best Advantage, that they might
make a better Profit of their Money, than the Interest they paid; and lent it
out to insolvent Persons, or laid it out in desperate Cases, as our Bankers
did. Hence when they were disappointed, they did unavoidably break, the
Creditor lost his Money, the Commonwealth their Trade: For the Banker got what
he could, and fled out of their Territories, as ours do into the King's Bench.

The States finding such intolerable Inconveniences as we have done; If Men
lend out their Money, many times they lose it; if it lie dead by them, Trade
dwindles away by this Stagnation. Just in such a Case and Time as this the
States set up their Bank, and their Officers became Cashiers (as at Amsterdam)
for about Two millions of Ducats, a Bank sufficient for their Trade, which was
kept in specie, to be taken or paid out as the Merchant desired it, until the
Necessity of their Affairs in 1668, their Turkish Wars forced them to expend
all their Money in specie, which was lodged in their Bank; Now there is no
Money at all; neither is any Money in specie ever paid out, but their Bank is a
perfect Credit-Bank, and their Fund is a mere imaginary thing: yet because the
Fund being, as I said, Four millions of Ducats, which Venice is able to raise,
and the States have obliged to pay, though they are never like to pay one
Farthing of it to the End of the World, and all Men accept of this Credit as
Money; nay, since it has been in this Condition, the very Credit has been
worth Twenty per Cent. more than Cash in specie. All Merchants trading thither
can tell you, Credit in the Bank is much better than Cash in the Chest; the
Reason is, what I have aforementioned, Credit in the Bank is more safe, more
portable, and more transferrable than Money in specie, and so of greater Value,
as Gold is better than Silver. --

Many Years since, Credit in the Bank at Venice (as some Merchants living now,
may remember) was better than Cash in specie, by more than Twenty in the
Hundred, which the States found inconvenient for their Trade, and could not by
any Laws suppress this excessive Exchange, though they were advised by a
sagacious Merchant to bring Money into Bank in specie, to answer their Credit:
thus doing, it brought down their Exchange. Hence some Merchants thought the
Credit of the Bank impaired, because the Exchange fell; when as it proved quite
contrary. The Bank paid Money in specie, in writing off the Credit from one to
another; this made the Exchange less, as attested by a Merchant long since
living upon the Place; though, I believe, some in this giddy Age of ours may
think it a Romance.

Now for their Satisfaction I will answer one Objection.

Obj. What Use can the Creditour make of this Credit in the Bank, that it
should be of such a Value; You acknowledge no Money can be had?

Ans. Suppose between Ten and Twelve a Clock this Bank is open to transmit
Credit from one to another; as soon as Credit is transmitted, several Persons
are attending, who will instantly apply themselves to the new Creditor, to know
of him whether he will sell his Credit in Bank for Money in specie, which they
are ready to give to him at the Price current; because they can make something
more of the Credit, by selling it off to others, than they pay: As our Brokers
do of what they buy. When Money was paid in specie, it was no better than such
Money in specie, and so could not be changed for Profit, any more than one
Peny-loaf will exchange for another to any Advantage. The Case is something
like this at the Bank in Holland, where the Exchange is Two, or Three,
sometimes Four per Cent. Exchange; not because Dollars in Bank are so much
better than Dollars current, though there is a Difference; but because Credit
in Bank is more safe, more portable, and more transferrable than Cash in specie
is; Ducats in Bank must needs be better than Cash in the Chest, because they
lie there untold, and are never stirred.

The waste of our Silver by carrying, re-carrying, and frequent telling it, is
no small loss in seven Years, as we have found to our woeful Experience in clipped
Money. If ever our Money becomes a Commodity, as it may be without Doubt or
Inconveniency; now these Banks are setting up at home. It is true, a thin
clipped Half-crown, or Shilling, or Sixpence, passes for Half a Crown, or
Shilling, or Sixpence in the Nation, and are not worth half the Value in
Holland or France, where the intrinsic Value, and not the Coin, is considered.
A wise Man thinks Bank-Money, for this cause, is better than worn Money in
Holland, where it may be exported at pleasure, and therefore is valued
according to its Weight and Fineness, not its Denomination. Our Banks in
England will be far better than the Venetian Bank, which is under most of the
same Inconveniences as that at Amsterdam, as does plainly appear, by
reflecting upon what has been said. Doubtless a Bill of Credit upon Banks, or
Credit transferred, will be more valuable here in England, when once the true
State of them is rightly understood and practiced, as well as it is at Venice
and Amsterdam; nay, it will be better. I shall leave every Man to make farther
Inferences as they please, their own Occasions and Necessities will teach all
Men to make their Advantages of this Credit.

To conclude, It will make the King great, the Gentry rich, the Farmer
flourish, the Merchant trade, Ships increase, Seamen to be employed, set up New
Manufactures, and encourage the Old. What may not such a King be and do, that
reigns over such a People, who are not inferior to any in Courage, and
doubtless their Spirits will rise higher, when they find they have Purses
superior to all.

PROPOSALS To increase TRADE, By way of a Lumber-Office.

PROPOSALS TO Increase Trade, etc.
Which may advance Their Majesty's Revenue, and Glory of the Nation, without
any Hazard or Charge to any Body, with apparent Profit to every Body; Humbly
presented to Their Most Sacred Majesty's King William and Queen Mary. Which I
pray may be of use to them whom it shall please Their Most Sacred Majesty's to
Honor in being Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors to the Corporation,
for a Bank of Credit in England, lately Confirmed by the King in Parliament.

May it please Your Most Excellent Majesty's.
SInce your Subjects have not all things necessary to enable them to be useful
to Increase the Trade of your Kingdoms; Therefore to their plentiful Being,
there is a necessity of exchanging one thing for another: they do not always
meet with an Opportunity of exchanging of what they have of superfluity for
what they want; therefore necessity does enforce them to find out some Medium
of Commerce: When this Medium grows scarce, Trading will be low, and all home
Commodities that are the Product of your Growths, as Wollen-Cloth, Linen
Cloth, Tinn, Lead, etc. will be all cheap, as at this Day.

These Inconveniences may be avoided, if another Medium, that costs nothing, as
transferrable as Money, might be found out; Credit that will never fail,
founded upon Commodities from our own Growths, may in greater Payments every
way answer Money: For Money is nothing but a Medium of Commerce; a Security,
that when we part with any thing we may spare, we can procure another thing we
want of its like Value. A plain Demonstration of this would be quickly made,
when once a Corporation is established.

If the Government of the Bank should set up an Office or Offices to this
purpose, which, I think, with submission, may be easily done in this Kingdom,
in this manner.

First, convenient Places may be appointed; suppose Warehouses near the
Custom-house, for grosser Goods, liquid and dry; Stowage for finer Goods in
convenient Places.

Secondly, They may appoint fitting Persons for the managing this Business,
which are to be of Two Sorts;

(1.) First, Men of Estates, that can and will subscribe -- Pounds as the Act
does direct: being Men of Reputation for Knowledge and Honesty, and well
skilled in all sorts of Merchandise; that they may be accountable to all
Persons for Goods brought into the Office of Bank; who are to sign the Bills,
and to be obliged, that all Persons depositing their Goods shall be justly and
fairly dealt withal.

(2.) Secondly, It is proper to provide Persons of a meaner Rank, or Quality,
subservient to the former; who understand Trade, and can value Goods, and show
them, keep the Warehouses, and Books of Accounts.

Thirdly, When Places are fitted, and Persons provided, the Government may
declare they are ready to receive all Goods as a Pledge, upon which they will
advance Bills of Credit to the two Thirds, three Fourths, or four Fifths of the
true Value, or higher, according to what the Nature of the Goods are; Nay, they
may give Credit to Lands when they have to deal with honest Men, and the Title
good; and upon Personal Security that is unquestionable.

Fourthly, When Goods are brought into these Offices, they may be appraized,
marked, and lodged, and a Bill of Sale registered of them in the Office-Books;
signed and sealed by the Deliverer, for your Officer's Security, and the Goods
entered Debtor.

Fifthly, The Deliverer may be entered Creditor, and have a Bill of Credit from
your Office, payable at seven Months, for which he is to allow -- per Cent.
which Credit he allows to be wrote off to others, to whom he is or may be
indebted. And I know no reason but that the Corporation-Bills be accepted at
first Sight, now the King by Law has made them passable.

Sixthly, The Time for which these Goods are deposited, may be according to the
Nature of them; as they are more or less perishable: that is, for I. month, II.
months, III. months, IV. months, or X. months, but not to exceed XII. months.

Seventhly, The Persons depositing his or their Goods has liberty at all times
to see and sell his Goods.

Eighthly, If he sells his Goods within the Time limited, he satisfies the
Office, pays Interest only for the time his Goods have been there, and takes
the Overplus to himself.

Ninthly, If the Goods be not redeemed within the Time limited, the Office
sells them by the Inch of Candle, satisfies it self, and restores the Overplus
to the Owner of the Goods; unless he gives the Office such Security they
approve of. If the Party depositing his Goods, be under such Circumstances,
that he must have Money in specie, which will seldom occurr, the Office may
exchange his Bill into Money at.... per Cent.

Tenthly, No Goods shall be pledged in the Office that will not bear Twenty
Pounds Credit; but other Petty-Offices may be erected, subordinate to this;
some of which may take in Goods under Twenty Pounds, others under Ten Pounds,
and another under Five Pounds, for the Benefit of the Poor: Upon which may be
advanced such Rates as may be agreed on.

Eleventhly, All Persons that desire it, may have Stowage for their Goods, in
the Warehouses belonging to the Bank, though they do not advance Credit upon
them; they will lie more conveniently for a Market, than in their own
Warehouses; because the Buyer perhaps may have occasion for Credit, the Goods
being there he may easily satisfy the Seller.

Suppose a Merchant lays in an Hundred Pipes of Wine, he sells them to a
Vintner that advances Credit upon them, with which he satisfies the Merchant,
and takes them out of the Office, as he can clear them by Money or Credit.

Suppose a Clothier brings up an Hundred and fifty Pounds worth of Cloth, which
he cannot sell; he must have Money or he cannot trade: he brings his Goods to
the Office, they advance him a Bill of Credit of 100 l. two Thirds of the
Value; as, suppose, in this or the like Manner, viz.

From the Royal Bank-Office, May 24. 1694.
There is due to H.M. 100 l. for Goods deposited in the Office; which we do
promise to pay at the End of seven Months.

C. D. H. M.


This Clothier goes and buys such Goods or Commodities as he wants, as Oils,
Spanish Woolls, Dying Stuffs, etc. and tells his Chapman he will pay him with
Credit in the Bank-Office, which most Men, in time, will accept of, rather than
make a Book-Debt. Nay it is better than any ordinary Man's Bond; for it has a
sure Fund settled by Act of Parliament, kept in good Men's Hands, and may
readily pass from one Man to another at present, because it will be Money at
the Time appointed; For either the Clothier has sold his Cloth in the six
Months, and deposited the Money; or the Office has sold them in the seventh
Month, and kept the Money: so that the Office shall always be in a Condition to
make Payment of all Bills brought to them. This being granted, the Clothier
brings, or appoints his Chapmen to meet him at the Office, and writes off so
much Credit from himself, as satisfies them; suppose to the Value of 50 l.:
still there remains 50 l. to this Clothier, which he must carry into the
Country, and is ordered, by his Neighbor at home, to pay it to a Silk-Man in
London, and he will give him the Money in specie at his Return. Few Citizens
will refuse the Bank-Credit, unless they have a Chapman in the Country that is
a very Sure Card. But admit the worst, the Silk-Man refuses the Bill; the
Clothier then sells it as he can, or at last brings it to the Bank-Office, who
gives him Money for it..... per Cent. Change.

When once this Office of Bank is settled, their Bills of Credit will readily
change for Money, as it is at Venice, where the Banks never pay out Money, but
give Bills of Credit to those interested, which Bills will pass, and sell
readily for Ducats out of the chest, at Ten per Cent. Exchange. In short time
ours in England will be of as great Credit, nay greater.

Objections.
Obj. 1. It is a New Whimsie.

Ans. 1. So were all things at their first Using which Adam had not in his
Creation. The Post Office was thought more ridiculous than this can be, not
many Years since, yet now it gives a good Revenue.

2. This is not new; it is practicable in our Leward Islands, where the
Planters bring their Goods to the Ports: when the Ships are not there, they
lodge them in a Warehouse, take a Bill of the Warehouse-Keeper, that they have
such Goods there; this Bill will pass currantly as Money, so far as the
Ware-house-Keeper is known: much more it will do so here. This Practice may be
improved.

Obj. 2. No Body will trust such an Office of a Bank at first setting up, till,
by a longer Tract of Time, People are habituated to it.

Ans. 1. All Men do trust every day worse Security. To be sure there is no
better in England than this Bank thus settled by Act of Parliament. Wise Men,
that know there is a Fund kept in good hands, will never scruple it; and middle
witted Men, in a little time, will follow their Examples.

2. If Men should be so scrupulous, as not to adventure their Goods upon a Bill
of Credit upon the Bank, they may trust others upon Bond and be deceived.

Obj. 3. Men may be injured in their Goods, and oppressed by the Persons
supervising this Office.

Ans. 1. So they may by their Servants at home.

2. They may complain to the Government, who have good Security for the
Officer's Honesty.

Obj. 4. It will be troublesome to transmit Credit thus from one to another.

Ans. It will be far more easy than if any Man had Cash in his Chest. Suppose
a Merchant had Credit for One thousand Pounds, which he is to pay to Twenty
Persons; he desires them all to meet him at the Bank-Office, and there writes
off Credit from himself to them, with more ease than he could tell the Money.

Obj. 5. It will be Discredit to Young Men to pledge their Goods, especially at
their first setting up.

Ans. 1. If none but necessitous Persons do bring in their Goods to this
Office, it will be so; but the richest Citizens, if they design their own good,
will deposite their Goods in this Office; if they do, it will be great Profit,
which will take off the Scandal.

2. Many people, that do not need Money at all, will lodge their Goods into
this Bank-Office-Ware-house rather than their own Cellars, merely for the
Conveniences of selling them, as I have showed in the Twelfth Particular.

3. Persons of the middle Sort, of good Credit, and in no great Necessity for
Money, will lay in their Goods here for Profit, to have Money at..... per Cent.
As suppose a Merchant lands a Cargo of Three thousand Pounds worth of Goods,
lays them into the Bank, and takes Credit upon them for Two thousand Pounds,
at.... per Cent. with which he Prepares for another Voyage, before his Goods
brought in are sold; and so drives a double Trade with half the Stock. I see no
reason, why our great East India Company, and others in Corporations, in
London, and in the Country, who are at great Interest for Money, may not, with
Profit (the Hinge upon which most Merchants move) lay their Goods here, where
they may, upon better Terms, and be discharged of this when they please. These
things being granted, It can be no Discredit, being none knows who lays in his
Goods out of Necessity, and who out of Choice.

Obj. 6. The Charge will be great.

Ans. 1. The Interest is but.... per Cent.

2. An Allowance for the Warehouse Room must be proportionable to the Goods, as
they are more or less Bulky; as it is in other Places.

3. The Appraizing, Registring, Stowing, careful Keeping them from accidental
Damages, may be for every Five Pounds.... the transmitting of the Credit. It
needs not be excessive; suppose for every Five Pounds....; for every Twenty
five Pounds....; for Fifty Pounds.... for an Hundred Pounds..... This is
nothing like borrowing Money of the Scriveners, where their Security is usually
settled at a Tavern, and the Borrower pays the Reckoning.

Obj. 7. Men will have Money, and not Credit, such has been the Custom of the
Nation.

Ans. Men desire Credit at Venice, though never answered out of the Bank in
specie, rather than Money, because it is more safe and more transferable than
Moneys are; so they will do here, when they know what is best. Their Ease,
Security, and Interest will bias them to choose it; but if they will have
Money, they may at Market-Price.

Obj. 8. Where shall the Bank have Money?

Ans. All monied Men, if kind to themselves, will lodge their Money here
without Fear, and sleep securely, and may afford to give.... per Cent.; because
it may so happen they may have, or make..... per Cent. by lending out these
Bills upon Personal Security. The Benefits arising from these Banks must needs
be great.

1. The Bank has the Benefit of the Interest of whatever Credit they issue out
for nothing, if it should be to the Value of Twenty four hundred thousand
Pounds Sterling.

2. The Coin of the Nation will be much improved, and immediately monied Men
will lodge their Moneys in these Banks out of Choice, and it will be their
Interest to give.... per Cent. because they may let out their Credit at Six per
cent. again, and because Bills and Bonds lie dead. The Bank lets out the Money
in specie left with them, which is in motion also.

3. Whereas before the Money was only the running Cash of the Nation, now the
Credit founded upon this Money is as much a running Cash, as the Money it self.
The running Cash of the Nation will be greatly increased, answerable to the
Credit issued out, let it be what it will, it will be great.

4. It will give Life to Trade for ever, and all Husbandry, and Growths, and
Arts upon Manufactures will be greatly improved, and increased, proportionable
to the Credit raised in these Banks.

5. It will make England and Ireland, so conveniently situated for the Trade of
the World, stored with safe Harbors, and blessed with manifold Improvements in
Manufactures, Woollen, Linen, Paper, etc. and in Growths, as in Tinn, Lead,
Iron, Copper, Coals, etc. will employ many Hundred thousands of People in
honest Labor, to the Glory of God, and strengthening of the Kingdom; which, by
the setting up of these Banks will be supplied with so great a running Cash, as
in time will out do all other Nations.

6. Our Merchants may have Credit in Foreign Parts to buy Goods without Money.

7. Men will not be under such Necessities of selling Goods at an under Rate,
for want of money, when they may have Credit upon them at an easy Rate,
equivalent to Money, till they can light of a Chapman.

8. Men with small Stocks may drive great Trades: As suppose a Silk-Man has a
thousand Pounds, he buyeth Silk with it, lodges it in the Bank for Eight
hundred Pounds; this he lays out at Market in Silks, and pawns that for Seven
hundred Pounds, and so downwards; by the help of this Bank he lays in Four
thousand Pounds worth of Goods with One thousand Pound in Money, and is not
tied to any particular Man; he fetches out his Goods as he vends them, or uses
them, by two, three, four or five hundred Pounds at a time.

9. Most Men will rather deal with Persons that have Credit in these Banks,
than upon simple Credit; this being secured by Act of Parliament. Other
Securities not comparable to this, as diverse can tell who have smarted through
the Deceitfulness of base Men, Scriveners and Goldsmiths.

10. It is not the Quantity of Commodities brought into these Banks will cause
a Cessation in Trade; for the Credit of one Commodity will still purchase
another; and what cannot be spent in England, by the Credit of other
Commodities, may be transported to other Countries to find a Market, which now,
for want of Money to answer them, lie rotting at home; Money being the Medium
to measure all kind of Commodities by, they must lie dead till it can be
applied. A hundred Yards of Cloth are not so soon measured with one Yard-Wand,
as with twenty Yard-Wands, if severally applied to this hundred. If twenty
Pedlars stood in a Market, and had but one Yard-Wand among them; one must stay
for the other to deliver their Goods, till they can have the Yard-Wand to
measure out.

11. Poor People, that now pay Twenty and Thirty, or Forty per Cent. for Goods
pawned to Brokers; of which they are perhaps at last cheated, if they do not
redeem them at their Day; may be supplied at moderate Rates, by the lesser
Banks set up on purpose for their Reliefs. If the Bank gets no great matter by
these Poor People, they will at least save; and the Poor will be relieved, that
now suffer for want of a running Cash.

To sum up all in short; All Persons, Natives and Foreigners, Men, Women, and
Children, Rich and Poor will have Profit one way or other, by the Access of so
great Riches, as these Banks may necessarily produce.

REMARKS UPON THE Act of Tunnage, Relating to the BANK.

REMARKS UPON THE Act of Tunnage.
Their MAJESTY'S having granted a Commission under the Great Seal, Dated the
15th. Day of June, 1694. for the taking Subscriptions for the Bank, pursuant to
the late Act of Parliament, as follows, (viz.)
WHEREAS by an Act, Entitled, An Act for Granting to Their Majesty's, several
Rates and Duties upon Tunnage, etc. It is Enacted, That for Four Years, from
the first of June, 1694. there shall be paid upon the Tunnage of all Vessels
wherein any Goods shall be imported from any the Countries in the Act named, or
Coast-wise from Port to Port in England, the several Rates in the Act
mentioned, and certain Additional Duties of Excise on Beer, Ale, and other
Liquors.

And that weekly on every Wednesday, if not an Holy Day, and if it be, the next
day not being an Holy Day, all the Moneys arising by the said Rates shall be
paid into the Exchequer.

And that Yearly beginning from the first of June, 1694. the Sum of Fifteen
hundred thousand Pounds, arising out of the said Duties and Rates (in case the
weekly Payments extend thereunto) shall be the Yearly Fund; and if they do not
extend thereunto, then the said weekly Payments, so far as they will extend,
shall be part of the Yearly Fund; and in case the Duties and Rates shall be so
low, as that within any one Year, the weekly Payments shall not amount to
Fifteen hundred thousand Pounds, or be sufficient to answer the Recompenses by
the said Act extended, in such cases the Commissioners of the Treasury are
strictly enjoined, without any Warrant from Their Majesty's, their Heirs, or
Successors, to make good such Deficiency out of any Treasure or Revenue of the
Crown, not appropriated to any other Use.

And that it should be lawful for their Majesty's to Commissionate any number
of Persons to receive such Subscriptions as should be made before the first of
August next, by any Natives, or Foreigners, or Corporations, toward paying
into the Exchequer the sum of twelve hundred thousand pounds, and that the
yearly sum of one hundred thousand pounds, shall be appropriated to such
Subscribers.

Their Majesty's (being resolved, that if the whole sum of twelve hundred
thousand pounds, or a Moiety thereof, or more thereof, be subscribed by the
first of August next, to incorporate the Subscribers) have nominated and
appointed A. B. etc. (the Commissioners named in the Commission) or any five or
more of them, to take the Voluntary Subscriptions of any Natives, Foreigners,
or Bodies Politic, before the first day of August, toward raising the said
sum of twelve hundred thousand pounds, taking care that none write above
twenty thousand pounds, and that before the first of July none write above ten
thousand pounds.

And that the said Weekly Payments as they come in, shall be divided in five
seventh parts, and two seventh parts, which five seventh parts shall be
appropriated to the paying of the said one hundred thousand pounds per Annum,
to be paid as the same comes into the Exchequer, to the Use of the Subscribers.

And that their Majesty's may appoint how the said twelve hundred thousand
pounds, and one hundred thousand pounds per Annum, shall be Assignable, and may
incorporate such Subscribers, by the Name of the Governor and Company of the
Bank of England, subject to the condition of Redemption.

And if twelve hundred thousand pounds be not paid into the Exchequer by the
first of January next 1695. then the Subscribers shall have only after the Rate
of eight per Cent. per Annum. And the Commissioners of the Treasury are
required, without any Warrant from their Majesty's, their Heirs or Successors,
to pay the said one hundred thousand pounds per Annum.

And that no Person or Corporation shall subscribe more than twenty thousand
pound, and every Subscriber at the time of his subscribing, shall pay one
fourth part of his Subscription, and in default thereof such Subscription shall
be void.

That the residue of the Subscriptions shall be paid into the Exchequer before
the first of January, and in default thereof one fourth part shall be forfeited.

That none before the first of July shall write above ten thousand pounds:
Provided if twelve hundred thousand pounds, or a Moiety, be not subscribed by
the first of August, then the Power for Erecting a Corporation shall cease; and
in such Case so much of the hundred thousand pounds as shall belong to the
Subscribers may be Assignable; and that the Moneys payable by the Act to any
Person, shall not be chargeable with any Duties or Impositions, as by the said
Act may appear.

June the 21th at Mercers-Chappel, the Commissioners did meet, and divided
themselves into several Officers, and with great diligence, and in excellent
Order and Form, attended to take the voluntary Subscriptions of all that came
that Day.

Thus every Person that comes pays in one fourth Part of what he subscribes to
one of the Receivers, who gives him a Receipt for so much, and directs him to
another Office, where he is to deliver this Receipt, and receives another
attested under the Hands of two Clerks, and by them directed to the
Commissioners, and to deliver his Receipt to them, who sitting round a great
Table with a great Book before them, inserting the Day of such Payment, the
Names of the Commissioners receiving the same; and the Name and Abode of the
Person paying the same; with their proper Additions, and the Sum paid, the
Party subscribing writing his Name.

The Form of the Receipt given to all.
No
WE whose Names are here under subscribed Commissioners appointed by Their
Majesty's for taking Subscriptions for and toward the raising and paying into
the Receipt of the Exchequer the sum of Twelve hundred thousand Pounds,
pursuant to an Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for Granting to Their
Majesty's several Rates and Duties upon Tunnage of Ships and Vessels, and upon
Beer, Ale, and other Liquors; for securing certain Recompenses and Advantages
in the said Act mentioned to such Persons as shall voluntarily advance the Sum
of Fifteen hundred thousand Pounds, toward the carrying on the War against
France; do hereby acknowledge and declare, That J. W. of London Citizen, has
this day subscribed the Sum of ^ and has paid to us the Sum of ^ being one
fourth Part of his said Subscription, according to the said Act and Commission.
Witness our Hands the (...) day of (...) in the Year of our Lord 1694.

June 21. subscribed near 300000 Pounds. June 22. subscribed near 200000
Pounds. June 23. subscribed near 200000 Pounds.
And from June 25. to July 2. the remaining Part of the 1200000 l. was
subscribed; which makes them in a Condition to be a Corporation.

That the Corporation may be settled, to the Satisfaction of the Subscribers,
the Commissioners, or any Five or more, after the first of August, or so soon
as Twelve hundred thousand Pounds are subscribed, which shall first happen, may
affix Public Notice on the Royal Exchange, for all who have subscribed not
less than Five hundred Pounds, and paid their fourth Part in, to meet on a Day
appointed, which is not to be sooner than four Days, nor later than eight Days
after the Notice, to Elect Members qualified as hereafter mentioned, to be the
first Governor, Deputy, and Directors of the intended Corporation.

And that all the Subscribers, their Heirs, etc. may meet, and choose out of the
whole Subscribers, of whom none shall have more than one Vote.

One Person who has subscribed in his own Right Four thousand Pounds at least,
and paid one fourth Part thereof at least, at the time of his Subscription, to
be the first Governor.

And one other Person, who has subscribed Three thousand Pounds at least, and
paid in as aforesaid, to be the first Deputy Governor. And Twenty four other
Persons, each of which has severally subscribed in their own Right, Two
thousand Pounds at least, and paid in one fourth Part thereof as aforesaid, to
be the first Directors; which Elections shall be determined by the Majority of
Votes then present: and in case they be equal, then by the Commissioners, or
the Majority of them.

That the Persons so elected shall be inserted in the said intended Charter,
and made the first Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors; to continue in
their Offices from the Date of the Charter till the 25th of March, 1696. and
till others be chosen in their Places, and sworn; subject nevertheless to the
Restrictions and Proviviso's in the said Act, and to such other Rules, as shall
be inserted in the Charter to be granted.

Provided no Subscribers shall be capable to Vote in the Election of the first
Governor, Deputy, or Director, until he has taken the Oath following, (viz.)

The OATH.
I A. B. do swear, That the Sum of Five hundred Pounds by me subscribed, or
the Sum of Five hundred Pounds of the Money by me subscribed, is my own proper
Money, for my own Use, and in my own Right, and not in Trust for any Person
whatsoever.

Provided nevertheless, That any Quaker, who has subscribed Five hundred
Pounds, as aforesaid, and made and signed the Declaration following, (viz.)

I A. B. do sincerely and solemnly declare, in the presence of God, That the
Sum of Five hundred Pounds by me subscribed, (and so on as in the Oath
aforesaid) shall be capable to Vote in the said Elections of the first
Governor, Deputy, or Directors.

Provided, That no Subscriber shall be capable to be chosen the first
Governor, Deputy, or Director, unless he be a natural-born Subject, and has
taken an Oath, That the Sums, which in the respective Cases of Governor,
Deputy, or Directors, are requisite to be subscribed as aforesaid, are his own
proper Moneys, subscribed for his own Use, and in his own Right, and not in
Trust for any other Person. And any Two of the Commissioners are empowered to
administer the said Oaths and Declarations to the Persons who are to be chosen,
or be the first Governor, Deputy, and Directors.

What Corporations, Natives, and Foreigners may do.
COrporations, Body Politic and Corporate, may subscribe any sum not
exceeding twenty thousand pounds, paying down one fourth part to the
Commissioners at Mercers Chapel, London; and a second fourth part on or before
the first day of October next; and the other third and fourth parts before the
first of January, 1694.

2. All Natives and Foreigners may subscribe any sum not exceeding ten
thousand pounds Ditto, to do, and pay in, as before-said. The Bank-Corporation
may purchase Lands, Rents, Tenements, and Hereditaments of what kind soever;
and may also Sell, Grant, Demise, Alien, or Dispose of the same; may Sue, and
Implead and Answer, in all Courts of Record; or any other place whatsoever: and
do and Execute all matters and things, by the name of the Governor and Company
of the Bank of England; may borrow or give security by Bill, Bond, Covenant, or
Agreement, under their Common Seal for any sum of moneys not exceeding twelve
hundred thousand pounds; may deal in Bills of Exchange home and foreign, may
buy Bullion, Silver and Gold; may sell Bullion, Silver and Gold; may sell any
Wares, Goods, or Merchandises whatsoever, which shall be left or deposited with
the said Corporation, for Moneys lent and advanced thereon, not redeemed at the
time agreed on, or within three Months after; may sell such Goods as are the
Produce of Lands purchased by the said Corporation; may give out Bill or Bills
Obligatory, and of Credit, under the Seal of the said Corporation, to any
Person or Persons by Endorsement thereon, under the Hand of such Person or
Persons may be Assignable, and assigned to any Person or Persons voluntarily
accepting the same; and so by such Assign, Toties Quoties, by Endorsement
thereupon, that such Assignment and Assignments, so to be made, shall vest and
transfer the Right and Property in and to such Bill or Bills Obligatory and of
Credit, and the Moneys due upont he same, and the Assignee may sue in his own
name on default.

What the Bank-Corporation may not do.
THE Corporation may not monopolize, or ingross, or buy up, any sort of Goods,
Wares, Merchandises whatsoever, with the Stock-Monies, or Effects, belonging to
the said Corporation; in so doing they shall forfeit for every such Dealing and
Trading, treble the Value of the Goods and Merchandises so traded for.

They may not upon any Account of the Corporation, at any time or times
purchase Lands, or Rents belonging to the Crown, or advance, or lend to their
Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors, any Sum or Sums of Money, by way of
Loan, or Anticipation, upon any Part or Parts, Branch or Branches, Fund or
Funds of the Revenue, granted, or hereafter to be granted, or belonging to
their Majesty's, their Heirs or Successors: in so doing they shall forfeit
treble the Value of every such Sum or Sums of Money so lent; the one fifth
Part to the Informer, and the Residue toward Public Uses, as the Parliament
shall direct, and not otherwise.

Any Bonds, Bills, Covenants, Agreements, Writings, made, sealed, or given
under their Common Seal, for any Moneys or Goods; every Member or Members of
the Corporation, their Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, in their private
and personal Capacities are chargeable and liable in Proportion to their
several Shares or Subscriptions, to the Re-payment of all Money so lent, with
Interest for the same; and an Action of Debt may be brought, commenced,
prosecuted, maintained in any of their Majesty's Courts of Records against all
and every, or any one or more of the Members of the said Corporation, their
Heirs, Executors, or Administrators, in proportion to their Shares or
Subscriptions, and have Judgment against every Person or Persons as aforesaid,
as if the Security were sealed by the Persons so sued; any Condition to the
contrary notwithstanding. In Actions so brought, no Privilege, Essoign,
Protection, or Wager of Law, nor any more than one Imparlance shall be allowed.

The Corporation may not permit, nor suffer any Person or Persons whatsoever,
in trust for them, to trade with any of the Stock, Moneys, or Effects of, or
any ways belonging to the said Corporation: and if they permit it, shall
forfeit for every such Dealing and Trading, treble the Value of all Goods and
Merchandise so traded for.

All Amercements, Fines, and Issues against the Corporation, on account of any
Suits, or Actions, shall not be pardoned, or discharged by any Letters of
Signet, Privy Seal, or Great-Seal.

Any Person or Persons obtaining Judgment against the Corporation, bringing it
to the Exchequer, the Officers are required to pay the same Sum or Sums to
the Plantiff in the said Execution mentioned; whose Receipt shall be a full
Discharge for the same, and may retain so much of the Yearly Sum of One
hundred thousand Pounds, as the said Debt shall amount to.

FINIS.

