Pro Populo Adversus Tyrannos: OR THE Sovereign Right AND POWER OF THE PEOPLE
OVER TYRANTS, Clearly Stated, and plainly Proved. With some Reflections on the
late posture of Affairs.

By a true Protestant Englishman, and Well-wisher to Posterity.

London, Printed in the Year, 1689.

IF Men within themselves would be governed by Reason, and not generally give
up their Understandings to a double Tyranny, of Custom from without, and blind
Affections within, they would discern better what it is to favor and uphold
the Tyrant of a Nation. But being Slaves within Doors, no wonder that they
strive so much, to have the public State conformably governed to the inward
vicious Rule by which they govern themselves; for indeed none can love Freedom
heartily but good Men, the rest love not Freedom but License, which never has
more Scope or greater Indulgence than under Tyrants: Hence it is that Tyrants
are not often offended with, nor stand much in doubt of bad Men, as being all
naturally Servile, but in whom Virtue and true Worth is most eminent, them they
fear in earnest, as by right their Masters, against them lies all their Hatred
and Suspicion. Consequently neither do bad Men hate Tyrants, but have been
always readiest, with the falsified Names of Loyalty and Obedience, to color
over their base Servile Compliances. And although sometimes for shame, and when
it comes to their own Grievances of Purse or Profit, especially, they would
seem good Patriots, and side with the better Cause, yet when others, for the
deliverance of their Country, indu'd with Fortitude and Heroic Virtue, to fear
nothing but the Curse against those that do the work of the Lord negligently,
Jer. 48.10. would go on to remove not only the Calamities and Thraldoms of a
People, but the Roots and Causes whence they spring; straight these Men, as if
they hated the Miseries, but not the Mischiefs, after they have Juggled and
paltred with the World, reflected on their King, and provoked Persons to bear
Arms against him; nay, forced him to fly the Land, and cursed him all over it,
to the engaging of sincere and real Men beyond what is possible or honest to
retreat from; not only turn Revolters from those Principles which only could at
first move them, but lay the stain of Disloyalty and worse, on those
Proceedings, which just before, themselves seemed to desire and promote, and
which are the necessary Consequences of their own late Actions; nor would they
now perhaps show any dislike to, did they not fear they will not be managed
entirely to the Advantages of their own Faction, not considering the while,
that he, toward whom they would boast their revived and almost lost Loyalty,
counts them accessory, and will, if ever he gets Power, by those Laws and
Statutes which they have frequently and inhumanly brandished against others,
doom them to the death of Traitors, for what they have done already.

Others there are too, who not long ago seemed fierce against their King, under
the just Notions of a Tyrant, an Jncroacher on the Rights of the People, a
Dispencer with the Laws, and a Promoter of all Arbitrary and Illegal Actions;
Yet when God, out of his merciful Providence, and singular Love, has delivered
him over to follow such Councils and Methods, as have induced him to rid us of
such an Enemy to the Public Good as himself was, on a sudden, and in a new
Garb of Allegiance (which their late doings seemed to have canceled) plead for
him, pity him, extol him, and protest against those that talk of Excluding him
from the Government of these Nations, which by his Arbitrary Actings he has
justly Forfeited. But certainly if we consider who, and what these are, on a
sudden grown so pitiful; we may conclude their pity can be no True and
Christian Commiseration, but either Lenity or Shallowness of Mind, or else a
carnal admiring of that Worldly Pomp and Greatness from whence they see him
fallen; or rather, lastly, a dissembled and Seditious Pity, feigned of
Industry to beget new Commotions.

As for Mercy, if it be to a Tyrant, undoubtedly it is the Mercy of Wicked Men,
and their Mercies (we read) are Cruelties, who would hazard the Welfare of a
whole Nation to save him, who rather than have failed in the Accomplishment of
his Arbitrary and Popish Designs (had it lain in his Power) would have set the
whole World on Fire. There is yet another sort, who coming in the course of
their Affairs, or by choice of the People, to have a share in great great
Actions now in Agitation, at least to give their Voice and Approbation therein,
begin to swerve and almost shiver at the Majesty and Grandeur of this Noble
Deed, as if they were newly entered into a great Sin, disputing Presidents,
Forms and Circumstances, when the Commonwealth nigh Perishes for want of Deeds
in Substance, done with just and faithful Expedition. To these I wish better
Instruction, and Virtue equal to their Calling; the former of which (that is to
say Instruction) I shall endeavor, as my duty is, to bestow on them; but
considering what Attempts are daily made to withdraw the Nation from their
Duty, and cause them to mistake their Interest, I will crave leave briefly to
exhort them all not to start from the necessary, just, and pious Resolution, of
adhering with all their assistance, to those to whom (next under the Divine
Providence) we owe our Deliverance from Popery, Tyranny, and Arbitrary
Government, and the Safety both of our Lives and Estates. And first, ^et not
any be discouraged by any New, Seditious, Foolish, or Apostate Scare-crows, who
under show of giving Counsel, send out their barking Monitories, Mementoes,
Speeches, and Advices, empty of ought else, but the Spleen of a Foolish and
frustrated Faction; for how can that pretended Counsel be either Sound or
Faithful, when they that give it, see not, for Madness and Vexation of their
Ends lost, that those Statutes and Scriptures, which both Falsely and
Scandalously they wrest against us, would, by Sentence of the common Adversary,
fall first and heaviest upon their own Heads? Neither let mild and tender
Dispositions be Foolishly softened from their Duty and Perseverance, with the
unmasculine Rhetoric of any puling Priest, Chaplain, or Prelate, either in
their Pulpits (which have constantly been made the place whence Revilings and
Curses, instead of Christian Doctrine and Exhortations, have been passionately
emitted) or in their Papers, pretended to be sent as Friendly Letters of
Advice; or the like, for fashion-sake in private, and forthwith published by
the Sender himself, that we may know how much of Friend there was in it, to
cast an odious Envy on him, to whom it was pretended to be sent in Charity.

Nor lastly, Let any man be deluded by either the Ignorance, or notorious
Hypocrisy, and Self-repugnance of some of our Dancing Clergy, who have the
Conscience and the Boldness to come with Scripture in their Mouths, glos'd and
fitted for their turns, with a double contradictory Sense; transforming the
Sacred Verity of God to an Idol with two Faces, looking at once two several
ways, and with Quotations to charge others, which in the same Cause, they have
at other times made serve to justify themselves; for, while the hopes to have
that unlawful and unlimited Power, which their late Kings gave them (as finding
them the most fit and chief Instruments to serve their Arbitrary ends)
continued to them by the present Powers led them on, then to Write and Fight
against the Kings Party was Lawful, it was no resisting of Superior Powers,
they only were Powers not to be, resisted, who countenanced the Good, and
punished the Evil: But now that they are (we hope) justly afraid their
unsufferable and unchristian Domineering, Persecuting, Lordly Power will be
abridg'd and taken away, and themselves deprived of those vast Revenues which
the most of them consume Riotously, and Pluralities to be now no more, now to
talk of bringing all Delinquents without Exception or Exemption to a fair
Trial, is to be no less than Corah, Dathan and Abiram. He, who but ere while
was industriously by them reported to be a Tyrant, an enemy to Cod, the
Protestant Religion, and Liberty of People, is now (though not one jot more
Penitent, or altered from his Principles) a Lawful Magistrate, a Sovereign
Lord, the Lords Anointed, not to be touched, though by themselves forced to
fly. Good God! what Inconstancy, what Folly and Madness possesses the Breasts
of this People, to what a miserable Slavery would they lead us, and how fond
and eager do they seem, to have him rule over us, who (like the Stork in the
Fable) has, and would make it his greatest delight, to devour the best of
Freeborn Subjects? But hoping all their Attempts, to bring us to our old
Slavery, will be blasted, and that their eagerness in prosecuting them, will
make us the more resolved to confound both them and their Devices, I shall
leave this Subject, and (according to my promise) endeavor to give suitable
Instruction on to those last and fearful sort of People I mentioned but now. To
begin then, who in particular is a Tyrant, cannot be determined in a general
Discourse, otherwise than by Supposition, his particular charge, and the
sufficient proof of it must determine that, which I leave to Magistrates, at
least to the uprighter sort of them, and of the People (though in number less
by many) those in whom Faction and Interest least have prevailed above the Law
of Nature and right Reason, to judge as they find: But this I dare own as part
of my Faith, that if such a one there be, by whose Commission Cities have been
burnt, Royal Relations Murdered, Multitudes of Innocent Subjects Butchered,
Nobles taken off by Sham-Plots, Poison, Perjuries or Massacres; part of his
Kingdom promised as their share, whom he had solicited to help him to destroy
his Protestant Subjects, and an Impostor put on the Nation to deprive the next
Heir of the Crown; I say if such a one there is, be he King, or Tyrant, or
Emperor, the Sword of Justice is above him, in whose hand soever is found
sufficient Power to avenge the Effusion of so much Innocent Blood, and those
other unspeakable wicked Tyrannies.

For if all Humane Power to execute, not accidentally but intendedly, the Wrath
of God upon Evil Doers without Exception, be of God; then that Power, whether
Ordinary, or if that fail, Extraordinary, so executing that intent of God is
lawful, and not to be resisted. But to unfold more at large this whole
Question, though with all expedient Brevity, I shall here set down, from the
first beginning, the Original of Kings; how and wherefore exalted to that
Dignity above their Brethren; and from thence shall prove, that turning to
Tyranny they may be as lawfully Deposed and Punished, as they were at first
Elected: This I shall do by Authorities and Reasons, not learned among Schisms
and Heresies, as our doubting Divines are ready to calumniate, but fetched out
of the midst of choicest and authentic Learning, and no prohibited, nor many
Heathen, but Mosaical, Christian, and Orthodoxal Authors.

No man that knows any thing, can be so stupid to deny, that all men naturally
were born Free, being the Image and resemblance of God himself, and were by
Privilege above all the Creatures, born to command, and not to obey; and that
they lived so, till from the root of Adam's Transgression, falling among
themselves to do Wrong and Violence, and foreseeing that such courses must
needs tend to the destruction of them all, they agreed by common League, to
bind each other from mutual Injury, and jointly to defend themselves against
any that gave disturbance or opposition to such agreement: Hence come Cities,
Towns and Commonwealths. And because no Faith in all was found sufficiently
binding, they saw it needful to ordain some Authority, that might restrain by
Force and Punishment, what was violated against Peace and common Right: The
Authority and Power of Self-defence and Preservation, being originally and
naturally in every one of them, and united in them all, for ease and for order.
And, left each man should be his own partial Judge, they communicated and
derived either to one, whom for the eminency of his Wisdom and Integrity they
chose above the rest, or to more than one, whom they thought of equal
deserving: The first was called a King, the other Magistrates. Not to be their
Lords and Masters (though afterward those Names in some places, were given
voluntarily to such as had been Authors of inestimable good to the People) but,
to be their Deputies and Commissioners, to execute by virtue of their entrusted
Power, that Justice which else every Man, by the Bond of Nature and of
Covenant, must have executed for himself, and for one another. And to him that
shall consider well, why among Free Persons, one Man by civil Right should bear
Authority and Jurisdiction over another, no other end or reason can be
imaginable. These, for a while, governed well, and with much Equity decided all
things at their own Arbitrament; till the Temptation of such a Power left
absolute in their hands, perverted them at length to injustice and Partiality.
Then did they who now by trial had found the danger and inconveniences of
committing Arbitrary Power to any, invent Laws either framed or consented to by
all, that should confine and limit the Authority of whom they chose to govern
them: that so man, of whose failing they had proof, might no more rule over
them, but Law and Reason abstracted as much as might be from personal Errors
and Frailties. When this would not serve, but that the Law was either not
executed, or misapplied, they were constrained from that time, the only Remedy
left them, to put Conditions and take Oaths from all Kings and Magistrates at
their first Installment, to do impartial Justice by Law; who upon those terms
and no other, received Allegiance from the People, that is to say, Bond or
Covenant, to obey them in Execution of those Laws which they the People had
themselves made or assented to. And this often times with express warning, that
if the King or Magistrate proved unfaithful to his Trust, the People would be
disingaged. They added also Counselors and Parliaments, not to be only at his
beck, but with him or without him, at set times, or at all times, when any
Danger threatened, to have care of the Public Safety. Therefore, says Claudius
Sesell a French Statesman, The Parliament was set as a bridle to the King;
which I instance rather, because that Monarchy is granted by all to be a far
more Absolute than ours. That this and the rest of what has hitherto been
spoken, is most true, might be copiously made appear throughout all Stories
Heathen and Christian, even of those Nations where Kings and Emperors have
sought means to abolish all Ancient Memory of the Peoples Right, by their
Encroachments and Usurpations. But I spare long Insertions, appealing to the
German, French, Italian, Arragonian, English, and not least the Scottish
Histories: Not forgetting this only by the way, that William the Norman, though
a pretended Conqueror, and not unsworn at his Coronation, was compelled a
second time to take Oath at St. Albans, ere the People would be brought to
yield Obedience.

First, It being thus manifest that the Power of Kings and Magistrates is
nothing else, but what is only derivative, transferred and committed to them in
trust from the People to the common good of them all, in whom the Power yet
remains Fundamentally, and cannot be taken from them, without a violation of
their natural Birthright: And seeing that from hence Aristotle and the best of
Political Writers have defined a King, him who Governs to the good and profit
of his People, and not for his own ends, it follows from necessary causes, that
the Titles of Sovereign Lord, Natural Lord, and the like, are either
Arrogancies or Flatteries, not admitted by Emperors and Kings of best Note, and
disliked by the Church both of Jews, Isa. 26.13. and ancient Christians, as
appears by Tertullian and others. Although generally the People of Asia, and
with them the Jews also, especially since the time they chose a King, against
the advice and counsel of God, are noted by wise Authors much inclinable to
Slavery.

Secondly, That to say, as is usual, the King has as good right to his Crown
and Dignity as any Man to his Inheritance, is to make the Subject no better
than the King's Slave, his Chattel or his Possession that may be bought and
sold: And doubtless, if hereditary Title were sufficiently enquired, the best
Foundation of it would be found but either in Courtesy or Convenience. But
suppose it to be of right hereditary, what can be more just and legal, if a
Subject for certain Crimes, be to forfeit by Law from himself and Posterity,
all his Inheritance to the King, than that a King for Crimes proportional,
should forfeit all his Title and Inheritance to the People, unless the People
must be thought Created all for him, he not for them, and they all in one Body
Inferior to him single; which were a kind of Treason against the dignity of
Mankind to affirm.

Thirdly, It follows, that to say Kings are accountable to none but God, is the
overturning of all Law and Government. For if they may refuse to give account,
then all Covenants made with them at Coronation; all Oaths are in vain, and
mere Mockeries; all Laws which they swear to keep, made to no purpose; for if
the King fear not God, (as how many of them do not?) We hold then our Lives and
Estates, by the tenure of his mere Grace and Mercy, as from a God, not a mortal
Magistrate; a position that none but Court Parasites or Men Besotted would
maintain. And no Christian Prince not drunk with high mind, and prouder than
those Pagan Caesar's, that Deifi'd themselves, would arrogate so unreasonably
above human condition, or derogate so basely from a whole Nation of Men his
Brethren, as if for him only subsisting, and to serve his Glory, valuing them
in comparison of his own brute will and pleasure, no more than so many Beasts
or Vermin under his feet, not to be reasoned with, but to be injured among whom
there might be found so many thousand men, for Wisdom, Virtue, nobleness of
mind, and other respects, but the fortune of his Dignity, of above him. Yet
some would persuade us, that this absurd opinion was King David's; because in
the 51 Psalm, he cries out to God, Against thee only have I Sinned; as if David
had imagined, that to Murder Uriah and Adulterate his Wife, had been no sin
against his Neighbor, when as that Law of Moses was to the King expressly;
Deuteronomy. 17. not to think so highly of himself above his Brethren. David therefore
by those words, could mean no other, than either that the depth of his
guiltiness was known to God only, or to so few as had not the will or power to
question him, or that the sin against God was greater beyond compare, than
against Uriah. What ever his meaning were, any wise Man will see, that the
pathetical words of a Psalm can be no certain decision to a point that has
abundantly more certain rules to go by. How much more rationally spoke the
Heathen King Demophoon, in a Tragedy of Enripides, than these Interpreters
would put upon King David; I rule not my People by Tyranny, as if they were
Barbarians, but am my self liable, if I do unjustly, to suffer justly. Not
unlike was the Speech of Trajan the worthy Emperor, to one whom he made General
of his Praetorian Forces. Take this drawn Sword, says he, to use for me, if I
Reign well, if not, to use against me. Thus Dion relates, and not Trajan only.
But Theodosius the younger, a Christian Emperor, and one of the best, caused it
to be Enacted as a rule undeniable, and fit to be acknowledged by all Kings and
Emperors, That a Prince is bound to the Laws; that on the Authority of Law the
Authority of a Prince depends, and to the Laws ought to submit. Which Edict of
his remains yet unrepealed in the Code of Justinian, lib. 1. tit. 24. as a
sacred Constitution to all the Succeeding Emperors. How then can any King in
Europe maintain and write himself accountable to none but God, when Emperors in
their own Imperial Statutes, have written and decreed themselves accountable to
Law. And indeed where such account is not feared, he that bids a Man Reign over
him above Law, may bid as well a Savage Beast.

It follows lastly, That the King or Magistrate holds his Authority of the
People, both Originally and Naturally, for their good in the first Place, and
not his own; then may the People as often as they shall judge it for the best,
either choose him, or reject him, retain him, or depose him, though no Tyrant,
merely by the Liberty and Right of freeborn Men, to be Governed as seems to
them best. This, though it cannot but stand with plain reason, shall be made
good also by Scripture, Deuteronomy. 17.14. When thou art come into the Land which the
Lord thy God gives thee, and shall say, I will set a King over me, like as all
the Nations about me. These words confirm us, that the right of choosing, yea
of changing their own Government, is by the Grant of God himself in the People.
And therefore when they desired a King, though then under another form of
Government, and though their changing displeased him, yet he that was himself
their King, and rejected by them, would not be a hindrance to what they
intended, further than by persuasion, but that they might do therein as they
saw good, 1 Samuel 8. only he reserved to himself the nomination of who should
Reign over them. Neither did that exempt the King as if he were to God only
accountable, though by his especial command Anointed. Therefore David first
made a Covenant with the Elders of Israel, and so was by them anointed King, 1 Chronicles. 11. And Jehoiadah the Priest, making Jehoash King, made a Covenant
between him and the People, 2 Kings, 11.17. Therefore, when Rehoboam at his
coming to the Crown, rejected those conditions which the Israelites brought
him; hear what they answer him, What portion have we in David, or Inheritance
in the Son of Jesse? See to thine own house David. And for the like conditions
not performed, all Israel before that time, Deposed Samuel; not for his own
default, but for the misgovernment of his Sons. But some will say to both these
Examples, it was evilly done. I answer, that not the latter, because it was
expressly allowed them in the Law to set up a King if they pleased; and God
himself joined with them in the Work; though in some sort it was at that time
displeasing to him, in respect of old Samuel, who had governed them uprightly.
As Livy praises the Romans who took occasion from Tarquinius, a wicked Prince,
to gain their Liberty, which to have extorted says he, from Numa or any of the
good Kings before, had not been seasonable. Nor was it in the former Example
done unlawfully; for when Rehoboam had prepared a huge Army to reduce the
Israelites, he was forbidden by the Prophet, 1 Kings 12.24. Thus says the
Lord, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your Brethren, for this thing is
from me. He calls them their Brethren, not Rebels, and forbids to be proceeded
against them, owning the thing himself; not by single Providence, but by
approbation, and that not only of the Act, as in the former Example, but of the
fit Season also; he had not otherwise forbid to molest them. And those grave
and wise Counselors whom Rehoboam first advised with, spoke no such thing, as
our old gray headed Flatterers now are wont; stand upon your Birthright, scorn
to capitulate, you hold of God, and not of them; for they know no such matter,
unless conditionally, but gave him politic Counsel, as in a civil Transaction.
Therefore Kingdom and Magistracy, whether Supreme or Subordinate, is called a
human Ordinance, 1 Pet. 2.13. etc. Which we are there taught, is the will of
God, we should submit to, so far as for the punishment of Evil doers, and the
encouragement of them that do well. Submit, says he, as Freemen. And there is
no power but of God, says Paul, Romans 13. as much as to say, God put it into
man's heart to find out that way at first, for common Peace and Preservation,
approving the exercise thereof; else it contradicts Peter, who calls the same
Authority an Ordinance of Man. It must be also understood of Lawful and Just
Power, else we read of great power in the Affairs and Kingdoms of the World
permitted to the Devil: For says he to Christ, Luke 4.6. All this power will I
give thee, and the glory of them, for it is delivered to me, and to whomsoever
I will, I give it: Neither did he lie, or Christ gainsay what he affirmed: For
in the 13. of the Revelations, we read how the Dragon gave to the Beast his
power, his seat, and great authority: Which Beast so authorized, most expound
to be the tyrannical Powers and Kingdoms of the Earth. Therefore St. Paul in
the forecited Chapter tells us, that such Magistrates, he means, as are not a
terror to the good, but to the evil, such as bear not the Sword in vain, but to
punish Offenders, and to encourage the Good. If such only be mentioned here as
powers to be obeyed, and our submission to them only required, then doubtless
those powers that do the contrary, are no powers ordained of God, and by
consequence no obligation laid upon us to obey, or not to resist them. And it
may be well observed that both these Apostles, when ever they give this
Precept, express it in terms not concret, but abstract, as Logicians are wont
to speak, that is, they mention the Ordinance, the Power, the Authority before
the Persons that execute it, and what that power is, left we should be
deceived; they describe exactly. So that if the power be not such, or the
Person execute not such power, neither the one nor the other is of God, but of
the Devil, and by consequence to be Resisted. From this exposition Chrysostom
also on the same Place dissents not, explaining, that these words were not
written in behalf of a Tyrant. And this is verified by David, himself a King,
and likeliest to be Author of the, Psalm 94.20. which says, Shall the throne
of iniquity have fellowship with thee? And it were worth the knowing, since
Kings, and that by Scripture, boast the justness of their Title, by holding it
immediately of God, yet cannot show the time when God ever set on the Throne
them or their Forefathers, but only when the People chose them; why, by the
same reason, since God ascribes as often to himself the casting down of Princes
from the Throne, it should not be thought as Lawful, and as much from God, when
none are seen to do it but the People, and that for just Causes. For if it
needs must be a sin in them to Depose, it may as likely be a sin to have
Elected. And Contrary, if the Peoples Act in Election be pleaded by a King, as
the Act of God, and the most just Title to Enthrone him, why may not the
Peoples Act of Rejection be as well pleaded by the People, as the Act of God,
and the most just Reason of Depose him? So that we see the Title and just Right
of Reigning or Deposing, in reference to God, is found in Scripture to be all
one; visible only in the People, and depending merely upon Justice and Demerit.
Thus far has been considered briefly the Power of Kings and Magistrates, how
it was, and is originally the Peoples, and by them conferred in Trust only to
be employed to the common Peace and Benefit; with Liberty therefore and Right
remaining in them to reassume it to themselves, if by Kings and Magistrates it
be abused; or to dispose of it by any Alteration, as they shall judge most
conducing to the Public Good.

We may from hence, with more ease and force of Argument, determine what a
Tyrant is, and what the People may do against him. A Tyrant, whether by wrong
or by right coming to the Crown, is he who regarding neither Law nor the Common
Good, Reigns only for himself and his Faction: Thus St. Basil, among others,
defines him. And because his Power is great, his Will boundless and exorbitant,
the fulfilling whereof is for the most part accompanied with innumerable Wrongs
and Oppressions of the People, Murders, Massacres, Rapes, Adulteries,
Desolation, and Subversion of Cities and whole Provinces; look how great a good
and happiness a Just King is, so great a Mischief is a Tyrant; as he the
public Father of his Country, so this the Common Enemy; against whom, what the
People lawfully may do, as against a common Pest, and destroyer of Mankind, I
suppose no Man of clear judgment need go farther to be guided, than by the very
Principles of Nature in him. But because it is the Vulgar Folly of Men to
desert their own Reason, and shutting their Eyes, to think they see best with
other Men's, I shall show by such Examples as ought to have most weight with us,
what has been done in this case heretofore. The Greeks and Romans, as their
prime Authors witness, held it not only lawful, but a Glorious and Heroic
Deed, rewarded publicly with Statues and Garlands, to kill an infamous Tyrant
at any time without trial; and but reason, that he who trod down all Law,
should not be vouchsafed the benefit of Law. Insomuch that Seneca the Tragedian
brings in Hercules the grand Suppressor of Tyrants, thus speaking,

-- Victima haud ulla amplior
Potest, magisque opima mactari Jovi
Quam Rex iniquus --
-- There can be slain
No Sacrifice to God more acceptable
Than an unjust and wicked King --
But of these I name no more, lest it be objected they were Heathen, and come
to produce another sort of Men that had the knowledge of true Religion. Amongst
the Jews this Custom of Tyrant-killing was not unusual. First, Ehud, a Man whom
God had raised to deliver Israel from Eglon King of Moab, who had conquered and
ruled over them eighteen years, being sent to him as an Ambassador with a
Present, slew him in his own Hoase. But he was a Foreign Prince, an Enemy, and
Ehud besides had special warrant from God. To the first I answer, it imports
not whether Foreign or Native, for no Prince so Native, but professes to hold
by Law, which when he himself overturns, breaking all the Covenants and Oaths
that gave him Title to his Dignity, and were the Bond and Alliance between him
and his People, what differs he from an Outlandish King or from an Enemy? For
look how much Right the King of Spain has to govern us at all, so much Right
has the King of England to govern us Tyrannically. If he, though not bound to
us by any League, coming from Spain in Person to subdue us, or to destroy us,
might lawfully, by the People of England, either be slain in Fight, or put to
Death in Captivity, what has a Native King to plead, bound by so many
Covenants, Benefits and Honors to the welfare of his People, why he through
the contempt of all Laws and Parliaments, the only tie of our Obedience to him,
for his own wills sake, and a boasted Prerogative unaccountable, after
unspeakable Damages done by him to the People of Great Britain for these many
years, and being now fled to our greatest Enemy, should think to escape
unquestionable, as a thing Divine, in respect of whom so great a number of
Christians destroyed should lie unaccounted for, polluting with their
slaughtered Carcasses all the Land over, and crying for Vengeance against the
Living that should have righted them. Who knows not that there is a mutual Bond
of Amity and Brotherhood between Man and Man over all the World, neither is it
the English Sea that can sever us from that Duty and Relation: A straiter Bond
yet there is between Fellow Subjects, Neighbors, and Friends: But when any of
these do one to another so as Hostility could do no worse, what does the Law
Decree less against them, than open Enemies and Invaders? Or if the Law be not
present, or too weak, what does it warrant us to less than single Defense or
Civil War? and from that time forward the Law of civil defensive War differs
nothing from the Law of Foreign Hostility. Nor is it distance of place that
makes Enmity, but Enmity that makes distance. He therefore that keeps Peace
with me near or remote of whatsoever Nation, is to me as far as all Civil and
Human Offices an Englishman and a Neighbor; but if an Englishman forgetting
all Laws, Humane, Civil and Religious, offend against Life and Liberty, to him
offend and to the Law in his behalf, though born in the same Womb, he is no
better than a Turk, a Saracen, a Heathen. This is Gospel, and this was ever Law
among Equals, how much rather then in Force against any King whatsoever, who in
respect of the People is confessed Inferior and not Equal: to distinguish
therefore of a Tyrant by Outlandish or Domestic, is a weak Evasion. To the
second, That he was an Enemy, I answer, what Tyrant is not? Yet Eglon by the
Jews had been acknowledged as their Sovereign, they had served him eighteen
years, as long almost as we our William the pretended Conqueror, in all which
time he could not be so unwise a Statesman, but to have taken of them Oaths of
Fealty and Allegiance, by which they made themselves his proper Subjects, as
their Homage and Present sent by Ehud testified. To the Third, That he had
special Warrant to kill Eglon in that manner, it cannot be granted, because not
expressed; it is plain that he was raised by God to be a Deliverer, and went on
just Principles, such as were then and ever held allowable, to deal so by a
Tyrant that could no otherwise be dealt with. Neither did Samuel, though a
Prophet, with his own hand abstain from Agag, a Foreign Enemy no doubt, but
mark the reason, As thy Sword has made women childless; a cause that by the
Sentence of Law it self, nullifies all Relations. And as the Law is between
Brother and Brother, Father and Son, Master and Servant, wherefore not between
King, or rather Tyrant and People? And whereas Jehu had special command to slay
Jeboram a Successive and Hereditary Tyrant, it seems not the less imitable for
that; for where a thing grounded so much on natural reason, has the addition
of a command from God, what does it but establish the lawfulness of such an
Act. Nor is it likely that God, who had so many ways of punishing the House of
Ahab, would have sent a Subject against his Prince, if the Fact in it self, as
done to a Tyrant, had been of bad Example. And if David refused to lift his
hand against the Lords Anointed, the matter between them was not Tyranny, but
private Enmity, and David, as a private Person, had been his own Revenger, not
so much the Peoples; but when any Tyrant at this day can show to be the Lords
Anointed, the only mentioned reason why David withheld his hand, he may then,
but not till then, presume on the same Privilege.

We may pass therefore hence to Christian times. And first our Savior himself,
how much he favored Tyrants, and how much intended they should be found or
honored among Christians, declares his mind not obscurely; accounting their
absolute Authority no better than Gentilism; yea, though they flourished it
over with the splendid name of Benefactors; charging those that would be his
Disciples to usurp no such dominion; but that they who were to be of most
Authority among them, should esteem themselves Ministers and Servants to the
Public. Matt. 20.25. The Princes of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them;
and Mark 10.42. They that seem to Rule, says he, either slighting or
accounting them no lawful Rulers; but ye shall not be so, but the greatest
among you shall be your Servant. And although he himself were the meekest, and
came on Earth to be so, yet to a Tyrant we hear him not vouchsafe and humble
word: But, Tell that Fox, Luke 13. And wherefore: did his Mother the Virgin
Mary, give such praise to God in her Prophetic Song, that he had now by the
coming of Christ, Cut down Dynasta's or proud Monarchs from the Throne; if the
Church when God manifests his power in them to do so, should rather choose all
misery and vassalage to serve them, and let them still sit on their potent
Seats, to be Adored for doing Mischief. Surely it is not for nothing that
Tyrants by a kind of natural instinct, both hate and fear none more than the
true Church and Saints of God, as the most dangerous Enemies and Subverters of
Monarchy, though indeed of Tyranny: Has not this been the perpetual cry of
Courtiers, and Court Prelates? whereof no likelier cause can be alleged but
that they well discerned the mind and principles of most devout and zealous
Men, and indeed the very discipline of Church, tending to the dissolution of
all Tyranny. No marvel then if since the faith of Christ received in purer or
impurer times, to Depose a King and put him to Death for Tyranny, has been
accounted so just and requisite, that neighbor Kings have both upheld and
taken part with Subjects in the Action. An Ludovicus Pius, himself an Emperor,
and Son of Charles the Great, being made Judge, ( Du Haillan is my Author)
between Milegast King of the Vultzes and his Subjects, who had deposed him,
gave his Verdict for the Subjects, and for him whom they had chosen in his
room. Note here, that the right of Electing whom they please, is by the
impartial testimony of an Emperor in the People. For, said he, A just Prince
ought to be preferred before an unjust, and the end of Government before the
Prerogative. And Constantinus Leo, another Emperor in the Byzantine Laws says,
That the end of a King is for the general good which he not performing, is but
the counterfeit of a King. And to prove that, some of our own Monarchs have
acknowledged, that their high Office exempted them not from Punishment; they
had the Sword of St. Edward born before them by an Officer, who was called Earl
of the Palace, even at the times of their highest Pomp and Solemnity, to mind
them, says Matthew Paris, the best of our Historians, that if they erred, the
Sword had power to restrain them. And what restraint the Sword comes to at
length, having both edge and point, if any Sceptick will needs doubt, let him
feel. It is also affirmed from diligent search made in our ancient Books of
Law, that the Peers and Barons of England, had a legal right to judge the King:
Which was the cause most likely, for it could be no slight cause, that they
were called his Peers, or Equals. This however may stand immovable, so long as
Man has to deal with no better than Man; that if our Law judge all Men to the
lowest by their Peers, it should in all Equity ascend also, and judge the
Highest. And so much I find both in our own and Foreign Story, that Dukes,
Earls, and Marquesses, were at first not heriditary, not empty and vain Titles,
but names of trust and office, and with the office ceasing, as induces me to be
of Opinion, that every worthy man in Parliament, for the word Baron imports no
more, might for the public good be thought a fit Peer and judge of the King;
without regard had petty Cavears and Circumstances, the chief impediment in
high Affairs, and ever stood upon most by circumstantial men. Whence doubltless
our Ancestors who were not ignorant with what rights either Nature or ancient
Constitution had endowed them, when Oaths both at Coronation and renewed in
Parliament would not serve, thought it no way illegal to Depose and put to
Death their Tyrannous Kings; insomuch, that the Parliament drew up a Charge
against Richard the Second, and the Commons requested to have Judgment decreed
against him, that the Realm might not be endangered. And Peter Martyr, a Divine
of foremost rank, on the third of Judges approves their doings. Sir Thomas
Smith also, a Protestant and States man in his Commonwealth of England, putting
the question, Whether it be Lawful to rise against a Tyrant? answers, That the
Vulgar judge of it according to the event, and the Learned according to the
purpose of them that do it, But far before those days, Gildas the most Ancient
of all our Historians, speaking of those times wherein the Roman Empire
decaying, quitted and relinquished what right they had by Conquest to this
Island, and resigned it all into Peoples hands testifies that the People thus
reinvested with their own Original Right, about the Year 446, both Elected them
Kings, whom they thought best; (the first Christian British Kings that ever
Reigned here since the Romans) and by the same Right, when they apprehended
Cause, usually Deposed and put them to Death. This is the most fundamental and
ancient Tenure that any King of England can produce or pretend to; in
comparison of which, all other Titles and Pleas are but of yesterday. If any
object that Gildas condemns the Britains for so doing, the Answer is as ready;
that he condemns them no more for so doing, than he did before for choosing
such; for says he, They anointed them Kings; not of God, but such as were more
Bloody than the rest. Next, he condemns them not at all for Deposing or putting
them to Death, but for doing it over hastily, without Trial or well examining
the cause, and for Electing others worse in their room. Thus we have here both
Domestic and most Ancient Examples, that the People of Britain have Deposed
and put to Death their Kings in those Primitive Christian times. And to couple
Reason with Example, if the Church in all Ages, Primitive, Romish, or
Protestant, held it ever no less their Duty, than the power of their Keys,
though without express warrant of Scripture, to bring indifferently both King
and Peasant under the utmost rigor of their Canons and Censures Ecclesiastical,
even to the smiting him with a final Excommunication; if he persist Impenitent,
what hinders but the Temporal Law both may and ought, though without a special
Text or President, extend with like indifference the Civil Sword, to the
cutting off without exemption, him that capitally offends, seeing that Justice
and Religion are from the same God, and works of Justice oft-times more
acceptable. Yet because some of our late Passive Obedience Men have wrote, That
proceedings against Kings are without Presidents, from any Protestant State or
Kingdom, I will briefly rehearse a few (of many) Examples, which shall be all
Protestant.

In the year 1546. the Duke of Saxony, Lantgrave of Hessen, and the whole
Protestant League raised open War against Charles the Fifth their Emperor, sent
him a Defiance, renounced all Faith and Allegiance toward him, and debated long
in Council, whether they should give him so much as the Title of Caesar.
Sleidan l. 17. Let all Men judge what this wanted of Deposing or of Killing,
but the Power to do it.

In the Year 1559. the Scotch Protestants claiming Promise of their Queen
Regent for Liberty of Conscience, she answering, That Promises were not to be
claimed of Princes, beyond what was commodious for them to grant; told her to
her Face in the Parliament then at Sterling, that if it were so, they renounced
their Obedience; and soon after betook them to Arms. Buchanan, Hist. l. 16.
Certainly when Allegiance is renounced, that very hour the King or Queen is in
effect Deposed.

In the Year 1564. John Knox a most Famous Divine, and the Reformer of
Scotland, at a general Assembly, maintained openly in a Dispute against
Lethington the Secretary of State, that Subjects might and ought execute Gods
Judgments upon their King; that the Fact of Jehu and others against their King,
having the Ground of Gods ordinary Command, to put such and such Offenders to
Death, was not Extraordinary, but to be imitated of all that preferred the
Honor of God to the affection of Flesh and wicked Princes; that Kings, if they
offend, have no Privilege to be exempted from the Punishments of Law, more
than any other Subject; so that if the King be a Murderer, Adulterer or
Idolater, he should suffer not as a King, but as an Offender; This Position he
repeats again and again before them. Answerable was the Opinion of John Craig
another Learned Divine; and that Laws made by the Tyranny of Princes, or the
Negligence of People, their Posterity might Abrogate, and Reform all things
according to the Original Institution of Commonwealths; and Knox being
commanded by the Nobility to write to Calvin, and other Learned Men, for their
Judgments in that Question, refused; alleging, that both himself was fully
resolved in Conscience, and had heard their Judgments, and had the same opinion
under Hand writing of many the most Godly, and most Learned that he knew in
Europe; that if he should move the Question to them again, what should he do
but show his own Forgetfulness and Inconstancy? All this is far more largely in
the Ecclesiastical History of Scotland, lib. 4. with many other Passages to
this effect all the Book over; set out with Diligence, by Scotch-men, of best
Repute among them, to let the World know, that the whole Church, and Protestant
State of Scotland, in those purest times of Reformation, were of the same
Belief, three years after, they met in the Field Mary their Lawful and
Hereditary Queen, took her Prisoner, yielding before Fight, kept her in Prison,
and the same year Deposed her. Buch. Hist. lib. 18. And four years after that,
the Scots, in Justification of their Deposing Queen Mary, sent Ambassadors to
Queen Elizabeth, and in a Written Declaration alleged, that they had used
toward her more Lenity than she deserved; that their Ancestors had heretofore
punished their Kings by Death or Banishment; that the Scots were a Free Nation,
made King whom they Freely Chose, and with the same Freedom Unking'd him if
they saw cause, by Right of ancient Laws and Ceremonies, yet remaining, and Old
Customs yet among the High-landers, in choosing the Head of their Clans or
Families; all which, with many other Arguments, bore witness, that Regal Power
was nothing else but a mutual Covenant, or Stipulation between King and People.
Buchan. Hist. lib. 20. Nor did our Queen, at the earnest Desires of both Houses
of Parliament, forbear to take off her Head, though a Crowned one, and the
Reasons which were urged by our Learned Bishops, and others, for the Queens
Encouragement in, and speedy Execution of that great act of Justice, being so
very Remarkable, and Convincing, I think it not amiss to transcribe a few of
them (which may be read more at large in Sir. S. D'Ewes Journal) which are as
follow, (viz.)

For that they had a long time, to their intolerable Grief, seen by how
manifold most dangerous and execrable Practices, the said Queen of Scots had
compassed the Destruction of her Majesty's Person, thereby not only to bereave
them of the Sincere and True Religion of Almighty God, bringing them and this
Noble Crown back again into the Thraldom of the Romish Tyranny, but also
utterly to ruinate and overthrow the happy State and Commonweal of this most
Noble Realm; to banish and destroy the Professors and Professing of the True
Religion of Jesus Christ, and the Ancient Nobility of this Land, and to bring
this whole State and Commonweal to Foreign Subjection, and to utter Ruin
and Confusion; which Malicious Purposes would never cease to be prosecuted by
all possible Means, so long as the said Queens Confederates, but Ministers, and
Favorites had their Eyes and Imaginations fixed upon the said Queen, the only
Ground of their Treasonable Hopes and Conceits, and the only Seed-plot of all
Dangerous and Traitorous Devices and Practices against her Majesty's Sacred
Person. And for that, upon advised and great Consultation, they could not find
any possible means to provide for her Majesty's Safety, but by the just and
speedy Execution of the said Queen, the neglecting whereof might procure the
heavy Displeasure and Punishment of Almighty God, as by sundry severe Examples
of his great Justice in that behalf left us in Sacred Scripture, does appear;
and that if the same were not put in Execution, they should thereby (so far as
Man's Reason could reach) be brought into utter Despair of the Continuance
amongst them of the true Religion of Almighty God, and of her Majesty's. Life,
and of the Safety of all her Subjects, and of the Good Estate of this
flourishing Common weal.

For that she (the said Queen of Scots) had continually breathed the overthrow
and Suppression of the Protestant Religion, being poisoned with Popery from her
tender Youth, and at her Age joining in that false termed Holy League, and had
been ever since, and was then a powerful Enemy of the Truth.

For that she rested wholly upon Popish hopes, to be delivered and advanced,
and was so devoted, and doted in that Profession, that she would (as well for
the satisfaction of others, as for the feeding her own humor) supplant the
Gospel where and whenever she might; which Evil was so much the greater, and
the more to be avoided, for that it slays the Soul, and would spread it self
not only over England and Scotland, but also into all Parts beyond the Sea,
where the Gospel of God is maintained, the which cannot but be exceedingly
weakened, if Defection should be in these two most violent Kingdoms.

For that if she prevailed, she would rather take the Subjects of England for
Slaves than for Children.

For that she had already provided them a Foster father and a Nurse, the Pope
and the King of Spain, into whose hands if it should happen them to fall, what
would they else look for, but Ruin, Destruction, and utter Exterpation of
Goods, Lands, Lives, Honors and all?

For that as she had already by her poisoned Baits, brought to Destruction more
Noblemen and their Houses, and a greater multitude of Subjects, during her
being here, than she would have done if she had been in Possession of her own
Country, and armed in the Field against them, so would she be still continually
the cause of the like spoil, to the greater loss and peril of this Estate; and
therefore this Realm neither could nor might endure her.

For that her Sectaries both Wrote and Printed, that the Protestants would be
at their Wits end, Worlds end, if she should outlive Queen Elizabeth; meaning
thereby, that the end of the Protestant World was the beginning of their own;
and therefore if she the said Queen of Scots, were taken away, their World
would be at an end before its beginning.

For that since the sparing of her in the Fourteenth year of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, Popish Traitors and Recusants had multiplied exceedingly: And if she
were now spared again, they would grow both innumerable and invincible also:
And therefore Mercy in that case would prove Cruelty against them all: Nam est
quaedam crudelis misericordia; and therefore to spare her Blood, would be to
spill all theirs.

And for Gods Vengeance against Saul, for sparing the life of Agag, and against
Ahab for sparing the life of Benhadad was most apparent, for they were both by
the just Judgment of God, deprived of their Kingdoms, for sparing those wicked
Princes, whom God had delivered into their hands. And those Magistrates were
much commended; who put to death those mischievous and wicked Queens, Jezabel
and Athaliah.

So much for these Reasons, which I leave to the perusal of our present
Prelates who have extremely degenerated from the good and laudable Principles
of their Forefathers.

I will now return to the History, and after having mentioned one President
more of Protestants Revolution from their Kings, will conclude this Subject.

In the Year 1581. the States of Holland, in a General Assembly at the Hague,
abjured all Obedience and Subjection to Philip King of Spain; and in a
Declaration justify their so doing; for that by his Tyrannous Government
against Faith so often given and broken, he had lost his Right to all the
Belgic Provinces; that therefore they deposed him, and declared it lawful to
choose another in his stead. Thuan. lib. 14. From that time to this no State or
Kingdom in the World has equally prospered.

But what need these Examples to any who have but sense enough to conceive what
monstrous Inconveniences and Miseries the Doctrine of Submission to a
Tyrannical Power brings along with it? Thereby the Property of all Subjects,
and the Laws of all Countries are destroyed together; and we are (contrary to
the Law of Nature, Reason, and Christianity) obliged to fit still while our
Children are Murdered, Wives Ravished, Estates consumed, and our own Throats
cut, besides an unspeakable deal more of Barbarity committed by the Irregular
Partisans of Inhumane Tyrants. In a word, the Lawfulness of raising War
against, and Deposing of a Tyrant in Defense of Religion and Liberty, has not
been denied, but constantly warranted and maintained by all the Protestant
Churches round, from the first Waldenses of Lions and Languedoc, to this day.

Having now, I think, sufficiently cleared what the People by their just Right
may do in change of Government and Governor, besides other ample Authority,
even from the Mouths of Princes themselves, give me leave to add further, That
surely they who shall boast as we do, to be a Free Nation, and yet not have in
themselves the power to remove, or to abolish any Governor, Supreme, or
Subordinate, with the Government it self, upon urgent Causes, may please their
fancy with a ridiculous and painted freedom, fit to cozen Babies, but are
indeed under Tyranny and Servitude, as wanting that power which is the Root and
Source of that Liberty, to dispose and oeconomize in the Land, which God has
given them, as Masters of Families in their Houses, and free Inheritance.

Without which natural and essential Power of a Free Nation, (how high soever
they bear their heads) they can in due esteem, be thought no better than Slaves
and Vassals, Born in the Tenure and Occupation of another Inheriting Lord,
whose Government though not Illegal or Intolerable, hangs over them as a Lordly
Scourge, not as a free Government, and therefore to be Abrogated. How much more
justly may they fling off Tyranny, or Tyrants? who having once forsaken the
Kingdom, and being justly Excluded, can be no more than Private Men, as subject
to the reach of Justice and Arraignment as any other Transgressors, as Grotius
affirms, de jur. and Bell. lib. 1. Chap. 4. Si Rex aut alius quis Imperium
abdicavit, aut manifest habet pro derelicto, in eum post tempus omnia licent
qua in privatum.

And certainly if Men (not to speak of Heathen) both Wise and Religions, have
done Justice upon Tyrants what way they could soonest, how much more mild and
human then is to Dethrone them, and divest them of their Prerogative, nay, to
bring them to Legal and open Trials? to teach Lawless Kings, and all that so
much adore them, that not Mortal Man or his Imperious will, but Justice is the
only true Sovereign and Supreme Majesty upon Earth.

Let Men therefore cease out of Faction and Malice to make Outcries and report
horrid things of things so just and honorable as our most Renowned Convention
has acted hitherto against our common Adversary, and we hope they will go on,
to act upon him such Justice as may be a President to future Ages to imitate,
who if they prove not too degenerate, shall look up with Honor, and aspire
toward those exemplary deeds of their Ancestors, as the highest top of their
Glory and Emulation, which heretofore in the pursuance of Fame and Foreign
Dominion, spent it self Vaingloriously abroad, but shall heceforth learn a
better Fortitude, to dare Execute the highest Justice on them that shall by
force of Arms endeavor the oppressing and bereaving Men of their Religion and
Liberty at home; that no ubridled Potentate or Tyrant, but to his Sorrow, for
the future may presume such high and irresponsible License over Mandkind, to
havoc and turn upside down whole Kingdoms of Men, as though they were no more
in respect of his perverse Will, than a Nation of Pismires.

I conclude all with one word of Advice to that Party called Prelatical, many
of whom I believe to be Honest Men, though they have been strangely misled by
some of corrupt Principles and Prosecuting Turbulent Spirits: I wish them
earnestly and calmly not to affect Rigor and Superiority over Men, nor justly
under them; not to compel unlawful and unmerciful things in Religion,
especially if not voluntary becomes a Sin, nor to assist the clamor and
malicious drifts of Men, who they themselves have judged to be the worst of
Men, the obdurate Enemies of God and his Church, nor to dart against the
Actions of their Brethren, (for want of other Arguments) those Laws and
Scripture, which though they hurt not otherwise, yet taken up by them to the
Condemnation of their own late doings, give Scandal unto all Men, and discover
in themselves either extreme Passion or Apostasy. Let them not oppose their
best Friends and Associates, who molest them not at all, nor Infringe the least
of their Liberties, unless they call it their Liberty to bind other Men's
Consciences, but are still seeking to live at Peace with them and Brotherly
accord.

Let them beware an old and implacable Enemy, though he hopes by sowing
Discord, to make them his Instrument, yet cannot forbear a minute the open
threatened Revenge upon them, when they have served his Purposes.

Let them fear therefore if they be wise, rather what they have done already,
than what remains to do, and be warned in time to put no confidence in Princes
whom they have provoked, lest they be added to the Examples of those that
miserably have tasted the Event.

Stories can inform them how Christiern the Second, King of Denmark, not much
above a hundred years past, driven out by his Subjects, and received again upon
new Oaths and Conditions, broke through them all, to his most Bloody Revenge;
Slaying his chief Opposers when he saw his time, both them and their Children
invited to a Feast for that purpose. How Maximilian dealt with those of Bruges,
though by Mediation of the German Princes reconciled to them by solemn and
public Writing drawn and sealed.

How the Massacre at Paris was the effect of that credulous Peace with the
French Protestants, made with Charles the Ninth their King; and that the main
visible cause which to this day has saved the Netherlands from utter ruin,
was their final not believing the perfidious Cruelty, which as a constant Maxim
of State, has been used by the Spanish Kings on their Subjects that have taken
Arms, and after trusted them; as no latter Age but can testify, heretofore in
Belgia it self, and not many years ago in Naples. And further they may
remember, how the present Tyrant of France, has, after all his many Edicts,
Oaths and Grants, to maintain the Protestants in all their Privileges, besides
the Obligations they have laid on him, most inhumanly and perfidiously
Banished, Dragoon'd, Murdered and made away most, if not all his Protestant
Subjects; nay, what might be more convincing, would they but lay it to Heart,
how our late Tyrant, notwithstanding the manifold Obligations they heaped upon
him, and Oaths he laid himself under, to maintain them and their Grandeur, has
nevertheless violated all, and with all his Power (as if Ingratitude was his
chiefest Delight) endeavored their Extirpation and Ruin, as well as other his
Protestant Subjects.

And to conclude with one past Exception, though far more Ancient, David, after
once he had taken Arms, never after that trusted Saul, though with tears and
much relenting, he twice promised not to hurt him. These Instances, few of
many, might admonish them, both English and Scotch, not to let their own ends,
and the driving on of a Faction, betray them blindly into the snare of those
Enemies whose Revenge looks on them as the Men who first begun, fomented and
carried on beyond the cure of any sound of safe Accommodation, all the evil
which has since unavoidably fallen upon them and their King.

I have something also to the Clergy, though brief to what were needful; not to
be Disturbers of the Civil Affairs, being in hands better able, and more
belonging to manage them, but to Study harder, and to attend the Office of Good
Pastors, knowing that he whose Flock is least among them, has a dreadful
Charge, not performed by mounting frequently in the Desk to repeat their
Prayers; or into the Pulpit with a Formal Preachment hudled up at the old hours
of a whole lazy Week, but by incessant Pains and Watching in Season and out of
Season, from House to House, over the Souls of whom they have to feed. Which if
they ever well considered, how little leisure would they find to be the most
Pragmatical Sides-men of every popular Tumult and Sedition? And all this while
are to learn what the true end and reason is of the Gospel which they teach;
and what a world it differs from the Censorious and Supercilious Lording over
Conscience. It would be good also, they lived so as might persuade the People
they hated Covetousness, which, worse than Heresy, is Idolatry; hated
Pluralities and all kind of Simony; left Rambling from Benefice to Befice, like
ravenous Wolves seeking where they may devour the Biggest; of which, if some
well and warmly seated from the beginning, be not guilty, it were good they
held not Conversation with such as are. These things, if they observe and wait
with Patience, no doubt but all things will go well, without their
Importunities or Exclamations; and the printed Letters and Pamphlets which they
send, subscribed with the Ostentation of great Characters and little Moment,
would be more considerable than now they are. But if they be the Ministers of
Mammon instead of Christ, and Scandalize his Church with the filthy Love of
Gain, aspiring also to sit the closest and heaviest of all Tyrants upon the
Conscience, and fall notoriously again into the same Sins, which they lately
seemed solemnly to have renounced and abjured, as God has rooted out those
great Enemies to Truth and Peace, the Papists, so may they (if they will be the
others Imitators) except that the same God shall, for the Vindication of his
own Glory and Religion, uncover their Hypocrisy to the open World, and visit
upon their Heads, in double and treble manner, those Curses and Miseries
wherewith they have endeavored to ruin and destroy the best of Subjects and
Christians in Great Britain and Ireland.

1 Samuel XII. 24, 25. Only fear the Lord and serve him, in truth, with all your
heart, for consider how great things he has done for you. But if ye shall
still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed both ye and your king.

FINIS.

