A TREATISE OF Civil power IN Ecclesiastical causes

SHOWING That it is not lawful for any power on earth to compel in matters of
Religion.

The author J. M.

London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb Anno 1659.

TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth of ENGLAND with the dominions thereof.
I Have prepared supreme Council, against the much expected time of your
sitting, this treatise; which, though to all Christian magistrates equally
belonging, and therefore to have bin written in the common language of
Christendom, natural duty and affection has confined, and dedicated first to
my own nation: and in a season wherein the timely reading thereof, to the easier
accomplishment of your great work, may save you much labor and interruption: of
two parts usually proposed, civil and ecclesiastical, recommending civil only
to your proper care, ecclesiastical to them only from whom it takes both that
name and nature. Yet not for this cause only do I require or trust to find
acceptance, but in a twofold respect besides: first as bringing clear evidence
of scripture and protestant maxims to the Parliament of England, who in all their
late acts, upon occasion, have professd to assert only the true protestant
Christian religion, as it is containd in the holy scriptures: next, in regard
that your power being but for a time, and having in your selves a Christian
liberty of your own, which at one time or other may be oppressd, thereof truly
sensible, it will concern you while you are in power, so to regard other men's
consciences, as you would your own should be regarded in the power of others;
and to consider that any law against conscience is alike in force against any
conscience, and so may one way or other justly redound upon your selves. One
advantage I make no doubt of, that I shall write to many eminent persons of
your number, already perfet and resolvd in this important article of
Christianity. Some of whom I remember to have heard often for several years,
at a council next in authority to your own, so well joining religion with civil
prudence, and yet so well distinguishing the different power of either, and
this not only voting, but frequently reasoning why it should be so, that if any
there present had bin before of an opinion contrary, he might doubtless have
departed thence a convert in that point, and have confessd, that then both
commonwealth and religion will at length, if ever, flourish in Christendom,
when either they who govern discern between civil and religious, or they only
who so discern shall be admitted to govern. Till then nothing but troubles,
persecutions, commotions can be expected; the inward decay of true religion
among our selves, and the utter overthrow at last by a common enemy. Of civil
liberty I have written heretofore by the appointment, and not without the
approbation of civil power: of Christian liberty I write now; which others long
since having don with all freedom under heathen emperors, I should do wrong to
suspect, that I now shall with less under Christian governors, and such
especially as profess openly their defense of Christian liberty; although I
write this not otherwise appointed or induced then by an inward persuasion of
the Christian duty which I may usefully discharge herin to the common Lord and
Master of us all, and the certain hope of his approbation, first and chiefest
to be sought: In the hand of whose providence I remain, praying all success and
good event on your public councels to the defense of true religion and our
civil rights.

JOHN MILTON.

A Treatise of Civil power in Ecclesiastical causes.
TWo things there be which have bin ever found working much mischief to the
church of God, and the advancement of truth; force on the one side restraining,
and hire on the other side corrupting the teachers thereof. Few ages have bin
since the ascension of our Savior, wherein the one of these two, or both
together have not prevaild. It can be at no time therefore unseasonable to speak
of these things; since by them the church is either in continual detriment and
oppression, or in continual danger. The former shall be at this time my
argument; the latter as I shall find God disposing me, and opportunity
inviting. What I argue, shall be drawn from the scripture only; and therein from
true fundamental principles of the gospel; to all knowing Christians
undeniable. And if the governors of this commonwealth since the rooting out of
prelates have made least use of force in religion, and most have favord
Christian liberty of any in this Island before them since the first preaching of
the gospel, for which we are not to forget our thanks to God, and their due
praise, they may, I doubt not, in this treatise find that which not only will
confirm them to defend still the Christian liberty which we enjoy, but will
incite them also to enlarge it, if in aught they yet straiten it. To them who
perhaps herafter, less experienced in religion, may come to govern or give us
laws, this or other such, if they please, may be a timely instruction: however
to the truth it will be at all times no unneedfull testimony; at least some
discharge of that general duty which no Christian but according to what he
has receivd, knows is required of him if he have aught more conducing to the
advancement of religion then what is usually endeavored, freely to impart it.

It will require no great labor of exposition to unfold what is here meant by
matters of religion; being as soon apprehended as defined, such things as
belong chiefly to the knowledge and service of God: and are either above the
reach and light of nature without revelation from above, and therefore liable to
be variously understood by humane reason, or such things as are enjoind or
forbidden by divine precept, which else by the light of reason would seem
indifferent to be don or not don; and so likewise must needs appeer to every
man as the precept is understood. Whence I here mean by conscience or religion,
that full persuasion whereby we are assured that our belief and practice, as
far as we are able to apprehend and probably make appeer, is according to the
will of God and his Holy Spirit within us, which we ought to follow much rather
then any law of man, as not only his word every where bids us, but the very
dictate of reason tells us. Act. 4.19. whether it be right in the sight of God,
to hearken to you more then to God, judge ye. That for belief or practice in
religion according to this conscientious persuasion no man ought be punishd or
molested by any outward force on earth whatsoever, I distrust not, through Gods
implored assistance, to make plane by these following arguments.

First it cannot be denied, being the main foundation of our protestant
religion, that we of these ages, having no other divine rule or authority from
without us warrantable to one another as a common ground but the holy
scripture, and no other within us but the illumination of the Holy Spirit so
interpreting that scripture as warrantable only to our selves and to such whose
consciences we can so persuade, can have no other ground in matters of religion
but only from the scriptures. And these being not possible to be understood
without this divine illumination, which no man can know at all times to be in
himself, much less to be at any time for certain in any other, it follows
clearly, that no man or body of men in these times can be the infallible judges
or determiners in matters of religion to any other men's consciences but their
own. And therefore those Beroeans are commended, Act. 17.11, who after the
preaching even of S. Paul, searchd the scriptures daily, whether those things
were so. Nor did they more then what God himself in many places commands us by
the same apostle, to search, to try, to judge of these things our selves: And
gives us reason also, Gal. 6.4, 5. let every man prove his own work, and then
shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another: for every man
shall bear his own burden. If then we count it so ignorant and irreligious in
the papist to think himself dischargd in Gods account, believing only as the
church believes, how much greater condemnation will it be to the protestant his
condemner, to think himself justified, believing only as the state believes?
With good cause therefore it is the general consent of all sound protestant
writers, that neither traditions, councels nor canons of any visibie church,
much less edicts of any magistrate or civil session, but the scripture only can
be the final judge or rule in matters of religion, and that only in the
conscience of every Christian to himself. Which protestation made by the first
public reformers of our religion against the imperial edicts of Charles the
fifth, imposing church-traditions without scripture, gave first beginning to
the name of Protestant; and with that name has ever bin receivd this doctrine,
which preferrs the scripture before the church, and acknowledges none but the
Scripture sole interpreter of it self to the conscience. For if the church be
not sufficient to be implicitly beleevd, as we hold it is not, what can there
else be named of more authority then the church but the conscience; then which
God only is greater, 1 Ioh. 3.20? But if any man shall pretend, that the
scripture judges to his conscience for other men, he makes himself greater not
only then the church, but also then the scripture, then the consciences of
other men; a presumption too high for any mortal; since every true Christian
able to give a reason of his faith, has the word of God before him, the
promisd Holy Spirit, and the mind of Christ within him, 1 Cor. 2.16; a much
better and safer guide of conscience, which as far as concerns himself he may
far more certainly know then any outward rule imposed upon him by others whom
he inwardly neither knows nor can know; at least knows nothing of them more
sure then this one thing, that they cannot be his judges in religion. 1 Cor.
2.15. the spiritual man judges all things, but he himself is judgd of no man.
Chiefly for this cause do all true protestants account the pope antichrist, for
that he assumes to himself this infallibility over both the conscience and the
scripture; siting in the temple of God, as it were opposite to God, and
exalting himself above all that is called god, or is worshipd, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
That is to say not only above all judges and magistrates, who though they be
called gods, are far beneath infallible, but also above God himself, by giving
law both to the scripture, to the conscience, and to the spirit it self of God
within us. When as we find, James 4.12, there is one lawgiver, who is able to
save and to destroy: who art thou that judge another? That Christ is the only
lawgiver of his church and that it is here meant in religious matters, no well
grounded Christian will deny. Thus also S. Paul, Romans 14.4. who art thou that
judge the servant of another? to his own Lord he stands or falls: but he
shall stand; for God is able to make him stand. As therefore of one beyond
expression bold and presumptuous, both these apostles demand, who art thou that
presum'st to impose other law or judgment in religion then the only lawgiver
and judge Christ, who only can save and can destroy, gives to the conscience?
And the forecited place to the Thessalonians by compared effects resolvs us,
that be he or they who or wherever they be or can be, they are of far less
authority then the church, whom in these things as protestants they receive
not, and yet no less antichrist in this main point of antichristianism, no less
a pope or popedom then he at Rome, if not much more; by setting up supreme
interpreters of scripture either those doctors whom they follow, or, which is
far worse, themselves as a civil papacy assuming unaccountable supremacy to
themselves not in civil only but ecclesiastical causes. Seeing then that in
matters of religion, as has been proved, none can judge or determine here on
earth, no not church-governors themselves against the consciences of other
believers, my inference is, or rather not mine but our Saviors own, that in
those matters they neither can command nor use constraint; lest they run rashly
on a pernicious consequence, forewarnd in that parable Mat. 13. from the 26 to
the 31 verse: least while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat
with them. Let both grow together until the harvest: and in the time of harvest
I will say to the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares etc. whereby he
declares that this work neither his own ministers nor any else can discerningly
anough or judgingly perform without his own immediate direction, in his own fit
season; and that they ought till then not to attempt it. Which is further
confirmd 2 Cor. 1.24. not that we have dominion over your faith, but are
helpers of your joy. If apostles had no dominion or constraining power over
faith or conscience, much less have ordinary ministers. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. feed the
flock of God not by constraint etc. neither as being lords over Gods heritage.
But some will object, that this overthrows all church discipline, all censure
of errors, if no man can determine. My answer is, that what they hear is plane
scripture; which forbids not church-sentence or determining, but as it ends in
violence upon the conscience unconvinc'd. Let who so will interpret or
determine, so it be according to true church discipline; which is exercised on
them only who have willingly joind themselves in that covenant of union, and
proceeds only to a separation from the rest, proceeds never to any corporal
inforcement or forfeture of money; which in spiritual things are the two arms
of Antichrist, not of the true church; the one being an inquisition, the other
no better then a temporal indulgence of sin for money, whether by the church
exacted or by the magistrate; both the one and the other a temporal
satisfaction for what Christ has satisfied eternally; a popish commuting of
penalty, corporal for spiritual; a satisfaction to man especially to the
magistrate, for what and to whom we owe none: these and more are the injustices
of force and fining in religion, besides what I most insist on, the violation
of Gods express commandment in the gospel, as has bin shown. Thus then if
church-governors cannot use force in religion, though but for this reason,
because they cannot infallibly determine to the conscience without convincement,
much less have civil magistrates authority to use force where they can much
less judge; unless they mean only to be the civil executioners of them who have
no civil power to give them such commission, no nor yet ecclesiastical to any
force or violence in religion. To sum up all in brief, if we must believe as
the magistrate appoints, why not rather as the church? if not as either without
convincement, how can force be lawful? But some are ready to cry out, what
shall then be don to blasphemy? Them I would first exhort not thus to terrify
and pose the people with a Greek word: but to teach them better what it is;
being a most usual and common word in that language to signify any slander,
any malicious or evil speaking, whether against God or man or any thing to good
belonging: blasphemy or evil speaking against God maliciously, is far from
conscience in religion; according to that of Marc 9.39. there is none who does
a powerful work in my name, and can likely speak evil of me. If this suffice
not, I refer them to that prudent and well deliberated act August 9. 1650;
where the Parliament defines blasphemy against God, as far as it is a crime
belonging to civil judicature, before ac melius Chrysippo and Crantore; in
plane English more warily, more judiciously, more orthodoxally then twice their
number of divines have don in many a prolix volume: although in all likelihood
they whose whole study and profession these things are should be most
intelligent and authentic therein, as they are for the most part, yet neither
they nor these unnerring always or infallible. But we shall not carry it thus;
another Greek apparition stands in our way, heresy and heretic; in like manner
also railed at to the people as in a tongue unknown. They should first
interpret to them, that heresy, by what it signifies in that language, is no
word of evil note; meaning only the choice or following of any opinion good or
bad in religion or any other learning: and thus not only in heathen authors,
but in the New testament it self without censure or blame. Acts 15.5. certain
of the heresy of the Pharisees which beleevd. and 26.5. after the exactest
heresy of our religion I livd a Pharise. In which sense Presbyterian or
Independent may without reproach be called a heresy. Where it is mentiond with
blame, it seems to differ little from schism 1 Cor. 11.18, 19. I hear that
there be schisms among you etc. for there must also heresies be among you etc;
though some who write of heresy after their own heads, would make it far worse
then schism; when as on the contrary, schism signifies division, and in the
worst sense; heresy, choice only of one opinion before another, which may be
without discord. In apostolic times therefore ere the scripture was written,
heresy was a doctrine maintaind against the doctrine by them deliverd: which in
these times can be no otherwise defined then a doctrine maintaind against the
light, which we now only have, of the scripture. Seeing therefore that no man,
no synod, no session of men, though called the church, can judge definitively
the sense of scripture to another man's conscience, which is well known to be a
general maxim of the Protestant religion, it follows planely, that he who holds
in religion that belief or those opinions which to his conscience and utmost
understanding appeer with most evidence or probability in the scripture,
though to others he seem erroneous, can no more be justly censured for a
heretic then his censurers; who do but the same thing themselves while they
censure him for so doing. For ask them, or any Protestant, which has most
authority, the church or the scripture? they will answer, doubtless, that the
scripture: and what has most authority, that no doubt but they will confess is
to be followd. He then who to his best apprehension follows the scripture,
though against any point of doctrine by the whole church receivd, is not the
heretic; but he who follows the church against his conscience and persuasion
grounded on the scripture. To make this yet more undeniable, I shall only
borrow a plane similie, the same which our own writers, when they would
demonstrate planest that we rightly prefer the scripture before the church,
use frequently against the Papist in this manner. As the Samaritans beleevd
Christ, first for the woman's word, but next and much rather for his own, so we
the scripture; first on the churches word, but afterward and much more for its
own, as the word of God; yea the church it self we believe then for the
scripture. The inference of it self follows: if by the Protestant doctrine we
believe the scripture not for the churches saying, but for its own as the word
of God, then ought we to believe what in our conscience we apprehend the
scripture to say, though the visible church with all her doctors gainsay; and
being taught to believe them only for the scripture, they who so do are not
heretics, but the best protestants: and by their opinions, whatever they be,
can hurt no protestant, whose rule is not to receive them but from the
scripture: which to interpret convincingly to his own conscience none is able
but himself guided by the Holy Spirit; and not so guided, none then he to
himself can be a worse deceiver. To protestants therefore whose common rule and
touchstone is the scripture, nothing can with more conscience, more equity,
nothing more protestantly can be permitted then a free and lawful debate at all
times by writing, conference or disputation of what opinion soever, disputable
by scripture: concluding, that no man in religion is properly a heretic at this
day, but he who maintains traditions or opinions not probable by scripture;
who, for aught I know, is the papist only; he the only heretic, who counts all
heretics but himself. Such as these, indeed, were capitally punishd by the law
of Moses, as the only true heretics, idolaters, plane and open deserters of God
and his known law: but in the gospel such are punishd by excommunion only. Tit.
3.10. an heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject. But they who
think not this heavy anough and understand not that dreadful aw and spiritual
efficacy which the apostle has expressd so highly to be in church discipline,
2 Cor. 10. of which anon, and think weakly that the church of God cannot long
subsist but in a bodily fear, for want of other prooff will needs wrest that
place of S. Paul Romans 13. to set up civil inquisition, and give power to the
magistrate both of civil judgment and punishment in causes ecclesiastical. But
let us see with what strength of argument. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers. First, how prove they that the apostle means other powers then
such as they to whom he writes were then under; who medld not at all in
ecclesiastical causes, unless as tyrants and persecuters; and from them, I
hope, they will not derive either the right of magistrates to judge in
spiritual things, or the duty of such our obedience. How prove they next, that
he intitles them here to spiritual causes, from whom he witheld, as much as in
him lay, the judging of civil; 1 Cor. 6.1, etc. If he himself appeald to Caesar,
it was to judge his innocence, not his religion. For rulers are not a terror to
good works, but to the evil. then are they not a terror to conscience, which is
the rule or judge of good works grounded on the scripture. But heresy, they
say, is reck'nd among evil works Gal. 5.20: as if all evil works were to be
punishd by the magistrate; whereof this place, their own citation, reck'ns up
besides heresy a sufficient number to confute them; uncleanness, wantonness,
enmity, strife, emulations, animosities, contentions, envyings; all which are
far more manifest to be judgd by him then heresy, as they define it; and yet I
suppose they will not subject these evil works nor many more such like to his
cognizance and punishment. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that
which is good and thou shall have praise of the same. This shows that religious
matters are not here meant; wherein from the power here spoken of they could
have no praise. For he is the minister of God to thee for good. true; but in
that office and to that end and by those means which in this place must be
clearly found, if from this place they intend to argue. And how for thy good by
forcing, oppressing and insnaring thy conscience? Many are the ministers of
God, and their offices no less different then many; none more different then
state and church government. Who seeks to govern both must needs be worse then
any lord prelat or church-pluralist: for he in his own faculty and profession,
the other not in his own and for the most part not thoroughly understood makes
himself supreme lord or pope of the church as far as his civil jurisdiction
stretches, and all the ministers of God therein, his ministers, or his curates
rather in the function only, not in the government: while he himself assumes
to rule by civil power things to be ruled only by spiritual: when as this very
chapter v. 6 appointing him his peculiar office, which requires utmost
attendance, forbids him this worse then church-plurality from that full and
weighty charge, wherein alone he is the minister of God, attending continually
on this very thing. To little purpose will they here instance Moses, who did
all by immediate divine direction, no nor yet Asa, Iehosaphat, or Iosia, who
both might when they pleased receive answer from God, and had a commonwealth by
him deliverd them, incorporated with a national church exercised more in bodily
then in spiritual worship, so as that the church might be called a commonwealth
and the whole commonwealth a church: nothing of which can be said of
Christianity, deliverd without the help of magistrates, yea in the midst of
their opposition; how little then with any reference to them or mention of them,
save only of our obedience to their civil laws, as they countnance good and
deterr evil: which is the proper work of the magistrate, following in the same
verse, and shows distinctly wherein he is the minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath on him that does evil. But we must first know who it is that does
evil: the heretic they say among the first. Let it be known then certainly who
is a heretic: and that he who holds opinions in religion professdly from
tradition or his own inventions and not from Scipture but rather against it, is
the only heretic; and yet though such, not always punishable by the
magistrate, unless he do evil against a a civil Law, properly so called, has
been already proved without need of repetition. But if thou do that which is
evil, be afraid. To do by scripture and the gospel according to conscience is
not to do evil; if we thereof ought not to be afraid, he ought not by his
judging to give cause. causes therefore of Religion are not here meant. For he
bears not the sword in vain. Yes altogether in vain, if it smite he knows not
what; if that for heresy which not the church it self, much less he, can
determine absolutely to be so; if truth for error, being himself so often
fallible, he bears the sword not in vain only, but unjustly and to evil. Be
subject not only for wrath, but for conscience sake: how for conscience sake
against conscience? By all these reasons it appeers planely that the apostle in
this place gives no judgment or coercive power to magistrates, neither to those
then nor these now in matters of religion; and exhorts us no otherwise then he
exhorted those Romans. It has now twice befaln me to assert, through Gods
assistance, this most wrested and vexd place of scripture; heretofore against
Salmasius and regal tyranie over the state; now against Erastus and
state-tyranie over the church. If from such uncertain or rather such improbable
grounds as these they endue magistracy with spiritual judgment, they may as
well invest him in the same spiritual kind with power of utmost punishment,
excommunication; and then turn spiritual into corporal, as no worse authors did
then Chrysostom, Ierom and Austin, whom Erasmus and others in their notes on the
New Testament have cited to interpret that cutting off which S. Paul wishd to
them who had brought back the Galatians to circumcision, no less then the
amercement of their whole virilitie; and Grotius adds that this concising
punishment of circumcisers became a penal law thereupon among the Visigothes: a
dangerous example of beginning in the spirit to end so in the flesh: whereas
that cutting off much likelier seems meant a cutting off from the church, not
unusually so termd in scripture, and a zealous imprecation, not a command. But
I have mentiond this passage to show how absurd they often prove who have not
learnd to distinguish rightly between civil power and ecclesiastical. How many
persecutions then, imprisonments, banishments, penalties and stripes; how much
bloodshed have the forcers of conscience to answer for, and protestants rather
then papists! For the papist, judging by his principles, punishes them who
believe not as the church believes though against the scripture: but the
protestant, teaching every one to believe the scripture though against the
church, counts heretical and persecutes, against his own principles, them who
in any particular so believe as he in general teaches them; them who most honor
and believe divine scripture, but not against it any humane interpretation
though universal; them who interpret scripture only to themselves, which by his
own position none but they to themselves can interpret; them who use the
scripture no otherwise by his own doctrine to their edification, then he himself
uses it to their punishing: and so whom his doctrine acknowledges a true
believer, his discipline persecutes as a heretic. The papist exacts our belief
as to the church due above scripture; and by the church, which is the whole
people of God, understands the pope, the general councels prelatical only and
the surnamed fathers: but the forcing protestant though he deny such belief to
any church whatsoever, yet takes it to himself and his teachers, of far less
authority then to be called the church and above scripture beleevd: which
renders his practice both contrary to his belief, and far worse then that
belief which he condemns in the papist. By all which well considerd, the more
he professes to be a true protestant, the more he has to answer for his
persecuting then a papist. No protestant therefore of what sect soever following
scripture only, which is the common sect wherein they all agree, and the granted
rule of every man's conscience to himself, ought, by the common doctrine of
protestants, to be forced or molested for religion. But as for popery and
idolatry, why they also may not hence plead to be tolerated, I have much less
to say. Their religion the more considerd, the less can be acknowledgd a
religion; but a Roman principality rather, endeavoring to keep up her old
universal dominion under a new name and mere shadow of a catholic religion;
being indeed more rightly named a catholic heresy against the scripture;
supported mainly by a civil, and, except in Rome, by a foreign power: justly
therefore to be suspected, not tolerated by the magistrate of another country.
Besides, of an implicit faith, which they profess, the conscience also becoms
implicit; and so by voluntary servitude to man's law, forfets her Christian
liberty. Who then can plead for such a conscience, as being implicitly
enthrald to man instead of God, almost becoms no conscience, as the will not
free, becoms no will. Nevertheless if they ought not to be tolerated, it is for
just reason of state more then of religion; which they who force, though
professing to be protestants, deserve as little to be tolerated themselves,
being no less guilty of popery in the most popish point. Lastly, for
idolatry, who knows it not to be evidently against all scripture both of the
Old and New Testament, and therefore a true heresy, or rather an impiety;
wherein a right conscience can have naught to do; and the works thereof so
manifest, that a magistrate can hardly err in prohibiting and quite removing at
least the public and scandalous use thereof.

From the riddance of these objections I proceed yet to another reason why it
is unlawful for the civil magistrate to use force in matters of religion;
which is, because to judge in those things, though we should grant him able,
which is proved he is not, yet as a civil magistrate he has no right. Christ
has a government of his own, sufficient of it self to all his ends and
purposes in governing his church; but much different from that of the civil
magistrate; and the difference in this very thing principally consists, that
it governs not by outward force, and that for two reasons. First because it
deals only with the inward man and his actions, which are all spiritual and to
outward force not liable: secondly to show us the divine excellence of his
spiritual kingdom, able without worldly force to subdue all the powers and
kingdoms of this world, which are upheld by outward force only. That the inward
man is nothing else but the inward part of man, his understanding and his will,
and that his actions thence proceeding, yet not simply thence but from the work
of divine grace upon them, are the whole matter of religion under the gospel,
will appeer planely by considering what that religion is; whence we shall
perceive yet more planely that it cannot be forced. What euangelic religion is,
is told in two words, faith and charity; or belief and practice. That both
these flow either the one from the understanding, the other from the will, or
both jointly from both, once indeed naturally free, but now only as they are
regenerat and wrought on by divine grace, is. in part evident to common sense
and principles unquestiond, the rest by scripture: concerning our belief, Mat.
16.17. flesh and blood has not reveald it unto thee, but my father which is in
heaven: concerning our practice, as it is religious and not merely civil, Gal.
5.22, 23 and other places declare it to be the fruit of the spirit only. Nay
our whole practical duty in religion is containd in charity, or the love of
God and our neighbor, no way to be forced, yet the fulfilling of the whole
law; that is to say, our whole practice in religion. If then both our belief
and practice, which comprehend our whole religion, flow from the faculties of
the inward man, free and unconstrainable of themselves by nature, and our
practice not only from faculties endu'd with freedom, but from love and
charity besides, incapable of force, and all these things by transgression
lost, but renewd and regenerated in us by the power and gift of God alone, how
can such religion as this admit of force from man, or force be any way applied
to such religion, especially under the free offer of grace in the gospel, but
it must forthwith frustrate and make of no effect both the religion and the
gospel? And that to compel outward profession, which they will say perhaps
ought to be compelld though inward religion cannot, is to compel hypocrisy
not to advance religion, shall yet, though of it self clear anough, be ere the
conclusion further manifest. The other reason why Christ rejects outward force
in the government of his church, is, as I said before, to show us the divine
excellence of his spiritual kingdom, able without worldly force to subdue all
the powers and kingdoms of this world, which are upheld by outward force only:
by which to uphold religion otherwise then to defend the religious from outward
violence, is no service to Christ or his kingdom, but rather a disparagement,
and degrades it from a divine and spiritual kingdom to a kingdom of this world:
which he denies it to be, because it needs not force to confirm it: Ioh. 18.36.
if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should
not be deliverd to the Jews. This proves the kingdom of Christ not governd by
outward force; as being none of this world, whose kingdoms are maintaind all by
force only: and yet disproves not that a Christian commonwealth may defend it
self against outward force in the cause of religion as well as in any other;
though Christ himself, coming purposely to dye for us, would not be so
defended. 1 Cor. 1.27. God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound
the things which are mighty. Then surely he has not chosen the force of this
world to subdue conscience and conscientious men, who in this world are counted
weakest; but rather conscience, as being weakest, to subdue and regulate force,
his adversary, not his aid or instrument in governing the church. 2 Cor.
10.3, 4, 5, 6. for though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the
flesh: for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal; but mighty through God
to the pulling down of strong holds; casting down imaginations and every high
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God; and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ: and having in a readiness
to aveng all disobedience. It is evident by the first and second verses of this
chapter, that the apostle here speaks of that spiritual power by which Christ
governs his church, how all sufficient it is, how powerful to reach the
conscience and the inward man with whom it chiefly deals and whom no power else
can deal with. In comparison of which as it is here thus magnificently
described, how uneffectual and weak is outward force with all her boistrous
tools, to the shame of those Christians and especially those churchmen, who to
the exercising of church discipline never cease calling on the civil magistrate
to interpose his fleshly force; an argument that all true ministerial and
spiritual power is dead within them: who think the gospel, which both began and
spread over the whole world for above three hundred years under heathen and
persecuting emperors, cannot stand or continue, supported by the same divine
presence and protection to the worlds end, much easier under the defensive
favor only of a Christian magistrate, unless it be enacted and settled, as
they call it, by the state, a statute or a state-religion: and understand not
that the church it self cannot, much less the state, settle or impose one
tittle of religion upon our obedience implicit, but can only recommend or
propound it to our free and conscientious examination: unless they mean to set
the state higher then the church in religion, and with a gross contradiction
give to the state in their settling petition that command of our implicit
belief, which they deny in their settled confession both to the state and to the
church. Let them cease then to importune and interrupt the magistrate from
attending to his own charge in civil and moral things, the settling of things
just, things honest, the defense of things religious settled by the churches
within themselves; and the repressing of their contraries determinable by the
common light of nature; which is not to constrain or to repress religion,
probable by scripture, but the violaters and persecuters thereof: of all which
things he has anough and more then anough to do, left yet undon; for which the
land groans and justice goes to wrack the while: let him also forbear force
where he has no right to judge; for the conscience is not his province: least
a worse woe arrive him, for worse offending, then was denounced by our Savior
Matt. 23.23. against the Pharisees: ye have forced the conscience, which was not
to be forced; but judgment and mercy ye have not executed: this ye should have
don, and the other let alone. And since it is the council and set purpose of
God in the gospel by spiritual means which are counted weak, to overcom all
power which resists him; let them not go about to do that by worldly strength
which he has decreed to do by those means which the world counts weakness,
least they be again obnoxious to that saying which in another place is also
written of the Pharisees, Luke 7.30. that they frustrated the council of God.
The main plea is, and urgd with much vehemence to their imitation, that the
kings of Judah, as I touchd before, and especially Iosia both judgd and used
force in religion. 2 Chr. 34.33. he made all that were present in Israel to
serve the Lord their God: an argument, if it be well weighed, worse then that
used by the false prophet Shemaia to the high priest, that in imitation of
Iehojada he ought to put Jeremy in the stocks, Ier. 29.24, 26, etc. for which
he receivd his due denouncement from God. But to this besides I return a
threefold answer: first, that the state of religion under the gospel is far
differing from what it was under the law: then was the state of rigor,
childhood, bondage and works, to all which force was not unbefitting; now is
the state of grace, manhood, freedom and faith; to all which belongs
willingness and reason, not force: the law was then written on tables of stone,
and to be performd according to the letter, willingly or unwillingly; (the
gospel, our new covenant, upon the heart of every believer, to be interpreted
only by the sense of charity and inward persuasion: the law had no distinct
government or governors of church and commonwealth, but the Priests and Levites
judged in all causes not ecclesiastical only but civil, Deuteronomy. 17.8, etc. which
under the gospel is forbidden to all church-ministers, as a thing which Christ
their master in his ministry disclam'd Luke 12.14; as a thing beneathe them 1
Cor. 6.4; and by many of our statutes, as to them who have a peculiar and far
differing government of their own. If not, why different the governors? why not
church-ministers in state affairs, as well as state-ministers in
church affairs? If church and state shall be made one flesh again as under the
law, let it be withal considerd, that God who then joind them has now severd
them; that which, he so ordaining, was then a lawful conjunction, to such on
either side as join again what he has severd, would be nothing now but their
own presumptuous fornication. Secondly, the kings of Judah and those magistrates
under the law might have recours, as I said before, to divine inspiration;
which our magistrates under the gospel have not, more then to the same spirit,
which those whom they force have often times in greater measure then themselves:
and so, instead of forcing the Christian, they force the Holy Ghost; and,
against that wise forewarning of Gamaliel, fight against God. Thirdly, those
kings and magistrates used force in such things only as were undoubtedly known
and forbidden in the law of Moses, idolatry and direct apostacy from that
national and strict enjoind worship of God; whereof the corporal punishment was
by himself expressly set down: but magistrates under the gospel, our free,
elective and rational worship, are most commonly busiest to force those things
which in the gospel are either left free, nay sometimes abolishd when by them
compelld, or else controverted equally by writers on both sides, and sometimes
with odds on that side which is against them. By which means they either punish
that which they ought to favor and protect, or that with corporal punishment
and of their own inventing, which not they but the church has receivd command
to chastise with a spiritual rod only. Yet some are so eager in their zeal of
forcing, that they refuse not to descend at length to the utmost shift of that
parabolical prooff Luke 14.16, etc. compel them to come in. therefore
magistrates may compel in religion. As if a parable were to be straind through
every word or phrase, and not expounded by the general scope thereof: which is
no other here then the earnest expression of Gods displeasure on those recusant
Jews, and his purpose to prefer the gentiles on any terms before them;
expressd here by the word compel. But how compells he? doubtless no otherwise
then he draws, without which no man can come to him, Ioh. 6.44: and that is by
the inward persuasive motions of his spirit and by his ministers; not by the
outward compulsions of a magistrate or his officers. The true people of Christ,
as is foretold Psalm. 110.3, are a willing people in the day of his power. then
much more now when he rules all things by outward weakness, that both his
inward power and their sincerity may the more appeer. God loves a cheerful
giver: then certainly is not pleased with an unchearfull worshiper; as the very
words declare of his euangelical invitations. Esa. 55.1. ho, every one that
thirsts, come. Ioh. 7.37. if any man thirst. Rev. 3.18. I counsel thee. and
22.17. whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. And in that grand
commission of preaching to invite all nations Marc 16.16, as the reward of them
who come, so the penalty of them who come not is only spiritual. But they
bring now some reason with their force, which must not pass unanswerd; that the
church of Thyatira was blamed Rev. 2.20 for suffering the false prophetess to
teach and to seduce. I answer, that seducement is to be hinderd by fit and
proper means ordaind in church discipline; by instant and powerful
demonstration to the contrary; by opposing truth to error, no unequal match;
truth the strong to error the weak though sly and shifting. Force is no honest
confutation; but uneffectual, and for the most part unsuccessfull, often times
fatal to them who use it: sound doctrine diligently and duly taught, is of
herself both sufficient, and of herself (if some secret judgment of God hinder
not) always prevalent against seducers. This the Thyatirians had neglected,
suffering, against Church Discipline, that woman to teach and seduce among
them: civil force they had not then in their power; being the Christian part
only of that city, and then especially under one of those ten great
persecutions, whereof this the second was raisd by Domitian: force therefore in
these matters could not be required of them, who were then under force
themselves.

I have shown that the civil power has neither right nor can do right by
forcing religious things: I will now show the wrong it does; by violating the
fundamental privilege of the gospel, the new-birthright of every true
believer, Christian liberty. 2 Cor. 3.17. where the spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty. Gal. 4.26. Jerusalem which is above, is free; which is the
mother of us all. and 31. we are not children of the bondwoman but of the free.
It will be sufficient in this place to say no more of Christian liberty, then
that it sets us free not only from the bondage of those ceremonies, but also
from the forcible imposition of those circumstances, place and time in the
worship of God: which though by him commanded in the old law, yet in respect of
that verity and freedom which is euangelical, S. Paul comprehends both kinds
alike, that is to say, both ceremony and circumstance, under one and the same
contemtuous name of weak and beggarly rudiments, Gal. 4.3.9, 10. Col. 2.8. with
16: conformable to what our Savior himself taught John 4.21, 23. neither in
this mountain nor yet at Jerusalem. In spirit and in truth: for the father
seeks such to worship him. that is to say, not only sincere of heart, for
such he sought ever, but also, as the words here chiefly import, not compelld
to place, and by the same reason, not to any set time; as his apostle by the
same spirit has taught us Romans 14.6, etc. one man esteems one day above
another, another etc. Gal. 4.10. Ye observe days, and moonths etc. Coloss.
2.16. These and other such places of scripture the best and learnedest reformed
writers have thought evident anough to instruct us in our freedom not only from
ceremonies but from those circumstances also, though imposed with a confident
persuasion of morality in them, which they hold impossible to be in place or
time. By what warrant then our opinions and practices herin are of late turned
quite against all other Protestants, and that which is to them orthodoxal, to
us become scandalous and punishable by statute, I wish were once again better
considerd; if we mean not to proclaim a schism in this point from the best and
most reformed churches abroad. They who would seem more knowing, confess that
these things are indifferent, but for that very cause by the magistrate may be
commanded. As if God of his special grace in the gospel had to this end freed
us from his own commandments in these things, that our freedom should subject
us to a more greevous yoke, the commandments of men. As well may the magistrate
call that common or unclean which God has cleansd, forbidden to S. Peter Acts
10.15; as well may he loos'n that which God has strait'nd, or strait'n that
which God has loos'nd, as he may injoin those things in religion which God
has left free, and lay on that yoke which God has taken off. For he has not
only given us this gift as a special privilege and excellence of the free
gospel above the servile law, but strictly, also has commanded us to keep it
and enjoy it. Gal. 5.13. you are called to liberty. 1 Cor. 7.23. be not made
the servants of men. Gal. 5.14. stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free; and be not intangl'd again with the yoke of bondage.
Neither is this a mere command, but for the most part in these forecited places
accompanied with the very waightiest and inmost reasons of Christian religion:
Romans 14.9, 10. for to this end Christ both died and rose and revived, that he
might be Lord both of the dead and living. But why do thou judge thy brother?
etc. how presum'st thou to be his lord, to be whose only Lord, at least in
these things, Christ both died and rose and livd again? We shall all stand
before the judgment seat of Christ. why then do thou not only judge, but
persecute in these things for which we are to be accountable to the tribunal of
Christ only, our Lord and lawgiver? 1 Cor. 7.23. ye are bought with a price; be
not made the servants of men. some trivial price belike, and for some frivolous
pretenses paid in their opinion, if bought and by him redeemd who is God from
what was once the service of God, we shall be enthrald again and forced by men
to what now is but the service of men. Gal. 4.31, with 5.1. we are not children
of the bondwoman etc. stand fast therefore etc. Col. 2.8. beware least any man
spoil you, etc. after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. Solid
reasons whereof are continued through the whole chapter. v. 10. ye are complete
in him, which is the head of all principality and power. not completed
therefore or made the more religious by those ordinances of civil power, from
which Christ thi^ head has dischargd us; blotting out the handwriting of
ordinances, that was against us, which was contrary to us; and took it out of
the way, nailing it to his cross, v. 14: blotting out ordinances written by God
himself, much more those so boldly written over again by men. ordinances which
were against us, that is, against our frailty, much more those which are
against our conscience. Let no man therefore judge you in respect of etc. v. 16.
Gal. 4.3, etc. even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the
rudiments of the world: but when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth
his son etc. to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons etc. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son etc. But
now etc. how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly rudiments, whereunto ye
desire again to be in bondage? ye observe days etc. Hence it planely appeers,
that if we be not free we are not sons, but still servants unadopted; and if we
turn again to those weak and beggarly rudiments, we are not free; yea though
willingly and with a misguided conscience we desire to be in bondage to them;
how much more then if unwillingly and against our conscience? Ill was our
condition changed from legal to euangelical, and small advantage gotten by the
gospel, if for the spirit of adoption to freedom, promisd us, we receive again
the spirit of bondage to fear; if our fear which was then servile toward God
only, must be now servile in religion toward men: strange also and
preposterous fear, if when and wherein it has attaind by the redemption of our
Savior to be filial only toward God, it must be now servile toward the
magistrate. Who by subjecting us to his punishment in these things, brings back
into religion that law of terror and satisfaction, belonging now only to civil
crimes; and thereby in effect abolishes the gospel by establishing again the
law to a far worse yoke of servitude upon us then before. It will therefore not
misbecome the meanest Christian to put in mind Christian magistrates, and so
much the more freely by how much the more they desire to be thought Christian
(for they will be thereby, as they ought to be in these things, the more our
brethren and the less our lords) that they meddle not rashly with Christian
liberty, the birthright and outward testimony of our adoption: least while
they little think it, nay think they do God service, they themselves like the
sons of that bondwoman be found persecuting them who are freeborne of the
spirit; and by a sacrilege of not the least aggravation bereaving them of that
sacred liberty which our Savior with his own blood purchased for them.

A fourth reason why the magistrate ought not to use force in religion, I bring
from the consideration of all those ends which he can likely pretend to the
interposing of his force therein: and those hardly can be other then first the
glory of God; next either the spiritual good of them whom he forces, or the
temporal punishment of their scandal to others. As for the promoting of Gods
glory, none, I think, will say that his glory ought to be promoted in
religious things by unwarrantable means, much less by means contrary to what
he has commanded. That outward force is such, and that Gods glory in the whole
administration of the gospel according to his own will and council ought to be
fulfilld by weakness, at least so refuted, not by force; or if by force, inward
and spiritual, not outward and corporeal, is already proved at large. That
outward force cannot tend to the good of him who is forced in religion, is
unquestionable. For in religion whatever we do under the gospel, we ought to be
thereof persuaded without scruple; and are justified by the faith we have, not
by the work we do. Romans 14.5. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind.
The other reason which follows necessarily, is obvious Gal. 2.16, and in many
other places of St. Paul, as the groundwork and foundation of the whole gospel,
that we are justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law.
if not by the works of Gods law, how then by the injunctions of man's law?
Surely force cannot work persuasion, which is faith; cannot therefore justify
nor pacify the conscience; and that which justifies not in the gospel,
condemns; is not only not good, but sinful to do. Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is
not of faith, is sin. It concerns the magistrate then to take heed how he
forces in religion conscientious men (...) least by compelling them to do that
whereof they cannot be persuaded, that wherein they cannot find themselves
justified, but by their own consciences condemnd, instead of aiming at their
spiritual good, he force them to do evil; and while he thinks himself Asa,
Iosia, Nehemia, he be found Jeroboam, who causd Israel to sin; and thereby draw
upon his own head all those sins and shipwracks of implicit faith and
conformity, which he has forced, and all the wounds given to those little
ones, whom to offend he will find worse one day then that violent drowning
mentioned Matt. 18.6. Lastly as a preface to force, it is the usual pretense,
That although tender consciences shall be tolerated, yet scandals thereby given
shall not be unpunishd, profane and licentious men shall not be encouraged to
neglect the performance of religious and holy duties by color of any law giving
liberty to tender consciences. By which contrivance the way lies ready open to
them hereafter who may be so minded, to take away by little and little, that
liberty which Christ and his gospel, not any magistrate, has right to give:
though this kind of his giving be but to give with one hand and take away with
the other, which is a deluding not a giving. As for scandals, if any man be
offended at the conscientious liberty of another, it is a taken scandal not a
given. To heal one conscience we must not wound another: and men must be
exhorted to beware of scandals in Christian liberty, not forced by the
magistrate; least while he goes about to take away the scandal, which is
uncertain whether given or taken, he take away our liberty, which is the
certain and the sacred gift of God, neither to be touchd by him, nor to be
parted with by us. None more cautious of giving scandal then St. Paul. Yet
while he made himself servant to all, that he might gain the more, he made
himself so of his own accord, was not made so by outward force, testifying at
the same time that he was free from all men, 1 Cor. 9.19: and thereafter exhorts
us also Gal. 5.13. ye were called to liberty etc. but by love serve one
another: then not by force. As for that fear least profane and licentious men
should be encouraged to omit the performance of religious and holy duties, how
can that care belong to the civil magistrate, especially to his force? For if
profane and licentious persons must not neglect the performance of religious
and holy duties, it implies, that such duties they can perform; which no
Protestant will affirm. They who mean the outward performance, may so explane
it; and it will then appeer yet more planely, that such performance of
religious and holy duties especialy by profane and licentious persons, is a
dishonoring rather then a worshipping of God; and not only by him not required
but detested: Prove. 21.27. the sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination: how
much more when he brings it with a wicked mind? To compel therefore the
profane to things holy in his profaneness, is all one under the gospel, as to
have compelld the unclean to sacrifise in his uncleanness under the law. And I
add withal, that to compel the licentious in his licentiousness, and the
conscientious against his conscience, coms all to one; tends not to the honor
of God, but to the multiplying and the aggravating of sin to them both. We read
not that Christ ever exercised force but once; and that was to drive profane
ones out of his temple, not to force them in: and if their being there was an
offense, we find by many other scriptures that their praying there was an
abomination: and yet to the Jewish law that nation, as a servant, was obliged;
but to the gospel each person is left voluntary, called only, as a son, by the
preaching of the word; not to be driven in by edicts and force of arms. For if
by the apostle, Romans 12.1, we are beseechd as brethren by the mercies of God to
present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is our
reasonable service or worship, then is no man to be forced by the compulsive
laws of men to present his body a dead sacrifice, and so under the gospel most
unholy and unacceptable, because it is his unreasonable service, that is to
say, not only unwilling but unconscionable, But if profane and licentious
persons may not omit the performance of holy duties, why may they not partake
of holy things? why are they prohibited the Lords supper; since both the one
and the other action may be outward; and outward performance of duty may
attain at least an outward participation of benefit? The church denying them
that communion of grace and thanksgiving, as it justly does, why does the
magistrate compel them to the union of performing that which they neither
truly can, being themselves unholy, and to do seemingly is both hateful to
God, and perhaps no less dangerous to perform holy duties irreligiously then
to receive holy signs or sacraments unworthily. All profane and licentious
men, so known, can be considerd but either so without the church as never yet
within it, or departed thence of their own accord, or excommunicate: if never
yet within the church, whom the apostle, and so consequently the church have
naught to do to judge, as he professes 1 Cor. 5.12, them by what authority does
the magistrate judge, or, which is worse, compel in relation to the church? if
departed of his own accord, like that lost sheep Luke 15.4, etc. the true
church either with her own or any borrowd force worries him not in again, but
rather in all charitable manner sends after him; and if she find him, lays
him gently on her shoulders; bears him, yea bears his burdens; his errors, his
infirmities any way tolerable, so fulfilling the law of Christ, Gal. 6.2: if
excommunicate, whom the church has bid go out, in whose name does the
magistrate compel to go in? The church indeed hinders none from hearing in her
public congregation, for the doors are open to all: nor excommunicates to
destruction, but, as much as in her lies, to a final saving. Her meaning
therefore must needs be, that as her driving out brings on no outward penalty,
so no outward force or penalty of an improper and only a destructive power
should drive in again her infectious sheep; therefore sent out because
infectious, and not driven in but with the danger not only of the whole and
sound, but also of his own utter perishing. Since force neither instructs in
religion nor begets repentance or amendment of life, but, on the contrary,
hardness of heart, formalitie, hypocrisy, and, as I said before, every way
increase of sin; more and more alienates the mind from a violent religion
expelling out and compelling in, and reduces it to a condition like that which
the Britains complain of in our story, driven to and fro between the Picts and
the sea. If after excommunion he be found intractable, incurable, and will not
hear the church, he becoms as one never yet within her pale, a heathen or a
publican, Mat. 18.17; not further to be judgd, no not by the magistrate, unless
for civil causes; but left to the final sentence of that judge, whose coming
shall be in flames of fire; that Maran athaa, 1 Cor. 16.22; then which to him
so left nothing can be more dreadful and ofttimes to him particularly nothing
more speedy, that is to say, the Lord comes: In the mean while deliverd up to
Satan, 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. that is, from the fould of Christ and kingdom
of grace to the world again which is the kingdom of Satan; and as he was
receivd from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God Acts 26.18,
so now deliverd up again from light to darkness, and from God to the power of
Satan; yet so as is in both places manifested, to the intent of saving him,
brought sooner to contrition by spiritual then by any corporal severitie. But
grant it belonging any way to the magistrate, that profane and licentious
persons omit not the performance of holy duties, which in them were odious to
God even under the law, much more now under the gospel, yet ought his care both
as a magistrate and a Christian, to be much more that conscience be not
inwardly violated, then that license in these things be made outwardly
conformable: since his part is undoubtedly as a Christian, which puts him upon
this office much more then as a magistrate, in all respects to have more care
of the conscientious then of the profane; and not for their sakes to take away
(while they ptetend to give) or to diminish the rightful liberty of religious
consciences.

On these four scriptural reasons as on a firm square this truth, the right of
Christian and euangelic liberty, will stand immovable against all those
pretended consequences of license and confusion, which for the most part men
most licentious and confused themselves, or such as whose severitie would be
wiser then divine wisdom, are ever aptest to object against the ways of God:
as if God without them when he gave us this liberty, knew not of the worst
which these men in their arrogance pretend will follow: yet knowing all their
worst, he gave us this liberty as by him judgd best. As to those magistrates
who think it their work to settle religion, and those ministers or others, who
so often call upon them to do so, I trust, that having well considerd what has
bin here argued, neither they will continue in that intention, nor these in
that expectation from them: when they shall find that the settlement of
religion belongs only to each particular church by persuasive and spiritual
means within it self, and that the defense only of the church belongs to the
magistrate. Had he once learnt not further to concern himself with church
affairs, half his labor might be spared, and the commonwealth better tended. To
which end, that which I premised in the beginning, and in due place treated of
more at large, I desire now concluding, that they would consider seriously what
religion is: and they will find it to be in sum, both our belief and our
practice depending upon God only. That there can be no place then left for the
magistrate or his force in the settlement of religion, by appointing either
what we shall believe in divine things or practice in religious (neither of
which things are in the power of man either to perform himself or to enable
others) I persuade me in the Christian ingenuitie of all religious men, the
more they examine seriously, the more they will find clearly to be true: and
find how false and deceivable that common saying is, which is so much reli'd
upon, that the Christian Magistrate is custos utriusque tabulae, keeper of both
tables; unless is meant by keeper the defender only: neither can that maxim be
maintaind by any prooff or argument which has not in this discourse first or
last bin refuted. For the two tables, or ten commandments, teach our duty to
God and our neighbor from the love of both; (give magistrates no authority to
force either: they seek that from the judicial law; though on false grounds,
especially in the first table, as I have shown; and both in first and second
execute that authority for the most part not according to Gods judicial laws
but their own. As for civil crimes and of the outward man, which all are not, no
not of those against the second table, as that of coveting; in them what power
they have, they had from the beginning, long before Moses or the two tables
were in being. And whether they be not now as little in being to be kept by any
Christian as they are two legal tables, remanes yet as undecided, as it is sure
they never were yet deliverd to the keeping of any Christian magistrate. But of
these things perhaps more some other time; what may serve the present has bin
above discourst sufficiently out of the scriptures: and to those produced might
be added testimonies, examples, experiences of all succeeding ages to these
times asserting this doctrine: but having herin the scripture so copious and so
plane, we have all that can be properly called true strength and nerve; the rest
would be but pomp and encumbrance. Pomp and ostentation of reading is admired
among the vulgar: but doubtless in matters of religion he is learnedest who is
planest. The brevitie I use, not exceeding a small manual, will not therefore, I
suppose, be thought the less considerable, unless with them perhaps who think
that great books only can determine great matters. I rather chose the common
rule, not to make much ado where less may serve. Which in controversies and
those especially of religion, would make them less tedious, and by consequence
read ofter, by many more, and with more benefit.

The end.

