THE Minister's Reasons For His not reading the Kings' Declaration, Friendly
Debated.

By A Dissenter.

Allowed to be Published this 21st day of June 1688.

SIR, I Am beholding to you for Publishing the Reasons you alledg for your
refusal to Read His Majesty's Declaration in your Church; for by them I
discern, that he who writ the first Letter to a Dissenter, wherein he told us
you were convinced of your Error, in being Severe toward us, and that we had
not now to do with those Rigid Prelates, who made it a matter of Conscience to
give us the least Indulgence, writ this of his own Head, without any Authority
from you; but that He, or They who writ a Treatise, which was Published a
little before the Kings Declaration, Entitled, The Vanity of all pretensions
for Toleration, (wherein the Question is put and Answered, Shall we give up the
Cause, and subscribe to a Toleration? Nothing less, and that because in our
Circumstances, it is not only contrary to Religion and Civil Prudence, but also
to Charity and Compassion) were guided in this matter by the same temper of
Mind, with that which is discovered in your reasonings, which are as like one
to the other as Face is to Face in a Glass; for therein the Author, who is your
Advocate, and without doubt had both your Countenance and Assistance, tells us,
That the practice of punishing Dissenters is contrary neither to the Doctrine
or Practice of Christ, and therefore He hopes, they that use it upon great
occasion may be discharged of the odious Imputation of Antichrist; and that
Experience has taught us, that Compulsion in matters of Religion serves many
times to render Men more Teachable, and willing to be Instructed; And besides
all this, That a steady and discreet Execution of the Laws against Dissenters,
might happily have been a much more merciful Conduct, even with respect to
them, then that R^^nissness or Connivance which tempted them to presumptuous
Sins. One touch he has also at the Kings Prerogative, not like to your present
reasoning, which calls it into Question, but by way of Allowance and
Commendation; for he says, We owe it only to the Wisdom and Foresight of His
late Majesty, that some of the most considerable Laws are now in being, I mean
that of 35 Q. Elizabeth, which He saved by His Prerogative, as well as Men,
when it was condemned to be Abolished, and if His Clemency had saved many, who
the Laws had justly Condemmed, Why should it not save a Law that had done Him
and His Ancestors no small Service, and was then doomed to an undeserved Fate.

I intend not to enter upon Examination of this your Advocate Treatise, which
is sufficiently refelled and rebuked by His Majesty's Royal Declaration of
Indulgence; but to show you, until you give a better Evidence to the contrary,
then hitherto you have done, how the Dissenters are to interpret Your Charity,
Your Compassion, Your Mercy, Your Clemency, and Your due tenderness toward
them, when you have an opportunity of showing your Inclinations without danger:
But I pass from this to what I intend, and that is to make a brief enquiry into
the weight of your Reasons, which I suppose, you therefore make Public, that
they might be well considered and scanned, in order thereto I have without
partiallity, or injury to their proper sense, not Literally Transcribed but
Extracted the substance of them.

That which has principally induced me to this, is, because I think you either
do not your self understand the substance of the Kings Declaration, or else by
your not Reading it, and Mis-representing it, you seem unwilling that it should
be understood by any others: For thus you begin.

I. To take away the Test and Penal Laws at this time is but one step from the
introducing of Popery, and therefore to read such a Declaration in our
Churches, though it do not immediately bring Popery in, Yet it sets open our
Church Doors for it, and then it will take its own time to enter.

Here is a far fetched Inference; How would you be understood? Suppose it
granted for Argument sake, that to take away the Test and Penal Laws is but one
step from the introducing of Popery; Is your Reading the Declaration a nearer
step to the introducing of Popery then such a Repeal? If you should Read it,
will that open your Church Doors so wide that Popery may enter without any more
to do, though the Penal Laws and Test should not be taken away? I take the true
and genuine sense of the Kings Declaration to be a setting open your Church
Doors that Papists and Dissenters, who have no mind to be there, may not be
Compelled by Temporal Penalties to come in, and abide there, whether they will
or no; For you have hitherto opened your Church Doors, that you may drive them
in, and in force of Penal Laws to keep them there in Spiritual Bondage against
their Wills; and if they have at any time, for above these Hundred Years,
adventured to start out of your Churches to free themselves from this sort of
Bondage, you by your Excommunication prosecuted them into Corporal Bondage
without Redemption: Its accounted an ill Omen to stumble at the Threshold, but
this you have done by calling that an opening your Doors to let Popery in,
which is intended only to let Papists and Dissenters out, and to leave you with
all that are of the Religion Established by Law in the full and peaceable
Possession of your Churches, and to enjoy them with Security to Perpetuity.

II. You say, Should we comply with this Order all good Protestants would
Despise and Hate us, and then we may be easily Crushed, and may soon fall
without any Pity.

In reasoning thus, you are either very Censorious and Uncharitable toward all
Dissenters, or else you greatly mistake their Temper; For your reasoning herein
can conclude no less, then, either that there is not one good Protestant among
all the Dissenters, or else, if there be any such, that they would Despise and
Hate you for doing of that which is their Interest to do themselves, and to
have done by all Men, and by you in particular, that the Justice, Reason and
Clemency which the King has manifested in His Gracious Declaration may be known
and acknowledged by all: If any other good Protestants should Despise and Hate
you for it, for which they have no cause, yet you do not suppose, that they are
the Men that would Crush you; and for the Dissenters, though you Mis-represent
them in the Close of your Letter, yet herein I would do them this right, to rid
you of your groundless Fears; You may be assured that for your Reading and
Pursuing the intent of the Kings Declaration which Tends both to your and their
Security in Equity and Law, they will not Crush you, for thereby they will
expose themselves to be Crushed together with you; so that I see no cause for
your Fears, either of Dishonor or Downsal, unless you resolve to throw your
selves down, and pu(...) down the Dissenters also to verisie your subsequent
Prognostications.

III. You say, We fall a little sooner for not Reading the Declaration, If our
Gracious Prince resent this as an Act of an Obstinate, Peevish or Factious
Disobedience (as our Enemies will be sure to represent it to Him) we shall as
certainly fall, and not long after if we do read it, and then we shall fall
Unpitied and Despised, and it may be with the Curses of the Nation, whom we
have ruined by our Compliance, and this is the way never to rise more.

I do not Reckon my self to be among the Number of your Enemies, and therefore,
though you are somewhat Peevish, I would not that you should be represented to
the King as Obstinate: For my Hopes are, that upon better Consideration you
will show your selves Obedient to his Commands; But if it should prove
otherwise, as your Enemies will not, so your Friends cannot Excuse you, as
being altogether Free from Faction, But how comes it to pass that you being a
Minister of the Gospel should fix your Eye so steadity upon the Dishonor being
Unpitied and Despised, as inseparable Concomitants of a Certain Fall not long
after you have read the Kings Declaration, if you Comply to Read it? A settled
Apprehension that you shall certainly Fall, whether you Read or not Read, is
sufficient to Disturb your Fancy, so as to Interrupt the making of a Solid
Judgment in reference to your Duty, and Discharge of a good Conscience toward
God: There is as little need, as there is Just Occasion for you to Surmize, as
you do, that your Compliance will Ruin the Nation, and procure their Curses;
for I cannot see any such moral certainty attending your reading as Ruining the
Nation: Those other Incredients might have been p^^termitted, if you have no
Disposition, by discovering your seeming Fears, to stir up a real fear in the
minds of others. I think it more nearly concerns you, setting aside all
thoughts of Honor and Dishonor, good Report or bad Report, to see to it that
you have the Law of God on your side, to excuse your Disobedience to the King;
for otherwise the ill Consequences of contending with Sovereign Power, and
enticing others to do the like after your example will lie heavy upon you. For
tho you Mention only your own Fall, yet you intimate plainly enough, that you
are not to Fall alone, and never to Rise more, but that this will be the Fate
of all the Protestant Chruches also, and therefore you proceed after that
Manner.

IV. May I Suffer all that can be Suffered in this World, rather than to
contribute to the final Ruin of the best Church in the World.

So that it seems if you Fall, the best Church in the World must Fall also,
and that not partially, or for a season, but Totally and Finally. Do you not
Attribute too much to your self in this? Are you the only Pillar upon which the
best Church in the World is Built? And are Penal Laws the only strength by
which you Support the Church? If those you will have in this point to be
accounted, your Adversaries, should prevail (as once you know they did do, for
Twenty Years together) to Divest you of your Coercive Power, your Experience
may Dictate to you; that a Protestant Church here, as well as else where has
subsisted, and may Subsist through Divine Assistance, when that coercive Power
is taken out of your Hands: However I acknowledge no Man can justify himself
for contributing to the Ruin of any true Church; but in this you are not
singular, as you would make your selves to be; the Dissenter may claim Equally
with your selves a share in such a resolution as this, and say as you do; may I
Suffer still, as I have Suffered all that you have Inflicted upon me, or what
else the Providence of God Allots for my Portion; rather then that I should
contribute to the Ruin of the best, or any Church of Christ in the World.

V. You say, I suppose no Minister of the Church of England, can give his
consent to the Declaration, and reading the Declaration in our Churches, will
be with great Reason interpreted a Consent.

You might have taken caution from your own Postscript to your Reasons,
concerning Henry Care, not to have made your Supposition, so Universally
Comprehensive of every Minister of the Church of England; in regard you say,
Reading is Teaching, and signifies Consent to the matter Read; and you Instance
in Four or Five which did Read, and I think I may more probably suppose, that
if any precise Disquisition should happen to be made, many of your Ministers
who did not Read, may choose to excuse themselves, rather by their not receiving
Directions from their Ordnary to Read, then to allege as you do, that ^hey did
refuse to do it, because they could not consent to the matter of the
Declaration.

VI. You say, By our Law, all Ministerial Officers are Accountable for their
Actions, which shows, that our Law does not look upon the Ministers of the
Church to be mere Machines and Tools, to be managed wholly by the will of
Superiors, without Exercising any Act of Judgment or Reason themselves.

Apply this to your usual Practice of publishing all such Declarations in your
Churches, as have been commended to you by your Ordnary, or his Official: Tell
me in what case you have charged your Conscience, so much as to make a private
Judgment, which you ought always to have done whether all the sentences of
Excommunication, and Ecclesiastical Censures and Orders which you have
published; Censures of Churchwardens, for refusing the Oath prescribed by your
Cannons: Censures for not paying your Apparitors and Officers the Fees they
Demanded. Excommunications purposely contrived and improved to prevent many of
their Votes at Elections: Interdicting any Divine Service, to be performed in a
Church for Burying of persons Excommunicated for Nonconformity in Consecrated
ground, till the Churchwardens caused the Dead Corp^ to be Dug up again, and
removed: Publishing whole Sheets full of Orders of S(...)ons, wherein such
Dissenters as conformed so far as to come to Church, have been reproached, as
doing i^ to save their Money; and therefore giving a charge to mark all such
(...) not Kneel at their Prayers, and stand up at the Gloria Patri: Orders that
none should be relieved that fell under Poverty, if they came not to Church and
Conformed to your Ceremonies, if they were able of Body so to do; and many
others of like nature: Have all these in your private Judgment been warranted
by the Law of God? Do you Esteem it a light thing to Cast, or Publish any Man's
being cast out of all Christian Society, and delivered over to Satan for such
matters as are no crimes against any Divine Law? I take it (for ought that ever
I saw manifested to the contrary) that a Subjection to the command of your
Superiors, as being only in such things Ministerial Offices, has been at
least your tacit Plea, for not stirring up or troubling your Consciences, to
make a Dis^retive Judgment; whether the Act of your Superior which you are
commanded to Publish, were Lawful, or Unlawful, by the Law either of God, or of
the Land; and to tell you the truth, I do not think you are in the Eye of the
Law such Criminals as on this particular occasion you would render your selves
to be, in case you should Read the Kings Declaration in Obedience to his
Command, though you did not approve the matter of it in your private Judgment;
it not being your Province, positively to determine concerning it in point of
Law: You might with better pretense of Conscience, (if pressed to it in your
own mind, as an Act necessary to avoid a Sin against God) after the Reading of
the Declaration, have taken your Exceptions to it in your particular Station,
then to have followed the course you have taken, as it were by common consent,
one in the name of all the Rest, thus openly to Declaim against it, for that
had been an Exercising of such an Act of Judgment, and Reason, if the cause
Required it, as a Minister of the Gospel might have done in reference to God,
whatever had been the consequence of it in respect to Men: And the Prospect you
had of this (as you afterward manifest) does not excuse but rather condemn you
for seeing better things, and following the worse.

VII. You say, Our Law supposes, that what we do in Obedience to Superiors, we
make our own Act by doing it: This is the only Reason I know, why we must not
obey a Prince against the Laws of the Land, or the Laws of God; because what we
do, let the Authority be what it will that Commandt it, becomes our own Act,
and we are Responsible for it.

If you State this as a general Case of every Subject, I suppose you mistake
the Law, for I cannot conceive how a Clerk in Parliament, Privy Council, Court
of Justice, or Convocation who Writes, and afterward Reads openly what his
Superiors have Dictated, and Commanded him to Read should be supposed in the
Eye of the Law, to be his own Act: If you mean by your Laws, you being
Ministers are Responsible for what you do in any other Manner, then the rest of
the Kings Subjects, or Ministerial Officers are, you should have done well to
have showed it, for till that be done I know not how to Distinguish of your
Case as Different from other Ministerial Clerks.

The only Reason you allege, why you must not obey a Prince against the Law
of the Land or the Laws of God, is both Complicated, and Equivocal; For if you
willingly walk after any Command, which is contrary to the Law of God, let the
Authority be as you say what it will, that Commands it, whether of a Prince
singly, or a Prince in conjunction with a Parliament; I grant, that it becomes
your own Act, for which you are responsible to God; But it is not so in many
Cases, where a Prince may Command to Do, or forbear, what a particular Statute
forbids or appoints, Because He may therein Exercise His Prerogative according
to the Common Law.

Besides, if you being a Minister should obey the Kings, and your Lawful
Superiors Order, and Read his Declaration, by which some Penal Laws are
suspended, and this Act of Prerogative should afterward come to be Questioned
in Parliament to whom are you Responsible? Surely not to the King, nor to your
Ordnary, whom you have Obeyed; you cannot mean tha^, not to any ordinary Court
of Justice, for no Information or Indi^^ment will lie against you there at the
Kings Suit; you must be then Arraigned for it in Parliament, or no where, And
if you come to be Responsible for it there, I think your Rubric established by
Law, and our Ignorance of any other Law will be a Sufficient Plea to excuse
you, For it will be a President of the First Impression; I know not of any
Parish Minister has ever heretofore been Questioned and Condemned in Parliament
for obeying an Order in this Kind of His Prince or Lawful Superior.

VIII. Ministers are bound to take care that what they Publish in their
Churches, be neither contrary to the Laws of the Land, nor the good of the
Church. Ministers of Religion are not looked upon as common Cryers, but what
they Read, they are supposed to recommend too, though they do no more then read
it, For is not Reading Teaching? It may be it were no fault to consent to the
Declaration, but if I consent to teach my People what I do not consent to my
self, I am sure that is a great one.

I take it for granted that you have sufficiently demonstrated to all Men, that
Reading and not Preaching off Book, is Teaching, for that has been your
ordinary Practice for many Years, and it is true, by Reading you Teach your
People to understand what you Read, but when that is done, your People are at
liberty to judge, and you also in this Present Case being ordered to read what
the King has declared, are at liberty to Pen a Sermon that may be a Paraphrase
upon what you read before, and read that in your Pulpit afterward, so as
therein you do not transgress the Law of God, or of the Land, and by that your
People may understand whether you consent to, or dissent from what you have
read, and if your are commanded by Law to read what you do not consent to in
your own Conscience, and for the discharge of a good Conscience toward God,
let your People know so much; I think you therein discharge both the Office of
a Minister to Man, and Duty of a Teacher to God; and in such a Case, tho you
should afterward be judged by Man's Law, yet you may with a quiet Mind, therein
commend your Cause to God, who judges righteously.

Be it so, That Ministers are not looked upon as common Cryers, yet give me
leave to say, you being Ministers are looked upon as public Preachers, or
Heralds to publish the Orders of your Superiors, and are no more accountable to
any Man for the matter which you so publish, then a Herald who Publishes the
Kings Proclamation to his Subjects; con^^der the Consequence, if the Judgment
of what i^ agreeable or contrary to the Laws of the land, the Good or Hurt of
the Church, be left to the private Determination of every Parish Minister, What
will become of the Authority of their Superiors? Of what us^ is the Rubric to
which they have Subscribed, which directs them to read what the King or their
Ordnary enjoins? For in this Case, it is all one, as I said before, whether you
are enjoined to Read by an ^ of State or an Act of Parliament; for I think you
will grant me this, That the ^ of an Eternal (...)t (...)t of Parliament then
(...): So that in (...), (...) no (...) f^r in your S^tion to (...)it himself
of Evil a(...) the (...) of (...), but by the Method before prescribed,
especially i^ such a case as is before us; wherein you say, It may be no fault
to consent to the Declaration, for if the Matter be so doubtful in it self, as
that it cannot be any otherwise determined to be either Good or Evil, then by
every Man's private Judgment, by such a Rule as What is not of Faith is Sin; you
have exceeded your Bounds in prescribing a general Rule concerning it, as a
like Obligatory upon all Ministers.

IX. You say, I take the Declaration to be a contradiction of the Doctrine of
our Church by Law Fstablished.

O^r Reading it in our Churches, must serve instead of Addresses of thanks,
which our Clergy generally Resused, tho it was only to thank the King for his
Gracious Promises renewed to the Church of England in his Declaration, which
was much more Innocent then to Publish the Declaration it self in our Churches.

I think my self bound in Conscience not to Read it, because I am Bound in
Conscience not to approve it.

Its against the Constitution of the Church of England which is Established by
Law, and to which I have Subscribed, and am therefore bound in Conscience to
Teach nothing contrary to it while this obligation lasts.

Your Terms are so general, and the s^nse of your Arguments are so Ambiguous*
that tho I labor to Pick out your true meaning, I am afraid of mistaking it,
if I do so, pray R(...)i^ie me Heartily, and Friendly, because the manner of
your Express(...) your self, and not any wilful Error in (...) is the cause of
it.

You take the Declaration to be a Contradiction of the Doctrine of your Church
by Law Established; In what Sense shall I take your say so? Is the whole, and
every part of the Declaration contrary to all, and every part of your Doctrine
by Law Established? This cannot be your Meaning, because you take Notice of the
Kings Gracious Promises Renewed to the Church of England: I can find none of
the Thirty-Nine Articles Contradicted, nor any of your Religious Constitutions
Invaded by any thing in the Kings Declaration; But Your Doctrines, your
Service, your Ceremonies remain all the same, as they were Settled, and
Exhibited to the late King Charles the Second, by the Presidents, Bishops, and
Clergy of Both Provinces, with the same Civil Sanction for the use of them,
that Ever they had: And besides that, they are neither contradicted nor
Invaded, The Royal promise you mention, is to Protect, and Maintain his
Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy, and all other His Subjects of England, in
the Free Exertise of their Religion, as by Law Established; and therefore if
you would Free your Self from all Suspicion of Prevarication in this Point, Its
incumbent on You first to show, wherein the Kings Declaration Contradicts it
self, and then, wherein, in particular, (...) Coatradicts your Doctrine, and
Invades your Constitution; For till then, your telling openly, That You take
the Declaration in General to be a Contradicton, and against the Constitution
of the Church of England in General, may be taken, as Intended by You to Amuse,
and not to Edify your Reader:

But what is it you mean, when you say, Your Reading must serve instead of
Addresses of Thanks, which your Clergy generally Refused? Did His Majesty
Require, You should Thank Him for his Declaration, as He does, that you should
Read it; and did you Refuse to Obey Him in that, though as you say, It was more
Innocent than the Other, as you do in this? Is this Intended as a Memorial of
unmannerly Disobedience at First, and undutiful Carriage at Last? or what is
that you signify, by your Resusing to Thank Him, which must now be Recompensed
by Reading? Do you think His Command to Publish His Declaration, is of no more
Weight, in point of State, than your passing of a complement with His Majesty,
in Giving Him Thanks, or that the Thing He designed in His Command, was
principally to Solve the Want of your thankful Addresses? Let me tell you, this
is not only a streign of Levity in Interpreting the Reason of the Royal Precept
for your Reading His Declaration in your Churches, unbecoming your Gravity, but
a Surmize of a more Dangerous consequence: The King Commanded, that you should
Publish His Declaration in your Churches, that All His Loving Subjects might
Know the Contents of it; And you Insinuate to them, That it is to Serve instead
of a thankful Addressing, which before you Refused.

But you pass from this to Matter of Conscience, and herein you show your Self
more Subtle in your Distinction, of Conscience, then the Learned Bishop
Sanderson in all his Praelections on this Subject; For you seem to have a
Politic Conscience, not to do any thing, which by consequence may Hurt (your
Interest, or as you Term it) the Church, and herein your Conscience is Guided
by a frequent Review, and Must' ring up the Numbers on both sides; How many may
be for, and how many may be against your Reading; and finding by the
Computation you make, that the greatest Number of your supposed Friends will be
Disobliged by your Reading, and that more may be against it than for it: This
Governs you to make as much Conscience of Reading the Declaration, as of Doing
the most Immoral Action in Nature.

Your Second Distinction is of a Temporary Conscience, which is to Last as long
as the Obligation of your Subscription, to that, you call the Constitution of
the Church of England, lasts: By what means you will reckon your selves
Discharged of this Temporary Obligation of Conscience, I cannot divine, unless
you Reckon, that perhaps you may be Absolved from it by an Act of Convocation,
or Statute Law: But then here lies the Difficulty with me. Because

Your Third Distinction of the Obligation of Conscience seems to be of such a
permanent Nature, as no Law of Convocation or Parliament, any more than the
Kings Prerogative can Absolve you from: For this I take to be the Genuine Sense
of this sort of Conscience you mention in contradistinction from the other;
That you are Bound in Conscience not to Read the Kings Declaration, because you
are bound in Conscience not to Approve it; And If you make the Invariable Law,
or Revealed Will of God, the Rule of your Conscientious Approving, or not
Approving the Matter of the Kings Declaration; You cannot in my Apprehension
any more Approve of it, or Consent to the Reading of it, if it should be
Established by A Convocation, or Statute Law (the Law of God, and the Matter
remaining the same, as now they are) than you can Do it at the Command of the
Kings Royal Will.

Tenthly, Possibly the People understand, that the Matter of the Declaration is
against Our Principles; But is this any Excuse that we Read, and by reading
Recommend that to them, which is against our Censcience and Judgments?

Reading the Declaration would be no Fault at all, but our Duty, when the King
Commands it, did we approve of the Matter of it; But to Consent to Teach our
People such Doctrines as we think contrary to the Laws of God, or the Laws of
the Land, does not lessen, but Aggravate the Fault.

Consenting to Teach your People such Doctrine, as you think contrary to the
Laws of God, is a Fault; may be a great Fault: Though the Doctrine you Teach,
may, in it self, be true Doctrine, because Conscience, though Erroneous,
obliges not to Act against it: But what it is that does not lessen, but
aggravate the Fault you mention, I cannot discern, For you Grant, That reading
the Declaration, when the King commands it, if you Approved the Matter of it,
would be no Fault at all: You say, It is possible the People understand that
the Matter of the Declaration is against your Principles; I Answer, It Is
possible they understand neither the Declaration nor your Principles, for by
the Reports I hear frequently ^ut of the Countries, there may be Thousands that
never Read themselves, nor heard the Kings Declaration read to them, but take
the Matter of it to be, as you represent it, which to be sure is Bad enough;
and thus they are kept in ignorance, and Affrighted with the conceit of it.
Most certainly, if the Kings Heart were not well Assured of the Justice and
Clemency toward all His Subjects in what He has Declared, It would be the most
Impolitick Action imaginable for Him to command, that it should be Published,
and Communicated to all of them, in the most solemn manner, when they are
Discharged from all Secular Diversions, and have their Minds most Free, and
Intent upon the Matter that is read to them: His Majesty Declares the Reason
why He would have it thus Published, Viz. That they may Understand and Reap the
Benefit of that General Good, which He designs for the whole Kingdom; That His
chief Aim has been, not to be the Oppressor, but the Father of His People, That
they may lay aside all Animosities, and groundless Jealousies, and Choose such
Members of Parliament, as may do their part to Finish what He has Begun, for
the Advantage of the Monarchy, over which Almighty God has placed Him. Now, if
the Matter of the Declaration would not bear the most exact Scrutiny, and
Recommend it self to the Consciences and Understanding of all His Subjects: Can
any Man rationally think, that this was a probable way for His Majesty to
Effect the End He proposed therein? But since you put me upon Possibilities, I
think it may possibly be, and very probably also, as I Gather from your
Reasonings, that you do what lies in you, to Conceal from your People, the
Matter of the Declaration, least your People would Approve it, and Consent to
Promote it.

But though you are thus Industrious to Conceal the Declaration, Why do you not
tell us what your Principles are, for in this, you are as Dark as in all the
rest? I must profess, if I had no other means of knowing what the Declaration
contains, nor what your Principles are, than by what you have said in your
Discourse concerning them, you deal so much in Generals, that I should never be
Able to Understand either of them, nor wherein the One is against the Other.

But now let us come to the main Point, for in comparison of that, All the Rest
is of little value.

You say, For you to Consent to Teach your People such Doctrines as you think
contrary to the Laws of God, or the Laws of the Land, does not lessen, but
aggravate the Fault.

You have, in your Letter, made mention of an old Maxim, The King can do no
Wrong, And therefore if any Wrong be done, the Crime, and Guilt is the
Ministers, who does it: Nor is any Minister, who does an Illegal Action,
allowed to pretend the Kings Commission, and Authority for it.

You cannot Forget who They were that before you Insisted upon this sort of
Argument, nor how severely you of all Men have in your Pulpits and Prints,
handled them for it; But now you think it may serve your Turn, you Revive it
again.

Since therefore you make it no scruple of Conscience in this Case, to Approve
such Things now, as you Condemned heretofore; Why should you not do it in some
other Cases also?

The Dissenters, as often as they were Summoned into your Courts, or elsewhere,
for their Nonconformity to your Modes of Worship, or for Assembling to Worship
in other manner, Pleaded simply, They could not Do the One, nor Forbear the
Other; because in doing the first, or forbearing the last, They should Sin
against their Conscience, and Transgress the Law of their Lord; whatever your
Laws, or the Laws of the Land commanded, or prohibited: This Plea was usually
Termed a mere pretense, and their Assemblies Censured by their Secular Judges,
as Riots, Routs, Seditious or Unlawful Assemblies; and by your Judges they were
Condemned, as Obstinate and Contumacious; and upon these Scores they suffered
the Penalties inflicted: Now, though you did Publish, and cause to be Executed,
such Sentences heretofore against the Dissenters, who made use of this Plea, as
a Pure matter of Conscience, with respect to God's Law; this may be no Bar, as
appears by your former instance, but that you may take up the same simple
Honest Plea at this time, if you are, as they were, sincere therein, and make
it for your selves now, as they did then; And by this way you may, without
Intangling your selves by determining positively Doubtful Points of Law (which
is not your Province) come to a fair Issue in that, which is the proper Charge
of your Function as Ministers; for the Dissenters agree with you in this
Principle, that For any Man to Consent to Teach others such Doctrines as he
thinks contrary to the Laws of God, is a great Fault: Let the Matter of the
Declaration therefore be fairly Discussed between you and us, with that
Modesty, which becomes Subjests: Many Dissenters differ from you in their
Thoughts in this point; They think The King's Declaration is not contrary to
the law of God; and that therefore it may lawfully be Read; If any of them
question any part of it, It is that wherein the King promises to Protect and
Maintain the Archbishops, and Bishops, as Lord Bishops, of which they find no
Footsteps in the Holy Scriptures; but if they will consider, that the Dignity
of Barons is only an Addition to that of a Bishop, and does neither Alter,
Enlarge, or Abrogate the Spiritual Office; but is an Honor conferred upon them
by the Civil Sovereign Power: There is no Reason for any Dissenter, or any
other of the King's Subjects, to make this a scruple of Conscience, in regard
it proceeds from a Civil Constitution, and is a Law of Man's Creation, to which,
among others of like nature, every Christian is to submit for the Lord's sake:
And that you and I may as well Agree in our Thoughts about the Subject in hand,
as in the Principle I have mentioned: Its necessary that we consider, what it
is that His Majesty has Declared; I shall repeat that Point, upon which many
others Depend, as a necessary Consequence, as that to which I think you take
the greatest Exception: The KING declares, that It has been His constant Sense
and Opinion, that Conscience ought not to be constrained; nor People Forced in
Matters of mere Religion.

Now its incumbent on you to show wherein you think this Point is contrary to
the Laws of GOD, and that you do it, is but a reasonable Request, for else you
perform not your Function to your people, but will lie under the suspicion of
Teaching for Doctrines, the Commands of Men, which you know our Lord sharply
Reproves in those that exercise the Function of Teachers.

Till you have done this, and made it plain, you have no Reason to Carp at any
Thing that is naturally subsequent, as the suspending such Penalties, by which
many of His Subjects are co-erced to Worship contrary to their Consciences, or
pardoning Offenses against such Laws, For this is a natural Exercise of His
Prerogative, as God's Vicegerent in Acts of Goodness and Clemency; It can be no
Offense to GOD, that the Execution of such Laws be neglected by the King's
Ministers, or Suspended by Himself, till they can be Repealed by Parliament,
which ought never to have been made, and could never be obeyed, without
Transgressing the Law of GOD: The King's lawful, proper, and necessary
Prerogative, is to provide for all Exigents, wherein there is no provision made
by a particular Law, and to suspend such particular Statutes, as were from the
Beginning, or in process of time, prove useless, or burthensom to a multitude
of His Subjects, and Wherein no particular Subject is injured, as to any Right,
or Privilege, which he can claim by Law: so that till you have performed your
Task, and showed that this Doctrine, which the Declaration Teaches, is against
the Law of God, and what Branch of the Divine Law it is against, that the
Penalties whereby Men are compelled to Worship contrary to their Consciences,
should be suspended: No more need to be said to this, taking it singly, as it
is a Matter of pure Conscience, supposed by you to be an Offense against the
Law of God.

But I consider how you state it with a double Aspect, having an Eye both to
the Laws of God, and to the Laws of the Land, and that not conjunctively, but
disjunctively: It is an Aggravated Fault with you to Consent to Teach your
People such Doctrines as you think contrary to the Laws of God, or the Laws of
the Land, that so you may have a double string to your Bow: If you cannot prove
the Doctrine of the Kings Declaration to be contrary to the Laws of God, yet
you cannot consent to Teach it your People, because you think it is contrary to
the Laws of the Land: nevertheless taking your Reasoning to be consistent with
it self, having before showed, you did not Approve of the Matter of the
Declaration, I cannot suppose you made mention of the Laws of God
superfluously, or vainly, and therefore it remains as a Charge upon you to
declare plainly, Whether you think it contrary to the Laws of God, or not: And
having Repeated this, that you may take the more Notice of it, I Will pass to the
next Branch, and that is for you to show, wherein it is contrary to the Law of
the Land; the Reasons for this I shall give you in my Remarks upon your next
Paragraph.

Eleventhly, Say you, It is to Teach an unlimited, and universal Toleration,
which the Parliament in 1672. declared Illegal, and which has been Condemned by
the Christian Church in all Ages.

It is to Teach my People, that they need never come to Church more, but have
my Free Leave, as they have the Kings, to go to a Conventicle, or to Mass.

It is to Teach the Dispensing Power, which Alters what has been formerly
thought the whole Constitution of this Church, and Kingdom, which we dare not
Do, till we have the Authority of Parliament for it.

Let us consider what part of the King's Declaration may be supposed by you to
do the Things here Alleged, and whether, what you are required to do, be as to
the Matter of it, of any other Nature, than what has heretofore been Approved
by Authority of Parliament.

His Majesty, after the suspention of all Penal Laws in matters Ecclesiastical,
for not coming to Church, or not Receiving the Sacrament, or for any other
Nonconformity to the Religion Established, or for, or by reason of the Exercise
of Religion in any manner whatsoever, is pleased to Declare upon what Terms,
and in what Manner All His Loving Subjects have Free leave to Meet, and Serve
God after their own Way, and Manner.

Now I must pray you to Interpret what you mean by an Unlimited, and Universal
Toleration, for you are still in Generals, Is it such an Unlimited, and
Universal Toleration, as gives all Men Liberty to Meet in such manner, and to
do, and say as they please: There seems to me many Restrictions in the
Declaration, the Meeting must be For the Exercise of Religion, and not
Irreligion, and though All may Meet, and Serve in their Own Way, yet It is to
Serve God, and not an Idol.

For my part, if I had no Fear of God before me, yet I should very much fear
severe Corporal punishment from the Hands of the Civil Power, if I should Meet,
and openly preach Blasphemy, Idolatry, or any other Doctrine of immortality,
against the Light, and Law of Nature given to, and inscribed on the Heart of
every Man; For though the King is pleased to say, I shall not be compelled to
perform any Act of Worship contrary to my Conscience, I am nevertheless
Accomptable for all Things that I openly and voluntarily, without any
compulsion do, or say, which fall under the Cognizance of the Civil Magistrate,
as all things do, which are against the Reason of Mankind, and common Light and
Law of Nature; and though there should be no Statute Law in the Case, The Comman
Law of the Land is grounded upon the Law of Nature, and no way suspended by the
King's Declaration, and by this, open Scandals against the Light of Nature are
Punishable by the Civil Judges.

But you say, an unlimited, and universal Toleration the Parliament in 1672
declared Illegal; It may be so, but I do not know it; I have seen no Copy of
any Law, or Ordinance of Parliament applicable to the point in hand: If you
Intend to prove the Kings present Declaration, was declared to be Illegal by
the Parliament in 1672, you must mend your Common Fault of Dealing in General,
For it is all one, and no more a Proof of any thing being Declared Illegal in a
Parliament, to Quote only the year, without repeating the Words of the Law,
and applying the matter of the Declaration to it, then if you had said it of
your Own Head, or mentioned for a proof of your Assertion, a Vote of the House
of Commons, which was Published by Order of their Speaker, Jan: 10. 1680,
Wherein it was resolved to be the Opinion of that House, That the Prosecution
of Protestant Dissenters upon the Penal Laws, was at that time Grievous to the
Subject, a Weakening of the Protestant Interest, an Encouragement to Popery,
and Dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom.

Your next Assertion is, That an unlimited and universal Toleration has been
Condemned by the Christian Churches in All Ages; If you mean by this, that the
Christian Churches in All Ages did Assume to themselves a Power of Judging, and
Jurisdiction over all men that were without the Church, or that the Church in
all Ages did by Temporal Penalties constrain men to come into the Church, or
when they were there, to Worship contrary to their Consciences, or to Abide
there, when they had no Heart to do so, but would Forsake their Faith, their
Profession, or their Christian Doctrine, and Conversation, and also their
Assemblys: I think you are very much mistaken in the Christian Doctrine and
Practice of the Churches in the primitive Ages: Surely I may say in this, as in
the Rest, Show me an Apostolical Authority for such a Practice; And I have so
much the more Reason to insist upon this, Because Christ's Disciples in the
primitive Age, were All Volunteers, Suitable to the Doctrine which Our Lord,
and his Apostles Taught, Repentance from Dead Works, and Faith in the Son of
God, which are Convictions, and Operations upon the Mind of Man, and necessary
Qualifications to the being of a True Christian, and the profession of them to
the being of a Visible Christian, and the Doctrine of Self-Denial to his
Continuance in his Profession; The Doctrine is plain, Whosoever Will, let him
take of the Water of life Freely, You will not Come to me that you may have
life; and when many of those, who for some time professed to be our Lords
Disciples went back, and Walked no more with him, That which was the Ground of
the Others perseverance was, that with him were the words of Eternal Life, and
that they Believed, and knew that He was the Christ, the Son of the Living God,
and that therefore there was none Else to whom they could Go; The Apostle
Foretells us, That in the Latter Times, some would Depart from the Faith, Giving
heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils; That there would be M^ckers
Walking after their own Ungodly Lusts; that such They were, who being sensual,
and having not the Spirit, separated themselves, and the Apostle John says
Expressly, that in his day there were Many Antichrists, who went out from us
(that is from the Apostles, and Churches) but they were not of us; For if they
had been of us, they would have Remained with us, But They went out, that it
might be made Manifest, they were not All of us: And this the Apostle makes as
the Characteristical Note, by which he Knew it was the Last time.

Now as I cannot find the I east Mention in any One word, Doctrine, or Precept,
that any persons were, or should be Compelled, by Outward Force to come or
continue in the Christian Church in the First Age, so neither can it be
agreeable to the Mind of Our Lord, that any persons should be Compelled by
Temporal Penalties so to do against their Minds in After Ages, Unless you can
show us, that the Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles are not the same in
After Ages, that they were when they were first delivered.

Say you, It is to Teach my People that they need never come to Church more,
but have my Free Leave, as they have the King's, to go to a Conventicle, or to
Mass.

Does any thing of this kind Flow naturally from the King's Declaration? Does
that Engage or Incline you, or any Man else to teach any Doctrine contrary to
his own Sentiment? I take it rather to be an Encouragement to do, and say
sincerely what they apprehend, and believe to be the Will of God, relating to
the Worship of himself, and that your Leave is neither Asked nor Granted in my
going from your Church, further than this, That if I be Excommunicate by you
for it, you cannot thereupon, by your Certificate, obtain as formerly, the Writ
De Excommunicato Capiendo, to make me a perpetual Prisoner, whilst the King is
pleased to Suspend the Execution of that Penalty.

The Declaration does not Teach any of your Hearers, that they need not come to
Church, and Worship God any more there in that Way and Manner, if in their Own
Consciences they are Convinced they ought so to do; It does not Forbid your
Teaching or Reading to your People any Doctrines, or Homilies Approved of by
the Church of England, Queen Elizabeth's Injunctions, (which she Enjoined to be
Read in your Churches Four Times in a Year,) or any thing Else by which they
may be Instructed in the knowledge, or discharge of their Duty to God in your
Churches.

You greatly undervalue your Ministry and Doctrine, to suppose that there are
no Arguments to prevail with your People to come to your Church, but only
Temporal Scourges, For if you have the Truth of God on your side, as no Humane
Law can Alter the Nature of it, so you are at Liberty, notwithstanding any
thing in the Declaration, to Preach it to your People.

The Declaration is an Incitement to all the King's Subjects to Worship God,
and no enticement for any of them to forsake his Worship, and that they may
respectively serve God, (as the Christian Religion teaches, in Holiness and
Righteousness) without fear: His Majesty promises Equal Protection to all who
do worship God in such Way and Manner, as each of them Understand and Believe,
it is his Will they should do; And in the first place gives the Royal
Countenance and Protection to All of the Church of England in their worshipping
of God in their Churches, as by Law Established: So that you make a wrong Gloss
upon the Declaration, in insinuating that it Teaches your People, that they
need never to come to Church more, or that they have the King's Free Leave, or
Yours, contrary to their own Minds and Consciences to forsake the Church, or to
go to a Conventicle, or to Mass. For there is nothing in the Declaration that
requires, gives Leave or Countenance to any man to forsake that Religion, and
way of Worship to which his Conscience obliges him, or to Dissemble, and play
the Hypocrite, in forsaking of any one way, and (in appearance) to adhere to
another, if he do it not in sincerity, but against his Mind and Conscience.

But we are now come to another Point, at which you seem to stick more than at
all the rest.

Say you, It is to Teach the Dispensing Power, which alters what has been
formerly thought the whole Constitution of this Church and Kingdom, which we
dare not do, till we have the Authority of Parliament for it.

Let this Matter then, as you say in your Letter, be examined Impartially, and
take in here also that Question I touched upon before; Whether the Matter of
the King's Declaration herein be contrary to the Laws of the Land? Whole
Treatises have been Written upon this Subject, with great Evidence to Manifest
the Kings Right of Indulgence in Spiritual Matters, which you may do well (in
Order to your Satisfaction) at your Leisure to Peruse: I shall here Instance
only in some few Cases, wherein the Kings of England, have for several Ages
past Exercised such a Dispensing Power; and in their Grants, Tolerated a
Dissent from the Religion and Ceremonies by Law Established, which have been,
either not Questioned at all in Parliament, or there admitted to be legally
done: Queen Elizabeth in her Reign, granted many Dispensations of this kind;
and as is credibly Reported, to some Laymen to Preach publicly. Several
Grants have been made before, and in the Reigns of the three last Kings, both
to Foreigners here, and to their own Subjects abroad, for the Exercise of
Religion in their own Way; with a Non Obstance to the Statute in Force, for
Uniformity in Religion. The Act for Uniformity in the 14th Year of King Charles
the Second, takes notice of those Grants to Foreigners; and Provides, that the
Penalties of that Act, shall not extend to such Churches as have been Allowed,
or shall be Allowed by the King, His Heirs or Successors.

The Act for Suppression of Seditious Conventicles, though it do not in express
Words grant a License for any Number of Persons, not exceeding four besides the
Family, to meet under Pretense of Exercising Religious Worship, otherwise than
according to the Lyturgy and Practice of the Church of England; yet it does not
make it Penal for any so to do, except they exceed that Number: And the common
Interpretation given of it, by your selves and others, and Encouragement taken
thence has been, That it was Tantamount to such a License; and this I think,
fully reaches that, which you call the Matter of the Declaration that you
cannot approve of: For if you admit, as you have done in all the Arguments I
have seen upon this Point, that is was Allowed* that four Dissenters besides
the Family might meet, and Worship in other manner than is by Law Established,
without Incurring any Temporal Penalties thereby, the Paucity or Greatness of
the Number, cannot alter the Religious Nature of the Matter; What Is lawful for
Four, is lawful for Four Thousand, with respect to the Matter of Worship; The
restraining the Number, is only the Policy and Prudence of the Civil State,
which may be Limited or Enlarged at Pleasure: And by this Act, It is provided,
That Nothing therein Contained shall Extend to Invalidate, or Avoid His
Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs, but that His Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors, may from Time to Time, and at all times hereafter, Exercise
and Enjoy all Powers and Authorities in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as Fully and as
Amply, as Himself and His Predecessors have or might have done the same, any
thing in this Act Notwithstanding: And I think, the Exercise of the King's
Power, is as naturally applicable to his Dispensing with the Limitation of
Numbers, in this Case, as to any other Clause in that Act; which without this
Especial Provision, might have been Construed, an Abridgment of the King's
Supremacy.

To make good this, That the King's Dispensing Power in His Declaration, alters
what has been formerly thought the whole Constitution of this Church: It is
Incumbent on you, to show wherein it does so, more th^n has been done in any
Case of the like Nature heretofore, by any former Royal Dispensations, Grants,
or Authority in Parliament.

And tell me ingeniously, if without any Offense against the Holy Scriptures,
the King may not, if He so please, Grant a Dispensation to His Own Subjects, as
well as to Strangers and their Off spring, (even after they are become
Denizens, and understand Our Language) to Worship God after their own Way and
Manner? And whether among all the Jurisdictions Annexed to the Crown, which
heretofore have been, or may lawfully be used for the Reforformation or Order
of the Ecclesiastical State, there be no manner of Dispensing Power Contained?

12. Say you, No Men in England will be pleased with Our Reading the
Declaration, but those who hope to make great Advantage against us, and against
Our Church and Religion. This is a bare Supposition, arising merely from your
own Disturbed Imagination, which is through Prejudice so Darkened, that you
cannot discern between your Friends and your Enemies: I can tell you of many,
who neither Hope, nor seek to make any Advantage against you, your Church or
Religion, that are displeased at your refusing to Read, because you thereby
give an Advantage to such as may be your Adversaries, which they could never
have gained by your Compliance with the King's Order.

You afterward suggest, That the Dissenters, who are Wise and Considering, are
sensible of the Snare themselves, and though they desire Ease and Liberty, they
are not willing to have it with such Apparent Hazard of Church and State.

But if there be any Dissenters who deserve the Epithites you give them, you
have by your Severities kept them at such an uncharitable Distance from you,
that you are unacquainted with their Temper; and thence it is, that as on the
one Hand you Misrepresent them, that you may render them Equally Obnoxious to
the Government with your selves, as giving Countenance to your Disobedience: So
on the other Hand, you suspect them without Cause, to be seeking an Advantage
against you, your Church and Religion: You cannot but know, that the Generality
of Dissenters (who have rendered their solemn Thanks to the King for His
Indulgence, and the Establishment proposed in His Declaration,) are for the
Reading of it, That all the King's Subjects may understand, and in their
places, pursue the Contents of it to Effect: Therefore* upon what Grounds you
suggest, (as if you spoke their Language) that they are not willing to have
their Liberty in the Way which the King proposes, I cannot Imagine.

You Term it with such Apparent Hazard of Church and State; They Apprehend and
Express it, with Apparent Advantages of Church and State, and that which has a
direct Tendency to settle Both on such a Righteous Foundation, as may preserve
them in a safe and prosperous State to Perpetuity.

But, is not this to ^^^tter such among the Dissenters, as you can Entice to
hearken to your Insinuations, that they may be thought Wise and Considering?
For you tell them, When there is an Opportunity of showing your Inclinations
without Danger, they may find you are not such Persecutions as you are
Represented: But while you speak of their being sensible of a Snare, are not
you laying a Snare for them? How long may they wait for such a Season, wherein
you may in your own Apprehension without Danger, Manifest any Incli^n^ions or
Kindness toward them? Immediately after the House of Commons Declared, That
the Prosecution of Dissenters, was a weakening of the Protestant Interest, you
Promoted it with greater Vehemence than ever before: If the King at any time
dispense with Penal Laws, you Cry out, The Dispensation is Illegal: As often as
any Bill of Comprehension has been brought into Parliament to touch any thing
of your Constitution, so as to enlarge it beyond its present Streightness, it
has met with Opposition from your Ordinaries: So that the Dullest Dissenters
in England, have been sensibly taught by you, That there has been no
Opportunity, wherein you could without Danger, show them any kindness for
Twenty Eight Years past; and if any Dissenters should be so Caught in the
Snare of your Insinuations, that at some time or other hereafter, there may
happen an Opportunity, wherein you may be kind toward them, as to let go the
present Season, wherein His Majesty Proposes, a Legal and Perpetual
Establishment both of your Church State and their Freedom from Temporal
Penalties for Nonconformity to it; I shall not take such Dissenters to be in
this Case, either Wise or Considerate.

13. Say you, Reading the Declaration, is to Recommend to Our People, the
choice of such Persons to Sit in Parliament, as shall take away the Test and
Penal Laws, which most of the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation have declared
their Judgment against.

Our Reading will Discourage, Provoke or Misguide, all the Friends the Church
of England has; Have we not Reason to Expect, That the Nobility and Gentry, who
have already Suffered in this Cause, when they hear themselves Condemned for
it, in all the Churches of England, Will think it time to mend such a Fault,
and Reconcile themselves to their Prince; and if our Church fall this Way, is
there any Reason to expect that it should Ever Rise again?

These Consequences are almost as Evident, as Demonstrations; and let it be
what it will in it self, which I foresee, will Destroy the Church of England,
and the Protestant Religion and Intrest; I think I ought to make as much
Conscience of Doing it, as of Doing the most Immorall Action in Nature.

If We must compare Consequences, To Dis-oblige all the Nobility and Gentry, by
Reading the Declaration, is likely to be much more Fatal then to Anger the
Dissenters.

By Your Mistaking, and Misrepresenting the Sentiments of the Dissenters; You
have given me Cause to Suspect, You may be Mistaken in some things which you
have Asserted concerning the Nobility and Gentry; particularly in that you make
no distinction, between the Repeal of the Penal Laws, and that of tie Fest;
which diverse of the Nobility and Gentry in their ordinary Discourses on this
Subject have Done; and this seems to me the more Remarkable, because you make
it Equally as Necessary for the preserving your Constitutions, to keep the
Penal Laws on Foot, as the Test.

Secondly, You lay, in my Opinion, too great a Stress upon your Reading; Do you
suppose, None of your Friends to have any better Discerning, then to be
Misguided in their Judgments by the bare Reading the Declaration? No more
Resolution then to be Discouraged by it? No more Charity, then to be Provoked
to be your Enemies by it?

I cannot see any Reason you have to Expect, that your Reading the Declaration,
should lay any of the Nobility or Gentry under any Conviction of a Fault, or
that they would reckon themselves Condemned (if it had been or should be read
in all the Churches of England) for any thing which they have Done or Suffered
in that you call this Cause.

His Majesty has been pleased to Declare the Reason of the Changes He has made
in Civil and Military Officers; not thinking any ought to be Employed in His
Service, who will not Contribute toward the Establishing the Peace and
Greatness of their Country: If a Question be put to any Noble Man, or
Gentleman; Whether he will give his Consent to Repeal the Penal Laws and Tests?
Where such a Question meets an Inward Settled Principle, that no man ought to be
Debarred of his Civil Rights or Privilidge, for the sake of his Religious
Opinions, and that, no man ought to be Compelled by Temporal Penalties to
perform an Act of Religious Worship against his Conscience, Such a Person is
always prepared to give a Ready Answer; l'ts fit that all such Laws, as tend to
do either of these, should be Repealed; because they Tend to Alter such
Fundamental Maxims as should ever be preserved Inviolable, the One in reference
to Civil Rights the other in reference to the Christian Religion: But where the
Question meets not with any such Settled Principle; but either the Contrary
Opinion, or that present Policies of State may Govern in deciding it: In this
latter Case, Honor and Prudence both, may be pleaded against a Pre-engagement,
until they Arrive to a Satisfaction therein, by Debates on this Subject in
Parliament. Who sees not, that there is a vast difference between a previous
Obligation to a positive Vote in Parliament, and your Refusal to perform Such a
Ministerial Act, in Obedience to the King's Order, which you have never
Scrupled to do in Obedience to any Order of your Ordinary, or his Officials,
without any regard had to the matter published.

But I perceive, You are now upon your Politics, and you would therefore have
it, That these Noblemen and Gentlemen, are already Engag^d in the same Cause
with your Selves, or if they be not, you do your Best that they may be so, and
not be Reconciled to their Prince; For then you Suppose your Church would Fall,
and not only So; but that if it Fall this Way, You have no Reason to Expect It
should Ever-Rise again. And these Consequences you would have to pass for
Demonstrations, and from your Foresight of the Event, make as much Conscience
of Reading the Declaration, as of Destroying the Protestant Religion and
Interest, together with the Church of England: I will not give my Self the
Liberty for your Churches Sake, to Dilate upon the Surmises; I take them to be
the Effect only of a Sudden Vertigo, raised by an Imagination, that You are
upon the Top of a Precipice in imminent Danger of a Destructive Fall; When in
Truth, though you are in the ASCENT above any of your Fellow Subjects; yet you
have there a broad Space to Walk upon as long as you please and a safe Descent
into the Plain, to others of your Companions when you please, and are in no
Danger at all of Falling Down, from any other Cause, but the Swimming* Conceit
of your Own Head.

If it were not so, You would never have taken the Method you have done, to
draw your Conclusion from such Comparison of Consequences, as you have made; to
Disoblige all the Nobility and Gentry, is likely to be much more Fatal, then to
Anger the Dissenters. Would you have it Conceited, That you have Engaged the
Nobility and Gentry by a Positive Promise, upon no Terms to part with the Penal
Laws, or give the Dissenters any Ease, till you Signify to them, by Reading
the Declaration, That it is an Opportunity, wherein they may Do it without any
Danger?

Have you no Cause, as you are a Minister of the Gospel, to relent at the Hard
Measure, which You, and Others by your Instigation have Meted out to the
Dissenters of all Sorts? Suppose, All the Nobility and Gentry were against the
Repealing of Penal Laws, Yet I should think, If you set your Thoughts upon the
proper Discharge of your Function, that Equal Justice and Clemency would Govern
your Determinations more then all Worldly Policy.

But you are for putting a Question Ironically, and Answering it plainly and
positively: Cannot the King keep his Promise to the Church of England, if the
Test and Penal Laws be Repealed? Your Answer is, We cannot say, but this may
be; And yet the Nation does not think fit to try it; and if the Question were
put to us, We think We ought in Conscience to deny them Our Selves, and we
Commend those Great Men that deny it.

This looks as if your Passions were in a high Ferment, and yet there is some
appearance of an Artifice in it: It Sounds with what follows, as if you had an
Assurance, That the gene ^a Vogue of the Nation, is under your management and
direction, either to have or not to have a Parliament, to Repeal or not Repeal
the Test and Penal Laws, as you please, -- For say you, Are there not as high
Probabilities, that our reading the Declaration will Promote the Repeal of the
Test and Penal Laws, as that such a Repeal will Ruin our Constitution and
bring in Popery?

Herein you show your selves, to be greater Artists the Doctrine of
Probabilities then any College of Jesuits, whilst you persist in your
Disobedience to the Kings Order, and will not read it: The Nation does not
think fit to try; But if you Return to your Obedience and Read, you shall
thereby induce them to Try and Promote the Repeal. Let me for once after your
Example (tho I come One Thousand degrees short of your skill in the Doctrine)
Conjecture at a few probable Points.

First, It seems to me that you are convinced in your Conscience that there is
Such an innate Virtue and Power in the matter o^ the King's Declaration, as
will command an Assent in the minds of them that hear and consider it; whence
it may be, That you think in your Conscience it is not safe for your Interest
to Read it.

Secondly, If you were not under some such Conviction, it is probable you would
make as little Conscience to read it, as you did any of those Censures or
Orders, which you cannot otherwise justify, than as you therein only performed
a Ministerial / Act, in Obedience to your Superiors.

Thirdly, It Is very probable, that it is also from hence, that in your
Reasonings, you run altogether upon the Topics of Trusting to the King's
Promise, and upon a Repeal of the Test and Penal Laws, and speak not a Word;
either of the King's making no doubt of the Concurrence of his two houses of
Parliament (when he shall think sit to call them) to this Declaration of
Indulgence, (which he mentions in the first Paragraph of it) or of His
Majesty's Conjuring His Subjects to lay aside all private Animosities, as well
as ground less Jealousies, and to choose such Members of Parliament, as may do
their part to finish what he has begun, (in the close of it) or of any of the
Clauses throughout the whole of it, or of His Majesty's Endeavors to establish
Liberty of Conscience on such just and equal Foundations, as will vender it
unalterable, and secure to all People the free Exercise of their Religion for
ever.

Now if this be plainly manifest, (as it is in its self, and will appear to
every Man who is not scared by you from considering it) that it is not any one
Single Clause but the whole and every part of the Declaration, that the King
seeks to have Established by a Perpetual Law; and that he would have this
speedily Effected. Why is it that you descant so much upon His Royal Promise,
(of the stedfastness whereof, we have had so general an Experience) as if that
were all the Security intended to Perpetuity; unless you have still a Mind to
Monopolize the Laws to your selves, and that none of His Subjects should have
the Benefit of any Law, but such as will (though it be contrary to their
Conscience) Conform to a Tittle to your Measures and Modes of Worship?

Lastly, It may be also probable, if a Parliament be speedily called, as His
Majesty declares he intends it shall be, that they, when they are met, will
wisely Consider, how both to gratify the King in what he desires, and secure
the Subject in all their Properties, Civil and Religious: For the Sum of all
that is to be Granted, de Novo, Is Liberty of Conscience, to worship God
without incurring any temporal damage by it. What things are already settled by
Law, as to the Religion of the Church of England, and their Possessions, are so
to continue, and be confirmed to them. And if such a New Law be contrived to
this Purpose, as may continue for ever, it will require such Ingredients to be
in it, as may by the Provisions therein made, (which the Wisdom of Parliament
will readily suggest,) render it stable and perpetual, and it may be in
particular, such as may prevent your suggested Jealousies of Priests and
Jesuits; and also, keep you as well as them, within the Spheres of your proper
Function, that all of the Clergy who expect the Benefit of other Laws, shall
subscribe t before your Eyes, that no Royal Promise, no settled Laws, no common
Interest can dispel it, so as to give a Discerning of the proper Means to
Arrive at a secure Establishment?

Bear with my Expostulations; I am coming to a Close.

It is not desired you should Part with any Laws in ^^ing, but such only as are
the Causes of an Vnjustifiable ^^pression, and consequently of an Unavoidable
Contention.

If you can justify the Compelling of any Man ^y Temporal Punishments, to
Worship God contrary to his Understanding and Conscience, bring out your strong
Reasons for it, that all who are otherwise minded may be Convinced; But if you
cannot do this, bring your Mind to do, and permit Right to be done to all Men
herein: Even your Enemies, that they may have no just Quarrel against you, nor
seek by any undue Attempt, to wrest themselves from under your Power: Neither
you nor any others* have any Reason to fear a Downfall; if you are willing to
depart from the Ways of Opression.

It is not desired, that any Laws in being, should be Removed by any other
means, but by Introducing such as are Just, Equal, and of much greater security
in their stead: Do not conceit your self safe (and that you can be secured
o^^^) under the Continuance of Unequal and Oppressive Laws; such as (...) just
humane Nature, Christian Grace, and Known Maxims of the Law of the Land.

I Consider how you close your Letter, That if you were never so desirous that
the Dissenters might have their Liberty, yet you cannon consent they should
have it this Way, which they will find the dearest Liberty that ever was
Granted: I am afraid from First to Last, le^st I should mistake your Meaning;
You have said before, You dare not ^each the Dispensin^ Power* till you have
the Authority of Parliament for it; You cannot Read the Declaration, because it
is to Recommend to your People, the Choice of such Persons to Sit in
Parliament, as shall take away the Test and Penal Laws: So that you suggest, as
there is no Authority, so you are not willing there ever should be any
countenance given by Authority, Either to Dispense With, or to Repeal Penal
Laws against Dissenters; Where to do your Desires that they should have Liberty
Tend? You cannot consent they should have it This Way; that is, by a Dispensing
Power; nor that Way, that is* by a Repeal. In your next, I Pray signify what
means you Propose, that are effectual for the Accomplishment of your Desires;
and if upon the Contemplations thereof, you cannot find any Means in common Use
heretofore, so effectual for making Way for Removal of Spiritual Oppressions as
the stirring up the Hearts of Princes: In the first Place, To give the Subjects
ease, by Discountenancing and Suspending such Laws, as are the Occasion of
their Oppression. And in the next place, By the Royal Assent to the Advice of
their great Council, to Repeal such Laws, and Establish better, and more equal
in their stead;

Return to your Obedience, and acknowledge it is just and equal that together
with your own Perpetual Establishment by Law, Dissenters of all sorts, should
by the same Law be secured in that which is THEIR RIGHT by the Law of GOD and
NATURE, in common with all mankind; not to be Compelled to Worship contrary to
their Consciences, but to enjoy a just, and duly-stated Liberty to Worship God
according to their Consciences; and that measure of Understanding of the Will
of God, that he has, or shall please to Reveal to them: And if you can remove
your Prejudice, and come to a right Mind in these things, I doubt not, but they
will Incline you, not barely to Read the Kings Declaration in your Churches;
but also to Recommend to your Auditors, ( from the Consideration of the
Reasonableness, Righteousness, and Clemency of it) the Choice of such Members
to serve in Parliament, as may Happily Finish that, which His Majesty has
therein Proposed, and Mercifully Begun.

LONDON: Printed by G. Larkin, at the Two Swans without Bishopsgate. 1688.


