Dr. Walker's Invisible Champion FOILED: OR, AN APPENDIX To the late Narrative
of the Siege of Derry: WHEREIN All the Arguments offered in a late Pamphlet to
prove it a False LIBEL, are EXAMINED and REFUTED.

By JOHN MACKENZIE, Publisher of the said Narrative.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and Sold by the Booksellers of London. 1690.

Dr. WALKER's Invisible Champion FOILED, etc.
I Am sorry to find Dr. Walker's Reputation sunk so low, that his Friend who
undertakes his Defense, dare not publish his Name. For since he dare not, and
yet makes so bold with other Men's Reputations, he looks much more like a
Libeller than one who by owning what he writes, renders himself accountable to
the Public for the Truth of it. And if I may make any conjecture about my
Accuser, either from this disingenuous Practice, or from his admirable Style
and Humor (which are all of a piece with it,) it is the same Gentleman that
wrote Remarks on Mr. Osborn's Vindication: But I fear he will have as little
success in disproving what he calls a Libel against Dr. Walker, as he had in
justifying, or rather palliating the Doctors real Libel against Mr. Osborn: And
as Mr. B. was better employed than to throw away his time in refuting such a
heap of falsehoods as his former Scribble contained, dressed up in a medley of
Grub-street and Billings-gate, so should I have served this, if he had not
endeavored to amuse the World with some show of Proof for the few things he
has to say against my Narrative.

It Is no inconsiderable Argument of the Truth of that Relation, that one whose
Inclination and Interest led him to take so much pains to blast the Credit of
it, has produced no greater Objections against it. There being not above two or
three passages, and only one of any moment in the Narrative it self that he
ventures to nibble at: For the greatest part of his Powder and Shot is spent
against a passage or two in the Preface, where he tells us the Venom lies. But
how little execution he has done either on the Preface, or on the Narrative,
will appear by a particular examination of all that is material in his
Certificates about 'em: For the scurrilous Humor which he will needs without
any occasion given him vent against Religion, I think it unworthy of my notice.

I have said in the Preface to my Narrative, That that part of it which gives
an Account of the Siege of Derry it self, was offered by me to be reviewed by
such of the Officers of Derry as are now in Town, several of whom, as Colonel
Crofton, Colonel Murray, Lieutenant Colonel Blair, Capt. Alexander Sanderson,
etc. having heard it read in the presence of Sir Arthur Rawdon, Sir Arthur
Langford, Colonel Upton, and several other Gentlemen, and being desired upon
every material Paragraph to object against any thing either misrepresented or
omitted in that Relation, freely professed their assent to it.

Here are two things asserted, That that part of the Narrative was offered to
be reviewed by such of the Officers of Derry as were then in Town: And that
several of 'em, particularly those named, had heard it read, and freely
professed their Assent to it.

Against which, after abundance of such language as is suitable to his
Breeding, he produces three Certificates; and I doubt not but he may obtain
many more of the same kind from the like Persons.

Against the former Assertion he brings a Certificate of 17. called Derry
Officers, then in Town, who declare, They never saw my Narrative before it was
printed, and do not now approve of it, p. 3. 4.

Now if he please to put on his Spectacles, and compare the words of the
Preface with those of this Certificate a little better, He may perhaps be able
to discern, that the contradiction betwixt 'em lay only in his Imagination,
That it might be offered to be reviewed by those who had not leisure or
inclination to be present at the reading of it. And that it was ^^tually
offered to be reviewed by the Chief Officers of the Regiments he mentions; and
that they were desired to bring any others with 'em that they thought capable
of giving me any Information, appears by the following Certificate.

WE whose Names are subscribed, do hereby Certisie, That on the 28th of
February last past, we consented and agreed with Coll. Murray, Coll. Hamil,
Lieutenant Coll. Blair, and Capt. Sanderson, to meet at the Fountain Tavern in
the Strand on the next day, being the first of March, to peruse that part of
Mr. Mackenzie's Narrative which related to the Siege of Londonderry, and
desired the said Gentlemen to inform Coll. Crofton, and any other Officers they
knew in London, that were capable to give any account of the said Seige, all
which Persons might have liberty to hear the said Account, and be admitted to
make any objections thereto before it was printed.

Witness our hands this 22d of May, 1690. Art. Langford. Will. Conyngham.

And now let the Reader judge, whether the everlasting Shame with which he
would charitably brand me on this occasion, be not much more due to his
Ignorance or Malice, or both. I would here only add, That whether these 17
Persons mentioned in this Certificate approve the Narrative or no, I think my
self little concerned, unless they had showed me any mistakes in it. Some of
'em it may be did very good Service; but for others of em perhaps they may
dislike it, because it makes no more mention of themselves: But that was not
any defect of mine, but their misfortune, in having done nothing more
memorable; besides, some of them are not in the list of Officers, which I had
from the only Store-keeper: But it is fit to return them as such, that they may
do some service.

Against the latter Assertion he produces two Certificates, one of Colonel
Crofton's, that I did not read all that part that related to Derry, (he should
have said the Siege of Derry,) and that he objected several things against it,
and does not assent to, or approve of it. Another of Captain Sanderson's, that
he did not assent to two particulars viz. The Articles against Dr. Walker, and
the discouraging Sermon, not knowing any thing of 'em.

For Captain Sanderson's Certificate, It Is no way contradictory to the true
intent of the Preface, which in asserting their Assent to the Narrative, cannot
be reasonably thought to imply, they personally knew the Truth of every
particular related in it. It Is sufficient that there was no passage they could
object against the Truth of: But how little regard is due to either of these
Certificates, so far as they contradict what is said in the Preface to the
Narrative, will appear by the Testimony of the following Gentlemen then
present, whose Credit must be allowed by all that know 'em sufficient to
overpoize theirs in this matter.

WE whose Names are subscribed, do Certify, That that part of Mr. John
Mackenzie's Narrative, which relates to the Siege of Londonderry,
(particularly the passages now controverted in the Pamphlet, entitled, Mr.
Mackenzie's Narrative a false Libel) was (before the printing of it) on the
first of March last, at the Fountain Tavern in the Strand, read in our presence
and hearing, before Coll. Murray, Coll. Crofton, Lieutenant Coll. Blair,
Captain Alexander Sanderson, and Captain Samuel Murray, late Officers at Derry,
who being frequently desired and urged while it was a reading to object freely
against any thing either misrepresented or omitted in that Relation; and to
that purpose several stops and pauses being made at the end of material
Paragraphs, told us that where they made no Objection, we might take it for
their assent to what was read, and accordingly there were but two or three
passages about which any doubt was raised, and even as to those, the Objectors
upon hearing the Debates about them, acquiesc'd in the Evidence given by others
for the truth of them; particularly Coll. Crofton, and Captain Sanderson owned
the change of the Government (page 30.) to be truly represented; the former
also owned that there were such Articles against Dr. Walker, and the latter
denied not his having heard frequently of them.

Given under our hands this 8th of May, 1690. Jo. Cuningham. Arth. Rawdon. Art.
Langford. Arthur Upton. David Cairnes, Sam. Bull. W. Cuningham. Joh. Abernethy
J. Boyse.


I must add, That this Certificate from Coll. Crofton is the more strange,
because he not only confirmed what is said of Coll. Lundy, Dr. W. and Major.
General Kirk, which he has also since owned before Sergeant Osborn, and other
Gentlemen, but acquainted us with some passages that on his Information were
inserted: Nor do any then present remember any material Objections he made,
except one, which was against the Meeting, (which at Coll. Lundy's persuasions
signed a Paper of Surrender) being called a Council; but he could not deny what
is said of 'em to be true; and whatever Names he would now assign 'em, they
then called themselves a Council. And now for the civil Language, of a Spirit
of Lying, brassy Impudence, bold Asseverations, gross Prevarication, studied
and deliberate Lie, etc. which this Pamphleteer uses on this occasion; the
Reader will better understand where to apply it.

For the Articles against Dr. W. I need no other Instance of this Gentleman's
extraordinary Confidence, than his saying they were never exhibited but in my
Narrative. It Is a sign he is an entire Stranger to Derry, that has the face to
deny what was so publicly known there, and there are yet so many living
Witnesses of. But as this Advocate of Dr. W -- 's, has said nothing to disprove
the Articles themselves, so his big words about 'em do not much affright me.
Dr. W. will I suppose be wiser than to offer himself to a fair Trial upon 'em;
And whether in such a Trial he be cleared or cast, concerns not the truth of my
Narrative, which only affirms such Articles were drawn up, and a considerable
number of Officers engaged to prosecute him upon 'em, till Governor Baker
diverted 'em, by offering to put the Government into the hands of the Council
of 14. whereof he was made President: And it is not probable, they would
undertake to bring such a charge against him without strong presumptions of the
Truth of it.

The next thing which this Pamphleteer falls upon, is to prove Dr. W. Governor
of the Garrison as well as the Stores: That he was Governor of the Stores, and
therein Assistant to Governor Baker, is asserted in the Narrative, and no way
denied in the Preface: But that the care of the Military Affairs of the
Garrison was committed to him, or that he showed himself a Hero in the
management of 'em, is not asserted in the Narrative, because it is not true,
and therefore the Preface does but justly expose his pretenosins to it.

Now to prove Dr. W. Governor of the Garrison, as to the Military Affairs of
it as well as Governor of the Stores: Here are 3 Certificates produced, one
signed by 17, called Derry-Officers, another by Captain Bennet, and a 3d by Mr.
Squire (whom he calls the present Mayor.)

On which I need only make the following Reflections, to show the insufficiency
of 'em, to the end for which they are brought.

1. He has not (tho great pains were taken to that purpose) produced the
Testemony of one Officer for what he asserts concerning Dr. W's. being chosen
Governor, that was present to vote at the Election of Governor Baker on the
19th of April. For Colonel Crofton, I can show him a Paper under his own hand,
wherein he affirms that Colonel Baker was sole Governor of the Garrison. What
Lieutenant Coll. Blair has said of that matter, will appear in its due place:
And for Colonel Murray, he did to the Doctors Face deny him to have been
Governor of the Garrison, before the Commit of his Majesty's Privy Council,
Coll. Hamil, and Lieut. Coll. Blair, being then present, and not offering to
contradict what he said, tho the Dr. made his appeal to 'em. And sure these
Gentlemen that sign this Certificate, cannot pretend to know that matter better
than those who were present when it was transacted. And even some of these very
Persons have frequently declared the quite contrary to what they here certify,
as Capt. Macullogh, Capt. Watson, etc. so little regard is due to their
Assertions, who are so little constant to themselves.

2. It Is strange that neither these 17 Persons nor the Pamphleteer for 'em,
should offer the least syllable to invalidate the Truth of those matters of
fact which plainly overthrow what they here certify.

I might upon a little more leisure have produced the Testimonies of more of
those present at Governor Bakers Election, for the Truth of what is there
related; but I need 'em not while the matters of Fact there mentioned stand
uncontradicted. It Is strange that Dr. W. should be chosen Governor of the
Garrison, and the Military Affairs of it, when he did not so much as stand a
Candidate with Coll. Baker, and the other two Competitors; nay when he was not
so much as present till after Coll. Baker was elected Governor, and the
Regiments were concluded on: And as it is in it self a most improbable thing,
that they should in their circumstances, while their Safety entirely depended
on their Union, set up two Governors entrusted with equal Power, and much more
that they should commit the Military Affairs to one who they knew could not
pretend to the least Skill or Conduct in 'em; so the falsehood of it is evident
from the very reason alleged by Coll. Baker for desiring an Assistant, and
from what he spoke on that occasion, and from the Nomination of his Assistant
being left to himself. Besides the frequent Attempts of Dr. W. to assume more
to himself, and the vehement opposition he still met with in all of 'em, See
Narrat. P. 37, 38. 44.
plainly show the Vanity of his pretensions: For if he was Governor of the
Garrison, he was such a one whose Authority was so very insignificant and
contemptible in it, that were it not for the liberal Reward that Name has so
luckily produced him, he had better never laid any claim to it: But with the
good leave of the Writer of the Epistle, annexed to the end of that Pamphlet,
these passages do not merely prove that his Government was opposed, as he would
now gladly color the matter, but that his pretensions to the Military part of
it were rejected with disdain by the major part of the Garrison, who were
forced by such rude treatment to check his busy confident Humor, in
incermedling with more than belonged to his Province.

3. It Is yet more strange, That these 17 Persons should never acquaint us with
the manner of his being chosen Governor as to the Military Affairs, nor give
us the least Instance of one thing done by him in pursuance of his Trust as
such a Governor.

These 17 Persons speak not one syllable of the manner of his being chosen
Governor: But perhaps that defect may be thought abundantly supplied in the
Certificate of Gervase Squire, Esquire which I shall set down at length, that what
I shall offer to invalidate it may appear the more plain and unexceptionable.

I Do hereby Certify, that Dr. George Walker, during all the time of the Siege
of the City of Londonderry, and until Major General Kirk came into the said
City, executed the Office and Place of Governor of the same joint with
Colonel Henry Baker, until the said Bakers sckning (of which he diel) and
after with Colonel Job. Mitchelburn, who was in a general meeting of the
Field, and other Officers of the said Garrison, elected to act as Governor in
the said Bakers place, (during his sickness) as well in all things relating to
Military Affairs, as in seeing the Provisions gathered and distributed; the
management of the Provisions to the best advantage, was a great means by which
the said City held out so long: And I do also certify, that it being agreed
upon by the said Governors and Council, that I should administer an Oath of
Fidelity (then agreed upon to be taken by the said Governors and Council,) I
administered the said Oath to the said Dr. Walker, and Coll. Baker, as
Governors of the said City (the said Dr. Walker having the Precedence) as well
as to the Members of the said Council, all which I am ready to depose upon
Oath, if required: And I do further certify, that I never saw a Pamphlet
entitled, A Narrative of the Siege of Londonderry, or any part of it,
published by Mr. John Mackenzie, until after it was printed; and having perused
it since, I do not approve of it.

Witness my hand the 9th day of April, 1690. Ger. Squire, Mayor.

I shall not now insist on it, That as Mr. Squire was not then Mayor of that
City; so his Reputation is not of so great weight as this Pamphleteer would in
kindness to Dr. Walker make it: But I shall by clearing those matters of Fact
which this Certificate gives a very confused Account of, show its weakness and
falsehood.

To this purpose the Reader must know, That neither Coll. Baker, nor Dr. W.
were sworn at all at the time of their Election, viz. the 19th day of April,
(nor indeed any of those that were then made Colonels.) The occasion of their
being sworn was this: The greatest part of the Officers in the Garrison were in
May extremely jealous of the Treacherous Designs of Dr. W. and to a high degree
disgusted with Governor Baker himself for giving so much ear to the advice of
one, of whose Integrity they had so deep a suspicion. Governor Baker to remove
all occasion of their sears, and give them full satisfaction in that matter,
agreed to the Motion of putting the Government into the hands of a Council of
14. of which they were contented Governor Baker should be the President,
(every Regiment deputing one to sit in it, and both City and Country having
some to represent 'em.) And if Mr. Squire had pleased to acquaint us what the
Oath was which he administered, it would have cleared the whole Affair. For it
was no more than this, That they should be true to the Garrison, and have no
Treaty with the Enemy, without the Knowledge and Order of that Council. Nor was
there any difference in the Oath as taken by Governor Baker, by Dr. W. or any
other Member of that Council. Now when this Council of 14. had the Government
put into their hands, when Coll. Baker was the only President of it, when Dr.
W. had no more power than any other Member in it (his Concern in the Stores
excepted) when the Oath Administered to all of 'em was the same, with what face
can this Gentleman pretend to have Administered this Oath to Governor Baker and
Dr. Walker as Governors of the said City: Nay, to have allowed D. Walker the
Precedence, who was not President of the Council? For if he were sworn first in
these Circumstances, it could be no other than a mere complement paid to his
gown; for the precedence was evidently due to Coll. Baker, and Mr. Squire could
not (whatever he might intend) by Administering that Oath to Mr. Walker make him
any more a Governor of the Garrison, than each Member of that Council might as
justly pretend to be. Note here, that Mr. Squire in this Certificate mentions
not one word of Dr. Walkers being chosen Governor.

Having said so much to Mr. Squire's, I need say the less to Capt. Bennet's
Certificate. For not to mention the Obscurity of his Expressions concerning Dr.
Walker's Governourship, it is strange that he should not only insinuate that
Colonel Baker and Dr. Walker were Sworn at the time of their Election; but
that this was during his stay there, both which are notoriously false. The
Election was on the 19th. of April: The Oath was Administered about the latter
end of May; And both by Dr. Walker's Account, and the Relation that is said to
be published by himself, Captain Bennet left Derry about 23d. or 24th. of
April. And so insignificant is his Certificate, as well as false, that were all
true that he says concerning Dr. Walkers signing any Writings with Colonel
Baker to Lieutenant General Hamilton, or giving him a little Money to bear his
Charges, or being called a Governor in the Irish Army: It Is all consistent
enough with his being Governor of the Stores only, if we consider his
forwardness, and Colonel Baker's Complaisance. And Captain Bennet might by
these weak Arguments, be as easily led to fancy that Dr. Walker was chosen
Governor of the Garrison, as he was that Colonel Murray was chosen the
General of their Forces, because he usually led 'em out in their Sallyes, as is
asserted in the printed Relation which is known to be Mr. Bennet's. But that
the Reader may the better conjecture what it was indeed that moved Captain
Bennet to Sign such a paper for Dr. Walker, do but observe the following
Certificate from two of Derry Officers.

WE whose Names are Subscribed, do Certify, that about the 20th. of April
last, being in Company with Captain Joseph Bennet in the City of London, and
Discoursing about his and our going for Ireland, he demanded whether we had
owned or approved of Mr. John Mackenzies Narrative of the Siege of
Londonderry, declaring to us, that if we did, we-needed not go for Ireland
with any expectation of Employment in the Army there; nor any who would not
express their dislike or disapproving of the same, by reason of Major General
Kirks and Doctor Walkers Influence there, or words to that purpose.

As witness our Hands this 12th. Day of June. 1690. Samuel Murray. Alexander
Heron.

And as none of the Certificates allege any thing done by Dr. Walker as
Governor in respect of the Military Affairs, so I would desire his Advocate to
give us some Instances of that kind, which methinks 'twere an easy matter to
have done, if his pretensions were true. For I hope they will not allow him to
have been a mere Cipher in that Station; And a few such Instances would have
signified more than all these Certificates. And one would think, as my
Narrative mentions, so many things done by Colonel Baker as plainly show, that
he had the Conduct of their Military Affairs: So Dr. Walkers account should
furnish us with the like Evidence of his sharing with him in that part of the
Government. I have to that purpose reviewed his Narrative, and shall (to
supererogate for once) take the pains to examine all the passages that give the
least ground to imagine that the Military Affairs of the Garrison were under
his Conduct.

In p. 21. of Dr. Walker's Account, it is said, the Governors divide the
Outline into 8 parts, and each Regiment had it is own ground, and each Company
knew their own Bastion -- The Drummers were enjoined to quarter in one House.

Now the Division of the Outline was made by the Officers themselves; and the
quartering the Drummers in one House, was the contrivance of Governor
Mitchelburn, and that not till the last Month of the Siege. And the enjoining
all parties to forget their Distinctions, etc. and to betake themselves to
their several Devotions, mentioned in the same page, was an Order I never heard
of in Derry: But those who have so liberally given Dr. Walker the Conduct of
our Military Affairs, might very well (to carry on the Humor) give him the
Conduct of our Ecclesiastical too, and make him Bishop, as well as Governor of
the City.

In p. 24. Mr. Walker is said to have found it necessary to Mount one of the
Horses, to make our flying Horse rally, and to relieve Colonel Murray.

Now though this grand Feat it self be no very-convincing Argument of his
Governourship; because it might be done by him as Colonel of a Regiment, (it
being more proper for a Colonel, than a Governor to expose himself to so
Eminent hazards) yet the Credit of it is much more spoiled by the unhappy
Disputes that have arisen about the matter of Fact. For some have started such
cross questions about the Armor of the Rider, as well as the Color of the
Horse, as I fear will go near to dismount the Doctor in the next Edition of
that Account, and leave Colonel Murray to get off as well as he can without
him.

In p. 26. Mr. Walker is said to draw a Detachment of 10 Men out of each
Company, and (after putting 'em into the best order their impatience could
allow) to Sally out at the Head of them, with all imaginable silence at
Ferry-key-gate.

Now I have heard indeed, that Governor Baker and other Officers were about to
Detach such a number of every Company; But the Soldiers were too eager to wait
any of those Formalities, and ran out in what order best pleased themselves.
But I never was informed before, that Mr. Walker was so foolishly prodigal of
his Life, as to Sally out at the Head of 'em: For if he did so, it was not only
with all imaginable silence, but with so wonderful Secrecy too, as to be
neither seen nor heard by any of those that are said to follow him. No he
understood his Post in the Stores too well to expose his person in any of the
Sallyes. And therefore the Gentleman that wrote the Vindication of his Account
might have spared that long and Learned Apology he has made for the Doctor, as
if in the Siege he had been fore't to do so many things inconsistent with the
Character of a Clergyman. For as to the Enemy, he was a Man of Peace all the
time, and was guilty of Shedding no other Blood to Stain his Coat with, but
that of the grape.

In p. 26. It Is said the Enemy hung out a white Flag, to invite us to a Treaty,
and Mr. Walker ventured out to come within hearing of the Lord of Louth and
Colonel Oneal, and in his passage, had 100 shot fired at him, but he got the
shelter of a House, and upbraided 'em with this perfidious dealing, and bid 'em
order their Men to be quiet, or he would command all the Guns on the Walls to
be fired at 'em.

Now besides that Dr. Walker might be sent on a Treaty without being Governor
of the Garrison, (as several others were;) I have heard some incredulous people
say, that the smoke of the 100 shot was as invisible as the flying of the
Bullets; and they could not imagine whereabouts the House stood (all without
the Gates, next the Irish Camp, being pulled down) that so happily yielded the
Doctor a safe shelter, till he could call to the Men on the Walls to fire the
Guns at these Treacherous Villains.

In p. 32. It Is but barely asserted (and without the least ground) that
Colonel Mitchelburn was appointed during Governor Baker's Sickness to Assist
Governor Walker, that while the one commanded in the Sallyes, the other might
take care of the Town.

On the contrary, Colonel Mitchelburn was Deputed by Governor Baker to his
own Post, and consequently Mr. Walker was only his Assistant, and as I presume
that Dr. Walker will no more pretend to have Commanded in the Sallyes, so the
Garrison by this time understood him too well to lay any great stress on his
care of the Town.

In p. 33. It Is said by the Contrivance of our Governor and Colonel
Mitchelburn, etc. we Countermine the Enemy before Butcher's- Gate.

It Is a sign how he minded those Affairs, that talks of our Counter-mining the
Enemy: For neither they nor we ever drew a Mine. We did indeed Counter-line
'em, but this was purely Governor Mitchelburn's Contrivance, and 'twas a
double injury in Dr. Walker, at once to rob him of the sole Honor of that
Action, and the Title of Governor too.

In p. 37, 38. There is a pleasant story about the Suspicions of the Garrison
concerning Dr. Walker, occasioned by some Discourse of one Mr. Cole, whom Dr.
Walker is said to have confined on the account of it, etc.

Now the story is strangely misplac't at the end of the Siege; whereas Captain
Cole came into Town about the 9th. or 12th. of May: And he was confined by
Governor Baker, not Mr. Walker; and that not for any Discourses against Mr.
Walker; but on Suspicion of his being an Agent for the Enemy, among whom he had
been detained for some time. And so far were the Garrison from being brought to
a better Opinion of Mr. Walker by any thing Mr. Cole discovered (as is here
idly suggested) that soon after in the same Month, the Articles against him
were drawn up.

And yet these are the only passages in that Account, that carry any color of
an Argument for Dr. Walker's being Governor as to the Military Affairs. And
sure if he was such a Governor, he was not so extremely modest, but he might
have given us some true Instances of his Military Conduct, especially when he
had the confidence to impose upon the World so many mistaken ones. Likewise the
Doctor will have Captain Darcy to be prisoner in Derry, and one of the Signers
of the Letter, with the Lord Nettervile, etc. to Lieut. General Hamilton, the
beginning of July, when it is certain, the said Darcy left Derry before May, 3
or 4 days, Mr. Walker being privy to it.

And as these three Considerations are sufficient to blast the Credit of these
three Certificates, so far as they contradict either the Narrative or the
Preface, so for the three Letters annexed, viz. of Captain Alexander Sandersons,
Lieutenant Colonel Blair's, and from the Officers of Colonel Lance's
Regiment, I shall only say, that as they were written to Dr. Walker, to beg his
Recommendation of 'em, so they only give him the Name of Governor, (which the
Narrative owns was often given him, as Colonel Baker's Assistant in reference
to the Stores.) And these Letters are not the only Evidence, how fulsom
Complements, necessity and hope of Preferment (especially hearing that nothing
was to be done at Court for them, but by Dr. Walker's Interest) has drawn from
too many of 'em, to one of whom they expressed other thoughts before. For Captain
Alexander Sanderson, how particularly he approved what the Narrative relates
concerning the change of the Government, was before observed from the Testimony
of such as were present. For Lieutenant Colonel Blair, that the Title of
Governor wherewith he Complemented Dr. Walker, was never intended by him any
otherwise than I have explained, appears not only by the foresaid Testimonial,
but by the following Certificate also.

I do hereby Certify, that about the 15th. Day of of April last, Lieutenant
Colonel Thomas Blair declared to me in the presence of Mr. John Mackenzy, that
he was earnestly Solicited to Sign a Certificate contradictory to the said Mr.
Mackenzie's Narrative, and was threatened if he refused, with the danger he
might be exposed to by Major General Kirk's, and Dr. Walker's Interest, when he
returned to Ireland: But he refused to Sign any such thing; he added also, that
though he had in Ireland Subscribed two Letters, one of his own, the other with
some other Officers of his Regiment; wherein they had Complemented Dr. Walker
with the Title of Governor, in hopes of being by his Interest put on the new
Establishment: Yet he knew, and was ready to give it under his Hand, that be
acted only as Governor of the Stores.

Given under my Hand this 8th of May. 1690. John Abernethy.

And as this Discourse of the Lieut. Collonel's unriddles the whole Mystery of
these seeming contradictions, in what these Gent. write and speak concerning
Dr. W. so it gives a shrewd specimen of the Artifices (of Threats as well as
Flattery) used to suppress the plain Truth in these matters: For that such
methods have not been tried with him alone, appears by so many of 'em having
changed their Note soon after they came to this Town.

For the Arguments to prove Dr. W's Governourship from its being owned by the
King, the Parliament, the Privy Council, London, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Cambridge
and Oxford, I shall only add, that as I know not that they have owned him
Governor in any such sense as I have here opposed, ( viz. with reference to
the Military Affairs of the Garrison) so if they have done it, it is a much
stronger Proof of that Gentleman's extraordinary Confidence in imposing such a
Mistake on 'em, than of their Weakness in believing it at first, 'till better
informed; but I suppose if he will enquire better, he will find several of 'em are
undeceived, and of another Opinion. And if on the score of this small Trick,
and the admirable success of it, he will needs compare Dr. W. with the English
Rogue, Spanish Gusman, and Crafty Clansy, he may (as being related to him) use
the greater freedom with him; but most People will beg his Pardon for thinking
it so great a piece of Wit to lead those who had only his own Account of that
Matter, and the Account of such as designedly abetted him, into that Mistake
concerning him.

And so much for Dr. W's Governourship.

The only material Passage that relates to the Narrative of the Siege against
which the Pamphleteer has any thing to except, is the Article against Dr. W.
for Embezelling the Stores, and the Order occasioned, thereby that his Note
should not be accepted by the Store-keepers, unless signed by Gov. Baker or
Major Adams. Against this he produces a long Certificate of Mr. Curling's,
wherein he affirms that Dr. W. neither could nor did embezzle the Stores, and
he never knew the Dr's Orders disputed. Now Mr. Curling does not understand the
meaning of that Article; for the Dr. was suspected to have embezzled the Stores
by disposing of 'em when taken out of private Houses to his own advantage,
without ever suffering 'em to come into the Store-keepers hands. And as my
Narrative only affirms this to have been one of the Articles, so the Officers
concerned in drawing 'em up, thought themselves capable of proving it, and the
Order mentioned was really made on that occasion; and if Mr. Curling himself
never saw the Dr's Orders disputed, others as well as my self have several
times seen his Note rejected by Mr. Harvey on this very Account, that neither
Gov. Baker's nor Major Adams his Hand were annexed to it, and after their
Decease Governor Mitchelburn's.

But there is one dangerous Paragraph in that Certificate of Mr. Curling's,
which I must take notice of, it is the last, in these words: And lastly, I do
declare that some Persons ( concerned in putting out this Pamphlet, [ viz. The
Narrative.] as I presume) since I came to London, did come to me, and would
have drawn me by great Promises to have bespattered and abused the Reputation
of the said Dr. W.

Upon which Clause the Pamphleteer thus insults; And do not your Ears tingle?
are not your Faces covered with a Blush, who have plotted, caball'd and
contrived such a scandalous Libel, and more calumniating Preface, and now to
hear that some of you have been tampering to pervert Truth, and to add
Subornation to Bearing false Witness.

Here is a desperate Charge, but if he that brings it do not blush when I have
cleared this matter, it will be only because he has steeled his Forehead.

I hope none can be presumed a better Interpreter of Mr. Curling's words than
Mr. Curling himself, and what he meant by the Passage last quoted, will best
appear by this Certifieate of his own.

I Edward Curling do hereby Declare, that whereas it is mentioned in a
Certificate under my hand, dated the 25th. of April, which is inserted in the
Pamphlet entitled Mr. John Mackenzie 's Narrative of the Siege of Londonderry
a false Libel, etc. that some Persons since I came to London did come to me,
and would have drawn me by great Promises to have bespattered and abused the
Reputation of Dr. George Walker, that all I meant or intended therein, was only
a Discourse that one Mr. Hugh Galibraith had with me soon after I came to this
City, touching a certain Letter of Dr. Walker's, which he was told I had, and
often was very earnest to have seen or procured it, saying it should be 50
pounds in my way, or words to that effect, in case I would procure it for him;
neither were any other Proposals or Promises made to me by him or any other in
that behalf, or toward any other bespattering or abusing of Mr. Walker's
Reputation, or to have sworn any thing against him, which was never in the
least proposed to me by any Person whatsoever, which I Certify, as

Witness my Hand this 19th. day of May, 1690. Edw. Curling.
Witness. Thomas Boulton.

Here the Reader may see by his own Explication, the [some Persons] mentioned
in the former Certificate, amount only to [ one Mr. H. G.] And by the way, Mr.
G. was no more concerned in the Publishing that Narrative than the Ar. Bp. of
Tuam, George Philips Esquire or Mr. Wilkinson himself: Their drawing him by
Promises to bespatter and abuse the Reputation of Dr. W. amounts to no more
than Mr. G's encouraging him to expect so much Money for delivering up that
Letter (which by the way is a very improbable Story, and expressly denied by Mr.
G. himself.)

And now let the Pamphleteer and the other Gentlemen concerned in procuring
this Certificate clear themselves as well as they can of the guilt of Suborning
Mr. Curling to express so innocent a practice of Mr. G's, as desiring to obtain
a real Letter of so considerable importance, by so suspicious words as these;
That some Persons concerned, as he presumes, in publishing that Narrative,
would have drawn him by great Promises to have bespattered and abused the
Reputation of the said Dr. W. I am sure this looks in good earnest like shrewd
tampering to pervert Truth.

But perhaps the Reader may be curious to know what this Letter of Dr. W's was
which Mr. G. was so solicitous to procure, and what is become of it; to
gratify him therein, I shall give the best account I can of it, from the
Relation of Mr. Curling, mentioned in the following Certificate, and the rather
because it confirms what is said concerning Dr. W. in the Narrative, and shows
how little regard is due to all the good words Mr. Curling has bestowed on him
in his first Certificate.

WE the Subscribers do certify, That on the third of February last, or
thereabout; we heard Mr. Edward Curling (who had been in Londonderry during
the Siege) say publicly on the Exchange, That Mr. George Walker was never
Governor of that Garrison, but only of the Stores; and be further said, that
Mr. Walker was a great Rogue and Villain, and had endeavored to betray the
said City into the Enemies Hands: And for that end, had Corresponded with
Lieutenant General Richard Hamilton; which the said Curling affirmed, he could
prove by a Letter now in his Custody, written by Mr. Walker to the said
Lieutenant General Hamilton, the which Letter he offered to show to Mr. John
Mackenzie, and us the Subscribers at six a Clock that Evening, in expectation
whereof Mr. John Mackenzie and we waited on him at the time and place
appointed, and he accordingly met us, and having searched many papers be had in
his Portmanteu, found not the Letter, for which he appeared to be much
troubled, declaring that he believed that Captain Godfrey (to whom he had given
the Key of his Portmanteu that morning, to get out some Clothes he had in it)
had Stolen the Letter; notwithstanding the said Edward Curling very solemnly
declared, that he fully remembered the Contents of the said Letter, and could
prove the same by diverse that had seen it. The Contents of which Letter he
solemnly Affirmed, were as follows, viz. Mr. Walker first excused himself for
not performing his Engagement to the said Lieutenant General, showing that the
Mobile were in a great Tumult and Rage against him; but he hoped they would be
soon quieted, faithfully promising that he would perform his Engagement, only
requested the Lieutenant General's Patience for a little time, and that he
confidently expected the Lieutenant General would not fail the payment of the
five hundred pounds; and the securing his Life and Fortune, and procure King
James's favor to him. The Contents of this Letter as related here, he promised
to Swear before any Magistrate in the City of London, if desired. All which was
Mr. Curling's own voluntary Proposal (neither expected nor desired by us) upon
our first meeting with him in London.

Subscribed this 7th. of May. 1690. John Abernethy. Hugh Galbraith.

And now unless the Letter it self could be produced, we cannot expect any
clearer Evidence what the Contents of it were, than these two last Certificates
compared together. And as I hope Dr. Walker's Advocate will no more upbraid me
with Mr. Curling's Certificate, so he must thank his own folly (to say no
worse) that his senseless Triumphs upon it have made it necessary to lay open
this whole matter, which indeed dos sufficiently bespatter, but (if Mr. Curling
his own Witness may be believed) dos no way abuse, i. e. injure or wrong the
Reputation of Dr. W.

For the Appendix relating to Captain James Hamilton, and the passage
concerning him in Sir Arthur Rawdon's Memoirs; I need only quote Sir Arthur
Rawdon's own ingenuous Reply in a Letter to a person of Quality, a Friend of
his in Town.

-- There is one Passage in that Pamplet, because it belongs something to me, I
beg leave to take notice of, which is about Lundy's being sworn aboard the
Ship: In the first place I must needs say, I meant to particular Reflection on
Coll. James Hamilton, whose forwardness every where, especially at Cladyfoord,
are too great demonstrations of his Zeal and Integrity to the Cause, to be at
all blemished; but as it was matter of Fact, I could not omit it; for being
accidentally in that Ship with Will. Ponsonby and others, that I have forgot,
and Lundy coming aboard, after some small Discourse we were told they had
private Business, so that we withdrew out of the Cabin, and stayed above Deck
with Capt. Beverly, 'till we were wet with rain; what was done in the Cabin in
the mean time I know not, nor did I hear 'till next day, that most People were
dissatisfied with Lundy for refusing to take the Oath publicly again, tho much
pressed to it, particularly by Coll. George Philips; and tho now the excuse is,
that the Mayor was a Papist, yet they found a Protestant Mayor there who
Proclaimed the King, etc. namely, Mr. Campsie. There is a Mistake of mine taken
notice of too in the Book, viz. saying that the Officers Civil and Military,
etc. which was from my not remembering the Instructions, which I never heard but
once. I find in the Printed Book, inserted in my Memoirs, That the Bishop was
by at the Proclaiming the King, etc. tho I suppose I meant the Mayor, but the
Mistake is not great, and of no consequence. I beg your Pardon for this
trouble, etc. --

Arth. Rawdon.


I shall only add here, that as all that Sir Arthur Rawdon's Memoir says about
the Swearing of Lundy, is, that if he were Sworn, it was very privately, so
this may very well consist with the Truth of what Captain Mervin and Captain
Corry Certify: And yet his refusing to Swear publicly in those Circumstances,
was a very suspicious sign of his ill intentions, and therefore justly taken
notice of.

For the grave Letter at the end, I see nothing in it of Argument against any
thing in the Narrative. For sure it is but a sorry proof of Dr. Walker's being
Governor of the Garrison, that some who were at first so Charitable as to
believe what he pretended to, altered their Sentiments when better informed;
but that this was owing to any mistake about his persuasion, is only an idle
fancy of the Writers. But sure those have little reason to complain of Dr.
Walker's Account being Attributed to the A. B. of T. who with far greater
Confidence, father the Preface to my Narrative on Mr. B. and thence take
occasion to say whatever their Wit and Malice could suggest against him. But
how little either of 'em could furnish 'em with to his prejudice, appears by
what this Pamphleteer has said. For he is forced here to renew the same
Accusation he had brought in the Remarks on Mr. Osborn's Vindication, viz. That
when Dr. King and Dean Manby were picqueering he took up a Flail, and thresh'd
them both, and while the Dr. was engaged in a Duel with a pernicious Apostate
from the Protestant Religion, he came behind his Back and stabbed him, only
because he incidentally reflected on that persuasion, whereof Mr. B. is
ambitious to be the Celebrated Champion. And in his Remarks on Mr. Osborn's
Vindication, he says, he could tell Mr. B. what harm his Book did the
Protestants, and what use the Papists made of it against the Church at that
time.

Now if this Pamphleteer's passion had not blinded his Wit, he would in
prudence have concealed what casts so unhappy a Reflection on some of his own
Coat, but can never lessen the Reputation of Mr. Boyse in the Judgment of any
but such ignorant Bigotts as himself. For since he will bring that matter on
the Stage, the plain Truth was this.

Dean Manby printed his Considerations, that moved him to change his Religion,
which were nothing else but the old Banter about the Mission of Protestant
Bishops and Priests revived. Dr. K. in his Answer, chose to insist on such
principles as were only calculated to defend the Mission of the English Bishops
and their Clergy, but left the Ministers of other Protestant Churches (that had
not Bishops for their Reformers) in the lurch: Nay, he laid down such Notions
as made Church-Rebels of them, as well as the Dissenting Ministers, (whom with
their Flocks he expressly excluded from the Catholic Church.) Mr. B. wrote
Reflections on both these Papers, wherein he laid down the true and common
Notions of Protestant Writers about Mission, and on those endeavored to
justify the Reformed Ministry abroad, and particularly those at home: And now
can this Scribbler have the Impudence to pretend that that Book should injure
the Protestants and give the Papists advantage, which vindicates the Mission of
all the Ministers of Protestant Churches (those of the Chapter of England included
as much as any) from the Schismatical Principles of the Papists on the one
hand, that deny the validity of all Protestant Orders, and those of Mr.
Dod-well and his Followers on the other, that deny the validity of any Orders
but what are derived from Diocesan Bishops. If Mr. B -- 's Flail did on this
occasion thresh 'em both, it was because both deserved it: Nor did he stab Dr.
K. but rather warded off the stab which his unhappy Notions would have given,
not only to his Brethren in Ireland, but those in France, Piedmont, etc. too,
and all out of a narrow Zeal for the Church of England. I shall only add that
Mr. B. was so far from opposing any just endeavors then used to stemm the Tide
of Popery, that he preached as many Sermons against it in the late King James's
Reign as perhaps any one Clergyman in that Kingdom.

And on this occasion I can heartily join with the Writer of this Epistle in
his Prayers, that God would rebuke that Spirit of bitterness and evil-speaking
that exposes us to the scorn of our common Adversary, and contempt of all: And
I could wish he had given some good Advice of that kind both to this
Pamphleteer, and to the A. B. of T. who in a Sermon preached at Windsor, 1684.
and since printed, vents his Passion in such expressions as these, p. 32. But
while I am speaking of these things, methinks I hear a Voice saying to me, as
to the Prophet, Son of Man, see thou what they do, they of the Church of
Rome? Turn thee yet again, and thou shall see greater abominations, A People,
etc. And so he goes on to describe the Dissenters. And so p. 35, 36. -- In
return of all which, I hear her (speaking of the Church of England) crying out
in the words, and with the tears and compassion of our Blessed Savior, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, etc. O ye of the Foreign
Reformation, how often would I have gathered you under the wings of my
Communion, and covered or excused your defects, but ye would not, but now these
things are bid from your eyes, and your house is left to you desolate. And O ye
of the Domestic separation, how often would I have gathered you, but so often
have I stretched forth my hands to a gainsaying and disobedient People: And the
same Person in a Sermon preached at Bow-Church, Oct. 23. 1689. speaks to the
same purpose.

P. 15. That Church (viz. The Church of England) would gather all the parts of
the Protestant Religion under her wings as a Hen does her Chickens, but they
would not: But as soon as the Sun shines, and the Bird of prey is removed, too
many begin again to scatter and divide, and quarrel, as if they would pick out
their Mothers Eyes, and then one another, etc. The Reader may observe what a
Spirit of meekness, healing, and moderation is in the Mouth of this great
Prophet, as well as what a Spirit of Truth, Ingenuity and Candor is in the
mouth of this ignorant and scurrilous Pamphleteer.

For my part, I am not in the least conscious to my self of having said any
thing against any Party of Protestants: And if some have the cunning to
interest a Party in their Reputation, as if whatever is said to expose their
Treacheries, were levelled against all others that are of their persuasion, I
cannot help their weaknesses who so grossly misunderstand the Design of my
Narrative. But what I have said concerning two or three particular Persons, is
no more than what was not only true, but necessary to have been said, in giving
that plain Account of these Transactions, which the misrepresentation of others
gave too just occasion for. And if the Pamphleteer will needs draw that
perverse Inference from my Narrative, That all the brave and glorious Actions
in the Siege were performed by the Dissenters, and Coll. Murray at the Head of
'em, All inglorious Actions, and treacherous Attempts are to be imputed to the
other part of the Garrison, and principally to Dr. W. let him look to his
Conclusion, for the premises are true: But I confess I should deny the
Inference, because several of the Officers that are much commended, were of the
Church of England, tho but very few of the common Soldiers.

To show further how little Credit is due to Mr. Squire's Certificate, which
the Pamphleteer boasts so much of, I shall produce Mr. Squire to confute
himself in the following Certificate, though not in its due place, because it
came but late to my hands.

I Do hereby Certify that Gervase Squire, Esquire of the City of Derry, did soon
after his coming over for England, upon my enquiry concerning Mr. Walker,
inform me, that he was not Governor of the said City, but Coll. Baker, and
that he had only the Stores committed to his Trust.

Given under my hand this 14th. Day of June, 1690. Gervase Byfeld.

I should not have taken notice of another small Mistake relating to Derry,
suggested in Mr. Walker's Narrative, if it had not been also inserted in a
Letter, subscribed H. R. (probably Hugh Rowley) set down in Mr. Cox's History
of Ireland, Part 2d. that Mr. Philips should have sent to the Citizens of Derry
on approach of the Irish Forces to shut their Gates, and that they accordingly
did so; ascribing that to him which was inconsistent with the Citys
Declaration, Letters subscribed by himself, in my Narrative mentioned, and the
Account given by those who were principally concerned in that Affair.

Having said so much to clear my Narrative from the Aspersions cast upon it by
this idle Pamphlet, I think fit to desire the Author if he scribble again, to
be so honest as to set his Name to it, for I shall not think my self concerned
to encounter any longer with Specter and Hobgoblins.

Any Person that has a desire to see the Originals of these Certificates, may
find them at my Lodging, at the Golden Ball and Tobacco-roll in Clements-lane,
near Lumbard-street.

FINIS.

