A Modest EXAMINATION Of the NEW OATH OF ALLEGIANCE.

By a DIVINE of the Church of England.

London, Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall, in the Year. MDCLXXXIX.

THE OATH of ALLEGIANCE.
I A. B. Do sincerely promise and swear, that I will be faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to their Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. So help me God.

Quaere. Allegiance? And what is it that we promise when we take this Oath?

The Resolution. (Allegiance) being a Term of Art is variously rendered. But we
are not to trouble our selves with the sense of it amongst the Feudists, from
whom it was borrowed, but are rather to examine what it may signify, according
to present Use and Custom here in England.

Now this word [Allegiance] as applied to King Williaem and Queen Mary in this
Oath, can denote no other then one of these Two Things. 1. An acknowledgment of
their Title. Or, 2. Submission and Obedience to their Government.


If the former, then the sense of the Oath is this.

I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknwledge, profess testify and declare in my
Conscience before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord and Lady King
WILLIAM and Queen MARY are lawful and rightful King and Queen of this Realm,
and of all other their Majesty's Dominions and Countries: and that I will bear
Faith and true Allegiance to their Majesty's as such.

If the latter, then the sense of the Oath seems only to be this.

Whereas at present I am under the Government, and enjoy the Protection of King
WILLIAM and Queen MARY, I do faithfully promise to submit to this their
Government. And that I will not contrive, attempt or encourage any act of
Hostility, against them: But living quietly and peaceably, as a good Subject,
in obedience to the Laws, will promote the safety of my Country, and the
Preservation of Religion and Civil Society.

Now since all Oaths and Promises are to be taken in the sense of the Imposer,
we are next to inquire; Whether of these Two Senses is intended by this Oath?

I think the latter, and not the former. For these Reasons. 1. Had the framers
of this Oath any such Design viz. To impose an acknowledgment of the King and
Queens Title; they might then easily have made use of such expressions, as
would have put the matter out of all Doubt. Or else, mutatis mutandis, they
might have proposed the former Oath of Allegiance, wherein the King's Title is
expressly acknowledged. Which since they have not done, it seems highly probable
they had no such intention. 2. The very Form of the Oath, viz. I do promise --
I will be faithful and bear true Allegiance -- seems to exclude such a Sense.
For the Subject matter of a Promise is something that is future not present.
And consequently this Oath, being not Assertory but Promissory, does plainly
respect our future carriage and behavior; and is not Declarative of our
present Sentiment and Opinion. So that if by this word Allegiance were meant
the acknowledging of their Title; put it into plain Language, and observe how
harsh and improper it would be. viz. I A. B. Do sincerely promise, it is my
Sentiment and Opinion; That King William and Queen Mary have a just and lawful
Title. Where it is evident, that had this Oath been framed* to establish the
King and Queen's Title, the word should have been Dclare or Acknowledge instead
of Promise. 3. This is yet further suggested by reflecting on the former Oath
of Allegiance. Which being both Assertory and Promissory, does consist of Two
Parts. 1. A recognition of the King's Title. 2. A promise of future Allegiance
and Obedience.
Plainly denoting that these are Two Things; different and distinct each from
other.


However, you will say, it is sufficiently intimated hereby; That the King's
Title is the true and only ground of our Allegiance: and consequently, if King
WILLIAM and Queen MARY have, as yet, no lawful Title; it is then unlawful to
take tbis Oath; and to swear Allegiance to them.

ANSWER. William and Queen Mary is not now to be disputed. Those who are
dissatisfied may consult the Two Houses: Who are best able to resolve such
Scruples, and to vindicate the Justice of their own Proceedings. But private
Persons need not trouble their heads about Titles. It Is sufficient for such to
know; That King William and Queen Mary are de facto King and Queen; And
therefore, by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, there is an Allegiance due
to them.

By the Statute of 25 E. 3. De proditionibus, is declared in certain particular
Cases, what Offenses shall be taken to be Treason. viz. Fait compasser on
imaginer la mort nostre Seignior le Roy, Madame sa Compaigne, etc. Ou si home
leve guerre enconter nostre Seignior le Roy en son Realm ou soit aidant as
enemies nostre dit Seignior le Roy en son Realm, donnant a eux aid, ou comfort
en son Royalme; ou per aylours. That is to say, When a Man does compass or
imagine the Death of our Lord the King, of my Lady his Queen, etc. Or if a Man
do levy Mar against our Lord the King in his Realm, or be adherent to the Kings
Enemies in his Realm, giving to them aid and comfort in the Realm or elsewhere,
such a Man is declared, by this Act, to be guilty of High Treason.

Observe now Sir Edw. Coke's Exposition of this Statute.

Nostre Seignior le Roy] This Act is to be understood of a King in Possession
of the Crown and Kingdom: For if there be a King regnant in possession,
although he be Rex de Facto, and non de Jure, yet is he Seignior le Roy within
the Purvien of this Statute. And the other that has Right, and is out of
Possession, is not within this Art. Nay if Treason be committed against a King
de Facto, and non de Jure, and after the King de Jure, comes to the Crown, he
shall punish the Treason done to the King de Facto: And a Pardon granted by a
King de Jure that is not also de Facto, is void. 3. Part. of the Institutes,
page 7.

From which Words this Remark is obvious.

If it be High Treason to compass or imagine the Death of King William and
Queen Mary (who are de Facto King and Queen; as being in Possession of the
Crown and Kingdom.) If it be High Treason to levy War against King William and
Queen Mary; If it be High Treason to adhere, to give aid and comfort to the
Enemies of King William and Queen Mary in the Realm or elsewhere; then it
undenyably follows (according to my Lord Coke's Exposition of this Statute)
That it is the Duty of the People of these Nations to Protect and Defend King
William and Queen Mary. To do their best endeavor to disclose and make known
unto their Majesty's, all Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies against them,
and consequently, There is a Duty, an Homage and Allegiance due to them.

OBJECTION. But is not this a strange Gloss, thus to encourage Usurpation; and
to fix the Crown upon the Point of the Sword? Sir Edw. Coke, though otherwise a
great Man, had hi^ Passions and his Errors: And may not this justly be rejected
as one of his Mistakes?

ANSWER. Sr. Edw. Coke, but all ^^^ers who write of the Pleas of the Crown do
give the same Exposition, I began to cool in my Censures. And since -- peritis
in sua art -- I thought it most modest to suspect my own Judgment: and did
rest satisfied, that there was some weighty Reason (were I able to explain it)
why these Sages of the Law did thus Determine.

From these Premises I infer. CONVENTION: and who are of Opinion, That King
JAMES by withdrawing his Person did not Abdicate the Government: I say, even
those very Persons (according to this Exposition of 25. Edw. 3.) may lawfully
Promise and Swear Fidelity and true Allegiance to their Majesty's, King WILLIAM
and Queen MARY; who are at least de facto King and Queen; and are undoubtedly
in Possession of the Crown and Kingdom

FINIS

