TRAVELS AND VOYAGES INTO Africa, Asia, and America, THE East and West Indies;
Syria, Jerusalem, and the Holy Land.

PERFORMED BY MR. John Mocquet, Keeper of the Cabinet of Rarities, to the King
of France, in the Thuilleries.

Divided into Six BOOKS, and Enriched with SCULPTURES.

Translated from the French, By NATHANIEL PULLEN, Gent.

LONDON: Printed for William Newton, Bookseller, in Little-Britain; and Joseph
Shelton; and William Chandler, Booksellers, at the Peacock in the Poultry, 1696.

TO THE KING.
May it Please Your Majesty,
ONE of the Principal Graces which it has pleased Almighty God to show me, in
Preserving me from so many Perils and Dangers that I have run through in
Traveling about the World, is this, To see my self at present at Your
Majesty's Feet, offering, in all Humility and Obedience, This, my Writings, as
the only Fruit which I have been able to Reap in my Long and Dangerous Travels.
I know very well, that it is a thing which of its self is not worthy to be
presented to Your Majesty. But should it please Your Majesty to consider, that
the late King, Your Royal Father, of Glorious and Eternal Memory, did me
formerly the Honor, to command me to undertake the most part of these Voyages,
and to take pleasure in the Relations which I made to him thereof, at my
Return; I dare promise my self, that Your Majesty (as you follow in all things
the Generous Steps of the Greatest King, and Best Father that ever was) will
not also disdain to receive with Your wonted Goodness and Sweetness, this
little Testimony of my most humble and most devout Affection to Your Majesty's
Service; the which may encourage me to cause Your Majesty one Day to see (God
willing) something of more Value, and to hope that, according to Your Royal
Design, Your Majesty will give me Means to continue and perfect the Cabinet of
Rarities which, by Your Command, I have began to erect in Your Majesty's Palace
of the Thuilleries, an Enterprise so laudable, that it merits to be reckoned
amongst so many other Worthy Actions of Honor and Virtue, which render Your
Majesty Glorious and Commendable for ever: And in the mean time I will continue
all the rest of my Life to pray to God,

That it would please him to augment more and more to Your Majesty, his Holy
Graces and Benediction.

Your Majesty's Most Humble, and Most Obedient Subject, and Servant, John
Mocquet.

A PREFACE, FOR THE Understanding of Circles, Zones, Parallels, Degrees of
Longitude, and Latitude, Climates, and other necessary Things, in the
Description of the Universe.
BEFORE we come to a particular Recital of the Six Voyages which I have made
during 14 or 15 Years in diverse Places of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, I
think 'twill not be much amiss (for the more clear Understanding thereof) to
speak briefly, by way of Preface, something of the Four Parts of the World, and
of certain Principles appertaining to the Sphere, and Geography, to the end
that the Reader may the more easily apprehend such things as he shall find
dispersed here and there in these my Writings; laying down for certain and
necessary Maxims several things which I should otherways have been constrained,
too often, to repeat; though but touching as it were upon what might be said of
this Science, the more exact Research, and Knowledge of which, I leave to those
who make Profession thereof, and who are more Learned therein than my self, who
desire to know no more thereof than what may be necessary for me in the
Narration of my Voyages.

Know then that God has so dispothe Universe, that he has joined the Earth
and the Sea in one round Mass, whose Weight reposes in the Center of the World,
as being the lowest Place, serving for a most sure Retreat and convenient
Habitation for Man and Earth for Man and Beast.
Beast, in Parts raised above the Waters, which have their limited Place in the
Abysms and Depth of the Earth. Now these Waters encompass all the Earth, and
separate it by an admirable Artifice into Three great and spacious Continents,
or firm Lands, upon the which (according Three Continents.
to the order and situation of the superior Parts of the World) the
Cosmographers place Five principal Circles, which are the Equinoctial, the Two
Tropicks of Capricorn, and the Two Polar-Circles, Artick, and Antartick. The
first Circle is called Equinoctial, Circle of the Sphere upon the Earth.
because the Sun coming underneath the Circle, (which happens Twice in the
Year, about the 21st. of March, and the 24th. of September) causes, throughout
the whole World, Day and Night to be of equal length. It is equally distant
from the Two Poles, and divides the Terrestrial Globe into Two Hemispheres, or
equal Parts, one extending toward the North, and the other toward the South.

The Second Circle is the Tropic of Cancer, or Solstice of the Summer, because
the Sun arriving there, causes Summer to all the Countries on this side the
Equinoctial, the which happens at such time as the Sun enters into the first
degree of Cancer, which is about the Stili novi.
22d. of June; and then we have the longest Days, and shortest Nights in the
Year. The Circle is distant from the Equator 23 Degrees and a half toward the
Border of the North.

The Third Circle is the Tropic of Capricorn, or Solstice of the Winter, where
the Sun arriving, which is about the 23d. of December, causes the shortest
Days and longest Nights with us; for to the other Hemisphere of the South
happens the contrary. It has the same Declension of the Equator toward the
South as the other, to wit 23 Degrees.

The Fourth Circle, is the Circle Artick, and the Fifth, Antartick; each of
them distant from its Pole 23 Degrees and a half.

Now by these Four last Circles, all the Earth is divided into Five Zones,
Zones.
or Girdles, which encompass and cover the Face of the Earth, one of which is
called Torrid or Burnt, two Temperate, and two Cold. The Torrid is situated
betwixt the Two Tropicks, 45 Degrees in breadth; one of the Temperate,
Septentrional betwixt the Tropic, and Cancer, and the Circle-Artick; the
other, Meridional, betwixt the Tropic and Capricorn, and the Circle-Antartick,
of 43 Degrees each. The two Cold, are one betwixt the Circle-Artick and its
Pole, and the other betwixt the Circle-Antartick, and its other Pole, each of
23 Degrees.

The Torrid Zone, thus called by the Ancients, in regard of the Opinion which
they had, that because of the Perpendicularity, and ordinary Neighborhood of
the Sun, all these Countries were uninhabitable, because of the excessive
Heats, also that the cold Zones were so, because of the excessive Cold, caused
by the great distance and lowness of this same Planet. But the Navigators of
ours, and the precedent Ages, have by experience found all these Countries
Habitable and Peopled; so that Torrid Zone Inhabited.
some of the most Wise and Learned amongst the Ancients, have left behind them
in their Writings more Discourse according to Reason and Science, than by
Experience: For in the Torrid Zone, the Heat of the Day is gently temperated by
the Cold, equal with the Night; and in the cold Zones, the Air is mitigated in
Summer, by reason of the long Residence of the Sun in their Horizon; besides
the Cold there is rendered the less insupportable, in regard there being very
little or no Winds, and their Blasts very feeble and weak. It Is true, the
Countries under the cold Zones are scarcely Inhabited, because the Earth does
not there fructify as in the Temperate. But as for those of the Torrid Zone,
there are vast Places wonderfully Peopled, as well for the Commodity of the
Waters, as for the Goodness and Fertility of the Countries, which bear Grain,
or Rice, in abundance, like the Countries subject to the King Monomotapa,
toward the Cape of Good-Hope, Angoche, and the Cape of Currants, and the
Country of the Ab^ssines, or Prester-John, which extends in Land from Bombase
to the Red Sea.

Upon the Eastern Coast you have also very spacious Islands, as those of St.
Lawrance, Zealand, Maldives, Sumatra, the Java's, Moluque's, and others without
Number, extreme fertile, and abounding in whatsoever is delectable, and
necessary for Human Life.

Toward the West, are the Lands of New-Spain, Brasil, and Peru, and others
adjacent, near to the Equator, which are very good. All which clearly shows the
Falsehood of the Opinions of the Ancients concerning the Habitation of these
Zones.

Now the Extent or Breadth of these Five Zones, from the Equinoctial to each
Pole, is divided into Paralells, as their length from East to West into
Meridians; from whence is taken the Longitudes, and Latitudes of diverse
Countries.

The Parallels are Circles equally distant one from the other, beginning at the
Equator, and finishing at the Poles. The Meridians are Circles passing through
the Poles, and crossing the Equator; or when the Sun is arrived, it causes
Noon to those who are above the Horizon, and Midnight to those who are
underneath.

The Latitude of Regions is distinguished by the Parallels from North to South,
as the Longitude by the Meridians from East to West: The Meridians of equal
Extent, gather together from Two Poles; but the Parallels do not so, who are
always equally distant one from the other, though sometimes greater, or less,
according to their Approach to the Equator or Poles.

According to the Extent of these Circles, are taken the Longitudes and
Latitudes of diverse Countries and Places of the Earth. The Latitude, or Hieght,
is counted from the Equinoctial to the Poles, from one part to another, by 90
Degrees: And the Longitudes, beginning at the Meridian of the Fortunate
Islands, or Canaries, go from West to East 360 Degrees quite round the Earth;
in which it is Remarkable, that the Regions under the same Degree or Latitude
whatsoever, have in the same moment the like *Time, as those who under diverse
Weather or Season.
degrees have Diversity, and that in varying, in an Hour's time, by 15 Degrees,
sooner or later, according as you are more East or West. Thus those who are
under the same Degree of Latitude, though several of Longitude, have Day and
Night equally, and Days and Nights diverse.
the same Seasons on the one side the Equinoctial; for on the other, it is quite
the contrary: like as if the Winter is in the Septentrional Part, you shall
have the Summer in the Meridional, though in the same Latitude, as I have
remarked in the Kingdom of Canary, and Goa, in the East Indies, where they have
their Winter in June, July, and August, contrary to the same Latitude of our
Europe: But this Winter consists only in Rains, and great Winds coming from the
South; and this Rain is very hot, insomuch that the Winter in these Parts of
Goa, is rather hotter than our Summer here, the Trees there being continually
green, and bearing Fruit in all their Seasons, as Jaquebar, Anana's, Jangomes,
Carambola's, Jambo's, and others; for all the Winter is hot and moist, and then
the Sun seldom appears, being hid under thick Clouds, so that it renders the
Days very dark. But the Places who have diverse Latitudes have inequality of
Days and Nights, more or less, according to their difference, and approaches,
or distance from the Poles: The Day beginning from Sunrising to the setting
thereof.

In the Countries under the Equinoctial, they are equal with the Nights, of 22
Hours each; on the contrary, in those Places stretching toward the Poles, they
lengthen as in the 30th. Degree of Latitude, the longest Day being 13 Hours 5
Minutes; under the 50 Degree, it is 16 Hours, 20 Minutes; under the 66 and half,
or in the Artick-Circle, it is 24 Hours entire; under the 70. the Sun sets not,
during 64 Days, and 14 Hours, as in those Parts of Moscovia, as I have heard a
Dutch Captain say who has been there, that their longest Day, without Night,
was from June to July, as in Winter they have Night proportionably; so that it
is expedient for the Ships which come from those Countries to return in the
Month of August except they have a mind to be stopped by the Ice. The People
who inhabit those Countries, make, during the Winter, little Holes in the Ice
to take Sea-Wolves, though sometimes they are deceived, and caught themselves, as
I have been informed; so that Multitudes of People have been swallowed up, the
Ice coming to break on a sudden, by reason the time or season of the Heat
approaches sometimes sooner than ordinary, the which has caused these People to
be more circumspect for the future.

It Is also Remarkable; That the Degrees and their Quantity.
Degrees of Latitude are always every where equal, each Degree containing 15
German Leagues, or 17 and a half of Spanish, 25 of French, or 60 Italian Miles:
But the Degrees of Longitude are equal with those of Latitude, under the
Equinoctial only; and the more they decline there from, they diminish, until
that under the Poles they are reduced into one Point: For under the Line, the
Degree of Longitude contains 60 Miles, whenas under the 60 Degree of Latitude
it is no more than Thirty, and under the Pole nothing at all. So that it shall
happen, that Two Ships being distant one from the other 150 Miles, if they sail
from the Equinoctial toward the Septentrion, being arrived under the 60
Degree, they shall be no more than 75 Miles distant, and under the 71 Degree,
31 Minutes, they shall approach to Fifty, and at last under the Pole shall meet.

The Pilots ought well to observe this, in regard of the Currents which are
found in certain Parts; so that thinking to make one way, they take another:
Also I advise 'em to take heed they be not deceived by certain Cards, which
commonly are false, except they have been experienced by good Pilots. This
happened to us in our Voyage to the West Indies, parting from the River of
Cayenna, where the Caribes are, to the Isles of Santa^ucia: For we were
deceived as well by the Currents, as the Cards we had with us, which were
false, we finding but one which was sure for those Parts; for instead of going
to the Islands aforesaid, we passed along by the Isle of Tobaco, and Trinidad,
and cast Anchor at the White-Island, where we could find no Water, of which we
were in great want. 'Twas no small Astonishment to me, how such infinite
Multitudes of Cabrits, and wild Goats, (besides other Animals which are there,)
could live without so much as a drop of Water: But the Divine Providence has
otherways ordered it, (as I have above-touched) by the cool Nights, and the
Dew, with which these Beasts refresh themselves.

From thence we went to Margurite Island, but we found no more Water there than
we did at the other, and so to the Mouth of the River of Cumana, where the
People of a Dutch Ship had told us we should find some, as we did at the
entrance of the River. This shows the Necessity of having good Cards, and well
rectified.

But to return to the Three Continents, or firm Lands, from the which all the
Earth is separated by Waters: The first was by the Ancients divided into Three
Parts, to wit, Europe, Asia, and Africa, all joining together. The second,
unknown to the Ancients, and discovered in our Days by Christopher Columbus, in
the Year 1492, and by Americus Vespusius, 1495, is America, which for its vast
Extent is divided into Two Parts, Peru, and Mexico. The Third is
Terra-Australis, or Mag^llanique, thus called, because of Ferdinand M^g^llan,
who first found it out in the Year 1519. It Is supposed to be very great, but
for the most part uninhabited and desert. It Is also called Terrad^l Fu^go, for
the great quantity of Fire there seen, the which renders it infertile and
uninhabited, there being several Mines of Sulphur which cause those Fires, as I
saw in going to the East Indies; for passing by the Isles of Cape-Verd, there
is one of them called Fu^go, because of the Fire there continually seen, and is
very high: One Night we sailed round about her; and seeing the Flames in great
abundance coming out of the Earth in all parts, we were not a little surpised;
and the next Day passing along by this same Island, with a very boisterous
Wind, and approaching somewhat nigh, the Wind drove the sulphurous Vapors just
into our Europe.
Faces, which were very unsupportable and stinking.

Europe, the first of the Three Continents, is the least in extent, and for her
Fertility gives not place to the others; but for Arms, Laws, Policy, Religion,
Sciences, Arts, and all sorts of Virtues, she surpasses them by far. And of the
Provinces of Europe, France alone is the Principal, according to the Judgment
of the Nations her Enemies, whether you consider the Goodness, Fertility, and
Beauty of her Lands, the Excellency and temperature of the Air, Salubrity, and
Abundance of her Waters, and Number of Inhabitants; or in regard of the Manners
of her People, their Piety, Valor, Erudition, Justice, Discipline, Liberality,
Freeness, Courtesy, Liberty, and all other Qualities Military and Civil. In
short, the Renown of the French has been such, by their Conquest in the East,
that their Name remains there for an Eternal Memory: So that to this Day,
throughout all Asia, and Africa, they call all those who come from Europe, by
the Name of Franghi, let them be of what Country soever.

The Fertility of France is such, that she furnishes abundantly, Spain,
Portugal, Italy, and Barbary, not only with Corn, but several other
Commodities; and I verily think, that every Year there goes from Provence,
Languedoc, Bretagne, Poitou, Xaintoign, and Normandy, above Six thousand Ships
laden with Corn, and other Merchandise. To Lisbon only, there comes above a
Thousand, as well great as small: And I believe that the Spaniards and
Portugueses could not furnish Corn for so many Voyages, were they not supplied
therewith from France to make Biscuit; besides Sails, Cordage, Salt Flesh, and
other necessary things to furnish their Ships.

The Principal Provinces of Europe, are, France, Spain, Germany High and Low,
Italy, Sclavonia, Greece, Hungary, Poland, Danemark, Sweden, Muscovy, and the
Isles of England, Scotland, Ireland, Island, Groneland, Sicilia, Candia, Malta,
Sardania, Corse, Corfu, Majorica, Minorica, and others of the Archipelago.

Asia, the second Part of our first Asia.
Continent, is of very great Extent, Riches, and Fertility, and ever very
Renowned for having born the greatest Monarchies, and first Empires, as of the
Assyrians, Babylonians, Persians, Greeks, Parthians, Bactrians, Indians, and
others; and at this Day, the Turks, Persians, Arabians, Tartars, Mogols,
Chinese, and other Indians. But above all, this Part is the most esteemed, for
the Creation of the first Man, planted in the Terrestrial Paradise, Colonies
and People coming from thence, and dispersed through the rest of the World, and
moreover, for the Redemption of Mankind, and the Operation of our Salvation
acted therein; besides, for having given Religion, Science, Arts, Laws, Policy,
Arms, and Artifices, to all the other Parts: In short, for its inestimable
Riches, the Wisdom and Dexterity of its Inhabitants. Her most celebrated
Provinces are the Countries of the Great T^rk, of Persia, the Great M^gul, the
^rand T^rtar, Arabia, China, Ind^storn of the E^st-Indies: G^zarat, Cambaya,
Mal^bar, Coromandel, Bengall, Pegu, Stam, and the rest of the I^d^es, on this
and the other side the Ganges. The Isles are innumerable, as Z^ilan, Sumatra,
the Java's, Molucco's, Philipians, Japan, Maldaves, and others.

The last Part of this first Continent is Africa, separated from Europe Africa.
by the Mediterranean-Sea, and from Asia, by the Isthmus of Egypt, and the
Red Sea, making as it were a Peninsula, encompassed on all sides by the Sea,
save by this Neck of Land, which is betwixt Egypt, and Palestine. Its principal
Provinces are Egypt, Barbary, Fez, and Morocco, Aethiopia, or Abyssine, Nubia,
Lybia, Guinia, Congo, Monomotapa, and others of the South: This Part is very
good and fertile in some Places; but it contains several great and sandy
Deserts without Water.

That part of Africa, unknown to the Ancients, and discovered by the
Portuguese, about the Year 1497. is called by the Arabians, Zanzibar, and
extends from the Lakes where the Nile takes its Original, to the Cape of
Good-hope, containing several good Countries bordering upon Monomotapa, as
amongst others, Cefala, and Cuama, from whence is gotten great quantity of fine
Gold; insomuch that it has been the Opinion of several, That those Countries of
Cefala, and Cnama, was the Ophir where Solomon sent to fetch Gold; though others
think 'twas rather Malaca, and other Places of the East Indies, and some will
have it to be Peru in the West.

The last Continent of the World is that Part which we call America, America.
and which, as I have said, is divided into Two Principal Parts, Mexico in the
North, and Peru in the South, separated by the Isthmus of Banama: There are
several Provinces, and People of different Languages, Manners, and Fashions.
The greatest City in those Northern Parts, is Mexico, or Temistitan, opulent in
Riches, and all manner of Delights. Before she was subject to the Spaniards,
she contained (as they say) above 70000 Houses, with an exceeding great and
glorious Temple, where they sacrificed Men, Women, and Children, of all Ages
and Sex, to their Idols, in cleaving them down the Breast, and plucking out
their Hearts whilst they were beating, which they cast into the Faces of these
Idols; and sometimes they thus opened Women with Child, but especially Virgins,
though how beautiful soever, were not exempt, and whom they used in a most
shameful manner, in exposing that which Nature has hid from the Eyes of all
the World: For this their great Cruelty, and horrible Tyranny, they acquired a
very bad Name amongst the People their Neighbors, who would never become their
Friends, but by Force; and what was the most strange, they spared not their
nearest Kindred for these abominable Sacrifices; and when any Man of Authority
came to die, they interred with him their Slaves alive, to bear him Company in
the other World: When they had offered in Sacrifice their Enemies, they cut the
Bodies into pieces, and then roast them, to feast with their Friends therewith.
The Caribes, another People toward the South, do the same of which we will
speak in its proper place.

Ferdinand Cortez, who conquered Mexico, had no small Trouble to make them quit
this abominable Custom; also the Hatred which their Neighbors bore them, was
cause of their total Destruction: For they raised such great Numbers for the
Assistance of Cortez, that at last, by their Help, (after a great Slaughter of
'em,) he got the Victory, and took their City, to the extreme Joy and
Contentment of these neighboring Indians, their ever sworn Enemies.

The Septentrional, or North Part of America, comprehends the Countries America.
of Mexico, or New-Spain, Florida, Virginia, Canada, New France, Estotiland,
the Countries of Labrad^r, and Cortereal, and several other Countries toward
the North, to the Straights of Anian, who are not yet discovered.

Toward the North of New Spain, were several Countries discovered by the
Spaniards, in the Year 1583. as the Land of Conquas, Passaguates, Tiquas,
Toboses, Jumans, Quires, Pattarabives, Cumanes, Quivora, and others.

The Meridional, or South Part of America, contains several Provinces, as Peru,
Chile, Los Patagons, Brazile, Cariabane, Cumana, Dariena, Vraba, Cast^llia
d'Oro, New-Granadae, and others; besides the Isles, as well in the North Sea,
as Cuba, Hispaniola, and others, as those in he South Sea, of Solomon, and
others unknown.

Brazil has for Limits toward the North the great River of the Amazons, and
toward the South, Rio di la Plat^, or the River of Silver. This Country is
very pleasant and agreeable, with a good Air and temperate, for the most part
hot and moist, abounding in several sorts of wild Fruits, and in Raisins,
Potato's, and Cassaves, of which the Inhabitants live. There are a great Number
of terrestrial and watery Animals, which feed upon these Fruits, and Serpents
Wonderful Serpents.
of such a strange and monstrous sort, that the color of the Skin only is
enough to cause Horror and Amazement. They frequently eat the Armadilla, which
is a Creature armed with a Coat, as also the Crocodile, and Gouana's, which is
a sort of a Lizard with very long Feet. The Flesh of these are savoury enough,
though sweetish and insipid.

The People of Brazil are great Enemies Brazilians great Enemies to the
Portuguese.
to the Portuguese; and when they can catch any of 'em, they eat them without
Intermission; and what is most admirable, they know how to find out by the
sandy and dirty Ways, the Portuguese above all other Nations whatsoever, and
can discover them by their Tract, like as the Hunts-man does the wild Beasts.

They once took a Portugal Woman, Miserable End of a young Woman.
young, and very beautiful, whom the French, who were there, could not save
from being eaten, and which was done in a strange manner; for assembling a
Company of them together, in a Ring, in the midst of whom was set this poor
young Woman, then having stripped her stark naked, not at all regarding her
Modesty, they viewed her from Head to Foot; and after having well considered
her Delineaments, some commending one thing, and some another, they fell to
howling and yelling like so many Devils; whereupon immediately, like a Company
of hunger-starved Dogs, they fell upon this poor innocent Creature, and in less
than two Minutes tore her into above a Thousand pieces, which they as suddenly
swallowed down. They are very Vindictive, never pardoning, but by force, and
not of Goodwill. When the French arrive there, they give them their Daughters
to lie withal, hoping they will give them something at their Departure.

The Third Continent is Terra-Australis, not yet discovered, which is otherwise
called the Land of Fire, of Parrots, and New Guiney. There, toward the calm
Sea, and the Archipelago of St. Lazarus, are the Isles of Solomon, not yet
fully discovered.

Some Years since, a Portugal Captain, named Pedro Fernandes di Quieros, sailed
round some Parts thereof, and tells Wonders of those Countries, how that they
abound in Beauty and Goodness; insomuch that they resemble an Earthly Paradise.
But we ought to wait for a more certain and ample Discovery. The Geographers,
and Portugal Pilots tell us, That these Countries of Terra-Australis are
greater than Europe, and part of Asia. This Captain Pedro-Fernandes, found out
there the Bays of St. Philip, and St. James, and the Port of Vera Crux, which,
as they say, is capable of above a Thousand Ships, in the Altitude of Fifteen
Degrees and a half.

JOHN MOCQVET.

THE CONTENTS Of this BOOK.
THE First Book of the Travels and Voyages of John Mocquet, to Libia, the
Canaries, and Barbary Page 1.

The Second Book of the Travels and Voyages to the West Indies, as into the
River of the Amazons, the Country of the Caripous, and Caribes, and other
Countries of the West p. 39

The Third Book of the Travels and Voyages to Morocco, and other Places of
Africa p. 139

The Fourth Book of the Travels and Voyages to Aethiopia, Mozambique, Goa, and
other Places of Africa, and the East Indies p. 197

The Fifth Book of the Travels and Voyages to Syria, Jerusalem, and the
Holy Land

The Sixth and Last Book of the Travels and Voyages to Spain, with an Intention
to pass farther, and what was the Hindrance thereof.

THE TRAVELS AND VOYAGES OF John Mocquet, INTO Lybia, the Canaries, and BARBARY.

BOOK I.
ACcording to the desire I had, of a Long time, to Travel about the World, I
had a mind to begin with Africa, having occasionally found a Ship bound for
Lybia*

I parted then from St. Malo the 9th Parting from St. Malo 16^1. Encounter with
a Ship.
of October, 1601. and embarked in the Ship called the Serene, Laden with
Salt, and very well furnished with Victuals, and munition of War; we were 25.
men in all, and having born to the S-West, and the wind being very favorable,
we passed the Cape of St. Vincent, and being come up within view of the Canary
Islands we met with a Ship and a Patache, whom we descried a far off, using
their utmost to come up to us, the Patache came with a Light-wind to view us
nearer, and to know who we were; but they were not so ill-advised as to come
within the reach of our Cannon. At last after having viewed us well on all
sides, and taking notice of the Port, and fashion of our Ship, they returned
toward their Admiral, who was about 3 or 4. Leagues off us, telling him that
our vessel was not so great as theirs; yet they did not know what sort of
people we were, not having spoken with us. Their Admiral hearing this, sent
them again with the Patache to watch us all night, with, a Lanthorn upon the
Mast, coasting us continually a good way off. But we, seeing our selves so
close pursued by these Pirate Ships, broke our boat to make plat-forms, so that
we might change our Cannon from one side to the other; then having fitted our
Net-deck, and made ready our Muskets, with our Cannons and Patterero's, and
hoisted our Sails, with provision of wine upon the Deck, for the Seamen to
drink, to make them the more Courageous; we were resolved all to die, rather
than suffer our selves to be taken by these Corsairs. Thus having been round
about us for two days and two nights, at last their Admiral arriving with all
his top-^ails, full ^ail, he commanded us to vield; but we being deaf to that,
and ready to let fly our whole broadside; he cried out aloud that we should not
fire if we were wise, and that if we were a French Ship he would do us no harm,
and that we should only put out our boat; we made answer that our boat was
broke, and he might put out his if he would; upon which he was a long time
disputing the matter: But at last seeing us so resolute, and so well covered
with our net-deck, he put out his Boat, and came aboard us, and seeing nothing
but Salt in our ship, he returned again without doing us any harm for so small a
matter, besides seeing us so resolved to defend our selves to the last man, and
that there was nothing to be gotten but blows, he left us. From thence we
pursued our course: But upon our return, meeting with us again, he beat us
soundly, and did us a great deal of damage, having three or four ships to our
one.

The 6th of November we perceived Another E^cou^te^.
a Ship, and a Pa^ac^^ ^id behind (...)-bla^^, making full ^ail toward us: But
we, seeing ourselves so near being surprised about four or five a clock in the
afternoon, we Tacked from him that we might have time to prepare our selves:
But before (...) could run out our Cannon (...) our Net-deck, they came up
(...)* and commanded us to (...), o^ they would sink us; upon which (...)
Captain (not at all affrighted at these threatenings) commanded the Cannoniers
to do their duty, which they did, saluting them very near, and they in the mean
time answering us very briskly: At last, having given us several broad-sides A
Fi^ht.
and Volies of small sh^r, which rained upon us like ^ail, the night came on,
and the Moon s^in'd a little. In the mean time we had several of our men
wounded, but none mortally: The enemy had battered us, thinking to have taken
us, but he was as soon repulsed as come; he seeing that, made on the other
side, thinking our Cannon had been changed; but he was deceived; For we had
there three Cannons ready, with Paterrero's full of sto^^, (...) ^ails, besides
bullets. Coming then close one upon the other, we let fly these three Cannons,
and Patereros, directly upon his Fore-castle, where there were near Eighty m^n
(...) leap into our Ship; They see^^^ themselves covered all over wi^^^ire, by
so many (...), we discharged upon them, and many (...) their men lay along upon
the Deck, they sell to crying out, God the Lord my God, in En^l^sh, then running
back, they fired a great shot which pierced our ship through and through, and
broke the leg of a mariner, who in have was running to the pump, because they
cried out that we were sinking, for we had already almost six foot * water in
the hold by a shot received in the beginning of the fight: our Carpenter was
very nimble in stopping it. Hereupon these Pirates presently bore away, and we
saw them no more. I belie^e they had (...) a great many of their men, otherways
they would never (...) left us, they were so animated against us, and having
sworn to ca^^ us all into the Sea. They mu^^ needs have had great want o^
(...)* that being all they demanded (...). Having then escaped this great
danger, our next business was t^ ^it up our Rigging* ^ut almost to pieces, and
our Sa^^ ^orn on every side; Our Ma^^s also were ready to tumble down, they
were so battered with great shot. All that we could do was to recover
Cape-blane, where we found Cape-blane.
seven Ships Laden with Liquor, who seeing us Arrive near the Muscle, which is
a little Creek, or Bay, before the entrance into the Haven, where we had cast
Anchor.

The Seventh of November, about two a clock in the morning; two of these seven
Ships, the greatest and the best armed, came and cast Anchor on each side of
our ship, and the other five round about, beating their Drums, and sounding
their Trumpets, which mightily disturbed us, at such time when we thought to
have taken our rest: Then we began to deck our Canons, and Muskets, order our
net-deck, and to hoist our sails: but they crying out to us to tell them from
whence we were, we were a long time without giving them any answer, not knowing
what (...) p^^ple they were, and were jus^ (...) ^o tell them that we were
Sp^^^ards* But at last the Master, named H^mand Clement, cried out, that we
were French, which they would not believe, commanding us to put out our boat;
But it was broke, as I have said before; so we answered that they might put out
theirs, which they a long time refusing, threatened to fire at us on all sides:
At last they resolved to come on board our Ship with their Arms, to know who we
were, which having done, after they had known us, they sent their boat again on
board their Ships, saluting us with several Cannons,

The next morning we entered into the Haven, where we sound three Lybian-Moors
on shore, who had run Moors of Lybia.
away from the people of these seven Ships, they not being able to catch them
again in these deserts. These three Moors came freely enough on board our Ship,
knowing again our Captain* who had formerly traveled into these parts: They
told us that there was a Portugal Pinnace hard by Cape-veille, on the other
side Cape-blane; upon which our Captain ^^pe*veille
was resolved to find them out by Land, which he did with a great deal of
trouble; for in his return he was well scorched* and tau^^^d with the Sun, in
passing these deser^^. He caused this Pinnace to come, and ca^^ Anchor in the
Moule of the Cape hard by us.

In the mean time I had a mind to go on shore to get some Ostrich eggs, by the
means of the King of Baze-Alforme, which is a place hard Baze-Alforme.
by where we were. But walking about these sandy-deserts I was in danger to
have been taken, and carried away captive by these Moors, who were holding
Counsel thereupon, but escaped the danger by casting (...).
my self into the Sea, and got into a boat that was coming toward Land: These
Barbarians seeing this, sell presently together by the ears, and the King Baze
endeavored to appease them: And th^^* I escaped from these People, who without
doubt had carried me away, and sold me at some pl^^^ ^ar distant from thence.

All this County of (...) Thirty or Forty Leagues off Ca^^-blane, is nothing
but Sands and (...) serts: and those of the Country are forced to seek for
water a far off, which they carry in Goat Skins upon Camels; they get this
water at the Fort of Arguin, which is about Arguin-Fort.
Seven or Eight Leagues from Cape-blane, and is situated in a little Island
where there is some Portuga^ Soldiers, and a Captain. The^ are great friends
to the Moors of the Country, who are not quite black, but tauny, yet there is
some amongst them black, and are all Mahometans. They Traffic in
Ostrich-feathers, and Fish, which they call Hallebranches.

As for the rest, the Ostriches (which are there in abundance,) Lay their eggs
in the sand, and there they bury them; so that it is a very hard matter to find
them out, but when the wind blows, they are discovered. These eggs are very
good to eat, and the Blacks live upon them for the most part.

Now about Five or Six days after, there Arrived a French-Pirate, who would
have entered into the Haven, but we would not suffer him; He desired of us to
let him take this Portugal-Pinnace; but because she was under our Protection,
we defended her.

Seven, or Eight days after, Arrived Spanish-Ships.
Five Spanish-Ships belonging to the Duke of Adelantade, which made us to
bestir our selves a little, and to stand upon our Guard, and to hinder them
from entering into the Haven, sending out the boat of the Portugal Pinnace to
know who they were, that, if they were friends, they might hang out their white
Colors* and we would let them enter into the Haven; which they did, and put
some of their men in the said boat to come on board us, to let us know that
they would do us no displeasure: Being all Arrived, and Anchored in the sa^d
Haven, we visited one another, after that each one returned on board his own
Ship. Three days after, the Spaniards being Anchored round about us, at their
case, they command us to depart out of the Haven, telling us that it was not
(...).
permitted to the French to take any Fish there; the which we were forced to
do, and took a Moor along with us to guide our Ship to Cape-veille. This Moor
was called Hiss, one who very well knew this Coast, we not being far from the
Fort of Arguin, where there were Portuguese, and B^acks. We found this place
very good for Fish, and having staid there for some time, a Spaniard coming
from the Fort of Arguin came toward us, desiring us to give him some Nails,
and wood which they had occasion for, for their Ship, which was in the Cape
from whence we were come. We gave him what he ask't; but this Traitor, came
only to spy us, and to know what we were doing, and if we had our Lading,
saying that they found no Fish in their Haven, and that they should be forced
to come and seek it on our side: And all this to deceive us, as they did.

For about three, or four days after Treachery of the Spiniards.
they came with three boats to force us, and they made use of this trick; that
is, they put their Nets into their Boats, and hid their Arms under neath, then
seeing that all our men were on Shore busy about the Fish, they sent two of
their boats to take our men, and the other came on board our Ship as friends,
and their Arms being hid we suspected nothing; we being but three on board, the
Captain, the Carpenter, and my self* with one Black. The Captain commanded me
to make ready a Collation for them; but they saved me that labor, by seizing
upon our Captain, and the Room where the Arms were. One of the Duke's
Ship-boy's taking a naked*sword in his hand, set himself against the
Cabine-door, to hinder any of us from entering, then they weighed the Anchors,
and set Sail, and made toward the Mole, where their Ships were: Being arrived
there, they took away all our Arms, our Powder, and our Sails; then putting
again all our men into our Ship, to complete the Lading of Fish, they kept good
watch all the night, continually mistrusting us.

But Christmas being come, which was almost the time to depart from hence, to
return with the Fish, against Lent. They took all our men out of our Ship, and
put them in theirs, placing Spaniards in ours, leaving some of our men there,
to help about the Fish. Of three Ships that remained there, two set Sail, and
ours made the third, to return into Spain* But being in the open Sea, holding
the Master of our Ship in theirs they gave the command to the Spanish-Captain,
which was in ours, and the Duke's Cabin-boy being left there for Master: the
others then held their Course, and left us alone: But being about Porto-Santo
near to the Isle Port-Santo, or Holy I Will. Madera.
of Madera, we were beaten with contrary winds in so much that we were forced
to make toward the Isle, where having cast Anchor a good way off from the City
of Madera, we had a mind to go on Shore to refresh our selves: But the
Portuguese that lived there would not suffer us, saying we had the Plague, and
therefore set Guards at all the Avenues. In so much that we were forced to get
down behind the Rocks, where we had bread, and wine brought us for our money,
which was from a wall let down to us with a rope, yet not without great
entreaty.

We remained Fifteen days in this misery, at the end of which the Spanish Ships
our companions* which we had left in the Sea, Arrived in the said Isle with
their Mainmast cut down by reason of the bad weather. And their General of the
Ship made such a do, by words, and remonstrances, that he obtained leave to
enter into Madera; upon condition to take the habit of the City of Madera, he,
and his servants; a little after, this General being somewhat indisposed, sent
to seek me out in this place, where we were in Custody and took the habit of
the City, after the Spanish fashion, which one of the Soldiers of the Castle
had lent me; and so I entered Madera to visit this General, where I tarried
until the time of our Embarquement.

Whilst I was visited, and stripped by these people of the Gard-maor in
changing my habit, I had forgotten my Purse, which I left in my pocket; But
these Gallants had remembered to handle it, and took out the most part of my
money for me, before I perceived it, and had I not returned presently again to
see after it, they had not left me so much as a blanck.

Now one night, as we were all Design to save themselves.
withdrawn into our Ship, except the Spanish Captain, and the Pilote, our
Captain took a resolution with Six of his men who were there to play the
Spaniards a fine trick, before the Master, and Pilote came on board, and the
Captain's Mate was ordered to lead the others to the bottom of the Ship,
promising to make them drink some good wine, to which the Spanish Mariners,
(who are always ready for their share of such a game, when they can have it on
free*cost) would not have failed. We had also disposed our other men in order,
some to Guard the Chamber of the Poop, where the Arms were, where I was
appointed with one of our men, who had but one Leg, having lost the other in
the last Fight: others to set Sail with the wind: And the more to facilitate
our design, we weighed one Anchor, leaving the other a pique. But no so sooner
had we made an end of weighing Anchor, than presently came the Captain, and the
Pilote, with the other Spanish Mariners on board. The Pilot was wounded by a
blow with a sword, having on Shore fought a Spaniard of one of the other Ships.
Their Arrival quite spoiled our design, and the next day the wind being good we
set Sail.

As for the rest, this I Will of Madera, A description of the Isle and City of
Madera,
one of the Canaries, or fortunate of the Ancients, may have about Forty
Leagues in compass, and has two Cities, of which the principal is also called
Madera, with two Fortresses, in one of which, and the strongest, there are
Castilian Soulders, and in the other Portuguese.

The City is seated in a Valley, and at the foot of a Mountain, from whence
comes so much water, and sometimes in such abundance, that very often it causes
inundations, which do much damage, carrying away Bridges, Houses, Churches, and
other edifices. The City is about as big as St. Denis, but very populous,
having a great number of slaves, who work upon the sugar without the City; and
about all the rest of the Island, stand here and there May-houses of pleasure.
The soil is very plentiful in all sorts of excellent fruits, and especially in
Wines: The Air there is very sweet and temperate, and the pleasantest place in
the World to live in; And it is no wonder if the Ancients esteemed this country
to be the Elisian fields, and as an earthly Paradise.

Amongst the rest the Earth there Sugarcanes.
produces a great quantity of Sugarcanes very spungie which they of the country
cut, and bruise in a Mill, then putting it into the Press, and the Liquor,
squeesed out, is put to the fire where it is boiled over and over in vessels
like those which the Dyers use, so that all the moisture may be wholly
consumed; and so having refined it, they clap it into Sugar-loaves.
Earthen-moulds, where it is formed into Sugar-loaves, as it is brought us* The
substance, or husk that remains is a redish, and blackish sugar, which they
call Meleche, that is to say black.

I saw there the French Consul, Named Jean de Chux, who had married the Niece
of Don Christoval de More, Vice Roy of Portugal: He is very rich, and courteous,
and did me and my companions a great deal of favor: There are always a great
many Factors; as French English Dutch, and others, who are to Load the Ships
that trade there, They make there a great quantity of excellent sweet meats,
that are carried from thence as Marmelades, quidnies, Candid Lemmon, and
several other curious Pastes.

But to return again to our departure; we were not gotten Thirty Leagues from
the I Will, when we were overtaken with such a great tempest, that we were forced
to return back to Madera, which was the Twenty fifth of January, 1602. and did
not go out again till the Ninth of February, and made such have, that we
Arrived at St. Lucar de Baramede in Spain, where being come, our Captain was
presently made Prisoner in the Real des Galleres, saying for these Reasons,
that in some of the former Voyages he had sold Corn, and Arms to the Moors of
Barbary, at Cap-blane; upon which they brought informations with the deposition
of the Moors; The Adelandate (not being willing to give Credit to the Moors)
Let go our Captain with his Ship, but our Fish was all spoiled, which was a
great Loss to us. We went from thence to Lisbon to sell it, where only we sold
part of it, but the Visitor of health being come on board our Ship, and finding
it bad, commanded us to sell no more of it upon great penalty, so that we were
forced to cast the rest into the Sea.

About this time our Captain found V^y^ges to Mazag^n.
an opportunity to Freight his Ship to go to Mazagan in Afrique, to carry Corn,
and biscquet to the Portugal Soldiers who are there in Garrison to make war in
Barbary. With this Lading we parted from Lisbon, the Twenty third of April, the
next day after Easter, and that in all diligence to go succor these Poor
people, who were ready to die with hunger; There had been before several Ships
sent with Victuals but had been taken by the Pirates. Being Arrived there, we
fired a Cannon to give them notice, to send us a Pilot to come nearer; they
answered us with another shot, and sent the said Pilot; we approached as near
as we possibly could, and cast Anchor about three or four Leagues from Mazagan,
with that a great number of boats came on board to unlade us. It was a great
pity to see these poor people Great hunger of the Spaniard.
how they were starved, and if these Victuals had not come so seasonably as
they did, I believe they had been either dead, or otherways had been forced to
have yielded themselves slaves to the Barbarous-moors. I could not hinder the
children, nor the great ones themselves, from boring holes in the sacks where
the biscquet were that they might eat, or rather allay their hunger. I did my
utmost endeavor to keep them away, though I was very sorry to see them so faint,
and look so dreadfully with hunger. My Captain had given me the charge of the
biscquet, for to return him the same weight that he had delivered to me at
Lisbon.

This being all unladed and put into the Magazines for that purpose, I saw the
Gentlemen and Cavalliers coming to look every one for his weight of Biscuit,
and measure of Corn, which is ordinarily allowed them by the King of Spain. One
of these Cavalliers received and lodged me in his House; for there is no Inn
nor resting place for Strangers.

I ordered the Business so, that our Captain and Master were lodged there also,
causing Beds to be prepared for them to lie in.

As for me, I received a thousand Courtesies from this Cavallier, whom I cured
of an Humor he had in his Eyes, which he finding removed, knew not how to
treat me. For in this place was neither Physician nor Apothecary, but only one
Surgeon, who was very well sk^ll'd in the Latin Tongue, but wanted the
knowledge of Medicines, and Experience.

The Cor^igidor, or Judge of this place, invited me one day to Dine with this
Surgeon, who discoursed very readily in Latin; yet for all that he could not
give Ease to a Patient that he had.

The most part of the People of the City came to ask for me at my Lodging to
give them Physic, and made me great Offers; But I had not leisure to give
Satisfaction to all; forasmuch as we were to return in a short time, as we did
not long after.

As for the rest, this City of Mazagan Mazagan described.
is very strong, and the Walls so thick, that six Cavalliers may walk abreast
round about 'em: The Houses there are very low, and over-topped by the Walls.
There is a great many Cannon, very large and long, and line almost all the
Wall, but ill mounted: There may be about forty Cannoniers, with some 600
Soldiers, viz. 200 Horse, and 400 Foot, the most part Married. They make
Incursions upon the Arabians, whom they take Prisoners, and drive away their
Cattle. They have hard by them a City called Azamor, which makes hot War upon
(...).
them, and not above two Leagues one from the other. Every morning there goes
out 40 Horse to discover what they can see, and tarry out till noon: In the
afternoon 40 others go out, who stay till night: And there are about six of
these Cavalliers whom they call Atalayes, that is to say, the Watch, Atalayes.
who are far distant one from the other, and keep Sentinel every where; and
when they discover any thing, they Post back; and then the City Watch, who sees
them, strikes 2 or 3 blows upon a Bell; with that, the others presently mount
their Horses, and run to the place of the signal. For in every place where
these Atalayes are, there is a long Pole, like a Mast; and when they perceive
any thing, they with a little Cord heave their sign on high, which is the
signal to all those who Salley out of Mazagan. When they have a mind to make an
Incursion, every one arms himself, each of 'em carrying Forage for their
Horses, whom they give Corn to, out of the Allowance, and Pension, which is
sent them from Por^^g^^.

They Eat there abundance of Caricols, Carical^.
which are little Snails in Shells, who ^^^d upon the Plants; and there the
Plants are of an exceeding force and virtue.

The Bees there make White Honey of Africa.
Honey, and of an excellent Taste: Their Hives are upon the Houses, which after
the African manner are covered with Sotees, like to Cieling after the Moresque;
and one may easily go from one House to another.

This City of Mazagan is nothing Country of Mazagan.
else but a Fortress, being about half a League in compass; and is inhabited by
none but Men of War, who have every one their piece of Land round about the
City, where they Sow Corn, as Barley, Pease, Beans, and other G^ains; but very
often the Moors Villainies of the Moors.
come and cut it up in the night time, and spoil it. The rest of the Country is
Uncultivated.

The Moors do them a thousand Injuries, even to Poisoning a Well, which they
have out of the City in a Garden, by casting in Carrion, with other filth and
nastiness.

Within the City there is a full Cistern; and upon the Ciloe's Festival-Day,
the watch is set: It is very high and large, and is capable of holding above
20000 Pipes of Water.

I was near being left to tarry in this City. For the day before we were to set
sail, our Captain and the Master came ashore for me; for I never budged from
the City, minding nothing else but the Cure of these People. Now, as I was gone
to walk along by the Seaside, to gather some Sea*Crist, which is there in
abundance, being returned to the City to take my rest* I was sent for in great
haste to go see a Patient, upon which our Captain went away, and left me there
all alone* Knowing this, I went presently*towards the Seashore, but he was
already far*enough from thence* so I was forced to go back again to the City to
wait till the next day* In the mean time the Ship finding the Wind good, set
Sail; and a Soldier, who was a Sentinel upon the Wall, knowing that I was still
in the City* came presently to give me notice thereof; At which all astonished
I run presently to the Wall to see if it was true, and being in great
perplexity how to get out from thence, ^ went to the Captain of the Foot
Soldiers to desire him to cause the Ga^e to be opened, which he did, and gave
the Key to the Porter; but I must stay till the Cavalliers were ready to go
out: This time seemed to me an Age. At last the Gate being opened, I desired
the Pilot-Moor to get me a Boat ready, to carry me on Board our Ship; and by
good fortune I found some Soldiers who were going a Fishing, one of whom had
brought us from Portugal. They did me that favor as to take me into their
Boat: Had we wanted that little Wind, which was weak enough, I had been forced
to have tarried there; for which I should not have been much perplexed, had I
but had my Clothes, my Medicines, and my other Things; but I had unhappily been
in my Doublet, without comfort, or any other thing. These Soldiers then did
their utmost to overtake the Ship, which was already got far off, besides the
Sea began to rise, insomuch that these Men would not go any further, telling,
that if the Wind should rise but never so little, they should not be able to
recover Land by their utmost Efforts, but run the risque of their Lives*
Hereupon they left of Rowing, and and held Council amongst themselves what was
best to be done; and having resolved to return, they began again to handle
their Oars; upon which, I being much vexed, endeavored to urge them by Prayers
and Promises, that I would certainly Content them, to return again toward the
Ship; and by strength of Oars we made our way so that we arrived there. This
was no small fortune for me, considering in what trouble they live in there;
Besides, the most part of the Portuguese there are such People who are carried
thither by Force, being Condemned to be there for a certain time to make War
upon the Moors; In short, they are almost all Criminals, otherwise none would
be forced to go there.

Having then happily overtaken our Ship, our Captain for excuse, let me
understand, that he could not possibly wait any longer for me than until it was
day, and if I had not been on Shore, he had set sail the same night, knowing
well that when I saw them under Sail I would have to overtake them. But I
believe the reason that moved him to go away so hastily without me, was rather
to Cheat me of some Money he owed me, and which he paid me since, against his
Will, telling me of his Losses; but I was not bound to participate in them,
forasmuch as the Condition that I made with him was neither for Gain nor Loss.
But I could not get any thing of him since then, but by an Arrest of the
Parliament of Britagne in the year 1603.

At last we arrived at St. Lucar de Baramede the 26th of May, and being Return
to Africa.
laden with Salt in the River of Seville, near the Salt*Houses, which are there
along the Coast, with some Scutcheneal, such as Scarlet is Dyed withal, and
about 30000 Crowns in silver, we set sail the first of July 1692. accompanied
with a little Flemish Ship. The 15th of the same month we descried two great
Ships, with their Pataches, making full Sail upon us, and we prepared our
selves presently to receive them, ordering our Net-Decks, and running out our
Guns, in number 12, with our Pattereroes and Muskets; then hoisting our Sails,
and handling our Yards, we waited for them in so ready a posture. It was not
long before they were upon us, commanding us to yield, and low^ Sea Fight.
our Sails, and began to Salute us, each with a Broadside; in the mean time we
answering them in the same Language: The Fight continued so all the day,
without gaining the least advantage one upon the other: We had a great many Men
wounded and burnt with the Fire that was kindled by some shots of Cannon; and
besides, one of the great Guns burst into pieces, and the Breech of it broke
through the two Decks, fell amongst the Salt, and had it not been for the
resistance that it found there, it had broke quite through our Ship. In the
mean time the small Shot rained upon us like Hail, and Fight.
without ceasing, insomuch that our Ship was pierced through and through on
every side, and our Sails torn to pieces, and all the rest in bad Equipage; but
the night coming on, the Fight ceased, and our Enemies watched us all until the
next morning, then they left us at liberty. All the night we were consulting
what we had best to do, whether to yield, or to defend our selves to the utmost
extremity. Our Captain, who was of a great Courage, would not hearken to
yielding: Hereupon we went on Board the Flemish-Ship to know their pleasure.
This Flemish Ship at the first discharge of her Cannon, had burnt all her
Powder, with which a great number of her Men were disabled and destroyed. They
had put their Powder in a piece of Sail, and a Match by chance touched Accident
of Powder.
it, which was the cause of this Disaster. I went on Board their Ship to see
their Pilot, who was quite Roasted, his Belly, Face, and Hands, mighty big and
swollen; I brought him some Remedies. I was told that there was 4 or 5 others in
a very bad condition, and ready to die: They were Burnt after a pitious and
horrible manner. In the end, after we had well consulted with them, it was
resolved to send a Boat on Board the Enemies, with a Man that understood their
Language, for they were English; which was done accordingly: But they would be
pacified by no means whatsoever, saying, that they had suffered a great deal of
loss, and that it was not their intention to do any harm to the French, that
being expressly forbidden them by the Queen their Mistress: But that our Captain
had given them ill Language, and that he himself must come on Board them to
excuse himself, which was done; And they came on Board us, with the Boats of
their two Ships, searching in every corner, but they found nothing but Salt: If
they had met with our Money, we should have been in a bad condition; for they
had played us a trick of their Trade. At last, after we had made them some
Presents of Victuals, they withdrew themselves. Their Mariners and Soldiers
told us that they had resolved to have fallen* upon us in the morning; and had
Drank to one another, and Eaten all the little Refreshment they had, hoping to
have more of us; but God by his Mercy delivered us from them.

Note, That one of these two Ships by whom we were so beaten, was the same that
we met withal at the first, and who had so Chased us in going to Cape-blane:
We having then made him good cheer, which was no small help to us at this time;
and he told us, that after he had left us, he took a Ship laden with Sugar,
which paid him well for the trouble we had given him.

In the mean time, being delivered Return to France.
from this danger, we made such haste that we came near to the Cape de Finibus
Terrae: On this side of the Cape we found a German Ship of Lubeck, very great,
and put out our Boat to go on board her, that we might have a little Biscquet,
for ours began to grow very short, because of the contrary Weather.
Winds. We had some of them for our Money, and they were very honest Men: I
went also in the Boat to have some Refreshments; but the Wind being high, the
Sea began to rise, and the fore part of our Boat was broke, drawing so much
Water that we could find no way to empty it; and the German Ship was already a
League and a half off us* but they made a little toward us, seeing us in the
Sea: We had much ado to get into her, and I to find hold betwixt the Boat and
the Ship, because the Sea was very high; but taking the end of a Rope, I was
very nimble in mounting up, and had only one Leg a little bruised.

At last, we arrived at St. Malo the first of August: The next day our Ship
Arriving at St. Malo.
was likely to have been lost in the Road, by a great Storm that came so Great
danger at An-charing.
unlooked for, that we had much ado to make the Men go on board, or otherways
the Vessel had sunk at Anchor; And so this troublesome Voyage was finished, for
which God be Praised.

The End of the First Book.
A Description of the following Cutts.
The First, The Lybians, toward Cape Blanc, go in this posture in search of
their Enemies.

The Second, The Form of the Lybian's Fighting when they Encounter.



A Description of the following Cutts.
The Third, The Moors of Lybia go thus about the Deserts with their Camels.

The Fourth, How the Lybian Women go along by the Seaside to look for Fish,
and Ostrich Eggs to Eat.



THE TRAVELS AND VOYAGES OF John Mocquet, INTO THE WEST INDIES: As also, In the
River of the Amazons; The Country of the Caripous and Caribes; and other
Nations and Isles of the West.

BOOK II.
AFter my return from Africa, I continued for sometime in France, and knowing
that the Sieur de la Ravardiere was going away for the West Indies, I had a
wonderful desire to see those Countries: And for this cause I Embarking (...)
the West Indies.
entered my self with the Sieur, and embarked in his Ship in the Haven of
Concale the 12th of Jan. 1604. We went to Cho^e, (which is an Isle five Leagues
from Concale) there to wait for weather for us to put to Sea. We tarried there
till the 24th of the same month, not without having suffered by great Winds;
which gave us no small trouble, besides the loss of our Boat; but we soon
bought another, and at last set Sail, bearing South East, and in a little time*
we passed the Channel. And forasmuch as our Ship was new, not having as yet
been proved in the Sea, we were forced to suffer her to take her Course; not
being able to bear up Sails; for she veer'd after such a manner, (her Topmast
being high) that she was continually with one side upon the Water, which was a
great inconvenience: Nevertheless, putting our trust in God, we proc^^ded on;
and at the height of the Cape de Finibus Terrae, we found a Ship, and made full
sail upon her to (...)
know what she was. Coming close up to, and being prepared to attack her, and
they also provided to receive us, we found out that it was a French Ship, the
Captain of which came upon the Poop well armed, with his Sword in his Hand,
crying out to us to Steer Leeward, or else he would fire at us; but we
contesting a little thereupon, that we might find out and know of what part of
France he might be: After having well considered him and known him for a right
French Man, we came up Leewards of him, of which he was not a little Proud,
thinking that we had been a Man of War, and durst not assault him; for he made
signs with his Sword upon the Poop, that we had done well to come up so: But
our design was not to make War upon our Nation; besides, that might have been
enough to have broken our Voyage.

Holding then our Course, we had so favorable a Wind that we came near to the
Isle of Lancelot the 6th of February; upon which day one of our Men fell
overboard into the Sea, and A Disaster.
it was impossible to save him, because we had a right Wind. We presently
tacked about upon him; but coming to the place, where he fell. we found nothing
but his Breeches. All things that belonged to him were presently put to Sale
upon the Deck, and every one Bought what he had occasion for, as Coats, Linen,
and other Things, with which he was very well furnished: For he was of the Rank
of the Nobility, and was named Duvall, of Vire in Normandy.

This done, we steered our Course toward the Coast of Barbary, and the Coast
of Barbary.
next day the 11th of the same month, we arrived near the Land to find out a
Port, and cast Anchor in a Creek or Bay, putting out our Boat to go on shore:
But coming there, we found nothing but Deserts, without any thing else;
insomuch, that we returned again on Board the Ship to weigh Anchor, and to look
out some other place more proper to stay in, and to fit up our Patache,
scowring along this Coast all the rest of that day and the night following*

Presently after, we found out the Mouth of the River Rio Del Oro, Rio del Oro.
where we sent our Boat to Sound the depth of it, and to see if we might enter
in so far as a little Island of flat Sand, which those in the Boat had
perceived. They found but 12 Foot of Water, and our Ship drew already as many*
so that the Keel touched Ground; but we had no harm, because the River was
Calm. Coming then to this Island, within the River of* Rio del Oro, about five
Leagues within from the Mouth, which is not taken notice of in the Map. We
named the same, Touch Island, after Touch-Island.
the Surname of our Commander, the Sieur de la Ravardiere, where we cast Anchor
to tarry for some time. And the 15th of February we began to fit up our
Patache, which was ready in our Ship, and only wanted Mounting and Chaulking.

During this time we went daily to look for Shells, the finest in the world,
and seemed as if they were enameled with Gold: As I put some of them into my
Handkerchief, the Poison within, (which was like little Snails) stained it into
a Purple color; and Sea Purple.
perhaps it might be the same Espece de Murex, so celebrated by the Ancients,
and unknown at this time. We gathered a great quantity of them for their
Beauty. We caught also with our Nets, as much Fish as we could well find use
for.

This Island was* full of Cormorants, Cormorants and their watch.
of which we killed a great number with our Harquebus shot. Of these Birds
there is always one that watches when the others take their rest, as it is said
of the Cranes. We had much ado to come near them, and were forced to creep
along the Ground to take them. But after they began to be a little frighted
with the Harquebusses, they came no more as before.

We tarried near a month in this place without seeing any Man; but about five
or six days before our departure, we perceived a Smoke in the Country, about
three Leagues from us; which made us conjecture that there were some Lybians
and Blacks Blacks of Lybia.
come there, because toward the Coast, the Deserts of Lybia begin. These
Blacks were come a great way out of the Country, to look toward the ^oast to
see if there was any Ship to Traffic for Ambergreece, and carried their Water
in Goat Skins, cut out for that purpose. In the night time they creep into the
Sand to Sleep, for fear of being smelt out by the Lions and Tigers, who are
there in abundance.

It might be properly said, that these Men came out of Hell, they were so
burnt, and dreadful to look upon: We sent then our Boat to know the cause of
these Fires seen in the Country, and found three of these Lybians, (of which 2
came on board our Ship) and one of them told me, that he was the Kinsman of
Taquide Alforme of Cape Blanc, of whom I inquired news, forasmuch as having
heard of him in my former Voyage, toward Cape Blanc.

This was the time that they fasted their Ramadan, and would not Eat any thing
till night. It Is a great pity to see these People, how poor and miserable they
are, without Bread or-any other Food. They Eat nothing but Ostrich Eggs, and
some dried Fish, besides some Flesh of the same.

He that had stayed alone on Shore, was Son to one of these other two, and came
to receive his Father's coming out of the Boat, prostrating himself before him,
and kissing his Hand* Then his Father gave him some of the Bisquet that we had
given him, of which he was exceeding glad, for he was very Hungry, and had
supped but badly in these Deserts; for the most part inhabited by Wild Beasts*
which are continually there: And from our Ship we heard sometimes in the night
terrible Cries and Roaring.

In all this Coast we could not find any fresh Water, nor before in the River,
where we sent our Boat to look for some, but in vain, all the Country being
Desert, and quite Barren This Island where we had cast Anchor, was directly
under the Tropic of Cancer.

Now having fitted up, and put out again our Patache to Sea, we set fail the
10th of March, and having born South West toward the Isles of Cape Verd, Isles
of Cape Verd. Sal, Santiago, Fogo. Brava.
we roved all along by the Isles of Sa^, Santiago, and Fogo, to go to Anchor at
that of Brava, where we tarried until the 22th of the same month.

All these Islands are much subject to Storms and Boisterous Winds, as it
happened to us at this Isle of Brava, where we lost an Anchor, being obliged to
weigh and drop Anchor so frequently there, when the Wind would drive us
sometimes toward Land, presently again to the Sea. It Is supposed that these
Winds are shut up there in some Gulf, as they come out at certain hours of the
day. And what is more strange, is, that a League from thence, the Sea was calm,
and without Wind; which made me believe that these Winds being so shut up, and
come out with such violence, have not the force to penetrate far, being struck
back, and repulsed by the Winds which come from the Sea.

We could not find out the Habitations of these Islanders; who are Portuguese,
Mestices, and Blacks: The Island bears Tobacco, abundance of Mace, and other
Fruits. The Country is very Mountainous, and there are some Fig Trees to be
seen, with Mulbery-Trees, and others.

After we had well refreshed our selves with sweet* Water, dried Fish, and
other things, which the Islanders sold us, we weighed Anchor to Steer our
Course, and had the Wind so favorable, that we arrived at the Mouth of the
River of the Amazons on Palm. River of the Amazons.
Sunday, about three hours before day. There are great Streams there about the
Sea side, which run with a strange swiftness and horrible noise, carrying along
with them Trees and Plants, which they pluck up by the Roots along the Coast.

We seeing our selves as soon as it was morning entangled amongst these roaring
Streams and Currents, having scarce any Wind, they who were up*on the Watch
began to cry out, that we were all lost, thinking we had been upon the the
Shelves* At this noise every one began to stir himself to look out for help;
and I hearing this word Lost, mounted presently upon the Deck to see if there
was any way to swim, and if we were near Land, having no other way to save our
selves but by Swiming till day, hoping to have sight of Land, from which
according to our Heights we were not far off. Hereupon the Pilot well advised,
took the Plummet in Hand, and found in Sounding 25 Fathom; whereof being very
glad, he cried out, that we were in the River River of the Amazons.
of the Amazons, which is almost one Degree on this side the Line. We made but
little Sail in expectation of the day, that we might see Land, which we saw the
next morning; and Sounding again, we found but nine Fathoms, and so lessening
to three or four, and yet we saw no Land, which was a great trouble to us.

On Monday we descried Land, very low toward the South West, and by little and
little we app^oached the Coast, to have knowledge of the Country, but with fear
to run a*ground; for there the bottom is nothing but Mud, which we touched
every moment.

As we were thus wandering about, by good chance we perceived a Canoe Encounter
with Indians.
with 17 Indians, who came toward us, and went to our Patache which was before
us, after that they came on board us: They were all naked, and Painted, as they
go in these Countries, with their Crowns of Feathers; and told us that they
came from War off the Cape of Caypour, one of the Capes near to the River of
the Amazons, and they had some Booty in their Canoe. Their Captain seemed to be
a Man of good fashion, yet he was stark naked, and had only a Langoutin, which
is a little piece of painted Cotton, to cover his Privities. He spoke with such
a Grace, that he might have been taken for a Man of Counsel; for he spoke
softly, and gave a grace to all his Words and Gestures* After we had discoursed
with him Country of Yapoco.
about the Country, and where we should Anchor, he left us two Indians for
Guides, who conducted us to the Land of Yapaco, in the Mouth of the River, or
very near, and caused us to shelter our Ship in a private corner, so that when
the Tide went out, she stuck upon the Mud; but the Tide coming in again raised
her up.

Arriving then in this Country of Yapaco, we left the River of the Amazons on
the left Hand, on the other side of which, toward the South, is the great
Country of Brasil, and on this side toward the North, are the Caripons, and
Caribes.

Thirty or forty Leagues off from this great River, we found along the Coast a
certain Rock, which had Veins of the color of Slate, with some silver mixed
amongst it, out of which I took a little Stone I since lost. We saw there also
the marks of some English* or Dutch Ship, that had passed by that way.

We arrived there on Monday night, Arrival in the Land of Yapoco.
and afterward on Tuesday morning, the 10th of April, desiring to know what
profit we might make in this Country, we went on Shore to Exchange Hatchets,
Bills, Knives, and Glass-Beads of several colors, with diverse other such like
things.

We saw these Indians with two Wood to strike Fire.
little pieces of Wood strike fire: I made the Experiment of it since to the
late King Henry the Great at Fontainbleau, in the year 1605. All the Indians
were run there from their Habitations, and had trimed up their Hammocks, or
hanging Beds, made with Wreaths of Palm Trees; and were in great numbers, Men,
Women, and Children, all as naked as when they came out of their Mothers
Bellies; except some Beads with which they decked their Bodies; and in their
Ears they had long pieces of Wood and round Stones. They had brought a thousand
Trifles, as Gumbs, Egrets Feathers, and Parrots, Tobacco, and other Things
which the Country afforded. I did my Duty in Exchanging, and took as much of
their Merchandise as I possibly could. We made our Bargains without speaking,
Merchandise of the Country.
showing by signs what we would have, or give.

The King of this Country of Yapoco, named Anacajoury, was then making ready
Cannoe's to go against the Caribes; This was the cause that we could not then
make much Bartering in th^s place: For they were all busy at work, some at the
Cannoes, others to make Arms for their Visage; and others to prepare Victuals,
which was the Women's Province: we saw all those People mighty busy at that.
Wine of the Country.
Amongst others, they made a certain Wine, or Drink of Fruits, which
inebritates like Beer or Citre: They chaw a certain Root, then Boil it, and
after Strain it. There is another sort of it more thick, which is made of
Fruits and Palms, as big as a Gall-Nut, they bruise only the Bark which is upon
them; it is as yellow as an Orange; for they make nothing of the Nut; after that
they Boil and Strain it. They have another sort, which might be taken for clear
Milk, mixed with soft Cheese. I had a great mind to Taste of it, besides, being
desired by them to Drink, I would not refuse, for fear they should have thought
that I intended 'em any harm; insomuch that they were mightily pleased to see
me Drink of it.

They do not love Melancholy and green Persons; and if you make sport with
them in Jest, it must be Nature and Manners of those Indians.
in Laughing. I clapped them sometimes upon the Back with my Hand in Jest, but
they would always return again the like in Laughing. They are very hardy and
warlike, courteous and liberal, and have very cheerful Looks.

The Caribes are not so, for they would give us, as the saying is, not so much
as a Patato.
Patatte; This is a Root like a Turnip, but longer, and of a red and yellow
color: It is of a very good taste, and they Eat it boiled or roasted upon the
Coals; but if it is often Eat of, it is very Disrellishing and Windy.

As for Fruits, they have several Fruits.
sorts of 'em, good to Eat, but wild and unknown to us, except the Ananana's,
or Figs which are very long, and as big as a great Pudding. They have
Plantanes, or Fig Trees, which the Spaniards call Plantins. They make small
thin Cakes of Casav^, which is a Root that they Grate upon a Stone, or a piece
of Wood made in the form of a File; not having any Mortar to bruise it in: Then
they put (...)
it into a great Basket made of little Twigs, like Willows. These Roots also
yield a juice which is poisonous. After having well pressed it, dried it, and
sop'd it in Water, they make it (...).
into a Paste, spread it upon a great flat Stone that is upon the Fire, which
gives it the form of a very thin Cake. When it is done so, it may be kept
three, or four years, or more, so it be laid in a dry place. I tasted of it,
but it did not relish as our Bread, and I believe that one would soon be weary
of Eating it often. They make several other sorts of things to Eat, but very
course and grossly, which is not very pleasant to those who are not accustomed
with them.

I saw them make their preparations in the Lodgings of their King Anacajoury,
to Victual the Cannoes which were to go to the War; but they put all these
Casaves, or Cakes, (which I spoke of) into a Pile in the middle of the House,
and their Drink in Gourd Bottles, which hold more than a Pail. For these Gourd
Bottles are of a wonderful greatness in comparison to ours.

I saw at the House of this King, a Caribe-Slave, whom they made to work to get
ready these Victuals for the War. This little Naval Army was about 35 Cannoes,
with 25 or 30 men in each.

But to return again to our arrival in this place of Yapaco; as soon as we King
Anacajoury.
were entered into this Country, the King Anacajoury gave us two of his Nephews
in Hostage, if by chance any of ours should there loose himself, or his way:
The Grandchild of this King led me about the Woods; for all the Coast is
covered with Trees, and there was some Indians with him. This little Boy was
very brisk, and mighty witty for a Savage, and showed me the Fruits, which
Mancenille Fru^t.
were good to Eat, and which not. Amongst others, they have a Fruit called
Mancenille, of the bigness of an Orange, very yellow, and beautiful to look
upon; but yet so venomous, that they say, if it is put never so little to the
Mouth, it kills immediately; and the Fish themselves, which are all along the
Coast, who suck this Fruit, are carried by the Sea to Land: for the Tree which
bears it is near to Sea, which comes up into these Woods, and drags along with
it a thousand sorts of Fruits, as we saw in the River of the Amazons.

The Fish who suck this Fruit, peel and loose their Scales: Whosoever Eats of
this Fish loose all their Epiderme, or Upper-Skin, like the Lepers who Eat the
Flesh of Vipers. As soon as any one finds himself seized with such an accident,
they presently conjecture they have Eat of the Poison of Mancen^lle, as the
Spaniards have named it, who inhabit these Indies.

This King's Grandchild showed me several Herbs which they make use of, and
one amongst others which Antidote against* Poison.
serves them for an Antidote when they are struck with Poisoned Arrows. I took
some of the Leaves of this Herb to compound an Unguent, which is an excellent
remedy for Wounds, and other Sores. I would also have plucked up some of the
Root, but this little Boy would not suffer it: And besides, the Indians who
were with him, seemed to be very angry he had showed me this Plant, which they
prised and esteemed above all others. I would not insist any more thereupon,
for fear his Grandfather should be displeased with me.

After I had gathered a great quantity of Plants, Fruits, and other Rarities, I
returned on board the Ship to lock them up.

On Tuesday the 11th of April, I went to their Habitations to see if I could
get any more Curiosities, taking some Knives, and other Pedlars-Ware, to
exchange with them. Our Pilo^ being with me, we went into a Cabin, where there
were a great number of Indians, Men and Women; and there were amongst the rest
some about 17 or 18 years of Age, pounding in a Mortar made of a hollow piece
of Wood, with a long Stick. I also took a Stick to help her to Pound, of which
she was very glad, seeing I understood the manner of Pounding after their way:
And though she was Stark-Naked, she cared not for my being over against
Innocent nakedn^ss of the^^ People.
her. After that, she gathered us some Potato's, and besides those, gave us
other Things to Eat, and all with an admirable Grace and Civility.

I believe these Caripous are of all the Indians the most sweet and mild in
Behavior: They are very curious of Honor, Ambitious to do Kindness to those
who visit them: The Women, Girls, and Children, came very freely on board our
Ship, without any show of shame for their Nakedness, but were continually
drawing their Legs close, like Half-Moons. There was a little Indian brought me
some Balls of Tobacco, with a little Case made of the Bark of a Tree, as wide
as a Pocket, and as round as a Ring: It Is that which the Men make use of to
bind up their Privy-Parts; they can easily change them, or take them away when
they please. I took two or three of them for curiosity, seeing 'em so
ingeniously made. All the Indians round about having heard the discharge of
Cannon, came presently from every quarter that was nigh, to exchange their
Goods with our Knives, Hatchets, and other small Ware.

When the Cannon had fired, the noise of it continued near a quarter of an hour
in these rough Woods, so that all the Country, Mountains, and Valleys, were
filled with the Eccho's, which answered one another with a wonderful noise,
which might be heard as I believe, above 25 Leagues from thence.

As for the rest, these Caripous People are great Enemies to the Caribes, who
make mortal War one Caribes.
upon the other The Caribes eat the Caripous, but the aripous do not eat them.
This little Grandson of the King of Yapaco's, showed me by signs, how the
Caribes had great Teeth, and Biting his Arm, made me to understand that they
Eat them when they happen to take them in War. The Hatred betwixt them is so
great, that it is impossible ever to reconcile them; nevertheless I have heard
say since, by a Mariner of Haure de Grace, that they had made some sort of a
Reconciliation betwixt 'em.

Being then amongst these Savages, I saw one day amongst others, the Captain of
the Cannoes, whom we found at the first: He made me great Demonstrations of
Friendship by his Gestures, saying, that he would bring me from his Country,
(far from thence) several choice Things, and amongst others, some little pretty
Parrots, speaking Parrot^.
their Language. Yet I waited not so much in expectation of his Promises, as to
neglect to provide my self elsewhere. My first thing was a little Parrot as big
as a Sparrow, with a long Tail, and very Tame, which would with a wonderful
Pleasure pick the Hair of the Beard, so that it could scarce be felt. I gave a
little Knife in exchange for it. This Captaih who had promised me so many
Rarities, came to offer me amongst other Things, a Truss of Serpents, Serpents
good to ^at.
which were as Fat as a great Conger, and the Skin so speckled with yellow,
gray, blue, and other colors, that I had no great mind to try how they
relished, though some living on them, make great Feasts together: They are
prepared in Leaves, and roasted. I also took notice that these Caripous live
better than these Caribes; for they know how to make Cakes with Mace, which are
very good, and have other things to Eat, agreeable enough to the Country where
they live.

These People Eat also another sort of Serpents, like Adders, of a strange
greatness and length. This Country of Yapoco is above 120 Leagues from the
Country of Toupinambous, which is toward the River Maragnon, or Brasil: And
those of Yapoco are of the same color and swarthy Complexion with the others,
but they are far finer, more lively, and pleasant.

Speaking of this Captain, I will relate in this place a strange and remarkable
thing of these People, that the Nephew of Anacajoury told me, to whom the
Sovereign Command of this Country belongs, and because of his Youth, his
Uncle governed until such time as he should be of Age to Rule. He told me, That
they did Eat neither Flesh nor Fish until Strange Ceremonies to make Captains.
they had killed some of their Enemies; and when they had killed any one of
them in War, they observed this Ceremony, which should not be otherways
agreeable to our French Captains. They make a Link of Palm in which they put
him whom they design for Captain, who before he may Eat either Flesh or Fish,
must undergo therein the Exercise of their Weapons; Then causing all the
greatest Captains of the Country to come, who with the King of the place, make
one after another, a Harrangue or Speech to this new one, telling him, that he
must be courageous, hardy, and nimble in Battle, and never give Ground but upon
great occasion, and with Judgment undergo all the hardships of War, be they
never so great; and love the Virtue, Honor, and Reputation of a good and just
Coptain. When they have finished this Discourse, they take a great Switch in
Hand, wherewith every one gives him three great Blows, with all their force, so
that the Body is all over Black and Bloody, upon which Blisters may be seen to
rise as big as ones Finger; and so one after another make him the same
Discourse, repeating so many Blows with the Switch; which lasts a full Month, 3
or 4 times a Week. In the mean time this poor Patient in all that time Eats
nothing but Casaves and Potates, until he has had all his Ornaments of Virtue.
And then they make a great Fire, putting thereon Green Leaves to make it Smoke,
and also to hinder the force of the Flame; Then they have an Amica, or Hanging
Bed after their manner, in which they put this new Captain, crowning him with
Leaves; and there he must endure all the Heat and Smoke until hr Swoon's away,
and seeing he scarce Breaths, they let the Bed down, and taking plenty of fresh
Water, they cast it upon him, until he comes again to himself, as from Death
to Life. All this being done, he is Honored as a great Captain, and then they
go a Cruising along the Coasts to meet their Enemies: After being upon their
return to their Habitations, they make still Remonstrances to this new Captain,
and give him each one, three Blows; and from thence forth he may Eat Flesh.
Sometime after that, they take another turn in the Sea with their Cannoes; and
if they find any of their Enemies, they fail not to return to perfect this
Captain, to whom they give three Blows more, and then he may Eat Fish; and so
he is created and admitted into the Office, to bear Command over the others.
But that is not done but to those who have well behaved themselves in Battle,
knocking down many Enemies.

I leave it to you, if our Men of War (who come to this Honor most commonly by
the Purse, than Virtue) would Buy that Honor at so dear a Rate as these poor
Savages do: Yet what I wonder at most of all, is, that Admirable patience of
these Indians.
the Indian who suffers these Blows with a Switch, is neither to st^r, nor cry
out in the least, but only to shrink up his Shoulders if he please.

As for my part, I saw almost the like in my return: For we had in our Ship
three Indians, whom we brought into France, two Caribes, Brothers, and one
Caripou, Nephew to the King of Yapoco.

Now one of these Brother Caribes, the least named Atoupa, (we being Atoupa
in the River of Cayenne, where the Caribes are) said, He would go into France,
but he thought the Ship was France, and called it so; but when we were to go
away, he strove with all his force to leap into the Sea, to save himself on
Land; And we being at Anchor in the River, to hinder him we gave him in custody
to the Caripou Yapoco, their sworn Enemy; so that at every step that Atoupa
took, Yapoco took another, following him up and down every where in the Ship,
and bid us let him alone, and if at any time he were so bold as to cast himself
into the Sea, he also would be presently after him, and make him Dive his Head
to the bottom, to Drink to his Friends. This little Caribe Atoupa, not being
above 14 or 15 years of Age, one day took a resolution to Drown or Kill
himself, as he could best have occasion; and had cast himself into the Sea had
not he, who, ever had an eye upon him, catched hold of his Legs. When we were
in the main Sea, his Brother held him continually Embraced, and in the night he
tied him, but he was often found untied; and seeing that he could find no
expedient to Drown or Kill himself, (for he was not suffered to get to any
Knives, wherewith he might do himself a mischief) one day finding a piece of
sharp pointed Wood, he struck Yapoco such a blow therewith upon the Throat,
that it sliced away the Skin from one side of his Neck; which our General
hearing of, caused him to be brought upon the Deck, and with a Whip made of
Pack thread, tied to a Stick, to be severely Whipped, but he seemed as if he
had not been touched, only shrinking up his Shoulders a little, without either
crying out, or speaking one word; which seemed very strange to me, seeing him
so marked with the Stripes he had received so severely.

But to return again to our Traffic in this Country of Yapoco, having made
Exchange of all the Merchandise that could be found there, we took a resolution
to go to the River of Cayenne, Cayenne River.
where the Caribes are: But before our departure, the King of Yapoco came on
board our Ship, with his Wife, his Sister, and his Mother, with the Indian
Yapoeo whom we carried away with us, who was his Nephew, his Sister's Son, in
whose room the King Anacajoury governed, until his Majority, which would be in
a short time. This Nephew told me, that he had almost received all the Orders
of Captain, having undergone the same that all the others do who would attain
to that Degree; and that he had been upon an Incursion, and had already Eaten
Flesh, but not Fish, which was his last Ornament for the height of Honor. His
Uncle, and his Mother put him into our Hands, and earnestly desired us by no
means to suffer him to fall into the hands of the Caribes, their Enemies, nor
the Spaniards, having heard of the Cruelty that they had exercised against
those Spanish Cruelty.
of their Country, and of the bad usage they had done to those of Jucatan,
Zempallan, Tlaxcallan, Panuco, Tecowantep^c, and Mexico.

This King also desired our assistance against the Caribes, and that he would
go with us, with his Naval-Army, which was ready prepared, as I have said
before; and that all the Booty that was taken should be ours: But our General
having a mind to Traffic sairly with these Caribes, would not yield to his
demand, only he promised to keep his Nephew safe, and that he would not assist
the Caribes against him. This Nephew who went along with us, was drawn on by an
Indian, Son to the King of the Island of Trinidad, that the English had taken
by Subtillity, and who served us for an Interpreter. It was the Millord-Ralle
who carried him away in a Voyage; yet he did not understand fo well the
Language of the Caripous, being at so great a distance from them; besides, it
is a Language very particular, and different also from that of the Caribes, who
have much ado to understand it, though they are not above 30 Leagues one from
the other. Now this Indian Interpreter, having a mind to Marry one of the
Daughters of Anacajoury, and already treated with the Father about it, had
caused his Clothes and other Things to be brought on Shore, telling this King
that he would make War upon the Caribes with him, because they had Eaten one of
his Brothers; Of which our General being advertised, commanded him not to stir,
seeing he was so necessary to us for the Language. He seeing himself detained
by force, never rested until he had persuaded Yapoco, this young Boy that we
kept for Hostage, with one of his Brothers, telling him such pleasant Things of
France and England, that neither his Mother, nor his Uncle could dissuade him;
so he came into France with us, where, upon his arrival he was set to turn the
Spit, at which he was so offended, that he went away from Cancale to St.
Malo's, without saying a word, but was thence fetched again: This was in the
year 1604.

Since, in the year 1613, upon my return from my Voyages to Paris, living
History of the Indian Yapoco.
in the Tuilleries, as Keeper of the Cabinet of Rarities to the King, the Sieur
de Rasilly came back from those Parts of Brasil, and hearing that he had
brought along with him some Brasilians, to present to the King and the Queen
Regent, I went one morning to the Capuchins, were they were, as well to see
them, as to hear News of the Sieur de la Ravardiere, Lieutenant to Monsieur de
Rasilly, who had tarried behind at Maragnon, to go to the River of the Amazons:
But I was no sooner entered into the Chamber where these Brasillian
Toupinambeax were, when I perceived Yapaco, who knowing me, came presently to
me and caught me about the Neck to embrace me, telling me all his Fortunes, and
how he was returned to Brasil, within almost 200 Leagues of his own Country of
Yapoco, where he could not go; and that he went to Marguan, a little Island of
Brasil; Maraguan
Then he embarked in a little Ship with the Segnior du Bos, a Gentleman of
Bretaigne, who was come from the Voyage that I made with Monsieur de la
Ravardiere; but having been taken by the Pirates toward England, he found
means afterward to return into France, and went to find out Madam de la
Ravardiere in Poictou, where he had been before, the other Voyage, and told her
News of her Husband, who tarried behind at Brasil. It happened that one day, a
Hog falling into the Castle Ditch, this Lady commanded her Servants, and among
the rest Yapoco, to help to draw him out; but he, though born in the Country of
the Savages* disdaining a piece of work so vile and base, told her plainly,
that he would not do it; upon which, the Lady giving him some harsh Language,
he out of Anger went away without a farewell, and came straight to Rochelle,
where he found some Hablois, who brought him to the Havre, and from thence he
went to Paris.

When I had thus met with him, and Caressed him, I carried him to my Lodging,
where I treated him as well as I could: After that, I took him to the King, who
desired to see him: I caused him to Kneel before the King, who commanded me to
speak to him in his own Language, for I understood a little of it; Then he
ordered some Money to be given him.

After that, he was carried to the Havre, where Madam de la Ravardiere sent for
him by her Servants, and since I heard no more News of him: Such was the
Fortune of this young Yapoco.

But to return to these People, Savage Good Nature of the Caripous.
as they are, they are great Friends to Honor, and of all that which is just
and true, which they reverence from their Infancy, abhorring all wicked Men and
Cheats, as much as they are Friends to the good and virtuous. They do not Love
a Coward, or a Pultron, but Honor such as are Valiant and Courageous.

But since we are still near the River of the Amazons, before we part from
thence, it will not be much amiss to say something of it from what I was able
to learn in those Parts.

Some have taken the River of the Amazons, or Oregliane, for that of Maragnan;
but others will make two of them, and say, that their Mouths are distant some
hundred Leagues; that of Maragan making the limits of Brasil on the Northen
Coast, as the River of Plate, or Silver, makes the other Bounds on the South.
All these Rivers come from the Mountains of Peru, the highest, and of the
difficultest access of any others in the whole World.

The River of the Amazons is very River of the Amazons.
broad in its Mouth, some 50 Leagues or thereabouts from one Shore to the
other, and contains several great Islands.

The Sea there runs at the hours of the Tide, being very swift in its Ebbing
and Flowing, and carries along with it many Trees and Plants it plucks up by
the Roots, all along the Coasts, which are like great Forests; for there the
Coast being low, the Sea easily enters far up into the Country. The color of
this River inclines to a dark gray: We found the Water of it Sweet 30 Leagues
within the Sea. Within this River, about 30 or 40 Leagues up, are some Islands
where these Warlike Women, the Amazons Amazons Warlike Women.
inhabit, who make War upon those of the Continent of the Coast of Brasil; and
on the other side, where the Indians inhabit, toward the Cape of Voyanpouc,
are their Friends and constant Confederates. These Women for Propagation, have
to do every year with the said Indians in the month of April, and give them
notice when they desire to have them come to see them, all the Days and Hours
of that month, and do not suffer the said Indians to enter into their Islands
more strong than themselves, setting some to guard the entrance, whilst others
pass away their time, exchanging always these guards, by their turn, and so
employing all this Month of Love in the soft Caresses of Joy and Delight. Month
of Love.
At the end of the year, when their Confederates return to them, if they have
Conceived in the mean time, they keep the Females, and give the Males to the
Men, not keeping them above a year; And it is probable that these Sons which
they give to these Indians, may afterward have to do with their Sisters and
near Kins-Women; For they have a Custom always to seek out the Children of
those they have had to do with. Now, though these Indians should be all Married
in the Continent, these Amazons serve them only for Friends, and make Presents
to one another for a sign of Mutual Love and Good Will. As to that which some
say, that they wear but one Breast, and Burn off the other, according to the
manner of the ancient Amazons, who inhabited toward the Thanais and Thermodon,
they are nothing but Fables. It Is true* that these Women do on purpose lose the
Milk of one Breast that they may the better draw the Bow; and so perhaps this
saying of the Ancients is to be understood.

The Son of the King of Yapoco, amongst other Things, told me, That these Women
wear the Hair of their Privy-Parts very long, Combing them like their Heads,
and that they are of a very great stature; adding also, that he had been in
their Country with his Uncle Anacajoury.

We could not go to see them, as we desired, because the Streams there are too
violent for Vessels, and especially for our Ship and Patache, who drew in
already abundance of Water: For the Streams run toward the Coast, and it is
impossible to go there except it be with a Boat and Oars, or with the Indians
Cannoes, which draw but one Foot of Water.

Behold what I was able to learn of these Amazons; which makes me not to give
credit to all that we find written of those ancient Women, so famous. It Is said
that there are still some of them in Africa, toward the Cape of Good Hope, in
the Kingdom of Monomotapa.

All the Country on the Left Hand, at the entrance into the River of the
Amazons, is comprehended in the great Province of Brasil, first discovered by
Alvarez Cabral, a Portugal Captain, in the year 1500, and by John Vincent and
Arias Pinco, who in a^e year 1509. discovered the great River Maragnan,
reckoned the biggest in the World. Since, Americus Vespuceus, and others, made
a fuller discovery of those Countries. In the year 1542, the French Captain
Oregliane, sent by Gonzale-Pizarro the Spaniard, found out the River which
comes from the Province Atunquixo, thirty Leagues from the South Sea. He parted
from Peru, and followed this River, descending above 400 Leagues in a straight
Line to its Mouth, and more than 1700 with the turnings and windings, finding
many Peopled Islands.

He was eight months in this Navigation, with a thousand Perils and
Incommodities; and reported, that he had found (upon a certain Rivulet here)
Women Archers, which are of the Amazons: The Spaniards had Wars with them.

Before this, Columbus in his second Voyage had discovered these Amazons in an
Isle, which the Indians call Madannina or Martinina. This Captain Oregliane
gave his name to this great River of the Amazons, which he took for Maragnan,
as the modern Navigators seem to agree: And indeed, they who were in the year
1612. in the Country of the Toupinambous, and in the Isle of Maragnan, report,
That there is no River there of this Name, but only a Creek or Bay, in which is
this Isle of Maragnan: This Name has perhaps been the cause that this River
toward Oregliane, or that of the Amazons, has been taken for another River of
Maragnan, though they are one and the same.

But to return to our departure from the Country of Yapoco, to go toward
Parting from Yapoco.
the Caribes Man-Eaters, we departed from thence on Easter Day, the 15th of
April in the year 1604. bearing along the Coast, and our Ship running a-ground
when* the Tide went out, we were forced to strike Sail, and cast Anchor until
the Sea floated us again. We run all along the Coast, which is very pleasant,
and filled with an infinite number of green Trees, which render all these
places very sweet and agreeable.

We had no sooner approached the River of Cayenne, than we perceived a Cayenne.
Cannoe, which came on board our Ship, and there was in it, one named Yago,
Brother to Camaria, King of the Caribes.
Caribes, who having spied the Nephew Camaria.
of Anacajoury whom we had in our Ship, was mightily surprised at first, not
knowing what to think of our coming with this Yapoco their Sworn Enemy.
Nevertheless, he failed not to guide us in this River of Cayenne, which is very
pleasant, and convenient for Ships to abide in, being 5 or 6 Fathoms deep, in
some places more, add others less. This Yago told us, That he knew well enough
the King of Yapoco was preparing himself to come and visit them, and that they
expected him within 3 or 4 days, as their Toupan or Devil had told them; which
was true: For while we continued there for some days, at the end of 'em our
General sent some of his Men into the Country, with Camaria their King; one of
my Servants also went along with them, to procure me some of the most curious
and rare Things he could find. Being come to a place where Camaria conducted
them, 5 or 6 Leagues from thence, they found out, that Anacajoury had been
there, with his Naval-Army, and had wasted and burnt the Country, and carried
away a great number of the Inhabitants from this Coast, and saw also how they
served their Enemies, who had been killed upon the place.

They Eating them Roasted, an Cannibals or Man-Eaters.
Indian Woman offered a roasted Hand to our General, but he angrily refused it.

Our General had already* been amongst them in the first Voyage, but having
seen some of their Cruelties, would go there no more, yet he sent some of his
men, as I have said before:

My Servant being returned, told me, they made great lamentations at Camaria
for the loss they had suffered; and that Camaria thereupon was troubled in such
a manner, that it was impossible to appease him; yet he comforted them as well
as he could, promising to order the Business so as to get into his Hands Yapoco
the King Anacajoury's Nephew, to make a Solemn Feast of him; and that they
should e're long have Revenge upon their Enemies, whom they would with Joy
Feast upon at their Pleasure. There was an Indian Woman, who, knowing my
Servant was a Surgeon, entreated him to Cure her of a blow of a Sword, she had
received upon her Head: But he perceiving that the Skull was split, and the
Brains to be seen, told her freely he could give her no help. There were
several others wounded, to whom he did what help he was able.

Whilst he was amongst them, he told me, that one Night retiring with them into
their Cabbins, (made of Branches of Palms) he saw the Ceremonies observed to
their Husbands and Friends who had been killed in the fight.

First, An Indian Woman, sitting upon her Amica, or Hanging-Bed, began a Song,
very pleasant and agreeable, which continued a long time. That done, she came
to reckon up the Ceremonies of the Dead.
Exploits of her Dead Husband, how he had Loved her, been Valiant against his
Enemies, excellent in Drawing the Bow, able to undergo all the Hardships of
War, and a thousand other Gallantries and Perfections, of which she gave a
particular account. After that, one of these Indians raised himself from his
Amica, and went to desire the others to lament; whereupon they presently fell
to Howling so strangely, that one would have thought them to be out of their
Wits. These Lamentations ended, they rose up to make Merry with the Flesh of
their Enemies, with some Lizards and Crocodiles intermixed, and all roasted
together, thus Feasting upon the Graves of their Husbands and dead Friends,
thinking themselves thus to have obliged them. Thus much, my Servant told me,
he had taken notice of concerning their Ceremonies to their departed Friends.

In the mean time we Equipped our Boat, the 18th of April, to go to find out
the end of the River of Cayenne, and know from whence it comes, and takes its
head. We had with us two Indians, to show us some Brasil, whereof they make
their Bows, and having taken with us a Barrel of Liquor, and some Bisquet for
Victuals, we spent Coast of the River of Cayenne and Voyage upon it.
all the rest of the day and the night in rowing along the Coast, which is very
pleasant; and there are a thousand several sorts of Birds making such a noise,
that it is a very dreadful thing to hear them.

There is in every place a great number of Flies, like unto a sort of Gnats,
which are very troublesome, and tormented us mightily both night and day, but
especially in the night time. The next morning we arrived at the end of this
River, seeing a violent Stream that descended from a Mountain into a Valley,
where it is below like a Lake, then comes to pass upon a Rock very flat and
broad, and from thence falls down as into a hollow Ditch, which grows wider
by little and little, until it casts it self into the Sea; the Tide comes up
to the place where it begins to fall. We found no great matter in this
Voyage, except several sorts of strange Creatures, and Indian-Hens of another
sort than those of our Europe: The old ones carry their young, and would not
fly away, seeing us, but were very tame. These Hens have Feathers upon their
Heads which are black and very beautiful, and like to those of a Heron. We
carried some of them to our Ship, but we could not preserve them all until we
came into France.

In short, we found all this Coast Desert; and being returned on Board, we told
what we had seen in this Voyage: Our General sent us again to discover another
River, which separates it self from that of Cayenne, and runs toward the
South-East.

We prepared our Boat, with some Indians, thinking it had not been very far
off, or else not well understanding our Interpreters, insomuch that we took not
Victuals enough with us, only I furnished my self with some Bisquet, acd gave
of it to one of our Indians, who was very glad of this Provision that I had
made.

Having then Rowed a good way up into this River, we found nothing but Branches
of Trees, which covered in a manner all the passage, so that we were forced
ever and anon to lie all along in the Boat, to pass underneath these Branches
of Trees, which were laded with Oysters. At last we came to a certain place
where there were Trees cut down by the People of some Ships that had been there
before us. These were exceeding Red-Wood.
great, and the Heart very red like unto Brasil, yet it was not so as I have
experienced it.

Moreover, the Indian whom I had given the Bisquet to, did not mind to follow
our Men, but sought for something to live upon, and came again presently
toward me, showing me by Signs, he had found something good for us, and went
to find out the Wooden-Bowl of the Boat, which served only to cast out the
Water; so led only me along with him, a good way into the Wood, to a Tree cut
down, which was hollow, and had in it a Bee-Hive, the most excellent, clear,
sweet and agreeable that could be imagined. This Honey was of a Jelly, like
Oil, and exceeding clear, of a greenish color, and enclosed in Bags, like
those great Purses the Merchants use, wherein there is several little Leather
ones. There the Honey is environed with a Membrane or Skin, which is the
Crisis, very clear: When this little Skin is broke, the Honey comes out of this
only, and not the others; so the Indian broke one after another, throwing the
Honey into the Bowl, which he gave me to drink of as a choice Liquor.

Having taken some of it in this manner, he went to look for Water to mix with
it, to the end that we might have the more of it, as also to quench our Thirst
the better.

In the mean time our Companions were in another place, on the other side of
this Wood, seeking for the Brasil-Trees. I saved some of this Honey in the
Bowl, not having elsewhere to put it: But our Thirsty People returning* from
this Wood, and taking the Bowl to Drink, mixed Water with the Honey, and so
drank it up; which caused me to Quarrel with out Carpenter who had done it on
purpose, like a Man of his Country, where they are born to Envy and Malice. I
bore the loss of this Honey, so excellent, as patiently as possibly I could,
because our Lieutenant was there, who had not a mind to do what this bold
Carpenter did, but had taken Water with his Hand out of the River to Drink.

I could never since find any more of this sweet Liquor, by whatever Signs I
could make to the King of the Caribes, to cause him to understand what it was;
for he did not know the name of it. But what I wondered at most, was, that this
Indian could so easily find out this Honey in these Woods, seperating himself
from the others for that reason. If I could have saved only 3 or 4 Ounces of
it, I would not have parted with it for any thing whatsomever, but would
preciously have preserved it, to make a Present thereof to the late King my
dear Master; as I gave him some of that which I brought from Africa, which he
found of an excellent Taste, Honey of Africa.
and caused me to lay it carefully up in his Trunk, as they do in the same
Country from whence I had brought it. This Honey of Africa was as white as
Snow, clear, and of an excellent good Taste; also the King confessed, that he
had never before seen any so excellent: But that was but course Honey in
comparison to this of the Country of the Caribes. The Bees which make this
Honey in the West-Indians, are of a pale and yellowish color, little and
harmless, and are not troublesome at all, as I found out in the place whence I
took this Honey, which was like to a most precious Balm, and I believe, that as
the Honey of Africa is excellent for Healing of Wounds, so this of the Indies
quite exceeds it every way, as in its consistence, taste, smell and color.

Being then returned from this River, where we could discover nothing to serve
our turn, our General was resolved to send me with the King Another Voyage to
the Caribes.
of the Caribes, to go to their Habitations, and look in the Woods, to see if
we could there find a certain Tree, which is a sort of Wood of Aloes, Aloes
Wood.
called by them Apariebou, for we had found of it in the Country of Yaposo.
For this effect, I parted the 29th of April, with Cam^ria, the King of the
Caribes, who had left in Hostage for me 7 or 8 of his Indians, and Embarked in
a Cannoe, with which we entered into a little River, which runs about two
Leagues up into the Country, and was very narrow, the Branches of Trees quite
covering it, so that we had a thousand Inconveniences, and much ado to lie
flat down in the Boat to avoid 'em. The Indians being stark Naked did not
matter it so much; for if these Branches had made them tumble into the River,
they knew so well how to Swim, that they would not have much needed to fear:
That which did us the most harm, was, that some of these Branches were laden
with certain Oysters, little, and of the color Oysters.
of Pearls, of a very good Taste; for I was willing to try, opening some before
these Indians, who wondered mightily to see me open 'em so easily, not knowing
how to do it.

We went thus Rowing along to find out their Dwellings, that at last coming to
the end of the River, we went on Shore, and about a League and a half from
thence, we saw one of their Habitations, and the Caribes came about us,
offering to their King, Fruit, and other Things to Eat, with which he also
presented me* After that, we left this Habitation and continued our way toward
that of Camaria: When we were come to the foot of a Mountain, this King fell a
crying out as loud as he could, and desired me also to do the like, which I
did, and I believe that it was to call home all those who were about the Woods,
because thereupon they presently returned to the Habitation; for I saw them run
from all parts to their place, which was in a Valley, where being come, I found
a great number of Caribes, Men and Women; amongst the (...) King of the (...).
others, the Wife of Camaria, who was making an Amica or Bed of Cotton. All
these Indians, Men and Women, naked as they were, came running to see me and my
Companion, a young Carpenter of our Ship, who was under a mortal apprehension
that they would Eat him, desiring me mightily to give them something of that
which I had brought to exchange with them* Then I commanded them to make Ovato
Courende, which is to say, a good Fire, because we had been Wet with the Rain,
by the way, which the Indians did not much matter, being not much* troubled to
dry their own Clothes: They presently made me a a Fire, it being very late at
night, so that we were pretty well dried in this great Hall where all these
Indians were; and thus we Supped with the King and his Wife, in the sight of
all the others: They made mighty much of us with their Savage Victuals. I had
brought a Bottle of Wine and some Bisquet with me, which was no small help to
us, after so many Fatigues by the way, troublesome with Water and Woods, where
sometimes the Indians were forced to carry me upon their Backs in certain
places that were very hollow.

After Supper, the King caused us Amacas or Hanging Beds.
to retire into his House, where he ordered two Amica's or Beds to be hung up
for me and my Companion. They had put my Bed so, that it joined to the King's,
and my Companion's a little higher; and that of the Queen's was on the same
side with the King's; and all the night there was Guards which kept a Fire near
the King and me. Our poor Carpenter did nothing else but tremble all the night
long, thinking every moment they were coming to Eat us.

The King Camaria in the mean King Camaria.
time began to discourse with me of the King of Yapoco, whom he said he did not
fear, and who had come up into one of his Rivers, where he had killed a great
number of his People; but that he desired mightily, (if it was possible) to
have in his Clutches, his Nephew Yapoco, who was in our Ship, and that I should
speak thereof to our General, and use my utmost Policy and Endeavor to have
him delivered up, that he might be Eaten, saying that he would send for all his
Subjects and his Friends to be at this Feast of the Caripou.

As for my part, when he talked to me after this manner, I would not contradict
him, but gave him the hearing, and promised, if I could, to do all he desired:
And he told me that he would willingly give all he had to have this poor
Yapoco, and that I would take care to have him delivered up, which I durst not
refuse him.

I thought this Night very long, seeing also that the Queen, Wife of Camaria
did not sleep. I rose up two or three times to go out of the House, continually
suspecting the Malice and Cruelty of these Anthropaphages, and Anthropophages,
or Cannibals.
Eaters of Human Flesh: Besides that, I perceived in the middle of this House,
a Toad of the strange and Wonderful Toad.
most horrible bigness that ever I saw; and I believe that it was rather some
Devil than a Toad, because Camaria Caribes speak with the Devil.
often spoke with the Devil, to know what their Enemies were doing.

As soon as it was day, I presently rose up to know what we had to do, and
Camaria showed me his Throat, which was very much out of order by a Cold that
he had.

I carried him with me into the Woods to seek for Herbs fit for his Disease,
and used my utmost to procure some Honey to compose a Remedy for him; but he
could neither understand me, or comprehend what I demanded of him. At last,
having Breakfasted, we went along with some Indians to look for Wood of Aloes.
This is a Tree of an extraordinary bigness, bearing Leaves like a Fig Tree, but
a little greener: The Tree contains in its Heart a black Wood, very oiley,
sharp, and of a very good Odor; And a Tree as big as a Tunn shall have in its
Heart but a very little quantity of this black Wood. This Tree is very hard,
and where it is black, 'twill sink to the bottom of Water like a Stone. We
laded thereof about 35 Tuns, which are 70000 pound weight or thereabouts. We
laded Store of 2 or 3 other sorts of Wood, one resembling a Red-Sandal, and the
other a Cittern, and partly of the same Odor. It is of a very sweet Scent when
first cut, but by succession of time it comes to lose its Odor. I have learnt
that this black Wood is certainly a sort of Wood of Aloes, but not so
sweet-scented as that of the East Indies, because it comes so far upon the Sea,
receiving thereby a certain Saltish quality. But at such time as I was at Goa,
being in an Ensarail where the Idolaters Work, I there saw some Wood of Aloes
of the River of Ganges, which was sweet, and had almost the same qualities as
that of the West, as I since found out by curious Virtue of the Wood of Aloes.
Experience. The Gentiles told me that this Wood was very excellent and
odoriferous, and neither Rotten nor Worm-eaten, and was chiefly a good Remedy
for the Headache, or the Ague. For the Headache, you must rub this Wood against
a flat Marble, agitating it with Rose Water, or common; then rub the Forehead
therewith. And for the Ague, drink Water thus agitated, taking 2 or 3 Ounces.
This Virtue is not found in that Wood of Aloes which is brought us, because it
is quite Rotten and Worm-eaten, having in it no other Virtue but for the
Perfumes, and very little for Medicine; So that I advise all curious
Apothecaries to choose for the good and right Wood of Aloes, True Wood of Aloes.
which is sharp, joined with a certain bitterness. As for the color, the best
is that which is black, inclined to gray with Veins, very hard and ponderous,
rendering a sweet-scent in the burning, and above all very Gummy. These are the
marks of the best as far as I could take notice of in my Travels. I know very
well that the price thereof is a little high, and that is the reason why it is
so seldom kept in Shops, where they have instead thereof the Sandal-Cittern,
which is of a quite contrary Faculty and Virtue: And so likewise of the Turbit
Which is a Root.
, of which they choose more of that which is white, light and falling to Powder
in the breaking, (than the gray) which is of a sweet scent, gummy and heavy,
which is the good and right, as I have seen at Goa, where they gather it. The
Indians themselves never make use of any other sort than the gray inclining to
white; but one Dram of that will make more in effect than three of the other;
and I believe that this white is not the right Turbit, never having seen any
such in the Indies, but that it rather comes from Persia, because it is brought
from Aleppo and Alexandria by the Caravans which come from Babylon. Thus much
can I say at present of the right Turbit. As for the rest, the Indians call
this Wood of Aloes Aupariebou.

We gathered then together, in the River of Cayenne, store of this Wood of
Aloes, which was very good and excellent: but the quantity that has been found
thereof, greater than has been hitherto seen, has been the cause that it is
not so much esteemed as formerly; yet nevertheless the able and learned
Apothecaries of Tours, Poitiers, Angiers, Rochelle, and other Cities, have
bought it of me at ten, fifteen, and twenty Sols the Ounce. I believe that if
this Wood of Aloes of the West was dried and cut twenty or thirty years, like
that of the Ganges, where the best grows, that it would very much resemble it
in Virtue, Color, and Odor: But in regard I brought it green as it was, the
ignorant Apothecaries thought it was not the right Wood of Aloes.

But to return to this River of Cayenne, there is, in the middle of it, a
little Island, about 100 Paces in compass, where a great number of Birds, from
all parts thereabouts, come to take their rest at night; and amongst others,
some of those beautiful Birds have Carnation Feathers quite to the Bill: and
having a mind to carry some of them alive with me into France, I strewed
Bird-lime all over this little Island, (for I had brought 9 or 10 Pounds of it
from France) and the next day some of our Men went there, who found a great
number of them taken; But as the ill fortune would have it, they tarried not
till I could see them, (for I was then in the Ship) but Eat them all up, like
Gluttons as they were, which I was mightily vexed at.

These Birds are of the bigness of a Crane, and are at first of a Dove color,
then in growing, change by little and little into a Carnation: The Indians make
their Garments of them, and Crowns of Feathers for their Heads: And it is a
fine sight to see them thus arrayed, painting also their Bodies with Zinzolin,
or Red the color of the Indians.
a reddish color, which is that they use to Paint themselves withal: This is
made of a little Seed enclosed in a Vessel of the Fashion of Alquequangi, a
little Plant which grows commonly in the Vinyards; They are called
Coquelourdes, and are filled full with these little red Seeds, wherewith they
Paint themselves.

In the mean time, we set these Caribes to work, and employed them in looking
out the Wood of Aloes, and gave them a Hatchet or Bill for a piece or two of
this Wood; and when they had prepared a piece, they came to give me notice of
it, to know if it was neat, and peeled of from the white Wood which is round
about it, and has in it neither Force nor Virtue.

They set several Men to trail a piece of this Wood to the Sea side; for it is
very heavy: Then they chose which they liked best, a Hatchet or a Bill, to
exchange for their Wood. I saw one of these Caribes, who was mightily puzzel'd,
and in great doubt, which of the two he should choose, and was a long time
considering and pausing with himself which would be the most necessary for him;
at last, after having well considered and bethought himself, he took the
Hatchet, seeing he who gave it him began to be angry for his standing so long
about it. They brought us also, to Sell, an abundance of Fruits, as Anano's and
Plantins, which are long Figs, and as big as a Cervela, with Patato's, and
other Things good to Eat; Also some Cervelas.
Crocodiles, and a sort of an Animal, armed with a Coat, which the Spaniards
call, Armadille. I made the Armadille
Dissection of a Crocodile, and Eat some of it is Flesh, which is pretty good,
only it is a little sweet and unsavory, though I had well Salted and Spiced it.

I had also in exchange, of them* another sort of a Creature, which is a kind
of an Ape or Marmot, but Apis.
more Arch and Roguish, and with a very long Tail.

The Indians say that this Beast carries her young ones upon her Back when she
has cast them out of her Belly, and goes jumping from Tree to Tree with them
upon her Reins; and when any one of them is ready to fall, she holds them up
with her Tail.

This Animal makes such a noise about the Woods, that when they are together
though never so few, you would say there were a hundred Hogs a killing.

That which I bought was Dead, and cost me a little Horn: It was a Female,
having two Teats in the Stomach like a Woman. The Indians had taken it with the
Bow, and it had a stroke with an Arrow in the Belly, and carried one of her
young ones upon her Back; which they brought us to Sell for a Hatchet. This
little one, being in our Ship, howled after such manner, that it made us all
quite Deaf; it died afterward, for it would not Eat.

There happened to be a Monkey at that time in our Ship, and this Creature
catching fast hold about its middle, griped it so hard, that the poor Monkey
could not shake it off, running about the Cordage from one side to another, and
endeavoring with his Paws to make her fall, but in vain.

We had another Animal, the strangest that can be imagined; for it had a very
long Beard, the Head set up very high, and the Legs very long, with three Paws
behind and two before: It kept it self continually in a Ball, not being able to
stand upon its Legs. We tied a Rope cross the Ship, and then put this Beast
upon it, but she continued always in a round* like a Ball. That which was given
it to Eat, she took in her Paw like a Monkey, and so put it in her Mouth. We
had many strange Creatures, which it would be too long and tedious, to give a
particular account of.

I return then to some Manners and Fashions that I have observed amongst these
Caribes. A little before our departure from this River of Cayenne, we saw one
day these Caribes, leading a new Bride about the Manner of the Caribes in their
Marriages.
Woods with a very great noise, and pursued and killed all that they found
about the Forest. Then they came to the Sea side to see our Vessels.

These are People of a very good Stature, and Plump. They sat down upon the
Bank of the River to view our Ship at their leisure* This Bride was there, all
alone, with a company of these Savages, and having continued there some time to
see us* with Admiration, she again rose up* then the others conducted her about
the Woods as before: Thus they lead about their Wives* their Kindred, and
Friends. As I kept Watch one night upon the Deck, I saw these Caribes upon a
high Mountain keeping also Watch, and Sounding with a Horn very loud; then all
the other Habitations answered, in the same manner, every hour of the night*
After that they made a clear Fire, which they presently put out again* They do
all this that they might be thought not to Sleep; for they mightily fear their
Enemies the Caripous*

Now our Ship being laden with Another Voyage of the Author.
as many Commodities as we were well able to procure, and being ready to set
Sail, I took a Resolution, the 17th of May, to go once again toward their
Habitations with some small Ware, as Knives, Combs, and other Things; and gave
all these to an Indian, to carry in a little Basket, who was wonderfully
pleased to follow me; but he, being subtle and sly, would not march before me,
saying, that it did not belong to him to go first; which made me not a little
wonder that this Indian could know what Honor was due to another; But, the
Rascal did it, that he might the more easily put his Hand into my Basket and
sharp something out; I perceived it happily, turning my self about, and so
caught him in the very act; upon which I showed him gently that that was
neither handsome nor well done: He excused himself as well as he could and then
went before me until he found in the Wood a little Way or Path, on the right
Hand, which went straight to his Habitation, and then he returned me my Basket,
not being able to retain him for all I could do; I gave him a Comb, for his
Labor, of which he was very glad. I do not know but that he had cast something
aside of what he had taken out of my Basket.

I proceeded on my way until I came to a high Mountain where there were, a
great number of Caribes, with their Wives and Children: There by chance I found
the Indian, our Interpreter, who helped me mightily in making my Bargains, for
what I wanted, as well for Parrots as other kind of Animals. Having exchanged
what I desired these Indians led me into another Habitation, where I saw,
Yapoira, the Brother Caribe of Atupa who was in our Ship: He was upon Yapoira.
the top of one of their Houses of Palm, and as soon as he perceived me, he
cast himself down, and came to embrace me, remembering that I had given him a
Hatchet when he had broke his own in our Service.

He spoke to me of his Brother Atoupa and that his Mother had no more than this
little Boy who was all her Comfort; That the Caripous had killed all his
Brothers and Sisters, and that, if our General would let him return to his
Mother, he himself was content to go with us into France. I told that he should
go along with me, to make his Remonstrances, which he did: I asked him for some
Water, which they call Tonna, and presently he caused his Wife to bring me
some, who was of an extraordinary sweet Nature, and very handsome, though she
was stark Naked: Having drank* they caused me to enter into a great Hall made
of Palms, where they keep themselves in the day time, with their Amaca's, to
hold Counsel concerning the Affairs of War. Then they led me into a certain
House where there was a great many Women and Girls stark naked; and put some
Patato's upon the Fire for me to Eat; and having made some exchange, as well*
for Mace and Patato's, as Gums, which is a black Bitume which they Chaulk Gums.
their Cannoes with, I laded 2 or 3 Indians, and so we returned, toward the
Port, to our Ship. I had a great deal of trouble in returning back because
these Savages led me through the Wood where there was a great many Waters to
pass; besides it rained, and was very bad Weather. After we had gone 2 or 3
Leagues of this bad way, we came to the end of a little River, and found a
Cannoe on Land that wanted only to be set a Float, but we had no Oars; yet
these Indians looked so* long amongst the Herbs that at last they found out
some that were hid. These Oars are very little, and like to a Battle-dore which
they beat Hemp withal.

Being thus Embarked, we Rowed so hard that we soon arrived at our Ship, where
they waited for me with great earnestness, not knowing where I should be kept
out so late, and they were to have set sail the next morning, as we did.

But before we come out of this Country, I will not forget, that amongst other
Rarities that grow there, there are certain Gums to be found, called Copal, and
Anime, and certain Animes Gums.
Bitum, or black Gum, very Odoriferous when it is put upon the Fire; It is also
good for the Rhume, by receiving the Smoke of it; the same is also the Anime,
which is a Gum, yellow and transparent, like the Gums of Arabia, and is found
in great Tears.

As for the Copal, it has not this quality, but it serves for Swellings.
Aposthumes, to ripen and heal them, so they come from a cold Cause and Phlegm.
For, as for those which come from Heat and Blood, the Copal is not so proper to
apply, being it is hot. This Copal is a White Gum, enclining to gray: The Tree
which bears it is like to a Laurel in its Leaves, but it is bigger in the Trunk,
and has also young ones. I picked out some of this Gum, by making an Incision
in the Tree; then the next morning, or two days after, I found the Gum pure and
clear upon the slit. The Anime is gotten after the same manner, and its Tree
also resembles the other. As for the Bitum, or black Gum, it comes from a place
where there are Springs of Water, and it is gathered, mixed with Earth at the
foot of certain Trees amongst Green Moss. The Indians make use of it, instead
of Pitch, to Chalk their Cannoes.

As for the Language of these People, I will only say, that it is of Language
of the Caribes.
several sorts; and that of the Caripous is something different from that which
the Caribes speak, and have much ado to understand other, although they are not
far distant. These Caribes were mighty desirous to know, of us, what it was
that we Worshipped in Heaven; whether it was the Sun, which they call Occayou,
or the Moon, which they name Nona, the Stars Cherica, Heaven Capa, the Clouds
Canopa; as for the Fire, they call it Ovato, Water Tonna, the Sea Parano, the
Woods Vropa, the Mouth Pota, the Eyes Onou, and the Hair Omchay.

Now as for the Religion of all these Religion of these People.
People of Brasil, and amongst others the Caripous and Caribes, they live
without Faith and Law, and without any certain Belief of a Divinity, true or
false; not Worshipping Idols, nor any thing whatsoever: only they believe some
kind of an Immortality of the Soul. They speak much of a God, which they call
Toupan, which is some Caribes deal with the Devil Toupan.
Devil with whom they have Familiarity, and exercise several sorts of
Divination and Witchcraft: And I remember we were told that when Camaria, King
of the Caribes, had a mind to know any thing concerning their Wars against
their Enemies, he made made a hole in the Ground, pronouncing some certain
Words, and then came something up with a horrible thundering noise, which spoke
to him, and instructed him, giving him notice what their Enemies were doing at
that*time. And indeed, when Camaria and his Brother Yago came on board our
Ship, they told us, that they knew very well, that their Enemy Anacajoury, King
of the Caripous, was preparing himself to come to attack them; that which he
could not have known so readily but by such means.

But to return to the Caripou-Yapoco, of whom I have spoken before, that Yapoco.
Camaria King of the Caribes had instantly desired me (being at his Habiration)
to order the business so with our General that he might have him in his power,
to Eat him in Revenge of the mischief that his Uncle Anacajoury had done them
before: When I was returned back to our Ship, I spoke to the General about it,
who told me, that I did very well to promise, but he would take care to avoid
such Wickedness: Thus Camaria was promised to have Yapoco given him, of which
he was mighty Joyful, and sent about all his Country, to all his Friends and
Confederates that they should prepare themselves to come to this Feast. The
next morning hoising our Sails, and weighing Anchor to go away, presently comes
Camaria with a great many Indians to have Yapoco, who being refused him in good
earnest, went away so affronted and vexed that I had not a mind to return to be
his Guest; for I believe they would have done the same to me they designed to
do to the poor* Yapoco. This Camaria had but one Eye, and was mighty Crafty and
Treacherous.

As for Yapoira, the Brother of Atoupa the Caribe, who had tarried all night in
our Ship as I have said before: Atoupa did all that ever he could to persuade
us to let go his Brother* but seeing he could not obtain that of our General,
he said that he would also willingly go with us into France, and that he would
either kill or drown himself rather than leave him. The General told him that
he was content, and that he should come betimes in the morning, and whilst he
was in such a good Humor: This being thus resolved upon, as soon as we began
to set sail, we saw the Mother of these two Caribes, who came toward us in a
Cannoe, crying and howling after the most pitiful manner that could be
imagined; She brought along with her the Bow and Arrows, the Paintings and the
Amica, of Yapoira, which is all their Wealth. Yapoira was mighty sorry to see
his Mother keep such a mourning for him, and desired our General to give her a
Hatchet, to appease her a little, which was done; yet she returned again thus
Disconsolate.

After that we set sail the 18th of Departure from the Country of the Caribes.
May, and passed by a little Island, very pleasant, near to the Coast of the
Caribes, holding our Course to go to the Isle of Santea-Lucia, but we
Santa-Lucia.
were deceived by the Currents which come from the South-East, having made
(according to the Estimation of our Pilot) in one night, above seventy Leagues,
without scarce any Wind. We went to touch at the Isle of Tabuco, which remained
Northwards of us. Tabaco Isle.
Then, leaving the Isle de-la-Trinadad toward the South, we discovered Isle de
la Trinadad
the Testigues of the Isle Blanch, which Blanche-Isle.
are 5 or 6 Peninsula's, very near to one another, and passed through the
middle of them, then seeing Land of some places above: We were a long time
considering if it was Land, or thick Clouds, because it was very low; and
thereupon several Wagers were laid, whether it was Land or not: At last,
bearing directly toward it, we found out that it was really Land, but unknown
to us, since deceived by the Currents.

As we approached it, we saw Animals, running in great Companies Wild-Goats.
along the Coast: Some of us not knowing what they were, said at first they
were Bands or Cavalliers; but these Cavalliers proved to be Wild-Goats, of
which this Isle is full: Taking down then our Sails very low we went as near to
this Island as we could, our Patache going continually before to discover if
there were any Rocks, as indeed we had gone directly upon one had not the
Patache given us notice thereof with a signal at the end of a Pike, and took
the way that she showed us, leaving this Rock about a little Stones cast off
us: It was not covered with above a Foot or two of Water, so that we going so
swift with a light Gale of Wind, had without doubt split, and been all lost in
such a place without help or succor; and besides, it being in the night; but
God by his mercy preserved us there from; and being there was not much clear
Water to be seen, we could not find the bottom to Anchor, but at last we found
but 30 Fathoms of Water, where we cast Anchor for this night.

The next morning the 29th of May Voyage into the Isle.
we caused our Boat to be Equipped to go on Shore, and to seek some Water: Our
Men after Breakfast, went thus away, with their Muskets and Pikes, without the
least drop of Water along with them; but they paid dear for it: For after
having gone a good way up into this Island, with the heat of the Sun and
running after the Goats, they were so wonderful dry and thirsty that, they
thought, they should all have Died for want of a little Water; and returning
again with great Trouble and Fatigue, they were forced to carry the weakest
upon their Shoulders: They brought along with them a great many Pelicans, and
coming confusedly one after another very weak and discomforted, and not minding
any thing but Drinking; and then our General's Brother of Friendship coming on
board our Ship, said aloud, that they looked for Pearls, but he had rather have
a Barrel of Water, than of Pearls, for the great Thirst that he had endured
with the rest.

The next morning we went (sixteen The Author visites the Isle.
Men) to discover the other side of the Island, and if there was any Water; and
coming on Land we saw before us a great number of Wild-goats, who came running
along the Sea side, and began to enter into a Valley, where we with Harquebuss
and Musket killed five or six upon the place. These Creatures, not being used
to be Hunted after this manner, made a horrible noise and bellowing; and though
they were Shot quit through the Body, yet they did not fall for that, but fled
away with a light pace. We left there a Man to order these we had killed. I
never thought then to look for the Besoart-Stone, which these Besoart-Stone.
Beasts carry in their Ventricle, but to follow the others about this Isle to
find out Water, and some curious Things.

We went thus three or four Leagues without finding any Water, at which our
Companions were mightily astonished, and deceived as well as those the day
before: For we had nothing at all to quench our Thirst, amidst such excessive
heat of the Sun: As for me, I had carried in my Pocket a Coco's or Palm-Nut,
full of Liquor, which was no small help to me at this time, and I believe
without that, I should had much ado to have returned. Our Carpenter was forced
to stay behind, earnestly desiring me to tarry with him; But it was not my
intention to lie in these Deserts; besides, the Ship was to set Sail the next
morning, which gave me the more courage to return the same day. After having
thus rambled about, and run from one side to the other, at last we came under a
great Tree, where we sat down in the Shade to take our rest. And as it is
certain that there is no better Remedy to quench the Thirst than Sleeping, all
our Men who were a little harrassed and fatigued, as much with Thirst, as by
the way, and having run after the A sort of Spanish Kid.
Cabrettes, fell presently a Sleep: But I not being at all sleepy, laid down
upon my Back, with my Face upwards to suck in the Air; and upon this I espied a
great Lizard, full and very high, the Tail very long, and about the bigness of
a Cat; I Hunting of the Lizards
presently rose up without awakening our Men, and having taken a Pike, I gave
the branch of the Tree therewith such a blow, that there tumbled down two of
them, which the Indians call Gouyana's. I run after them Guyana's or Lizards.
trailing along my Pike, which broke in two pieces, and made such haste that I
overtook one which was creeping under a Rock, and I took it by the Tail,
plucking it with all my force; but it being very strong, stretched it self in
such a manner against me, having very long Paws, that it saved its Body, but
the Tail remained in my Hands, and was alive above three hours after,
continually moving. As soon as our Men were awake, I gave them an account of
what had happened, and made so many Courses about this Island, that I caught
two of these Lizards, whereof I made very good cheer, for the Flesh thereof is
pretty good; I kept their Skins to carry away with me. This Creature is of a
very hard Life, for after having taken, and leaving them for Dead, yet they
from time to time come to move and start up, so that carrying them in a Napkin,
I thought to let them fall every moment. After we had reposed our selves a
little under this Tree, we took our way toward the other side of the Sea,
finding a little beaten Path which went toward these Cabrettes, thinking that
it was the way, where they went to look for Water to Drink; but after having
gone about a League of this way, we found in a flat ground, a great place where
these Cabrettes came to take their rest, for the place was mightily beaten. We
saw there another Path which went from this place; and hoping that it would
lead us to some Water, we found it brought us to the Seaside, where we saw
some Seawater upon a Rock, which was high and flat; it made us glad, thinking
it had been fresh, but tasting of it we found the contrary, and that it was
nothing but the Waves of the Sea which broke against this Rock, where there
always remains some little of it, besides the Sun had Congeled it into Salt
exceeding clear and pure. Seeing then that we found no Water, it behoved us
(though with great regret) to take again the way to our Ship, each one seeking
the nearest he could, for we went confusedly, striving who might arrive first
to quench his Thirst; but the allowance we had was not sufficient, not being
more than a little Cupfull of Drink, which was sower Citter, with two parts
Water, but some had provided Liquor for themselves.

I arrived the third at the Ship, and Bathed my Body in the Sea to refresh my
self, sopping also a little Biscuit in the Sea to Eat, and swallowing some
Mouth-fulls thereof. The rest of our Men were tarried behind, and being come
there with the Fleming and Scotchman, we called the Boat: But the Ship being
above a League and a half from Land, which was a great hinderance to us; for
the Boat would not carry us back without the others, who were still far enough
off, and kept one another up by the Arms; But at last I persuaded the Mariners
to carry me on Board, where, as soon as I came, I went to visit my Chest and my
Bottle, and remained full three days without being able to quench my Thirst:
The rest of our Men returned very late, and were wonderful weary and fatigued;
But the poor Carpenter tarried behind to keep company with the Cabrettes,
Lizards, and Parrots, who were there in abundance, and very beautiful. Our
General seeing that he was wanting, said, he would not part from the Road until
he had News of him; and sent Seamen all the Night, with the Trumpet Adventures
of the Carpenter.
to Sound all about the Island to call him, but all to no purpose, for he was
far enough from thence. The morning being come, his Seamen was commanded to
take a Shovel, with other Mariners who knew pretty nigh the place where they
had left him, and went thus seeking about these Deserts, (for it is a flat
Island having very few Trees:) At last they found him trailing along his Musket
as well as he could; for he was very Sick, and being come to the Ship, he was
taken with a Fever, accompanied with a Frenzy, continuing 3 or 4 days, and did
nothing but cry out for Drink, and it was almost impossible to satisfy him: He
told us afterward how he had lain under a Tree quite full of Parrots, which he
could easily take with his Hand; and that the Cabrettes came to smell upon him
in the night time; but that he never stirred from his Musket which he always
kept close by him: The moisture of the night had a little quenched his Thirst;
He was also forced to Drink his own Water.

Being parted from this Isle the first of June, to go to the Margueritta, as we
were under Sail very late at night, we descried two Ships coming full sail upon
us. We had sunk our Patache in this Desert Island. We got the Wind a little
upon them, and being very near one to the other, their Trumpets began to Sound,
and ours to answer them. As we were prepared to receive them, having put out
our Cannons, and ready to come to handy Strokes, the Wind being very savourable
for us, and the night very dark, they would not come on board without having
first known who we were. We got the Wind of them as much as we could, and in
the end, during the dark and stormy night, we escaped, and made toward the
Isle of Margueritta, where we arrived the next day toward the Evening, and
cast Marguerite Island.
Anchor near to a little Habitation on the East Side: Then we sent our Boat on
Land, with Arms, to discover the place: They found Fire still in the Houses,
but no Body within, all being fled into the Woods at the sight of us. We found
a Cannoe, which came from Fishing of Pearls, not having any thing in it but
Shells. The Master's Mate was sent to a rising Ground in the Island, to see if
he could discover any thing: He espied 3 or 4 Blacks, who run away into the
*Thorn-Bushes as soon as they saw him, and it was impossible to find (...).
them out, though very diligent search was made: We had a great mind to take some
one of the Islanders to show us the place where they Fish for Pearls, which is
in certain places along by the Isle; but it was impossible to find any one of
them.

The third of June in the night time we had so violent a Tempest, that our Ship
was in danger to have run aground, but leaving an Anchor in the Sea to save the
Ship, we were preserved from this imminent danger.

The fourth day of the same month, seeing we could not find any sweet Water, we
weighed our Anchors and bore toward Cumana, and arriving 2 or 3 Leagues on
this side, we perceived Cumana.
a Fleming Ship in a Bay or Gulf, lading with Bay Salt, which is there in
abundance: We cast Anchor on the Starboard-side of her, and put out our Boat
into the Sea to Board them, and so to ask them where we might find some fresh
Water. After having saluted us with their Cannon, they told us, that bearing
toward the River of Cumana we should find some, and that we should by the way
meet their Shalop, which they had sent there* which we did accordingly, but the
Men therein would come near us by no means, they were so afraid needlessly. We
continued our Course toward Cumana, where coming near the River, Extreme
Thirst.
we espied along the Coast two Ships at Anchor, not knowing what they should
be* Nevertheless we proceeded on, for it was necessary to have Water, and could
not live without Drinking. We found that of these two Ships the ^encounter with
the English.
one was a Fleming, and the other English: The Fleming Traffick'd there
underhand with those of Cumana, where the Spaniards are; And the English
Patache came there to seek some fresh Water for their Admiral, whom she had
left along by the Margueritta (...)

After several Guns for Salutation, the English came on Board our Ship,
Feasting our English Pilot and 5 or 6 others of their Countrymen which we had
in our Ship.

Our Trumpeter showed me their Strange History of ^n English (...).
Pilot, and told me, that he some years before being in an English Vessel, as
they were upon the Coasts of the West Indies, toward St. John de Love, (the
first place of the Indies to go to Mexico, where the Spaniards are, then their
Sworn Enemies) a great Storm overtook them, which cast them upon the Coast,
where they were all lost, except this Pilot, who saved himself by Swiming to
Land, carrying with him a little Sea-Compass, and went thus wandering about to
return by Land to the Newfound Countries: Upon that, he had found an
Indian-Woman, of whom he was Enamoured, making her fine Promises by Signs, that
he would Marry her; which she believed, and conducted him through these
Deserts; where she showed him the Fruit and Roots good to Eat, and served him
for an Interpreter amongst the Indians, which he found, she telling them that
it was her Husband. After having been thus 2 or 3 years continually wandering
about, and that for above 800 Leagues, without any other Comfort but this
Woman: At last they arrived at the Newfoundland, guiding himself by his
Compass: They had a Child together; and found there an English Ship a Fishing:
He was very glad to see himself escaped from so many Dangers, and gave these
English an account of all hi^ Adventures: They took him on Board their Vessel
to make him good cheer; but being ashamed to take along with him this
Indian-Woman thus Naked, he left her on Land, without regarding her any more:
But she seeing her self thus forsaken by him, whom she had so dearly Loved, and
for whose sake she had abandonned her Country and Friends, and had so well
guided and accompanied him through such places, where he would, without her,
have been dead a thousand times* After having made some Lamentation, Strange
and Cruel Acts of an (...).
full of Rage and Anger, she took her Child, and tearing it into two pieces,
she cast the one half toward him into the Sea, as if she would say, that
belonged to him, and was his part of it; and the other she carried away with
her, returning back to the Mercy of Fortune, and full of Mourning and
Discontent.

The Seamen who took this Pilot into their Boat, seeing this horrible and cruel
Spectacle, asked him, why he had left this Woman; but he pretended she was a
Savage, and that he did not now heed her; which was an extreme Ingratitude and
Wickedness in him: Hearing this, I could not look upon him, but always with
Horror and great Detestation.

After then that we had Feasted one another, the English Convoyed Water found.
us to get some Water: All the night long, I went to Drink in full Streams, to
compense the former Thirst I endured, filling the empty Vessels of my Chest for
the time to come. In the morning before we set Sail, two Spaniards, with an
Indian-Woman, came from Cumana, on Board, to exchange Pearls with some of our
Merchandise, but we had nothing fit for them: We weighed then our Anchors, and
took our Course the 5th of June, and repassing along by the Isle of
Margueritta, and the White Island, we went to get out of the Channel by the
Virginies: But having Virginia.
seen there a great Ship at Anchor, we could not imagine what she should be,
whether English or Spanish; we passed close by her, without perceiving any one
upon the Deck; And bearing a little further, we perceived a great Ship, in form
of a Galley, coming full sail upon us* We kept our selves to the Wind as much
as we could, nevertheless we were prepared to receive them; but the night
coming on, when they were near us, and at such time when we thought to come to
handy-Blows, this great Ship that we had left at Anchor made a Fire on Land,
which made them leave of Chasing us. We bore all night along by Portorico, and
Portorico.
the next day, at night, the 12th of July passed all the Island: We saw our
selves at break of day out of the Channel, and very joyful that* we were in the
Main-Sea, holding our Course about the height of the Isle of Bermuda. We had
tarried a long time without making any way, because Bermude-Isle.
of the Calms: And visiting our Bread, and finding it very short, we were
forced to come to parting, and my part fell to about 8 or 10 pound, as well
good as moldy; But having a great many Parrots to feed, I was in perplexity
what to do, being this Animal is very Gluttonous. At last, I was resolved to
^kill the greediest, and Roast him, which I did, and Eat him up before I came to
want more Bisquet. In the mean time, seeing the Wind was not favorable for us,
we began already to Extreme Council.
hold Council; that if this Weather continued any longer, we should be
constrained to cast Lots, who should Eat his Companion. We had in our Ship 3 or
4 Indians, who would have passed the first* But in the midst of these
Perplexities, it pleased the Divine Goodness to visit us a little after St.
John's Day, and to send us a fair Wind, which carried us to the Isle de Flores,
one of the Asores, where we took a little Refreshment; but not being able to
have as much as we desired, we crossed the Coast in waiting for the Wind; but
as it came good in the night, we quitted the Isle, and happily took our Course
as far as Con^ale in Britagne, where we arrived the 15th of August 1604. for
which all Praise and Glory be to the Most High.

The End of the Second Book.
A Description of the following Cutts.
First, The manner of the Fights, betwixt the Caribes and the Caripous.

Secondly, The Indian Woman go thus about the Woods looking Fruits to Eat.



A Description of the following Cutts.
The First, How the Caripous are Euiqpped going to War against the Caribes.

How the Caribes take Fish.

The First The manner of the Dances of the Caribes.

Amazons going to the Wars.



A Description of the following Cutts.
The First, The manner of the Cannoes, or Boats, of the Caripous, and other
Indians.

The Second, How the Caribes Roast, and Eat the Flesh of their Enemies.



A Description of the following Cutts.
The First, How the Caribes Eat the Flesh of the Caripous, and Feast together
therewith.

The Second, Amaca 's, or Hanging-Beds of the Caripous.



THE TRAVELS AND VOYAGES OF John Mocquet, INTO MOROCCO, And other Places of
AFRICA.

BOOK III.
THE Voyage that I had made the former year to the West Indies, had left me
such a desire to see also the rest of the World, that I was resolved to go to
the East Indies, if I found any fit opportunity: For this effect, I parted from
Paris the 12th of April 1605. and taking my way straight to Britagne, I went to
Embark at St. Lezer, (St. Nazare) in a Ship of Poligain, where we were not
above twenty Persons in all.

We were at the beginning of this Voyage so beaten with contrary Winds, that we
were forced to the Coast of Galice, a little below Cape d^ Vere. Having
continued there for some time, we set sail with the Wind, and arrived at Lisbon
in Portugal, at such time as they were Rejoicing for the Birth of an Infant of
Spain; which was a very fine sight. For after having Rejoicing at Lisbon.
a long time run the Bulls, according to their manner of Pastime, where there
was a great many Horses maimed, and Cavalliers overturned Lamed.
to the Ground, they laded a Bull with Crackers, but there was such a great
number of them on him, that he fell down under the Burden; and they were
forced to fetch a strong Ox to carry them, and yet he stooped under so heavy a
Load: These Crackers were fastened one to another, so that they covered all the
Body of this Ox; then there was others tied to his Horns. When the Feast was
ended, fire was put to these Crackers, and then you would have said, that the
Ox flew in the Air, with such an Impetuosity, which looked like Lightning; for
Ten Thousand Muskets would not have made so great a noise, each Cracker
answering one another, so that the Ox remained quite roasted.

I made some stay at Lisbon, upon the hopes that I should, (as I have said)
Dutch Army toward Lisbon.
find passage to the East Indies, if the Fleet had gone there that year: But as
it was ready to part, the Dutch Fleet came to cast Anchor about the Bar of
Lisbon, where they stayed a long time, waiting for the said Fleet; but the
Portuguese were not so foolish as to venture out. After that, Don Louis
Fajardo, General of the Army, knowing that the Hollanders were now retired,
riged out a Fleet of 35 sail to follow after; and went a good way out into the
Sea, sending a little Ship before, called the Pearl, (taken from the
Rochellers) to discover'em; But this Vessel meeting with the Hollanders, was
taken by them, and all the rest returned to the Haven of Lisbon without doing
any thing. Having then lost this occasion of passing to the East Indies at that
time, I was resolved to go to Barbary, and for this Cause Embarked at Cascais,
in a Vessel belonging to Captain Poul^t of Rochelle.

We bore South East, and passed Voyage into Barbary.
along by Azamor, near to the City of Lions, which is a place ruined, having
still very high Towers. On Wednesday the 8th day of the month, we cast Anchor
in the Road of Saffy, Saffy.
where I tarried some time without going on Shore at all: But Cidi-Hamet Talbe,
or Secretary to the King of Morocco, Mulei-Boufairs being come to Saffy with
his Almahalle, or Almahalle.
little Army, to conduct the Caravan which was come to Morocco, and to
reconduct the other, which was going there, he sell Sick; and having heard that
there was a Tabibe, or a Physician on board our Ship, he sent some Moors
immediately to fetch me. I went with them on Land, not knowing what they would
do with me; and coming there upon the Port, I found this Cidi-Hamet sitting
with a great number of Moors along the Walls of the Castle; and as soon as he
saw me, he rose up, and taking me by the Hand, led me into his Camp, which was
without Saffy, into his Tent, being very fine, and curiously Embroidered with
Figures, after the Moresque. There I found a Jew, which served for Interpreter
in the Gemique, (which is Spanish or corrupted Portuguese) which I understood;
and having discoursed with me about his Disease, I resolved upon that which I
thought best for his Cure; and for this cause went on board our Ship to look
for Drugs fit for this purpose.

In short, I Purged him so, that I caused him to Vomit up Worms like little
Serpents; which made me not a little admire, for they were so very great, and
long, that it was almost impossible to imagine that such odious and horrible
things could be in Human Bodies: Since that, he was very well and was my great
Friend; and he and his Alcades showed me all the kindness imaginable: He gave
me a Horse to go to Morocco, making very much of me by the way.

Thus we parted from Saffy to go to Morocco, the 28th of August, and went to
pitch the Almahalle near to the Adouars or Tents of the Arabs, and went to see
them with some Moors their Enemies. These Arabians caused us to enter into
their Tents; then they put some Carpets* very thick and hairy upon the Ground
for us to sit upon, and brought us some Camels Milk to Drink, with I don't know
what other things: After that, we retired in the night to the Camp of the
Moors, which was not very far from thence.

The next morning we raised our Tents, and went to pitch the Almahalle at the
Duguele, were there is Water. The Arabians had made there a great many large
and deep Ditches, which they call Matamores, in such manner that it is a very
dreadful thing to look to the bottom of them: It Is there they find Water; in
some of which there is some, in others none: And these Arabs come to look there
for Water, above 4 or 5 Leagues round about. From the Puquelle they come with
their Camels, which they lade with this Water, in Oudres, or Goat Skins. And
when they have Reaped their Corn, they raise their Adouars, or Tents, and go
away to some other place far distant from thence, leaving this Ground to lie
waste a long time: Then afterward, they return there again, laying their
Houses and Husbandry, Wives and Arabians, and their manner of Living.
Children, upon their Camels, like as the ancient Nomades, and the Tartar
Hordes, at this day, and go altogether in a Company, by Cabilles or
Generations; so that if any one comes to strike one of their Generation, they
think themselves all thereby injured, and presently Revenge it. There are some
of these Cabilles who join themselves together to make War upon other Cabilles
that are not their Friends: There are sometimes above Twelve thousand of a
Cabille or Parentage: For they Marry one another like Cousins, and thus
conserve the Memory of themselves. The most Ancient, and VVisest amongst them,
they make Chief, and Obey him in all Things, and every where, as their own
Father, with a wonderful Respect, as I have seen in their Alcayde-Abdassis,
Captain of one of these Cabilles, which conducted us from Morocco to Saffy, to
hinder those of his Cabille from doing us any prejudice, for he had taken us in
his Custody upon his Head, having so promised it to the King of Morocco;
forasmuch as his People held a good part of the way betwixt Morocco and Saffy.

But to return to our Voyage; the morning being come, we raised the Tents, and
in waiting till the Camels were Laded, the Cavaliers, Moors and Arabians
exercised themselves at the Lance: And there was, amongst others, a young
Alcayde, who took his Course with his Lance against me, crying out to me in his
Language, Senari Christian.
Bara, bara, aben senari, which is to say, Guard thy self, thou Son of a
Christian* I spurred then my Horse, which was a Barbe, very nimble, having two
Pistols at my Saddle-bow, I ran at the Re-incountre with this Cavalier; but my
Horse being strong in the Mouth, was very near Precipitating me to the bottom
of these Matamores, or Pits of Matamores.
Water, which I have spoken of; for the Mouth of them are hid amongst the
Grass, and they are there in great numbers: But seeing my self almost upon the
brink, and my Horse going to leap to the other side (which he could never have
done without loosing us both:) I reined him so to the purpose, that if the
Alcayde, which exercised with me, had* not also stopped, seeing me so near this
Precipice, I had infallibly tumbled therein, but never come out again entirely;
considering their great and horrible Depth.

When I saw my self delivered from this danger, I praised God, and retired as
far as I could from thence, leaving these Moors to exercise by themselves, not
knowing so well as they, where these Matamores are, so dangerous to those who
are not aware of them.

After that we Traveled all the rest of this Day, and endured extreme Heats
until toward Evening, then we pitched our Tents along by some Water, where all
these Arabs cast themselves to wash, and refresh 'em, at which I was not a
little vexed, for I had a great mind to drink of this Water, all muddy and
dirty as it was, and besides a little faltish, yet I was forced to Drink
thereof. We pitched then in these Deserts, and the next Deserts without Waters.
day, early in the Morning we departed, Traveling all the Day in the Heat of
the Sun, the greatest that can be possibly imagined, in these Fields Scorched
and Burnt, because of the Hot Winds which blew after such a manner, that we
were ready to Die with Thirst: At last, we came into a Des^rt, where we were
forced to look for Water a far off. There was there the Adouars of the
Arabians, who Adouars.
helped us to some Refreshments of water and Camels Milk, which is not very
sweet, but of a strange taste to those who are not accustomed to it; but
necessity makes every thing to seem Good, as I have often experienced in all my
Voyages.

The next morning going on our way, we perceived several Arabs with their
Camels laden with Corn, who came to join with us, to go to Morocco.

We met also great Numbers of Arabians on Horseback with their Lances, who
came about us to salute their chief Abdassis, and others of their kindred who
were in our Company; I saw them come with great Humility to kiss the Hands of
their General Abdassis who had Governed them a long time.

I went always in their Company, leaving the other Troops behind, for the
desire I had, by following them, to get some Water of the Arabs their Friends,
whom we found encamped in a Valley of the Deserts; for we went continually with
so excessive a Heat, that I durst not so much as lift* up my Eyes* Going thus,
we met at the bottom of a Mountain some Arabian Shepherds, who kept Flocks of
Sheep, Goats, and Camels: We went with a number of Cavalliers toward them, to
know where we might find some Water, but they would not show us: Hereupon one
of these Arabs, who came a long with us* commanded one of these Shephards to
give him his Stick; and having it in his Hands, began to beat these poor
Wretches with such Water (...)
fury, that I was very sorry to see it, although I was also very Thirsty. This
Savage Treatment made the Shepherds show us where their Adouars were, about a
League from thence; where we went with all diligence, and found there one of
these Arabs, who came to fetch Water far from thence, in a Goat-Skin. This
Water was very Salt and hot; yet every one of these Cavalliers cast themselves
thereupon, for it was very little for so many Men. I obliged them so, with
Money, that I obtained some of one of these Arabs where we were come. Truly it
seemed, that they bereaved these poor* Wretches of their Lives in taking away
their Water they come to look for so far, and besides there is but little to be
found, the Weather being so excessive hot; for all their Matamores were dried
up at that time.

Having a little refreshed our selves, we went to rejoyn the Camp of the
Almahalle, and pitched our Tents near the River Tensif, a little days Journey
from Morocco. We met a great Tensif ^iver.
many Arabians all on Horseback, with their Lances, who came about us, to
Salute their General Abdassis, and others of their Friends, who were in our
Company.

I saw them again come with great Humility to Kiss the Hands of this their
Chief, Abdassis, as before. There we quenched our Thirst a little with this
Water; though it was very hot. All the Land in these Countries is various, some
part good, and others bad, but for the most part Incultivated, except that
which is near some Water, which they Till. This River Tensif Breeds the most
excellent Trouts of any in the World, being very little, and their Flesh red,
but of an excellent Taste, and are mightily esteemed at Morocco.

The next morning, going a little Morocco.
further, we discovered Morocco, in a great Campaign; and this City seems to be
situated near to Mount Atlas Mountain.
Atlas, though it is above 7 Leagues distant: We found by the way some
Christians, who came about us.

These are People that Traffic there, and when they hear that any other
Christians come with the Casile, they are very glad, and meet them by the way:
They bring with them a little Mule laden with Victuals. Now the most part of
the Christians of this Casile were English, Prisoners, with Irons upon their
Feet, and had been English Prisoners at Morocco.
Arrested at Saffy, upon the account of an Alcayde named Abdelacinthe, who was
a Portuguese by* Nation, but a Renegado* And for his Capacity and VVorth, he
had given him the Command of the Casile who returned from Morocco to Saffy,
with about 500 Soldiers under his Charge.

Now it happened by chance, that Abdelacinthe, and (...) to him.
Antonio de Soldaigne, and Petro Caesar, Portuguese Gentlemen, had been both
taken at Tangier in Africa, and brought to Morocco, and being there detained
Captives 13 or 14 years, until such time that they were Released by the Sieur
de l' Isle, a Physician, and at that time Agent there for King Henry the Great.
As these two Portugueses were returning in liberty, this Alcayde, Abdelacinthe,
had Negotiated with them to save himself in their Vessel wherein they were to
Embark. For this cause, he went to Pitch his Almahalle toward the place where
they come to take Water for the Ships, near to the Cape of Cantin; and being
Cape of Cantin.
there one night, he told his Men, that he had caused a Moorish-Woman to be
brought him, with whom he desired to speak in Secret, a good way off from the
Camp, and took none along with him but a Slave of his: When he was near to the
Seaside, he fired a Fuzee, which was the signal that he had given to those of
the Ship. As soon as they heard this, presently the People of Boat (who were
hid in the Bushes) came to seize upon his Person, and took him, and carried him
away in their Vessel, by which means he saved himself. The Slave fled to the
Almahalle, to give them notice of the taking of his Master, at which they were
mightily astonished, and presently retired to Saffy: But as the People of an
English Boat at the same time were come on Shore for some things they had then
occasion for, they were Arrested, and had Irons clapped upon their Feet, as I saw
them in the Castle of Saffy, in very poor Equipage, and were since carried to
Morocco, where the Merchants paid for them, I don't know how many Ounces of
Gold, which was very near the Ransom of the Alcayde Abdalacinthe who had
escaped: For those Kings will not loose any thing, it being the Custom at
Marocco, that when a Slave runs away, all the others assemble together and pay
for him, cautioning one another to go freely about Cautioning of the Slaves at
Morocco.
the City without Irons; which is meant of the poorer sort: But as for the
Rich, they are put into the Sisane, which is the Kings great Prison, Sisane.
where they are well guarded, as these two Portuguese Gentlemen were of whom
I have already spoken.

To return to the Christians of Morocco, who met us by the way, they made us
very good cheer, in a Garden, along by a pleasant Water running some two
Leagues from Morocco. The Almahalle entered not into Arrival at Morocco.
Morocco this day, but I left it where it was pitched, and went to lie within
the City, in the House of the Christians, paying for my entrance to the Talbe
or Register; This was the 2d of September 1606. As soon as I was arrived, I
failed not to go visit the Sieur de l'Isle, Physician, who was lodged in a very
fine House in the Juderie, or Jews-Place. The Sieur de l'Isle was a long time
near to the Person of the King of Morocco, in Quality of an Agent, for our King
Henry the Great; And there had been since sent the Sieur Hubert, the King's
Physician, in the room of the Sieur de l'Isle; Then both went into France, but
since that, the said Sieur de l'Isle returned there again. The Sieur Hubert
lived about a year at Morocco, practicing Physic near the King, and there
following his principal design, that is, the Learning the Arabic Tongue; so
that since he rendered himself very expert therein, as he has made public
Profession thereof at Paris it self, with great Solemnity: He contented himself
to depart out of this Country more laden with Science and Arabic Books, than
with Riches, or any Commodities, in which the Sieur de l'Isle was more happy
than he.

Being then in the Juderie, I was there conducted by a Jew, who Cozened me of
some Rials, giving me falsely to understand, that I was to pay some at the Door
of this place, where we were to enter; and indeed he brought one, who came to
demand it, and I was forced to Content them.

This Juderie, or Jews-Place, is above Juderie of Morocco.
a good League from the Douane, where the Christians inhabit; and near the
King's Palace; and is like a City by it self, encompassed with good Walls,
having but one Gate guarded by the Moors: It may be as big as Meaux. There the
Jews inhabit, to the number of above 4000, and pay Tribute: There is also some
Christians; And in this place also live the Agents and Ambassadors of strange
Princes: As for the rest of the Christians Trafficking, and others, they live
in the Douane.

The City of Morocco is very great, Des^^i^tion of the City of Morocco.
and is much bigger than that at Paris which is called the City; being
wonderful populous, containing above 400000 Inhabitants, of all sorts of
Religions; and such Streets, that for the great multitude of People you can
scarce oass along. The most part of the ordinary Houses there are low, little,
and but badly built, with Earth and Lime: But the Houses of the Alcaydes,
Lords, and other Persons of Quality, are great and high, built with Stone,
environed with Walls, with a high Tower in the middle, to go take the fresh
Air, and a great many little Windows and Wickets: The upperparts of the Houses
are flat and in Cotees. The King's, Palace is built with little Stones, like
in-laid work, and a great many Pillars of Marble, Fountains, and other
Ornaments. Their Mosques in great number, well built with Marble, and covered
on the top with Lead. There are a great many Halls, or Vaults, where the
Merchants are, and amongst others, those which Sell the Alhec, or Clothes, like
Brokers. There is also several Colleges where they teach Law. There is no River
which passes by the City of Morocco, but a great many Water-Ditches, and
Channels on Land to guide the Waters Water.
which come in abundance from the Mountains of Atlas, partly from the Springs,
and partly from the melted and make this Water run here and there for their
Gardens and Fountains* They have also Wells and Cisterns* They serve themselves
dexterously with this Water to sprinkle their Gardens and Land. Without the
City* about the Fields, are a great number of Gardens, with all sorts of
Fruits* and Vineyards, with Water; and a little Habitation to go recreate
themselves: They keep their Slaves at work: All the Ground is very good and
fertile, and the Seed presently ripens. The Mountains are on every side of the
City, except on that toward Saffy, which is level. There are the Mountains of
Draz toward Lybia, from whence comes the good Dates. There are no Trees in the
Fields, except some Palms: All the Trees are in the Gardens, which are like
unto Orchards.

As for Justice; there is in Morocco Justice.
but one only Judge, which they call Haquin, who does ready Justice most
commonly upon the place; and has continually his Citeres, or Sergeants, on
Foot, armed with Cudgels, and Alfanges, or Cimmeters; and as occasion requires,
when it appears to be some notorious Offense, they Behead also upon the very
place; for they who are offended, cry Quoavac, quovac, c. to the help of the
King, in demanding Justice. The King, besides his ordinary Taxes, which he
sends to gather about the Country by his Guards, and in the Mount Atlas by
force of Arms* he takes also upon all Merchandises and Traffic the Tenth part.
The Women of Morocco are very beautiful and white; the others, who are of
Quality, and who stir not much abroad, are more Tanned and Sunburned* Every one
has 2 or 3 Wives, and as many Concubines as they can keep, and give to these
Concubines so much by the day, 2 or 3 Tomins to live upon; each Tomin worth
half a Rial. The King has four Wives, and Concubines without number, whom he
keeps in his Seraglio, or Palace; and when he has a mind to lie with any of
them, he causes them all to come before him stark Naked; then he chooses her
which pleases him best, for that time.

The Moors have but sew Household Goods, except some Alcatifs, or Carpets, upon
which they Eat, and Lie, and have some Covers, and sleep very low: Very few
have Couches and Linen: The Jews have such Beds as we use.

As for Victuals, they are good and Victuals.
cheap, and all, whether Flesh, Fish, Fruits and other things to Eat, are sold
by weight, and the Pound. As for Flesh, it is Beef, Mutton, Poultry, Venison,
which comes from the Mountains: Some Fish, as the excellen^ Trouts which come
from the Mountains of Atlas, and from the River Tensif: The Wines there are
excellent, and wonderful strong, of which the Moors do not Drink, but only the
Grapes. When a Moor makes himself drunk, at any Jews or Christians who sell the
Wine, the Judge comes to Stave all the Vessels of Wine which are upon the
Ground, and besides lays an Avarice, or fine upon the Master. Vintner. I will
content my self to have said this little of several other things, which I could
describe concerning this City and Country of Morocco, since they are so well
known to every one; only, I will add to this, that about 6 Leagues from
Morocco, near to Atlas, is a City called Angoumet, where are still to be seen a
great Angoumet
many ruinous Buildings of the Roman* and Antique Letters * half worn out: The
City is little, and nothing but Ruins. The Moors say, that there is Interred
some Holy Personage of the Ancients, and for this Reason will not suffer the
Christians to enter: And besides, in the Mountains of Atlas are certain People,
which they call Brebbes, Brebb^.
who cut their Cheeks in the manner of a Cross, and have a Language by
themselves, besides the Arabic, and are very strong in these Mountains: They
pay Tribute to the King of Morocco, who sends Forces to raise it. There is some
signs that these People should be the relicts of the ancient Africans*
Inhabitants of the Country before the Arabian Saracens entered there; and that
they retired there for security, being also in some manner Christians; but
since, the society and imperiousness of the Arabians have corrupted them*

As for the rest, when I arrived at Morocco the Affairs of the Country were
thus; That Muley-Boufairs the then King of Morocco, one of the Sons of
Maley-Hamet had War with his War betwixt the Che^ifs of Morocco.
Brother Muley-Chec, and Muley-Abdalla his Nephew, and with Muley Zidan his
other Brother: For all these three Brothers made cruel War upon one another for
the Kingdom of Morocco. Now this Muley-Boufairs, trusting wholly upon his
Bassa-Joda, lost all: For Muley-Abdalla, the Son of Muley-Chec King of Fez, won
a Battle of his Uncle Boufairs, who sled in the night time to the Mountains of
Atlas, in the House of the Alcayde of Asur, which is an exceeding strong
Alcayde of Asur.
Castle: But the Brebbes Robbed him, and did him a great deal of mischief
before he could get conveniently there. After that, he sent some of the
Alcaydes his great Favorites to go fetch his Wives and his Daughter, who
brought along with them all his Treasure, but they were Robbed before day, near
to Angoumet, in a place where they had sat down to take a little rest from the
fatigue of the way. The Brebbes had his Wives and Daughters at their pleasure,
and carried his Daughter to Muley-Abdalla, because he desired her to Wife,
though she was his Cousin. The Alcaydes or Conductors of these Women, seeing
themselves thus Robbed, and without any means to recover their loss, did enter
themselves into an Asoy or Mosque to the Alforme, or Sanctuary, of a Saint
Marabou. But Muley-Abdalla hearing of it, sent to fetch them out, with the
Marabou also, who earnestly desired Abdalla to give them their Lives, which he
promised to do; But before they arrived at his Micouart, or Palace, he
commanded all their Heads to be chopped off; African Faith.
which he sent to his Father at Fez, who was not so well pleased thereat as he
expected, because he had deceived the Marabou. This was the State of the
Affairs of these Princes.

Now, as I passed one day about the Alcasaue, which is the King's House, I saw
a Cannon cast of a wonderful bigness; and being surprised at the greatness of
the size, I was told that it had been made for a certain Alcayde, Story of an
Alcayde.
a great Favorite, who had a mind to betray a King of Morocco: But the King
having discovered the Treason, by the means of one of his Letters; Hereupon,
one day, without making show of any thing, demanded (by way of question) of
this Alcayde, if there was a Servant dearly Beloved of his Master, and
nevertheless who sought to Kill, what such a Servant would deserve; The Alcayde
presently answered, that he deserved to be put alive into a Cannon, and to be
shot out like a Ball; to which the King replied, That he himself deserved
Justice of a ^raytor.
the same Punishment; and thereupon shewin^ him the Letter writ by his own
Hand, the other remained all astonished and benumbed; and then the King ordered
this Cannon to be made, in which he commanded to be put this ^lcayde, to fire
him out as he himself had fore-judged by his own Mouth, according as the
Treason deserved.

In the City of Morocco, there are a great number of Christian Captives, as
well Men as Women, who are brought there to be sold from all Parts of Barbary:
Now it happened upon a time that a Christian Maid, History of a Christian Maid
and her Martyrdom.
being Slave in a great House of the City, instructed a young Woman of the same
House in the Christian Religion, teaching her secretly her Belief, insomuch
that this Damsel engrafted so well the Law of the True God in her Heart, that
it was impossible for her former Teachers to make her learn any more of the
Alcoran, or Law of Mahomet, and kept her self constant in the Religion of the
Slave, without going any more to the Mosque. The King being informed thereof,
sent for this New Convert to come before him, and Threatening her, that if she
would not renounce the Law of the Christians, he would put her to Death, She
generously answered, that she did not fear Death; and that all the Torments of
the World should not make her quit the Belief she had acquired. The King seeing
this, commanded her to be put into the Hands of the Haquin, or great Judge, to
be put to Death: But she being resolved not to make any show that she feared
Death, and about to be executed, the King asked her again if she would not be
Converted to their Law again: But, she answered, that their Law signified
nothing in reference to Salvation; and that she would Die for the Love of him
who had suffered Death for us. When this barbarous King saw that all these
Prayers and Remonstrances were in vain, he endeavored once more to divert her
from this Resolution, promising to Marry her to one of his highest Court
Favorites; But she mocked the more at all his Promises; at which, the King
being enraged, commanded her to be Beheaded, which was done accordingly. And
thus Christianly, and constantly, this innocent and virtuous Damsel suffered
Martyrdom.

Now as I curiously visited this City of Morocco, I entered one day into
Kings-Palace.
the Micouart, or Palace of the King, and saw in the first Court extraordinary
fine Buildings A-la-Moresque, with Fountains, and a great many Orange and
Lemon-Trees, laden with Fruit; But at the second Court, where I also entered,
were little Galleries sustained with Pillars of White Marble, so well cut, and
contrived, that the best Workmen would admire the Workman-ship thereof; and
upon the Ground were a great number of Vessels of Marble, full of clear and
fresh Water, where I saw the Moors wash themselves before their going to
Rehearse their Sala or Prayers* But as soon as they espied me, they began to
cry out, and run after me, which made me mend my pace in good earnest to get
presently from thence. I saw in another Garden, a very fine Fish Pond of Stone
Work, where the Moors Bath themselves, and found there some Moorish Women who
were washing their ^lquisayes or Vails, after that they had washed their Bodies.

After this I went to see the Lions, Lions. And the History of a Lion and a Dog.
which were shut up in a great ruinous House, open at the top, and to be
mounted one pair of Stairs; and saw there many remarkable things, but one more
particularly, which was concerning a Dog, who had formerly been cast to the
Lions for their Food; for one of the Lions (and the oldest of all the others
who feared him) took this Dog that had been cast in under his Paws, as if he
would have devoured him; but having a mind to play a little with him before, it
happened that this Dog flattering the Lion, as knowing his Strength, began to
scratch him gently with his Teeth upon a Scab which the Lion had upon his
Throat; at which, the Lion took such pleasure, that he not only suffered the
Dog patiently so to do, but also defended him from the others: So that when I
saw him, he had been then seven years with these Lions, as the Christian Slave
told me who looked after them; and told me also, that when they gave the Lions
any thing to Eat, the Dog fed with them, and would sometimes snatch the Meat
from their very Chops; And when the Lions would fight together for their Food,
the Dog did all he could to part them and when he saw he could not do it, by a
Natural Instinct he began to howl after such a manner, that the Lions (who fear
the cry of Dogs)* presently would part themselves, and agree together.

This example of Animals shows that we ought to be humble and obedient toward
those who are greater than our selves, and how noble and generous the Lion is
amongst other Beasts.

At my going from these Lions, I went to see the Kings Horses, who Horses.
were in Stalls after their manner, and were fat, and extraordinary well
Dressed and clean Skinned. They are Christian Slaves who look after them, and
have a great, and lesser Stable also, well ordered that it is impossible for
any to be better: They are all Barb-Horses, the finest in the World. After
having walked enough about the City for this time, I returned back to the
Douane, which is the place where the Christians are obliged to retire
themselves, a good League from the Alcasave, or Palace Royal, which is near the
Juderie.

I was there told a very pleasant History of a Son of the King of Morocco.
History of a King of Morocco, who having upon a time sent one of his Sons with
an Army to conquer the Kingdom of Gago, from whence comes the finest Gold. This
young Prince having passed all the Deserts of Lybia with great Trouble and
Fatigue, which both he and his Army there endured, as he approached the Country
of Gago, this King, informed of his coming, went to meet him with a great Army
of Blacks, and invested and encompassed him about, so that he could get neither
backward nor forward; and besides, he was oppressed with two great Extremities,
Hunger and Thirst; insomuch, that the most part of his Men were Sick, and knew
not what to do in such an extremity: For, to continue there, they must all Die
with Hunger, or yield themselves Victims to their Enemies Malice; and to
return, or to pass on, they must give Battle; and his Men were so weak, as well
by the fatigue of the way, by the Desert, as for want of Victuals. Now as this
Prince of Morocco was in this perplexity in his Tent, it happened that two of
his Soldiers were playing at Chess in their Tent, and one of them found himself
so much engaged, that he could not make his King go either backward or forward,
he being under Check; upon which his Companion, Laughing, said, he was like
their Prince, who could neither advance nor retire without exposing himself to
great danger: As he was saying these Words, it happened that one of the
Prince's Favorites, passing by chance near this Tent, overheard them, and went
presently away to give his Master an account of this Discourse, who, hearing
it, sent at that instant to fetch these two Soldiers before him, who were
mightily astonished; and having enquired several things of them, and
particularly of that which they had done and said; At last, seeing themselves
urged, they confessed the truth, and prostrating themselves upon the Ground,
they begged his Pardon, which the Prince did easily consent to, and demanded of
him, who had said thus, what he would advise him to do in such an extremity:
The Soldier wisely answered, that if he would take his Advice, he should not
only save himself and his Men, but should also come of with great Honor, if
the thing which he had contrived in his Mind took effect. The Prince Commanded
him to say boldly what he would; upon which the Soldier proceeded, and said,
that the King of Gago had a Beautiful Daughter to Marry, and that he, who was a
young Prince, and wanted a Wife, should send Ambassadors to this King to let
him understand that he was not come into his Country with intention to make War
upon him, but only to demand his Daughter in Marriage, of whom he had heard
many Perfections and excellent Qualities reported. The Prince found this
Counsel so good, and so much to the purpose, that he presently dispatches
Ambassadors to this King, upon this account, who were very well received,
according to their Embassage, and the Peace made accordingly; The Marriage was
agreed upon by this means, and Consummated with great Triumphing A-la-Moresque.
The Prince received from his Father-in*Law, the King of Gago, several curious
and rich Presents, amongst others three Balls of Gold, hollow within, weighing
in all 750 pounds, and are all three of a wonderful bigness, but proportionably
one a little less than the other, and are to be seen to this day in the
Alcasave, or Palace at Morocco, upon the top of a high Tower, being all three
fastened upon a Bar, the greatest at the bottom* and so mounting, the least at
top: When the Sun shines they cast a Reflex at a great distance, as I observed
in my coming to Morocco: In the Wars they have fired several shots of Musket
at them, but without any prejudice. Thus the Counsel of this Soldier took happy
effect, and since that time, the Kingdom of Gago, (of which this Daughter was
Heiress) fell to the Kings of Morocco, who send there to fetch their Gold.
After having returned from my Voyage, one day as I was at Dinner with the late
King Henry the Great, who had taken Physic that day, and was in his morning
Gown in his Closet, I was desiring his Majesty to grant me liberty to go to the
East Indies, he thereupon came to speak of the play at Chess, and how that two
of the Grandees of his Court had been two days and two nights at playing a Game
at Chess; upon which, the King discovering the cunning and subtility of this
play, I took the boldness to relate to him this History of the Prince of
Morocco, at which he was mightily pleased, and thought the Soldier's invention
very much to be ^pplauded: In short, all these Moors are great players at
Chess, as I have observed Game of Chess amongst the Moors.
amongst them. For at such time as I went to the Juderie, I found almost all
those who kept the Door a playing at this Game, at which they are very subtle;
and it is mighty diverting to them, in regard of their Melancholy Humor;
which renders them very ingenious, and great lovers of sharp and subtle
Tricks; as there was one day one of them, who made show of Friendship to
another, and gave him great store of Fruit upon a Carpet to Eat: But the other,
who was thus Honored, told him gently, give me not so much Meat, but thy Heart
rather; which was to say Good Will and Affection, for he well knew that he
wished him no good in his Mind. This Story is said to be of the Alcayde Mummin.

After having continued for some time at Morocco, seeing that the Caravan The
Authors return.
was preparing to go away for Saffy, I endeavored to obtain my Letter of Free
passage of the Haquin, who is the great Justice there, to the Haquin.
end that I might safely Embark, without any Let or Hindrance by those of
Saffy. I paid then for my Entrance and going out to the Talbes of the Talbes.
Douane, who keep the Door, which is a right that every Christian who comes to
Morocco is obliged to pay; And truly it is impossible ever to have done enough
to satisfy these sort of People.

I parted then from Morocco the 22th of October, and went to pitch the
Almahalle some 4* or 5 Leagues distant, in a Campaign, along by Mount ^tlas;
and being there, there were 3 or 4 Companies of us who went into the Adouars,
or Tents of the Arabians, to furnish our selves with Fowls, Eggs, and other
Victuals. But when we came there we perceived a great number of Cavalliers of
the same ^ation, running after one another, who drove away their Camels and
other Beasts. The Wives of these Arabians took the Saddles of their Husbands
Horses upon their Heads, and run to the place where their Horses were feeding:
The Husbands, who were hard by at work, presently mounted on Horseback, and
flew like lightning after their Enemies, with their Lances and other
Instruments; and I believe that at last they recovered their own. These Women
advised us to return with all speed to our Camp, for fear that these Arabs,
their Enemies, should carry us away Captives; which we did, seeing all in an
uproar and confusion, and the noise which they made amongst themselves: For it
is a strange thing to see these People, who are all of the same War amongst the
Arabians.
Law and Nation, to make so frequent War upon one another.

But, amongst themselves, they observe this Rule and Discipline, that when the
time comes for them to Sow their Land or to Reap their Corn, they make Peace;
After that, they begin again to their Wars when their Corn is beaten, and laid
up in their Matamores or Ditches in the Field, where they put it, then cover it
with Planks, and above that with Earth, after such a manner that they can Till
and Sow upon it* They lay up their Grain thus in the night, that none may see
them* no not their very Wives nor their Children: Afterward* if they happen to
have occasion for any quantity of Corn, either to Sow, or to carry to sell at
Morocco, they go and take it forth of this Magazine. This Corn is kept very
well in the Ground, where it keeps dry a long time.

The 23th of the same month we went to pitch the Almahalle close by Mount
Atlas, in a level ground, in which place I went to look for some Plants and
Herbs, and as I returned again into the Camp, the Alcayde Abdassis, Captain of
a Cabille of Arabians, perceived me, and called me to him, asking me what Herbs
these were that I carried, and what I intended to do with them; after I had
satisfied his Demands, I withdrew into our Tent: About 4 or 5 a clock in the
evening, going out to walk and to take the fresh Air, I met again with the
Alcayde, who was also walking about to visit his Camp; and having called me,
took me by the Hand, and led me without the Camp, giving me account of several
things of the Wars of Africa, and History of the Battle of Don Sebastian of
Portugal.
concerning the Battle of Don Sebastian, King of Portugal, at which time he was
a young Man, it being 35 years since: He told me amongst other things, how the
Christians at that time were reserved to extirpate them: But that they who were
before at Wars amongst themselves, (tho of one Faith) had made Peace together,
to the end that they might the better defend themselves against the Christians,
and went to meet the Christians toward the City of Tangier, which belonged to
the Portugals, That there they resolved to venture Battle with Don Sebastian,
who was accompanied with a Moorish King, who was a near Kinsman to the Kings of
Morocco, and who was said to be the lawful King, and that the others had
Usurped upon his Prerogative. As these two Armies were in Battalia near by one
another, the Christians made no show of attacking the first, but kept
themselves as on the Defensive; they on the contrary were all in the Action,
continually exercising themselves at the Lance, one against another; and
seeing that the Christians did not stir, they came furiously to attack them;
but having been beat back at the beginning, they betook themselves to flight,
and the Christians pursued them, in such disorder and confusion, that thinking
themselves too sure of Victory, the Moors thereupon Rallying upon these
disorderly pursuers, easily broke them: And thus Don Sebastian lost the Battle*
where he was killed upon the place, with two other Kings; and they had a great
number of Prisoners, who were carried to Morocco.

He told me also of Muley-Hamet Maluco, or Abdelmelech, one of the Kings Muley
Maluco, or Abdemelech.
which had won the Battle, who died of Sickness in his Litter, after having
given good Orders to all. When they who were about him perceived he was Dead,
they concealed his Death for fear of discouraging the Soldiers, who had the
better; and used this Artifice, that is, they put forth his Hand as if he had
been still alive: He himself had found out this trick, and had ordered them to
make use of it after his Death.

Abdassis having related to me thus Muley Boufairs King of Morocco.
much, told me also of Muley-Boufairs, the then King of Morocco, and how that
he gave himself wholly over to his Wives and Concubines, and trusted too much
upon a Bassa, named Joda, and was likely to loose the Battle, which he designed
to engage in when we parted from Morocco; and that all his delight was in
Comer, Couscoussou, Auquam; that is, eating of a certain Confection made up
into Sugar-Plums; but he found himself deceived; for he lost the Battle, as I
have said already, and was Deposed from his Kingdom, and fled away to Mount
Atlas about the month of November 1606. according as our Noster-Damus had
predicted in his Centuries, as I have been showed since: Abdassis told me also
thereupon, that the Soldiers are mightily discouraged when the King comes not
to Good advice for Kings.
Battle in Person; And when he is Courageous, or a Coward, his Soldiers become
the same.

As for the Couscoussou of which I have made mention, and which I have Tasted
Coucoussou.
several times, it is Meal made up and Kneaded into the fashion of Sugar-Plums
or Comfits, with Water, in a Drying Pan; then put it in an Earthen Vessel full
of holes at the bottom, like a Cullender, after that, it is put in a Pot upon a
hot Fire, and the Vapor boils it; then they pour Broth thereupon, and eat it
by great bits like Balls: It is of a very good Taste, which nourishes and
fattens the Body to Admiration. I have often Eat thereof, it being prepared for
me by the Moorish and Jewish Women: Their Corn is very fit for it, because it
is very dry; ours, which is more moist, would not be so good, except it were
first well dried.

After this Discourse of the Alcayde, we withdrew our selves into our Tents
until the next morning that we began again to take Journey, and had that day
very bad way by steep and inaccessible Mountains, not being able to keep any
Order for the insupportable Heat; as for fresh Water we had none. I was mounted
upon a Mule, and was forced frequently to get down to beat it away on foot,
which was no small trouble for me, in that I had near 6000 Crowns about me, as
well in Lignots, as in Tybre, that is Powder, as it comes from Gago, and also
in Money, which are Sequins of the Country: I had a great deal of trouble to
remount; for it did not behove me to stay behind, for fear of the Arabs, and of
those of our Caravan themselves.

Having passed all the hardships of this Journey, we came to pitch at the
Duquele, where these Matamores are, of Duquele.
which I have so much spoken. Here came several Arabians on Horseback, mounted
in order with their Lances, to salute Abdassis their Chief, and Captain of
their Cabille, every one bringing him Presents* then after having kissed his
Hands, they returned again to their Adouars, who were gone above 2 or 3 Leagues
from thence. The next day, the 2d of October, we went to lie at Saffy, and as
we approached there, passing through some Woods of Broom, very high, there was
two Moorish Cavalliers, who took me out of the right way, making me go with
them cross these Brooms, which were so high that one could scarce see another
in the middle of them. I was upon my Mule, and coming near to an old Well, they
got down, bidding me also to do the like: I thought there had been there some
Fountain to refresh our selves; but seeing that they had a mind to make me get
down only to entice me into this Well, I immediately ^a^ger of the Author
turned my Mule about toward the great Highway, with all the speed I possibly
could, and thus narrowly escaped from their Hands: Their design was, (as I
believe) to make me quit the Gold and Silver which I carried, and then to cut
my Throat, and to cast me in some Ditch: But I had a good Inspiration when I
was just upon the point of descending; and as my good Angel would have it, the
great Road, through which the Caravan passed was not far from thence, which did
facilitate my safety* My too much Diligence, and the great desire that I had to
advance to get to Saffy the first, had been the cause of this Accident. At
last, by the Grace of God, I arrived happily at Saffy: After having a little
refreshed my self, I took care for my Embarkment, and caused my Materials to be
visited by the Talbes, and paid them their due.

The next day, when I thought to Embark, causing my things to be carried to the
Port, the Talbes came and demanded of me the Letter and Passport from the
Haquin of Morocco, and having given it them, they told me it signified nothing
to the purpose, because Muley-Boufairs was no longer King of Morocco, and that
it behoved me to have another from Muley-Abdalla, Muley Abdalla King of Morocco.
who was then King of Morocco, under his Father Muley-Chec, who was at Fez: I
was very much afflicted at this Retardment, which made me loose the convenience
of a Ship, that was bound for France. Nevertheless, being forced to have
patience, it behoved me to send a Trotier or Messenger to Morocco with our
Letter to have another, which could not be done without a great deal of Trouble
and Expenses: But my ill fortune was, that this Letter being come, I must be
forced to wait there near 2 months, upon the account of a Dutch Ship, which was
not to set sail till January 1607.

This change of Affairs at Morocco happened after my departure from the
Revolutions at Morocco.
City: For Muley-Boufairs King of Morocco, having lost the Battle against his
Nephew Abdalla, fled away into the Mountains, where he was Robbed, as I have
said, and Abdalla was then in peaceable possession of Morocco; But during the
Peace, Abdalla having discovered that the other hatched some Treason to
dispossess him, he Stabbed him with his own Hands, after having reproached him
with his Perfidie: But after that, Zidan his Uncle, with the help of a Santon,
or Marabou, has chased away Abdalla, and made himself King of Morocco:
Afterward he himself was chased away by the Santon; and it was said that they
were ready to engage in Battle together, and since I have heard that the Santon
had been taken by Ziden, who had put him to Death by Sawing him down through
the middle, with two pieces of Wood: Since that, he and his Nephew Abdalla had
agreed together, and by the Agreement, the Kingdoms of Fez and Sus fell to
Abdalla, and that of Morocco to Zidan.

As for the Marabous or Santons, they Santons dangerous.
are very dangerous amongst these People, by reason that the pretext of
Devotion and Sanctity of their Law, as in all others, is a great means to
Commotions against the State, as it is often seen, and of fresh memory in him,
who within this 100 years has founded this last Family, which does Rule there
at this day.

As for Muley-Chec, who was at Morocco, he went into Spain, out of a desire to
become Christian, and indeed he delivered the strong place of Arache into the
hands of the King of Spain, who for this gave him a Pension, and promised to
restore him, with an Army, to the Kingdoms of Fez and Morocco: But those of Fez
would not hearken to that, not agreeing with the Spaniards; And Abdalla his Son
returned to Fez, who also hindered him, insomuch, that the Chec has been since
constrained to go back again of his own accord, without gaining any thing of
the Spaniards save the loss of putting such a place into their Hands.

But to return to the Abode that I was Sassy and its Description.
forced to make at Sassy, I employed my self in the mean time in viewing this
City, and the Parts there abouts: It Is a little City situated upon the brink of
the Sea, which has no convenient Haven but only a Road, and flat Shore, and has
formerly been possessed by the Portugals: It may be as big as Cor^eil, and very
well Walled, being in habited by all ^o^ts of People, as Jews, Moors, and
Christians, and has a Douane.

Doing there, I observed amongst other things the manner of their Marriages,
which are performed with this Ceremony. Manner of the Marriages.
They put the Bride upon a Mule, well furnished, and surrounded with a Hoop
like a Cage, covered with a Carpet, after the Turkish manner: Scarcely can any
see this Woman thus shut up, but she can see the whole company through a
transparent Vail: At the top of this is a Scarf: They walk her in this Equipage
round about the City, and cause to follow after several Mules laden with
Baggage of that which the Bride has given her in Marriage: Then follow the Men
and Women, mounted also upon Mules. Both the Men and Women make a strange and
ridiculous noise as they pass along, with their Mouths and Tongues. Amongst
these are double Drums, A-la-Moresque. After having finished* this walk, they
go to Dinner, then they return to the place. And if it is the Wife of a
Cavallier, or Man of War, all his Friends assemble there on Horseback, who
exercise themselves at justing, continuing 2 or 3 hours before the Bride; then
after that every one withdraws: As for the rest, if the Husband does not find
his Wife a Maid, he Divorces her, and sends her back with all that she brought;
and for this they cause the Drawers of the Bride to be carried about the City,
all stained in Blood, to testify that she was a Virgin. The Jews cry, and
observe the same thing.

As for what concerns the Dead, they have Burying-Places and Sepulchers, where
they go to Weep and Lament Burials.
upon the Graves of their departed Friends, especially the Women, who fail not
to go there every Friday, and the days of their Festivals. The Jews do the
same, as I have observed in Syria, where they use a certain Vessel pierced with
holes at the bottom, and make their Tears run down from thence, right upon the
Sepulcher, which is environed with all kind of Flowers.

I will add to this, that all the Moors are nothing else but Captives and
Slaves Moors Slaves to their King.
of their King; for they dare not so much as stir out of the Country and
Kingdom, without his express License and Command, as I have taken notice of
several times at Saffy. I remember one day, a young Man, a Moor, having by
chance cast himself into a Boat of the Christians, out of curiosity, or to play
and Fish, the Haquin seeing him, caused him to be taken by his Sergeants, then
to be laid upon the Ground and cruelly Bastinadoed.

Whilst I was at Saffy, waiting for my departure, I went about the Fields and
Deserts to look for Plants and delicate Flowers to carry to the King. I
gathered a great many of them, which I laid up, and having caused Biscuit to be
made for my Voyage, with other Refreshments, we set sail the 24th of Jan. 1607.
and having contrary Winds Departure for France.
toward the South Line: Having been driven from one side to the other, we
arrived in the end near the Coast of England, in very tempestuous weather,
having been so beaten by contrary Winds, we knew not well how far we had to any
Land, in regard that we were scarce able to take the height of the Sun or
Stars; But thereupon seeing a Ship coming, much about the bigness of ours,
straight to us, we lowred our Sails to tarry for her, making signs for her to
come up, which they did* telling us, that the South Line was very near
South-line,
us, and what Wind was best for us to take: We were very glad at this news, and
a little after we saw the South-Line; but the Weather was very tempestuous, and
I believe that without this advice we should have gone near to have lost our
selves on* the Rocks, which are low and in great numbers.

Being entered into the Channel, we descried a Ship, making full sail upon us,
and believing that it was a Fleming, we prepared our selves to receive her, but
the night coming on, which was very Stormy, we lost her, bearing more to the
N.E. The next morning we saw the Isle of Wight, imagining Wight-Island.
it was the Land of England: But approaching nearer, we sound out our mistake,
and Coasting it a little, we perceived the Land of England, which lay to the N.
E. of us, and went to cast Anchor in a Bay, which advanced into the Land, and
where there was a little Village: Those of the place seeing us Anchor there,
came on board us, and told us, that when the Sea went out we should be
a-ground, and that it behoved us to set sail in all haste to go to a Port not
far from thence; so they helped and conducted us to the said Port, near the
Ports-mout.
Poulle, in a Creek, not far from a Tower, where we were at Harbor: But the
night being come, we had the strangest and most horrible Storm that had been
heard of of a long time; insomuch that Horrible ^^mpest.
we were forced to cast 3 or 4 Anchors* which were all little enough to hold
our Ship.

This happened on Shrove-Tuesday* the 27th of Feb. and in this Storm two Ships
were lost near the Isle of Wight, the one a Fleming, who was lading, and the
other a French, who seeing themselves near being lost, put out the Boat to save
themselves, leaving nothing in the Ship save a Cat: But these People
approaching near Land, a Wave came which o^erturned the Boat, and they were all
lost.

The Ship in the mean time went with a right Winds toward Plymouth* a Town and
Port of England: Some People from the Coast seeing this Ship thus sail toward
Land, where there was no Port, ran to give them notice thereof; But calling out
aloud, and no Strange Accident.
one answering, they knew not what to think, judging they might be Pirates, who
had not a mind to be known* In the end, seeing the Ship like to be cast away,
they resolved to Board her, and entering, they found nothing but this Cat, at
which they were mightily astonished, and took the Ship into Port; It was laden
with Corn, and after having heard that the People were lost near the Isle of
Wight, they left it in the hands of the Justice, until it might be restored to
the right Owners.

This great Storm, the cause of all these Accidents, was such, that it caused a
great distraction and loss of People, along the Coast of England, as we heard
since. When we came to Portsmouth we found out the Truth of this, and how the
Sea had overwhelmed certain places a good way within Portsmouth, which is a
pleasant Sea Port Portsmouth.
Town.

After having been some days at Portsmouth, to refresh our selves, and to wait
for a Wind to carry us to Havre-de-Grace, where our Ship was to go, to leave
there some Merchandise of Barbary: When the Wind was favorable to us, we set
sail the 16th of March, and the nex^ day in the evening we arrived at the
Haven, for which I praised God, for having delivered me from so many Perils and
Dangers; and going by Land to Roan, I there tarried for my Materials, which
were brought in the Hoy; and having received and laded them in a Boat upon the
River, I went straight to Paris, where I arrived the 25th of March* From thence
I went to Fontainebleau, to give the King an account of my Voyage, and to
present him with the Plants and Rarities which Ihad brought, with which his
Majesty was mighty well pleased, enquiring of me several things, to which I
answered him in the best manner I could: And desiring to know further of me,
what it was that Muley-Zidan did, I answered him, that he had encamped in the
Deserts with his Army* and amongst other things, I gave him account of 3
Cavalliers belonging to Muley-Boufairs, his Brother, with whom he had War, the
which being come into his Almahalle, to render themselves to him, he demanded
of them if they came to him of their own Free Will, and having answered him
they did, and that they had quitted Muley-Boufairs, because they had been
falsely accused of a Robbery in the Juderie at Morocco: Zidan hearing this,
asked them if they took him for a Receiver of Robbers, and thereupon commanded
them to be Beheaded, showing thereby a great Act of Justice for a Barbarian and
Mohammedan: Having finished this Discourse and several others to the late King,
and presented him with the Plants and Rarities, and the White Honey of Africa,
exceeding clear and excellent, of which his Majesty tasted, and caused me to
lay it carefully up, I went back to Paris to think in good earnest of the
Voyage that I had a mind to make to the East Indies.

A Description of the following Cutts.
The First, The manner of the Fights of the Moors and Africans of Morocco, and
other Arabians of the Countries of Barbary.

The 2d, The Customs of the Arabians when they remove their Habitations, and
carry with them their Adouars, or Tents, and take their Families to Sow and
Cultivate the Land in any other part of the Country.



THE TRAVELS AND VOYAGES OF John Mocquet, INTO Ethiopia, Mozambique, Goa* And
other Places of AFRICA, and the East Indies.

BOOK IV.
LIke as our desires are never satisfied in this life, but continually coveting
after new Things, until we are entered into a perfect enjoyment of those which
we desire most; so, being returned from my last Voyage of Africa, the desire of
my former design was renewed in me to go to the East Indies, from which I had
been diverted by the occasion that I have given account of in the beginning of
my third Book; so that having taken a Resolution at this time, I took my leave
of the King and Queen in the year 1607. and parted from Paris the 16th of
October, with a design to pass into Britagne, and from thence into Portugal.

I Embarked thence the 16th of Nov. Embarking for Portugal.
in a Ship of Poligain, belonging to one named Yves Bigram, and we were about
18 or 20 men in all. This was in a morning, and in a very great Storm: We went
on Board with no small trouble, the Waves covering us very frequently. As soon
as we were there* we set sail; the Wind being for us: This Ship was bound for
Sevill, but, as fortune would have it, being toward the Cape of Pichay, we met
with so furious a Tempest, the Wind being quite contrary to us to gain the Cape
of S^. Vincent, that we were forced to slacken in the River of Lisbon, where I
was desirous to go: For it was the time the Fleet was preparing to go away. And
arriving at Sevill, I had the trouble to return back to Lisbon; and perhaps,
for all that, I might have lost the occasion of my Voyage.

We cast Anchor then at Sta. Catarina, a little above Belin, the 2d of
December: Belin.
I went on Shore, and lay at a place called Belin, where the Visitor of Health,
hearing I was come without License, commanded me to Re-Embark, under the
forfeiture of 50 Ducats* He made all this stir only for want of a little
Present: After having ordered my Business, I failed not to go to Lisbon, where
being come, I took a Lodging, and waited to Embark, and found there the Sieur
de-Herve, who had been in the Service of the King of Morocco, and was very kind
to these two Portugal Gentlemen, who were come out of Captivity; one being Son
to the Viceroy of the East Indies, Henry de Saldaigne; and the other, Brother
to Don Baptiste Fernand Sezar, Provisor-General of the House of the Indies, and
his Brother-in-Law, the Count de Fera went to the Indies for Vice roy. I
desired my Friend, the Sieur de-Herve to speak to these Gentlemen, his Friends,
who had so much Credit, that by their means I might pass to the Indies. Pedro
Sezar, Brother to Baptiste Fernand, promised him to do all he could, so that he
spoke to the Count de Fera; and the said Herve, to oblige them the more, said,
that I was his Brother; For those Gentlemen were very respectful to him for
having assisted them in the time of their Captivity with Money: They then
desired me to speak to the Count de la Fera by the means of Baptiste Fernand,
and told him that I was a very curious Count de la Fera.
Man; and he hearing that I had knowledge of Plants, was mighty glad, and told
me that there was great quantity of good and rare Plants in the Indies, which
he had proved at such time that he was Captain at Arms: After Proveditor de la
Case d'Inde.
that, he asked me my Name, and having writ it in a Paper, he sent it by one of
his Servants to the Proveditor of the House of India, who having read it, sent
it to him again, saying, That a Stranger might not pass to the Indies without
License from the King of Spain.

The Count de la Fera, seeing this, caused a Letter to be writ at that instant,
in my presence, by Baptiste Fernand, his Brother-in-Law, and sent it by the
same Servant to Don Christoval, Viceroy of Portugal, who commanded the
Frenchman to be set down, that is to say, received. I was very glad of this
Answer; and I with a Servant went to the House of India to carry this License
to the Proveditor, Nephew to the Viceroy, who kept it, and told him that
brought it, that he could not set me down for this Permission; but that he
would speak of it to the Count de la Fera. I was very sorry at this, and almost
out of all hopes of going the Voyage: Hereupon I retired to my Lodging to
consider of what I had to do, that I might not loose this opportunity. The next
day, going to find out the Servant of the Count de la Fera, I desired him to go
with me, as from the Viceroy his Master, which he willingly did, but I could
not obtain any thing at that time; but I lost not Courage for all that; and the
day following I went again to the Servant, and desired him to go with me but
once more; and so we went together to the House of India before this
Proveditor, the Servant bringing him Word from the Count de la Fera his Master;
The Proveditor seeing himself so much importuned from him whom he durst not
displease, in regard he was one of the Grandees of Portugal, and Viceroy of
the Indies* He demanded of me my Name, and that of my Father, and of my Mother,
and the place of my Birth; then he The Author received for the Voyage.
ordered me to be set down in the Book for a Natural French man. Thus at last I
was received, of which I was exceeding glad, and gave the Servant many Thanks,
promising to assist him all I could, as I did afterward, he being sick: Two or
3 days after I went to receive my Pay, which was 7500 Raise, (there must be a
thousand of them to make 25 Rials) and prepared my self to Embark in the
Admiral, in which the Viceroy was to sail.

When the time of Embarkment came, there was a great Confusion amongst us, were
being about 900. The Register called every one by their Name* to know if all
were Embarked. My Host answered for me; and that he might not have any trouble
upon my account, I was present at the Lecture of all the Equipage: For it is a
Register on shore which makes all this Inquest. These Ceremonies being over, we
set sail; first, five great Ships or ^arracks, which were, the Admiral called
Our Lady of Mount-Carmel the Olive, the Salvation, Our Lady of the Indies, and
the Palm; then 5 Galleys, St. Jerome, the Good Jesus, the Holy Ghost, St.
Bartholomew, and St. Anthony; then after these a Carrack, and two Hulks.

We parted from the River of Lisbon the 29th of March, on Easter-Eve, Parting
from Lisbon.
and bore to the S. W. and to the S. We had great Winds in the sight of Madera,
and passing close thereby, the Galley of Good Jesus lost us, and took her
Course as far as Mosambique, where she was taken by the Hollanders.

Amongst us was the greatest Disorder and Confusion imaginable, because of the
Peoples Vomiting up and Misery upon the Sea.
down, and making Dung upon one another: There was nothing to be heard but
Lamentations and Groans of those who were straightned with Thirst, Hunger, and
Sicknesses, and other Incommodities, and Cursing the time of their Embarkment,
their Fathers and Mothers, and themselves, who were the cause thereof; so that
one would have thought ^hey had been out of their Wits, and like Madm^n,
amongst the excessive heats under the Line, and the Abrolles and Calms: This
continued a long time, and the hot Rains upon the Coast of (...) was also very
troublesome to us, which afterward turned to Worms, ^f that which was wet was
not presently dried: It was a wonderful trouble to me, to see my Quilt wet, and
Worms crawling all over. These Rains are so stinking, that they rot and spoil,
not only the Pody, but also all Cloths, Chests, Utensils, and other Things: And
not having any more Cloths to shift my self withal, I was forced to dry upon
me that which I wo^e, with my Quilt, by lying thereupon; but I was well fitted
for that; for the Fever, with a great pain in (...) the (...).
the Reins, took the in such a manner, that I had a fit of Sickness, almost,
the whole Voyage; yet this was not all, for I had besides that, the Lovende,
S^u^^^.
which the Portugals call Berber, and the Hollanders Scurbus, which rotted
almost all my Gumbs, and rendered a sort of a black and pu^rified Blood; My
Knees were so contracted that I could not bend my Limbs; my Legs and Thighs
were as black as Members Gan-green'd, and was constrained to be continually
Launcing to get out this black and putrified Blood. I Launced also my Gums,
which were black and blue, and surmounting my Miso^y of the Autho^
Teeth, going every day out upon the side of the Ship, holding by the Cordage,
with a little Looking*Glass in my hand to see where to cut: When I had cut away
this dead Flesh, and drawn away abundance of black Blood, I washed my Mouth and
Teeth with Urine, but the next morning there was as much; And my ill fortune
was, that I could not Eat, having more mind to swallow than to chew, upon the
account of the great pains which this Disease causes. I found no better remedy
than the Syrop of Gilli-flowers, and good red Wine: Great numbers Died every
day thereof, and there was nothing to be seen but Bodies a flinging overboard,
and the most part Died without help, some behind Chests, having their Eyes, and
the Soles of their Feet eaten up with Rats. Others were found Dead in their
Beds, after having been let Blood, and moving their Arms, the Veins opened, and
their Blood ran out: Oftentimes after having received their Allowance, which
might be about a Pint of Water, and putting it near them to Drink, when a-dry,
their Companions robbed these poor Sick Wretches of this little Water, they
being asleep, or turned to the other side. Sometimes being under Deck in a dark
place, not seeing Strange ^hirst.
one another, they would fight amongst themselves, and strike one another, if
they caught any about to Steal their Water; and thus, oftentimes were they
deprived of Water, and for want of a little Draught they miserably died,
without any one offering to help them to never so little, no not the Father the
Son, nor the Brother the Brother, so much did every Man's particular Thirst
compel him to Rob his Companions. I found my self oftentimes thus deceived of
my allowance, but yet I comforted my self as well as I could, seeing so many
others in the same case: And this was the cause that I durst not Sleep too
much, and commonly put my Water where it could not be easily taken without
wakening of me*

After we had suffered thus much, and passed the Line, the Count de la Fera,
Viceroy, was took sick of a hot Count de la Fera falls Sick and Dies.
Fever, and continued so but 6 days before he died: He had a little before
Commanded the Estrinquere, (which is he whose Office is to hoise the great Sail
by a Wheel) to be made Prisoner* because he had Amancebado, that is to say, he
kept a Concubine, which he had brought from Portugal, and she being with Child
when she Embarked, was brought to Bed in our Ship: The Woman was sent back to
Portugal in the Hulk, in which was the Body of the Count de la Fera.

This Gentleman being dead, I Embalmed his Body, because of the hotness of the
Climate; then having Embarked it with about 50 sick Persons, who were to return
again to Portugal, tho not without great Entreaties to have the License of
Captain More, Major. We called this Captain of Captain Major-Mor.
the Vice Admiral named Don Christoval de Norogne, to Command in the Admiral,
where the said Captain Mor being, did us a thousand sorts of Injuries and
Cruelties, as well by Prisons, as by cheating us of our ordinary allowance of
Victuals; for he reserved several Pipes of Wine, and a great deal of Flesh and
Oil to sell at Mozambique. Don Alfonce de Norogne, Captain of our Ship, under
the Viceroy, when he was alive, was mightily displeased at this bad usage of
Don Cristoval; but he died within few days, and his Body was cast into the Sea.

Having passed about 9 or 10 Degrees on the other side the Line, the Wind not
being favorable to us, the Pilots held Council what they should do, whether to
Tack about and return to Portugal, or to pass on, fearing they could not pass
the Cape of Good Hope, in regard it was too late in the year; because, that the
M^eson's, or Muessons.
Winds of the Season were almost passed already: After having well disputed
upon this subject, they tacked about to return to Portugal, and having sailed
some time, the Captain Mor, who had a mind to make himself by this Voyage,
seeing himself at that time Chief Commander of the Fleet, threatened the Master
and Pilot with ill Language, and commanded them to Tack again for the Indies:
This was in the night, and thereupon Fires were made for a signal for the other
Vessels to return; but we were not long together in Consort; for the rest
knowing the Viceroy to be Dead, separated from us; and each held theirs a part,
we continuing alone until we came to the Isles of Angoche, near the River of
Cumana, Cumana.
where we found the St. Anthony and St. Bartholomew Galleys: We held then our
Course, though our Men dying every day of the Lovende; At last we approached the
Cape of Good Hope, seeing Cape de Bonne Esperance. Alcatraz. Mangues de Velours*
the signal of Alcatraz and Mangues de Velours; Alcatraz are Birds like
Sparrows; Mangues de Velours are Birds like Cranes, having the bottom of their
Bellies, and Backs white; and the end of the Wings, Tail, and Neck, black; and
these Birds continually keep above 80 Leagues round about the Cape. These
Signals did a little cheer us up, and encouraged us to come nearer to this so
dangerous and tempestuous Furious Tempest.
place: For coming there, we had the most furious and greatest Storm that I
ever saw; Our Carrack was about 2000 Tun, one of the Gallantest Ships in all
Portugal, having been built above 30 years, and yet seemed to be but like a
simple Boat, amongst these high and dreadful Waves. We needed little Foremast
to the Wind, and 30 or 40 Mariners at the Stern. In this Stormy Weather we
could not keep our Ship with Wind, and were about a 100 Persons, 50 on each
side, to Devise how to get again before the Wind, which we had lost. Our Deck
was covered all over with Water, and it was impossible to get any farther than
the Planks of the Ship, either behind or before. Amongst these Miseries and
Calamities we expected nothing but Shipwreck, committing our selves to the
Divine Mercy; and made a General Procession Praying Devoutly to God, that he
would preserve us from this imminent Danger; besides, we could no longer
resist, because of the weakness and sickness of our Men: But God of his
Goodness heard our Prayers, appeasing by little and little this great Tempest,
which we had so long endured; so that having passed this dangerous place, we
descried the Cape of Aigu^lles, which made us judge Cape de Aiguilles.
that we had passed that of Good-Hope* and from thence we arrived at the Land
of Natall, where it was very Natall.
tempestuous, and almost as dark as night: We found there boisterous Winds, and
we were forced to labor day and night to avoid the Baixos ds los Judios, or da
Judia, that is* the Baixos de los Judias.
Shelves of the Jews in the Channel of the Coast of Sofala, where there is a
great many Ships lost, and where amongst others, happened that no less
lamentable than memorable Ship wrack of the Ship called the St. James, in the
year 1585. who going to Goa in the East Indies, split upon these Rocks, and of
250 Persons, not above 90 escaped, by different manners, with as much or more
misfortune and miseries on Land as they had enjoyed on the Sea: There was some
Fathers, Jesuits, and Dominicans cast away there, and others saved themselves.
The strange and lamentable circumstances of the Accidents, have rendered this
Shipwreck the most remarkable that ever happened in these Seas; which is the
reason that these Rocks are so much feared, which are like great heaps of sharp
Stones and spikes of White Coral, and commonly covered with Water, so that they
are not perceived until you are upon them, and the Ship splitting; but we by
the help of God escaped them, so that having taken the height, and seeing our
selves escaped, we made the best of our way toward this Harbor, where we
found the two Galleys as I have said before, and knowing them again, we bore
toward them, and cast Anchor 4 Leagues from the Isles, sending the Boat to
Land to hear news from Mosambique, which is about 25 Leagues from thence. There
came on board us a Pangais, who told us how Mosambique had been Besieged by the
Hollanders, and that it was not above 15 days since they had raised the Siege,
and had taken the Galley of Good Jesus, which they burnt; and Hollanders at
Mosambique.
having known by this Gallion that we were coming, they presently retired; for
those of the Gallion knew nothing of the Death of the Count de la Fera, nor of
the dispersing of the Fleet, they being separated from us hard by the Isle of
Madera: We weighed Anchor from thence, not finding above 5 or 6 Fathoms Water.
As the Wind began to clear it behoved us to cast our Anchors, and the next day
to raise them again; this was the 15th of Sept. but the Currents of Water which
run toward the Islands of Angoche, were like to have swallowed us up: We
endured a world of Hardships in casting and weighing Anchor, which left me some
Blisters upon my Hands; and as weak as I was, I labored with all my might to
be rid of these dangerous passages: In the end, we cast and weighed our Anchors
so, that we arrived at Mosambique the 29th of Sep. and Anchored near the Isles
of St. George, Arrival at Mosambique.
which is 3 or 4 Leagues distant.

The next morning we Anchored near ths Fortress. As soon as we arrived at
Mosambique, we understood how our Vice Admiral had passed the Cape of Good-Hope
immediately after us, when the Storm was a little allayed; and how they had
seen a Sea Monster passing Sea Monster
along by the Ship, which was of a strange form and wonderful greatness: He
blowed and snored with a great noise, and kept his Body in a round like a
Pillar, carrying a thing like a Shield before his Head, and a Saddle upon his
Back: As he passed close by the Ship, he made so terrible a noise, that they
thought themselves all lost; but he left them, and they saw him no more.

Being then arrived at Mosambique, we were mightily astonished to find there
nothing to Eat, being then so fallen away by the fatigue of the Sea: We went on
shore, having Anchored the St. Bartholomew, St. Anthony, St. Jerome, and our
own, which was the Admiral: They were there full five Months, waiting for the
Muesson of Winds to convey us to Goa. We endured there not a little; for as I
have said, we could find nothing to live upon, there not being any Bread. The
Sick were put in Cabins of Palm, some in the Fortress, and others in the City;
but they Died by 10 and 15 aday, and there remained 735 Buried, Number of the
Dead.
as the haplain of our Ship told me, who kept a List of them.

I went also on Shore, scarce able to go, and walked about the Streets looking
for something to Eat; but I could find nothing save some little Fishes fried,
which these Ethiopian Women sell about the Streets, with some Cakes of Meal
Baked upon the Coals, which Mocates.
they call Mocates.

I bought some of this Fish fried in the Oil of Gerselin, (a little Seed like
Carraways, which they make Oil Rape-Seed.
of) which has a very ill Taste; Then retiring alone to make a Feast, and
comforting my self the best I could, relying wholly upon God: I demanded a
little Water of these Women, who gave me some, but it was so Salt that I could
scarce drink any of it; for they had drawn it out of a nasty Well, which was
hard by the place where I was; But they fetch the good Water out of the
Continent, at a place called Cabassie: There is indeed a little Spring, but it
was little better than nothing.

After that I went again on Board the Ship; Then the next day I returned again
to Land, to look for some to lodge in, because the Hollanders had burnt all the
Houses; and by chance I found a Soldier, who took me into his Lodging within
the Fortress, where I carried all my Materials; But after having been there
some days, as well to Purge my self, as to be cured of my Disease, comes some
of the Servants of Captain Mor to look for me, and commanded me to follow them
to speak with their Master: I followed them in abundance of pain, and they
hastening me forward, which I did after the best manner I could through these
Sands toward the Seaside* in the end, they laid me upon the Back of an
Ethiopian, to carry me into his Almadie, which is a sort of a Almadie.
little Boat of the Country, made of a hollow Tree: They cast me within it as
if I had been a Log of VVood; and one of the Sergeants Embarked with me: The
Tide being come, he made the Blacks row, to bring me on board the Vice Admiral
St. Jerome: I was a long time in this Almadie, du ring the excessive heat of
the Sun a-Noon-Day, and I expected to Die with Heat and Thirst, and bought a
Lagne, or Nut of Palm of these Ethiopians, to drink of the Water of it, giving
half to him who kept me Prisoner.

When I came on Board, he put me into the Hands of the Merigne, or Sergeant of
the Ship, who demanded of him how he would have me fastened; to which he
answered, by the Neck, the Merigne opened the Collars of Iron, Imprisonment of
the Author, and his Misery.
and caused me to lie down all along, and shut my Neck betwixt two pieces of
Wood: But seeing me Sick, he had some Compassion upon me and gave me a Pillow
to put under my Head: I was in this miserable Condition from the 7th to the
28th of October, at which time I was set at liberty.

I being then thus taken and shut up, about 4 in the evening comes the Ovydor
or Judge of the Army, with the Register, and demanding of me my Name, and from
whence I came, and who gave me License to pass into the Indies; They knew it
very well, but made as though they were ignorant thereof: For they hnew that I
had Embarked in the Service of the Count de la Fera; and besides, at such
Nature of the Portugals.
time when they themselves had been Sick, I had served and assisted them, for
which they said then they were mightily obliged to me: But these Portugals
being for the most part of the Race of the Jews, are by Nature Cruel and
Ungrateful; When they had enquired concerning my Person, and writ it down, they
demanded of me where my Chest and Utensils were, and to give them the Key:
Their design was to Rob me of that little Money, and other concerns which I had.

They had taken a little before one John Baptisto* a Geneue^e who had been
Secretary to the late Viceroy, and had made much enquiry after him, ^e^ing him
that he had some Papers and Memorials against the State of the Indies: The
Captain Mor had deceived him; For he had caused him to come on Shore from the
Pangais, where he was Embarked with Don Louis Alves, Brother to the Count de la
Fera, desiring him to go with him to the Conquest of Cumana. This Don Louis
carried Voyage to Cumana.
200 men to the assistance of Monomoptata, one of the Kings of the Lower
Ethiopia, against another King his Neighbor, who made War upon him; and the
said Monomoptata had promised the Portugals to give them all they could
Conquer. Now when this John Baptisto was come on Shore, upon the Faith of the
Captain, who John Baptisto taken.
promised him that he should not have any harm done, he was immediately sent as
a Prisoner to the Vice Admiral, and presently after I was taken as I have
before given account, and found the said John Baptisto Prisoner, under Deck,
not having then any Irons upon his Feet: He was mightily astonished to see me
fastened so as I was, and endeavored to render me what Consolation he could,
that I might take it patiently: But this was not all my Misery to be thus
fastened by the Neck; for Hunger, Thirst, and the Disease of my Gums tormented
me much more; for they would not so much as give me a little Water to Drink;
And by ill fortune I had taken no Money along with me, not knowing where they
would lead me; and had not in all above two Rials, one of which I was Robbed
of, and with the other I prayed the Merigne to buy me some little Fishes, if
any passed by our Ship, when the Blacks come from Fishing abroad, who commonly
pass by, asking in their Language if any one had occasion for Somba, that is to
say, Fish, and Macacoua, or Fish dried in the Sun. I had still my Instrument*
Case, and a Gold Ring upon my Finger, which I pawned for Victuals.

The evening being come, after the Inquest was made concerning the said John
Baptisto and me, the Captain Mor, sent Soldiers to guard us, and ordered Irons
to be fastened also upon John Baptisto's Feet, then caused him to be put at the
bottom of the Ship, and to shut the Hatches upon him, and the Keys to be
brought to him; and continued thus five days, without having any thing given
him to Eat: As for me, the Merigne in the evening took the Collars from about
my Neck, and put Irons upon my Feet, and caused me to lie upon a Chest in his
Cabin* As for Don Louis d'Alves, Brother to Don Louis d'Alves.
the Count de la Fera, when he saw how Captain Mor had served his Secretary
such an ill Trick, by thus falsifying his Faith* he was mightily troubled
thereat; besides he had before fallen out with this Captain, and would have
fought him, upon a difference about the Sea-Provision of the Count de la Fera,
which was worth very near 10000 Ducats, in Victuals, as well Flesh, Biscuit,
Wines, Oil, as other Refreshments for the Sea; and this Captain, who was before
Vice Admiral, and, since the Death of the Count, Admiral himself, had made use
of some of them, and carried the rest to Mosambique, and there sold them. Don
Louis seeing that he could obtain no Restitution of this wicked Man, he
Embarked to go on his Voyage to Cumana, to the Conquest of the Gold, which this
King, Enemy to Monomopata had; and Captain Mor thinking, that Don Louis upon
his setting Sail would board the Ship where we were Prisoners, sent a great
number of Soldiers and Cannoniers, with charge to fire at, and sink the Pangais
of Don Louis, if he made the least show to Board them. In the morning Don Louis
having caused his Pangais to set sail, he put himself in a posture to Board our
Ship; whereupon the Cannoniers turned their Pieces, and the Soldiers with their
Muskets cockt, to receive them; Some Diffrrence betwixt the Portugals.
said, let us Fire before they come on board us; others said that they would
not Fire because those in the Pangais were their Countrymen, and their own
Friends: In the end, Don Louis, (whether it was that he feared to be sunk, or
that he trusted not too much to the Faith of the Portugals his Compatriots)
went directly on in his Course. Whereupon the Captain sent for the Master
Cannonier, causing him to be Imprisoned, and Irons clapped upon his Feet, bidding
him prepare himself to be Hanged: But this Master Cannonier being a stout bold
Fellow, and not at all astonished at these Threatenings, boldly told him that he
confessed himself he had more offended in Commanding, than he had done in
Disobeying to Fire upon Don Louis.

This being thus over, the next day in the evening, the Captain sent one of his
Men to take off my Irons, who left me Prisoner below Deck, with 6 Soldiers to
guard me, who followed me every where for fear that I should leap into the Sea
to save my self.

When I saw my self a little more at liberty, I assisted the Secretary John
Baptisto, with a little Biscuit cut into little Bits, being black, rotten, and
moldy, and much ado to get that: I raised up, as well as I could, the cover of
the place where I was enclosed, and thus gave him some little Bits, which was
no small help to him.

But as God never forsakes his Servants in their Afflictions, the said John
Baptisto told me in Latin, that he had found means to open the Pad-Locks of his
Irons, and to take them of; and had also met with a Pipe of Wine, but could not
get any of it without a hollow piece of Tinn, which he would use, putting a
Stick through it with some Tow or Flax at the end, like a Sponge, and thus to
draw out the Wine: I discovered this Business to the Merigne, who kept us
Prisoners, and who was very well satisfied to have his part thereof, and not to
say a word, getting me a Burrage of Leather, which I gave to the said Baptisto
at night, when the Soldiers were busy at their sports above us, and before the
Lamp was lighted: This Wine was no small help to us, and I believe that without
it we could searcely have subsisted any longer; for I sopped in private a
little Biscuit in this Wine, which heartned me mightily.

About 5 days after, when Don Louis d' Alves was gone, John Baptisto was taken
out from under the Hatches, and was left under the Deck with me, but not
without Irons fastened on his Feet, when, as for me, I had no longer either
Collars or Irons: Now one day as I was walking backwards and forwards upon the
Deck, I by good fortune found under a Cannon, a Stone Bottle full of Syrop of
Gilli-flowers; this I communicated to the Meregne, who took and kept it up for
us both: I made use of this Syrop very often, as well to drink as to sop a
little Biscuit therein, and in a little time I perceived my Gumbs to grow
better, and my Legs began to stretch, which was no small comfort to me; in
short, I was quite cured of my Disease, also making use of some Remedies which
I took out of a Chest full of Medecines which I found one day below Deck quite
open.

Having continued about 22 days in this fashion; the Captain came one night
very late on Board, and then I took occasion to Discourse him, to know what he
had a mind to do with me, and why he let me thus languish; He made me answer,
that I should come on Shore with him, to speak with Captain Mor. The 28th of
the same month we went to see Captain Mor, who demanded of me, wherefore I
came, and having answered, that the Captain had brought me to speak with him,
he bid me wait till the next day, and commanded the Captain to take me to his
Lodging.

The next day being come, he carried me to Captain Mor: Then Captain Mor
enquired of me if I had liberty to pass into the Indies, and where my License
was; I told him I had left it with the Proveditor of the House of India; Then
he asked me if I knew any one at Mosambique, I told him no* Then he said do not
go out of this Island without my License first had* and gave me a Line or two
to the Register, and I had my Chest again, but my Money was gone.

After all these Troubles, walking one day about the Island, I went to visit a
Portugal Gentleman of my acquaintance, who lodged in a Horte, or Garden of
Francisco Mendy, Judge of the Orphans: These two offered me a place to make a
Cabin of Palm* the which I gladly accepted; and went to Lodge there; though the
Lizards and Ants came quite under my Beds*head* This Francisco Mendy kept
Slaves, and sent me every day a great many Presents* He had a great mind that I
should stay and live there, promising to give me one of his Nieces to Wife,
Daughter to the Captain of Cumana, from whence the Gold comes; But I had no to
mind tarry there, but rather pursue my Voyage to the East Indies.

After having suffered considerably in this place, being ready to Embark, I Pau
d' Anac Wood good for the Disease of Antac.
went to the Firm-Land of Cabassiere, to look* for a Barrel of Water, and a
Root called by the Portuguese Pau d' Anac, that creeps along the Ground, and
resembles much the Birth-Wort very long, bearing little long Pears, green and
tender: The Root of it has a wonderful Virtue in curing a Disease called
Antac, gotten by having to do with the Ethiopian Women, and there is no other
Remedy whereby to be exempted from Death but this: The Root is taken, ground,
with clear Water, of the weight of a Crown, which makes the Patient sweat so,
that in a short time it Cures him. It Is a little bitter, and yet the Taste and
Smell is agreeable enough. I bargained with some of these Blacks to fill me a
Sack therewith, who led me into the Woods to look for it.

Going along with them I found a thousand sorts of Plants and Fruits to me
unknown: At last we entered into a little Field, where we found some Blacks
keeping of Corm for fear of the Elephants, who have Ropes which reach the
length of the Corn, with Stones hanging thereon; As soon as Manner to Hunt the
Elephants.
the Elephants approach, they shake these Stones against one another, which
makes such a noise, that it frights the Elephants away: In the night they make
Fires, which these Animals fear mightily. They make a little Lodge at the top
of a Butt, and there watch by turns.

Having seen this, we retired to the Habitation where they had prepared my
Dinner: There I made the Seamen Drink so much that they had like to have
overturned our Boat. This Liquor was called Sura, a sort of Wine made of Palms;
and I was mightily troubled to see these Ethiopians so puzzeled that they could
scarce put up the Sails; and in the mean time the Boat was full of Water: One
of the Wives of these Blacks tumbled into the Sea, but I recovered her,
otherwise she had been Drowned. These Men understood not one another they were
so Drunk; but as good fortune would have it, the Mocadon, or Guider of the
Almadie, was not so Drunk as the rest. 'Twas looked upon as a Miracle how we
passed from Great Cabassiere to the little one, where there was a thousand
Nets, Trees, and Branches, fixed all along the Coast to catch Fish withal.

Having then more happily than prudently passed as far as the Little
Cabassiere, we went on Shore to provide fresh Water; but there was none but in
a great Well where there was but little neither: The Mariners were there making
Provision of Water, so that I could not have any till night.

The night being come, and not knowing where to Lodge, these Ethiopians led me
to a place above a League and a half from thence, but the People would not
receive us, so that we were forced to return to the Port by reason of bad
Weather: At last, being arrived at the Port, I laid me down in the Almadie,
covering my self with my Cloak, where I endured the Rain all the night.

The next morning we hoised Sail, and sailed directly upon the Banks, from
whence we had much ado to escape: In the end, being come off there from, with a
great deal of trouble, and the Wind carrying us by force toward the Main-Sea,
which did us that favor as to bring us near to the Chapel of the Bullwork,
where being come, I made a Vow, never to trust my self with such Mariners
again, who made me run the greatest hazard I ever had in the whole Voyage: I
ordered my Water to be brought into my Cabin, and prepared my self for the
Embarkment to Goa.

Whilst I was in this place, there White Prince of the Blacks.
came the Son of an Ethiopian King, from a great distance in the Continent, to
see some of his Kindred: His Father and Mother were black, and he was white and
fair* He brought with him one of his Brothers, who was black, and some Slaves:
They came both into my Cabin, telling me, that having heard say there was white
Men at Mosambique, they came purposely to see them.

The Portugals made him a very good Reception, to the end they might have
Free-Traffick in his Fathers Country: 'Twas said his Mother had two other White
Children; but that his Father killed them, saying, they must needs be by some
other Man; and that as he came into the World with this color, his Father had
determined to kill him also; but one of his Friends persuaded him to the
contrary by telling him that it was by Divine Permission, and so was saved. His
Mother had possibly had these Men in her Imagination which were said to be at
Mosambique, or else had happened to her by some other Course of Imagination. He
was not in the least Tanned or Burnt with the Sun, and was about 20 years of
Age, and his Brother about 18. They visited me 2 or 3 times in my Cabin, and I
gave them to Eat and Drink of what I could have in the Country, at which they
seemed to be very well Content.

I remember that being at Lisbon, I heard a Story of such a like thing History
of a black Genoway.
which happened at Genoua not long before, of which they made a Song in form of
a Romance, which I heard Sung in Portugal. There was a rich Genoua, who was
Married to a very honest and virtuous Woman, of one of the best Houses in
Genoua, who having conceived some displeasure upon the account of one of her
Black Slaves which had been gotten with Child by another Negro Slave, she
imprinted that so deeply in her Imagination, that being with Child her self,
she was brought to Bed of a black Child* but the angry Father believing that
she had dishonored her self with some Negro, was resolved to kill her; but she
fled away to her Friends. Whereupon he gave charge to one of his Servants to go
and leave the Child somewhere, or to kill it: But the Servant moved with
Compassion, (besides the Mother had recommended it to him) saved the Child, and
caused it to be brought up, making the Husband believe he had made it away: A
little while after, this Genoua, fore vexed with Spite and Anger, forsook
Genoua, and retired into Barbary, resolving to turn Turk, and live in Algier.
In the mean time the poor Disconsolate Mother took care to bring up this Child
to years of Discretion, and gave him Order to go seek his Father through the
World; for none knew what was become of him. This young Black being upon the
Sea, was taken by Corsairs, and carried to Argier to be sold, where he was
bought by his own Father; but being troubled to see himself become a miserable
Slave, his Father asked him whence he was, who learned of him the whole History
of his Birth, at which being astonished, he acknowledged him for his Son, and
resolved to quit the Country, and return with him to Genoua, and to be
reconciled to his Wife: Wherefore having secretly provided for his departure,
resolved to embark all his choicest things, and what he esteemed the most, they
departed one night out of Algier in a Boat; but as ill fortune would have it,
they were taken by Corsairs, by whom they were both cruelly Massacred: Such end
had the Adventure of this poor Black.

But to return again to our Embarkment at Mosambique; The Weather of Muesson
being come, (which is a Wind Muessons.
that comes at a certain Season of the year, for there are but two sorts of
Winds which reign in these Parts of India, East, and West; Don Estevan Don
Estevan de Tayde.
de Tayde, Governor of Mosambique, caused his Pangais to be made ready, burden
30 Tuns, more or less, and to be laden with Bretangis and Conterie: Bretangis
are a certain kind of Callico, dyed blue, and of a dark Violet; Conterie, are
Beads of Glass or Amber, as well good as counterfeit, which is the Merchandise
usual amongst these Ethiopians, who in exchange give Gold, Ambergreece,
Eliphants Teeth, and other Things which these Countries of Couama produce, and
the Cape of Courante, where these Pangais go.

Now, Don Cristoval de Porogne, alias Captain Mor, seeing these Pangais ready
to depart, went with his Soldiers in Boats to take them, and bring them to
Anchor along by the Gallions of the Fleet, which was near by: The which Don
Estevan perceiving from the Fortress, was mightily offended at; but not having
Soldiers sufficient to go Succor, and Recover his Pangais, he commanded his
Canoniers to Fire upon the Pangais, to sink them, not careing for the Loss of
his Merchandise; so he might but sink Captain More also, at least to do him
some mischief: The Canoneer took his Aim, and was going to fire one of the
great Canons: But as good fortune would have it, both for one and the other,
nothing but the Priming took Fire* and hereupon the principal of the City of
Masambique, ran in all have upon the Ramparts to appease Don Estevan, who was
resolved to sink them all, and promised him to procure the Pangais out of the
Hands of Captain Mor.

The Reason that moved this Captain to do thus, was nothing but Malice and
Revenge, to make the Pangais lose the opportunity of the Voyage, to the no
small damage of Don Estevan, to whom it had been above an hundred thousand
Crowns Loss for that year, for as much as he could not have sent the Pangais at
any other time to bring back the Profits which he uplifts every year from those
Countries of Covama.

Besides, he had endured a long siege of the Hollanders in this place: At last
the accord was made betwixt him and Captain More, and he sent his Pangais to
their accustomed Traffic; but yet they still retained betwixt themselves a
secret hatred, and ill will; Since which time Ruy de Mello came to relieve Don
Estevan of his Government; his three years being Expired.

This Country of Covama is the Finest of all Africa, from whence the best Gold
is brought, and in the greatest quantity; insomuch, that the Captain of
Mosambique during the three years that he Commands there, may carry away from
Mosambique, Sofala, and Covama, above three hundred thousand Crowns, without
reckoning that which he Pays to the Soldiers, and some Tibute which he renders
to the Gold of Africa.
King: While I was there I saw the Soldiers Pay, which was Gold in Powder, as
it is found, giving every one so many Carats: This Gold is so yellow and pure,
that our Pistol-Gold, and Crowns, seems to be but Copper thereto.

There dares none Traffic toward all this Coast of Mosambique without (...).
License of the Captain, who sends several Vessels to the Cape of Courrants,
and to Covama, who return laden with the finest Ivory, for there the Eliphants
are in abundance, and very great* They bring back also Amber-greace, and Gold,
in liew of some small Ware which they give in Exchange to the Blacks or Cafres,
who gather the Gold in the Field at the Foot of* certain Mountains, at such
time as the Floods of Water come, which running from on high, forces down store
of Gold in Powder; and then each Ethiopian has his little Brook, with a little
Net, made in the Fashion of a ^ock for to catch Rabets withal, but wove more
slender, with which they stop all this Gold-Sand running from the Mountains;
They sometimes find great pieces of it, and very fine, as I have seen some of
them at the Senior Francisco Meindi, Judge of the Orphans at Mosambique, and one
of the Richest belonging to the Captain: This Piece weighed about half a Pound,
and was Refined: But he kept that as a rarity, for such Pieces are not often to
be found.

Now the time of our Embarkment drawing nearer, and nearer, which was ^oss of
the Ships.
in the Month of March; I was not a little Joyful to quit this Desert Country,
where I was ready to Dye for Hunger the most part of the time. As for the other
Ships of our Fleet, I must not forget to tell that they were all cast away in
their Voyage to the Indies.

And First, the Carraque, called, Nostra-Seniora d' Aiuda was lost upon the
Coast of Ethiopia, where the most part of the Men Died of Violent Diseases
which are incident to that Country, Strange Disease.
and amongst others, a certain disease, which breaks out at the Fundament like
an Ulcer, and is presently full of Worms, which Gnaw as far as the Belly, and
so they die in great misery and torment: There has been no better remedy found
for this Disease, than the Juice of Lymon, in washing therewith the Fundament;
for that obstructs the Worms breeding there: I believe this Disease comes only
by Drinking the bad Water which is there in great abundance*

As for the Galion of the Holy Ghost, Galion of the Holy Ghost.
they seeing the Water coming in upon them, with such great Violence, were
forced to Sail back to Bresil, where being come, they sent into Portugal to
know what they had best to do, whether to return to Portugal, or to pursue
their Voyage; they were commanded to proceed: Having Chaulked their Galion,
they set sail for the Indies, and being at the height of Cape de Bonne Cape of
Good-Hope.
Esperance, they met with contrary Winds, and Tacking about from one side to
the other, continually beating about the Sea, they could no longer hold out,
and the Vessel struck a Leak in the Fore-Castle, which the Master seeing, he,
together with the Captain and Pilot, cast out the Boat in haste, with a Barrel
of Water and some Biscuit therein, slipping down themselves by a Rope; The
Captain not being Pitious Accident of a Ship.
able to hold so well as the rest, fell into the Sea, and they within were
ready to cut of his Hands when he caught hold of the Boat; but one among the
rest, crying out, 'twas the Captain, saved him: Several were kept off with
Swords, and had their Hands cut as they laid hold on the Boat; There was but 16
Persons out of 300 saved. The Boat endeavored to gain the Cape of Coarrants,
and sailed above 400 Leagues before they arrived at the place designed* but in
the end they came to Mosambique, and from thence to Goa, where I was told this
accident.

The Galion of Good Jesus was taken by the Hollanders near Mosambique, and
burnt, setting the Men at liberty.

The Carrack called the Palm was Mogincal* Woman-Fish.
lost at Mogincal, where the Blacks Fish for Pisce Mulier, which is to say
Women Fish: This Fish resembles a Woman, having the Privy Parts after the same
manner, and carries her young under her Fins, which are on each side, serving
for Arms, and goes often on Land, and is there disburthened of her young: The
Blacks who Fish, are to swear not to have to do with these She-Fishes: Their
Teeth are of great Virtue, (as I have experienced) against Hemorhoids, Bloody
Flux, and hot Fevers, in rubbing them against a Marble, and agitating it with
Water, and so to be Drunk. These Blacks are extreme fond of these Fishes, and
refresh themselves by having Communication with them. These Pisces Mulieres
have a hideous Face, like the Snout of a Hog, and all the Body like a Fish.

These People also Eat human Flesh, for which they are called Macone: It Is
Macone.
said they drank the Blood of the Hollanders Barbarity of the Blacks.
when the Portugals made a Salley out of Mosambique; And a Soldier of that
place told me, that he saw a Black cut the Throat of a Hollander that remained
upon the place, and swallowed down the Blood hot. They are very hardy and
courageous in War, fearing neither Sword or Dart; yet there are some Cowards.
The subjects of Monomotapa, when they kill any Strange Customs of the Blacks.
of their Enemies, cut off their Privy-Members, and having dried them; give
them their Wives to wear about their Neck, of which they are not a little
Proud: For they who have the most are the most esteemed, in regard that
Evidences the Husband to be the more hardy and valiant; They carry them before
the King to declare where and when they purchased the same.

As for the Carrack called Oleveira, Oleveira Carrack.
she was lost near the Isles Quemades, not far from Goa, being so close pursued
by the Hollanders, that they were constrained to put out the Boat and save
themselves by going a shore, setting Fire to their Ship.

The Carrack named the Salvation, was carried toward the Coast of Arabia to
the Confines of the *Abassins, and was there also Shipwrackt. I believe this
happened through the Villainy of the Master and Pilot, who having a mind to
Enrich themselves with the Money of private Persons, and the Cavedal, which is
that of the King's for the lading of Peper, run purposely a ground upon the
Coast: Then was it time for every one to save himself, taking with him his
Money and Arms; not thinking to lade themselves with Victuals. The Master and
Pilot agreed before to put the Money into the Boat, with some Victuals and
Arms, and some of their Confidents, went to cross the Coast, passing the
Red Sea as far as the Persian Gulf, to recover Ormus: When this was known at
Goa, they dispatched Galleys after them, and were taken toward Ormus, and
brought Prisoners to Goa, whilst I was there.

The rest (who were about 400 white Strange Adventure of the Portugals in
Ethiopia.
Men and 300 Negro Slaves* set themselves in order to march along the Coast,
and recover a certain Port of the Red Sea, to Embark for the Indies: But as
they marched with Colors displayed, and crying * Sautiago, thinking to make
the Ethiopians afraid of them, but it fell out to the contrary: Insomuch that
being fatigued with Hunger, Thirst and weariness, and troubled with the Enemy
behind, every one was forced to shift for himself, and the hindermost were
killed by the Ethiopians: The rest who saved themselves fell into the hands of
a most barbarous King, who seeing so many Blacks of their own Nation Captives
amongst these Portugals, Hypocritically told them, that if they would tender
their Arms, they should receive no hurt; They believing that, and seeing
themselves encompassed about on every side, delivered up their Arms, and
presently this Abassin King caused them to be taken, and led one after another
into a great place before his Palace, and afterward having stripped them
stark-naked, ordered them to sit down in a Ring, and caused an Herald to
Proclaim their Death, saying, that it was his Pleasure to have all their Heads
chopped off before his People.

But it happened by chance that in the same Ship that was thus lost, there was
a Persian Ambassador who had been sent into Europe from the great Sophy of
Persia, to demand succor of the Christian Princes against the Turk. This
Ambassador having been well received, and amongst others by the King of Spain,
with noble and rich Presents, he returned in this Ship by the way of the
Indies. I saw him at Lisbon march about the City in great State, and had his
Turbant covered with precious Stones. Now this Ambassador, who saved himself
among these poor Wretches, fell upon his Knees before the King, desiring, that
he would please to give these Christians their Lives, seeing he had taken from
them all they had, and suffer them to Embark in some Port of his Country;
telling him amongst other things, that if he knew but the Power of Spain, he
would not offer them the least Injury, and that their Prince was able in a
little time to Ruin him. The King was a little pacified at these Words, and
told the Ambassador that for his Sake he would give them their Lives, on
condition they* would presently depart his Dominions, or else he would put them
to Death.

The Portugals seeing this, were not a little glad to have their Lives saved,
got away Naked as they were, and Embarked in a Ship of an Arabian, Trafficking
upon the Coast of India, who gave them Victuals and Passage upon hopes to be
recompensed at Goa; and being arrived, the Master came to demand his Hire and
Charges, but Good Office ill requi^ed.
was Laughed at. He came to the Viceroy Andre Furtade de Mendoce, but could not
get any thing.

One of these Seamen that were saved being my Friend, told me, That the Master
Cannonier mightily lamented the loss of a Stone of a strange Virtue and
excellent Odor, for having it about Odoriferent Stone.
him, he seemed to have a Scent of Musk and Ambergreece: The Virtue was such,
that being Soaked in Water, it was an excellent Remedy against any Disease, and
had experienced it upon several of their Men, who as soon as they drank of the
Water wherein it was soaked, found themselves presently eased, and were cured
according to the quantity which they took. The aptain would have given him a
1000 Ducats for it, but he would not take under 3 or 4000. He came by it one
day as they made a Halt, taking his Harquebuss, and going about the Woods to
shoot something to Eat, he found an Animal of the bigness of a Deer, but a
little higher, who had two Horns below the Eyes, Animal carrying an excellent
Stone.
and had the fortune to shoot him in the Head: This Beast gave a leap to run
upon him, but he fell down dead. He and his Companions cut him up to Roast him
upon the Coals; and as he was going to Eat some of the Pluck, he found this
Stone in a little bag, which at first he made no account of; but having washed
it he found it of so curious and polished bright color, and of so sweet a
smell, that he kept it up carefully. The Coast of Ethiopia is full of excellent
and odoriferous Herbs, and perhaps this Animal might feed thereupon, and that
may be the cause of the Virtue of the Stone.

Thus was the greatest part of the Fleet lost: For of 14 Vessels there arrived
but 4 at the Indies, with a Hulk which served us for a Patach, yet not without
having the Masts broke in pieces. There was a Carracon of the Fleet which
sailed back for Portugal.

But before we depart from this Coast of Africa, I will relate the strange
Tragic Distory of Emanuel de Sosa. Sepulveda.
Fortune which formerly happened to one Emanuel de Sosa, called Sepulveda, a
Portugal Gentleman, and how he was lost upon this Coast of Ethiopia. This
Gentleman, who was rich, being in the Indies, fell in Love with the Daughter of
one Garsias Sola, Captain of Bombain, (a Fortress of the Portugals) esteemed
one of the most Beautiful Ladies of the East, and had many great Suitors to
Marry her; But he not being able to bring his Designs to pass, because of her
Father, who would by no means give his Consent, though the Daughter was very
willing he resolved to rid himself of the Father, and for this cause parted one
day from Goa, with some of his Sworn Companions, with whom he Embarked, and
coming late in the evening to Bombain, they watched their opportunity, so that
they found this Captain walking along by the Sea, and there killed him. This
was so secretly done that Sosa had no great trouble to attain to his Desires,
Marrying this fair Orphan named Leonor, whom he brought to Goa; where having
for some time lived in pleasure with her, and having two Children by her, he
had a desire to go with his Family to Portugal, to obtain from the King some
Preferment greater than that which he had in the Indies: And for this cause,
having bought a good Ship, and being Embarked at Cochim, with his Wife and
Children, a great many Slaves, and others of his Train, he sailed away; But
coming toward the Cape of Currants, and their Vessel running a-ground, they
were forced to save themselves in the Boat: They thought to have arrived at the
Little Cafala, where the Portugals have a Fort; for the great one is toward
Mosambique; but they found themselves in a Country betwixt the Cape of Currants
and that of Good-Hope, where they were troubled with the Blacks of the Country
along the Seaside. These Blacks not fearing the Harquebusses, killed a great
number of them, the rest, amongst whom were Sosa, his Wife and Children, saved
themselves by recovering the Country, and came at last into the Power of a King
of these Blacks, who treated them very kindly; But when they departed from
thence, as they Traveled toward Mosambique, they fell into the Hands of the
Enemies of this King, who did them all the Injuries imaginable, in killing the
most part, and striping the rest Stark-Naked: It was no small Grief to Sosa to
see himself, his Wife and Children in this miserable Estate, wandering about
the Deserts and Burning Sands of Ethiopia, without having wherewithal to Eat.
Then began the just Judgment of God to fall on Sosa for the Murder of his
Father-in-Law. He went up and down about the Woods seeking for Raisins to
nourish himself, his Wife, and Children: But the greatest motive of Compassion
was this poor innocent Lady, who seeing her self Naked, covered her self with
Sand, that she might not be seen in this Condition, and made the greatest
Lamentations imaginable, oftentimes telling her Husband, that their great Sins
were the cause of so many Evils: But having continued some days in this Misery,
after suffering the Death of her Children, overwhelmed with Grief, Hunger, and
all sorts of Incommodities, was found dying by the wretched Sosa, returning
from his Quest; yet he received her last Sighs, with Complaints and
Lamentations of his loss; and knowing himself to be the cause of all these
Misfortunes, went away like a Mad Man about the Woods, and was never after
heard of. All the rest of his Company died after the same manner, except one
Portugal, who with great difficulty escaped, and arrived at Mosambique, where
he related this sad Story, of which the Portugals have made a Romance. They who
have Writ of the East Indies have made ample mention of this Tragical Accident
of Sosa and his Wife, but they have omitted the Murder of his Father-in-Law,
which was the occasion of drawing the Judgment of God upon him.

But before we leave these Blacks it will not be improper to speak something of
their Language, because it is Language of the Blacks.
different from all the other People of Africa. That of Mosambique is called
Ethiopians, and can number no farther than Ten, and begin thus; Monti 1, Piri
2, Taton 3, Quinna 4, Chanon 5, Tandaton 6, Fongate 7, Nana 8, Quinda 9, Cohomy
10* They call the Head Mesora, the Ear Maro, the Nose Buonom: the Mouth
Muromoiu, the Face Cohope, the Arms Menio, the Feet Mirengi, the Hair Cici, the
Teeth Mannon, and so of other Things.

But to return to the 4 Ships which remained from the Shipwreck, viz. Our Lady
of Mount Carmel, St. Jerome, St. Anthony, and St: Bartholomew, with which we
parted from Mosambique, Departure from Mosambique from Goa.
and set sail for Goa the 20th of March 1609. And having then put out to the
Main Sea, the 23th of March we saw the Isle of Comba.

This Isle is very high, and is to be Combo* Isle.
seen above 25 Leagues distance: After that, we passed the Line toward the
Indies, the 5th of April, and the 12th, being at 4 Degrees on the other side
the Line, we found an Arabian Ship Arabian* Ship.
which came from Dia, and was going to Mecca; Our Vice Admiral made toward
her, saluting her with 2 or 3 shot of Cannon to make her strike sail; the which
they would not do, until they saw the Bullets fly, then they lowered their
Sails, and came to us. The Captain came with 6 or 7 Arabians of good Fashion,
carrying with him a Passport from the then Viceroy of the Indies: The Captain
seeing this Passport, durst not do them any harm, but having retained them 2 or
3 days, had great Presents from them, and sent to visit their Ship to see if
there was any prohibited Goods therein, as Cinnamon, Cloves, and other things.
There was about 700 Persons in the Ship, the most part Passengers, who were
going in Pilgrimage to the Sepulcher of their Prophet Mahomet. This Ship was
said to be worth above Two Millions, for there was nothing but Merchandise of
Silk, and other curious and precious Things.

After this Encounter we passed the Mouth of the Red Sea, near to the Isle of
Socreta, on the 7th of May, and there Socoreta Isle.
we had great Calms, which in regard of the want we were in for fresh Water,
and other Necessaries, much troubled us. When we arrived at the Bar of Goa, we
had but little Victuals left, and had we tarried but a little while longer we
had all Died of Hunger: By the way we found a Ship which came from Chaoul, and
was commanded by an Arabian: We commanded him with Cannon Shot to lower his
Sails; for he would not obey at first; and being come on Board us, Captain Mor
made him Prisoner at the Poop, where he was for some time; but having made some
Presents to the Captain, he was let go, because he Traffick'd with the
Portugals: We kept two of these Mariners to serve us for the knowledge of the
Coast, if by chance we should meet with contrary Winds. One of these Mariners
showed me a Bird no bigger than a Linnet, and told me, it never stirred from
the Sea, and never went on Land but when the Female Wonderful-Bird.
laid her Eggs, she mounts up out of sight, and so lays her Eggs one at a time
as she mounts up; after this Egg comes down tossing in the Air, which is very
hot in that Country, before it falls into the Sea, it is Hatched; after which,
the Sea nourishes it; which I found to be very wonderful and rare in Nature.

The 26th of May 1609. we arrived Arrival* at Goa in the Indies.
at Goa the Old, as they call it, and the 27th went on Land, being
Ascension-Eve, to Dine at Pangin, before we should come to Goa.

As soon as the Fleet arrived there, the Kings Packet was published, which
Andre Furtano Elected Viceroy.
was to be opened no where but at Goa, containing that in case the Viceroy
chanced to Die by the way, Senior Andre Furtado de Mandoze should be Elected;
and if he was not there at that time, they should send for the Governor of the
Isle of Seilan.

Andre Furtado having thus been received Reys-Magos* or the Church of the three
Kings.
for Viceroy, I went to Reys-Magos, (which is the Church of the Cordelieres,
where the Viceroys commonly reside whilst Preparations are made for his
Reception*) to speak with him, and desire him to help me in my necessity: He
made me answer that I should come to him when he was settled in his Government:
But all this signified nothing, for I could never speak with him until such
time as he sent for me to go with him to Portugal, being relieved of his Charge
by Ruy de Talbe, who came the next year to Goa: He sent for me then by his
Cup Bearer, to come and speak with him at the Pass of Madre de Dios, half a
League from Madre de Dio^ or the Mother of God.
Goa; the which I did, and told me, if I would go along with him to Portugal,
he would content me; to which I willingly agreed.

I went to live in his House till we Embarkt, which was in January following:
It was in November when he sent for me to this Pass, where there was a Captain
who kept the Passage so that none could go into the Main-Land without being
marked in the Hand, except those of the Country, and the Portugals, who must
have the License of the Coregidor. I desired then this Captain from Andre
Furtado, to give me an Almadie, with Mariners, and a Naique for Guide, which he
willingly did, and recommended me mightily to this Naique, telling him that I
went to look for Herbs for Andre Furtado, which was true, and accordingly
brought some which served him for Fomentation of the Opelation of the Spleen.
Passing then to the Main-Land, we went by these Places in the Habitations of
the Gentlemen Bramenis; and having demanded some Water to drink at the House of
one of these People, he gave me some, but stayed to see if I drank without
touching the sides of the Cup, the which I knew not, and Drank without any
Ceremony, which the Son of this Gentleman seeing, cried out as loud as he could
to his Father, who was in a little place behind the House, who presently came
running in great Ange, so that I was constrained to march of, and make clean
the Cup by my Naique to appease them.

After that I passed by a Pagod or Temple, very well built, and entering
therein I found one of the Natives stark-naked, adorning their Idol with
Flowers, which had a Head like a Calf, when presently an old Woman amongst them
cried out to me, Why I came in there with my Shoes; my Naique excused me in
telling her that I knew not the Custom.

As for the Pay-gods, they have several Paygods.
sorts of them; Some for War, others for Peace, and for Love, where the Maids
coming to be Married, are brought to be Des^oured; and their Idol has the
Privy Parts like a Man. The Damsels, who serve these Paygods like the
Vestal-Virgins, continue there from 10 to 20 years of Age, and Dance all night
long, carrying lighted Lamps in their Hands, and go to Sleep round about their
Idols. I saw there very beautiful Girls and Women They Marry their Daughters at
8 or 9 years of Age; when they are once past 12 or 13, they are not regarded,
because they believe them to continue no longer Maids, considering the heat of
the Country: At the end of 20 years, these Religious Women that Indian Women
Religious.
have thus served the Pay-gods, are kept in a certain place the rest of their
Lives.

After I had gathered some Herbs which I had occasion for, we went to a little
Habitation of Gentiles, where I demanded by my Truch-man, if they had any
Victuals to give us for our Money, for there is no Inns or Taverns there; but
there were some little Shops where they sold Fruit, and other things fit to
Eat: These Gentiles having Compassion on me, there was a Woman, who put me
under a Gallery of her House, where there was a Napkin full of Leaves and
Plantane, accommodated with Thorns; then she threw me some Rice thereupon, with
a certain Sauce which they call Caril, I Eat all this, and when I was about to
Drink out of a little Vessel of Copper that they had given me full of Water,
they began to cry out upon me, because I touched it in Drinking, for they never
touch the Cup in Drinking, only heaving it up with the Server whereon it
stands, and so Drink.

The Floor and Pavement of their Houses are composed with Cow Dung, Ants
troublesome.
which they make look exceeding bright, and think that it keeps away the Ants,
which are there in abundance; and they can keep nothing free from being
destroyed by these little Animals, to prevent which they have also Cupboards
bore upon Piles, set in Vessels full of Water, where the Ants drown themselves
by thinking to mount up. Near to this Habitation I found a great Tree, laden
with Tamarins, of which I gathered a few: Tamarins.
They had yet nothing but a sower Taste, I carried away the Husk, which are
almost like French-Beans, but larger and greater.

Now as I returned by a very Desert Place, I saw some of these Gentiles running
in great haste; and having caused my Truch-man to ask what ailed them, they
answered, that their Father was gone to Drown himself, a little after I saw
them return, bringing back their Father, and Comforting him after the best
manner they could: He was troubled for some Misfortune that had happened to
him. It is a common thing with these People to Drown or Poison themselves, or
to Indians subject to Despair.
Die after some such way, when any Accident happens to them.

As for the Women, it is the Custom, that when the Body of their Dead Husbands
are Burnt, they cast themselves into the Funeral Pile, and Burn Women who burn
themselves.
themselves, after being first adorned with their richest Accoutrements and
Jewels, Dancing at the Sound of Instruments, and thus Die with a wonderful
Constancy, speaking in the Fire to the very last: Those who do not this are
held Infamous so long as they live, not daring to show themselves before
others, nor to appear before their Friends and Kindred. Such as have a weaker
Courage Poison themselves, seeing their Husband Dead, and are Burnt together
with him.

It Is remarkable that the Body of the Woman has such an Oyley Property, that
one Body will serve like Oil or Greese to consume the Bodies of 5 or 6 men. The
Moors and Mahometans who inhabit the Main-Land of Goa toward Pichelin, do not
allow this sort of Cruelty in the Women; but when they see they cannot obtain
this favor, they Poison themselves.

This Custom of Burning themselves has continued, as they say, ever since a
certain Gentile King, who reigned amongst them; who seeing how all the Men of
his Kingdom died, and knowing that it was their Wives which Poisoned them, to
have other Husbands; and that those who had Children should continue alive to
take care of them, but without Power ever to Marry again, instituted this: They
observe this very strictly, and do nothing but Groan, Weep and Lament, during
the rest of their Life; and at certain hours of the day and night, howl and
lament after so strange a manner, that it is a great pity to hear them.

As for my part I was sometimes Deafened with the clamours and noise of some or
other who had lost Husband or Children* I have heard a Bramin say, (who had
turned Christian) that they who have lost a Child, mourn and lament 20 years
entire: He told me also, that a certain Woman* of those who used to serve the
Pay-gods, that after being retired into a House where they pass their time with
Men, she entertained one who heated himself so with her, that he Died upon the
spot, Resolution of a Lover.
at which she was so afflicted, that when they Burnt his Body, she Burnt her
self with him, seeing he had Died for Love of her, though she was no other than a
good Friend.

As I returned from my little Voyage, I passed by a Valley where there was a
very neat and pleasant Fountain, which came out from a ^ock flat and hollow,
and the Water which came out run through little holes in the Rock: 'Twas
impossible to empty it, though there was but very little Water therein: For in
taking out that which was there, more runs out, like a strong and active
Spring: After this, I went to Embark at a Paygod, which is in a certain place
along by the River, it being so deep that it is impossible to find the bottom.
They have made there large and spacious Foolish Opinions of the Indians.
Steps along by the side; and there the Gentiles come every year, 2 or 300
Leagues distant, to wash themselves at certain times, and sometimes there are
assembled there above a 100000 Men, Women and Children, casting abundance of
Fruit in this River, who believe that at the end of the year it comes again
upon the Water. Thus Satan deceives them, for there are always some or other
who tarry the^ for security, who sometimes drown themselves out of a Pond
Devotion.

As I Embarked by these Steps, I Another Voyage of the Author.
returned to the Madre di Dios, from whence I set out about Dec. Then I made
another little Voyage to the Main-Land of Pichelin, to procure some Pichelin.
Drugs and other Rarities of the Country, and took again my Truch-man* with the
Almadie, and the Mariners which the Captain of the Passage had given me, who
having expressly commanded them to Obey me, and to conduct me where I had a mind
to go.

We departed in a very fine evening, and traveled all night, the Moon shining,
insomuch that we arrived at Pichelin, a very pleasant City, where is a great
number of Gentile Merchants, and belongs to Dealcan, it being some 4 Leagues
from Goa: We went to the Lodging of one Manate,* a Gentile, who received us
kindly upon the Acquaintance he had with our Truch-man, and put me to lie under
a little Pent-House, where an Indian Woman brought her Daughter to lie with me,
as this Manate had counseled her; but this Girl not above 13 years of Age,
seeing I would not touch her, sell to Weeping and Groaning, thinking to force
me to have to do with her, and her Mother did all she could to appease her; I
understood not the ground of all this Mystery.

The next morning, I saw a Jogue-Gentile, who was all perfumed with Incense,
and stark Naked, squat upon his Tail before a Fire of Cow Dung, and with Ashes
thereof all bepowered his Body, having long Hair like a Woman, which he held on
the top of his Shoulders: This was the most hideous and monstrous Spectacle
that Strange fashion of the Jogues.
ever was seen: For he remained still looking on the Fire, without so much as
turning his Head.

These sort of People are sometimes 4 or 5 days without any meat, and use
extraordinary Abstinence: All these Gentiles, and especially the Bramins, never
Eat any living thing, or that has had life, and will not taste of Red-Herbs,
saying, that they have Blood in them; They Eat Rice and Milk, and call the Cow
their Mother-Nurse. About the Deserts they have Hospitals where they Feed the
Pilgrims that pass that way: When some rich Men Hospitals amongst the Indians.
Die they leave something to the Hospitals.

To this purpose, I will relate what happened to one of my Friends, coming from
the Kingdom of Pegu to Cochin: This was a Fleming, who was Married at Lions,
and had two Brothers Cochin.
Married at Goa, to the Metices of Cochin: These 3 were taken in the Ship Good
Jesus by the Hollanders, who put them on Shore; And as they came along by the
Seaside, they had but one pair of Shoes amongst them three, the which they
wore by turns: He who wore the Shoes went upon Land, and the two others,
barefooted, went in the Water along by the Shore, not enduring the Soles of
their Feet upon the Ground, it was so hot and burning at that time: They were
ready to Die with Hunger and Thirst, not finding any thing to subsist upon in
these Deserts: And being very weak, and in great Distress* they espied two
Gentiles, who ran toward them, crying out to them to stay a little; but they
not knowing what they meant, feared at first that it was to Rob them, but
having nothing to lose, they resolved to tarry, and these Gentiles being come
to them, courteously offered them Meat Courtesy of the Indians
and Drink, for which they thanked them, saying, they had no Money to pay for
it: They spoke by Signs* not being able to make them understand otherways: But
these Gentiles pointed toward Heaven, as if they would have said, 'twas God
who commanded them to do thus; so that these 3 easily consented thereto, and
afterward pursued their Voyage: This shows how these Gentiles are content when
they find occasion to do good to poor Travelers, they being all very pious
People, who endure all sorts of Ignominy and Injuries, such Lovers are they of
Peace and Tranquillity. This Goodness and natural Humanity of these poor
Idolaters, abused in so many other things, is an excellent Lesson for
Christians instructed in the True Religion, which they make so little account
of, since the Natural Light of these blind Infidels, shames the Supernatural
Gifts of those who profess Christianity.

After I had gathered together, and bought all the Drugs and other Things which
might be of any use to me, I began to think of my return with my Truchman and
Mariners; and going along the Coast, which was very green, pleasant, and
abounding in all sorts of Plants; When I saw any Herb which pleased me, I
commanded them to fetch it.

The Portugals put a thousand Affronts upon these poor People, and sometimes
they make show as if they would kill some Bird, or other Animal, Indians kill
not Animals.
which these Gentiles have pity on, and presently buy them to set them at
liberty: Yet since they have found out that the Portugals do this on purpose to
have their Money* knowing their bad Intention, they buy not these Animals as
they were wont to do.

When a Portugal has a mind to have Rude Comportment of the Portugals toward
the Indies.
some new Cloths, he makes no more ado but goes to the Shop of an Indian, with
a Tailor, and there chooses his Stuff; then orders it to be cut out in his
presence, and when it comes to be paid, he bids the poor Gentile follow him to
his Lodging to take his Money, where being come, he pretends that his
Companion, who has the Key of his Chest, is not there; and so the other
whatever he can say or do, can have nothing of him but this excuse: And 2 or 3
days after, the Portugal tells him he owes him nothing: They use the same
Tricks to all other Merchants, and Tradesmen: They have done as much to me,
when I have paid any thing for them; for some time after they made as if they
knew me not: Yet it ought not to be thought strange if they do thus in the
Indies, since they play the same Pranks in Lisbon it self; where one of my
Hosts told me, that one day having Dressed up a Hat for a Castilian, and asking
him for his Money, showed him a Pistol cockt, telling him, if he had a mind to
be paid, he must follow him into Flanders, where he was going, and this was all
he could get.

As soon as they arrive at the Indies, Nature and Quality of the Portugals in
the Indians.
they make themselves Gallants, calling themselves Fidalgues, or Gentlemen, tho
they be but Peasants and Tradesmen: They themselves relate, That a certain one
among them named Fernando, who had kept Hogs in Portugal, coming to the Indies,
and adding 3 Letters to his Name, caused himself to be called Don Fernando, and
was in a little time so well known and esteemed amongst the Women Metices, that
one having chosen him for her Servant, she caused him to Ride about with a
Chain of Gold about his Neck, and a great many Slaves after him; But one day it
happened that his Master's Son, whom he had served in his own Country for a
Swine-heard, Portugal Pride.
having met him in this Rich Equipage, riding about the Streets of Goa, saluted
him, saying in his own Language, Deos Guarde de Fernando Como Esta; which is to
say, God save ye Fernando, how goes it: But the other making show as if he knew
him not, asked, who he was; to which the other made answer, Was not he the same
who formerly kept Hogs for my Father; This Gallant hearing this, drawing him
aside, told him, he was, and was here called Don, and was looked upon as a
great Gentleman, praying him to hold his peace, and gave him Money; yet this
hindered not his being known by several, who made their own profit thereof.

But since I am fallen upon this Discourse, I will add, that when these
Portugal Soldiers first arrive at the Indies, wearing their Country Cloths,
those who have been there a long time before, when they see them walk about the
Streets, call them Reipol, laden with Lice, with a thousand other Jeers and
Affronts: When I was there, these Newcomers durst not stir out of their
Lodgings until they were dressed like the other Indians; And then they know
them no longer, using Majestic Gravity, and observing the Sossiego, after the
Spanish manner, always having their Boy, who carries their Parasol, or Cloak;
without which they dare not come out of their Lodging, except they have a mind
to be esteemed Picaro's, or poor miserable Wretches; as in truth they are to
those who know them: As long as they are there, instead of vile and base, as
they be, they esteem themselves all Fidalques and Noblemen, changing their more
obscure Names to more Illustrious: I knew one who Enrolled himself for the War,
and he changed his Name 3 or 4 times, as 'twas found out by the Secretaries and
Registers of Goa.

When they hear of any one that knows them, they are so wicked as to send to
ask whether he knew such a one or not, and who he was, of what Cast or Race,
and if noble and honorable, so that if the other answers, that he is some
Picaron, or miserable Fellow, this Friend reports it to the other, and then for
mere Spite, complots with his Associates against him who has told this Truth,
and meeting him in the City at their advantage, give him so many Blows that
they kill him, or leave him for Dead: This is the cause that one must take care
how he tells the Truth of such who are enquired after: But on the contrary, if
they tell all the glorious Things in the world of him, of his Nobility, Valor,
Power, and other Qualities, though never so false; Then he of whom all this is
meant, coming to meet the other, immediately salutes him, Embraces his Thigh,
and prays him always to say the same of him, and that he is wholly at his
Service, ready to reward him with his Life and Fortune.

When they have a mind to d'Accouchillar, or Slash any one with their Revenge
of the Portugals.
Swords, they send Notes to their Friends to desire their assistance against
one who has offended them: If he to whom this Note is sent does not come, and
excuses himself, because such an one is his Friend, they cry him about for a
faint-hearted Coward; and it is he on whom they will wrack their Revenge, if he
has not a care of himself* These are the Actions at this day.

One day standing at my Lodging Door in the Street of the Crucifix, I saw two
Companies of Soldiers, the one coming from the Misericordia, and the other
seeming from the Cordeliers, and drawing nigh one to the other, laid hands upon
their Swords with great fury, but the Rascals did one another no harm, being
the numbers were equal: But when 10 or 12 meets with one or two, then you shall
see them do wonderful Exploits.

There was one amongst the rest, who to show himself a Champion, challenged
another to fight him hand to hand, who appeared but plainly with his ordinary
Arm^: But the other wicked and false wretch, carrying with him a Harquebuss,
presented it to give Fire, at which the first cried out that he should kill him
like a man of Valor, and not like a Coward* yet he would not hearken to this,
but told him, that if he had a mind to have his Life given him, there was one
thing he must do, and the other demanded, what it was; this Wretch who had his
piece cockt, told him that he must deny Jesus Horrible Trick.
Cbrist, which the other having basely done, he firing, said to him, get thee
the right way to Hell, and so parted.

It Is impossible to tell the Wickedness, Insolences, and Irreverences they
Irreverence in the Churches.
commit in the Churches during Divine Service; which I have often seen, whilst
they were saying Mass at Goa, hearing them speak out aloud, and crying so to
one another, that none could hear any thing of the Service, making all that
noise in the Indian Language, and bawling as if they were in a Fair, or in the
Fields; and some will send their Slaves to fetch their Escritorio to take some
Letters out Escritorio
to show: Then when they see the Holy Sacrament raising, they give themselves 3
or 5 blows upon the Breast, and presently fall again to Bawling, Laughing, and
Mocking as before: There is nothing amongst them but Usury, Covetousness,
Theft, and strange Oaths, and such that the most subtle might be cozened and
deceived.

I have remarked that they have a sort of Honor amongst them, when they meet
about the Streets, the lesser Manner of Saluting.
number gives way to the greater, and if they are but two, they must begin to
Salute 3, when they meet 'em, and so of the others* And indeed I was once so
deceived; for, being in the company* of 2 or 3 of them, as we met with two
others, not knowing their fashion, I began to Salute them first, for they were
of my acquaintance; but the others checked me for it, saying, I knew not the
Custom, and for the future must take care how I did the like.

They go in the night, with their Robberies at Goa.
Carpausses, which are Dresses for the Head, after the manner of a Coat,
plucking up and down the Vizard when they please; and about Supper-time go away
to such Houses where they know there is something to take, knocking at the Door
if it is shut, and enter if they find it open, their Faces hid, asking for the
Master of the House, they demand of him to lend them 2 or 300 Cheraphins,
otherways they will Kill him, and so carry away the best Things in the House*

A Portugal Gentleman related to me how he had been thus Robbed by that sort of
People, as he was going to Supper; For his Slave having opened the Door upon
their telling him they had a word or two to say to his Master, entering in by
force, and leaving one at the Door, took at the first bout all the Plate which
was upon the Table, demanding of him 200 Cheraphins if he had a mind to have
them again, which he gave them, and so they went away. If the Justice goes to
take them, they have great Bags of Cannon-Powder, with Matches tied about them,
threatening to throw them amongst those who offer to approach the Door.

The Portugals are grown so extreme jealous of their Wives that you must
Jealousy of the Portugals.
not so much as look them in the Face; and if they see them but speak to any
one, they presently Strangle or Poison them; and when they have Strangled them,
they call their Neighbors to their Succor, saying, that a Swooning Fit has
taken their Wife upon the Chair; But they never come again to themselves:
Sometimes they send for a Barber to Blood them, saying, that they are not well;
When the Barber is gone away, they undo the Fillet, and let he Blood run out
until the poor miserable Creature dies; and then also they call in the
Neighbors, to see as they say, what a sad Disaster has happened to their Wife
in Sleeping.

Others there are who take their Wives with them to Bath in some Brook or Pond,
and there make them Drink their Belly full; and a little while after, send
their Slaves to look for their Mistress, whom they find Drowned, which the
Husband knowing before, seems to be* mightily astonished and grieved at.

Thus in different ways, they make away their Wives, on the least suspicion,
and afterward relate the Story amongst one another: There are some who have
thus made away 3 or 4 Wives.

But the Women also, when they think their Husbands entertain any other, rid
themselves of them by Poison, or otherways, and make much use of the Seeds of
Datura, which has a strange Virtue; Datura Poison.
This Datura, or Dutroa, a sort of Stramonium, is a great and high Plant,
bearing white Flowers, like the Cisampelos, Cisampelos.
but larger. Now he who takes too great a quantity thereof, Dies in a little
time, laughing and weeping like a Fool. Thus the Women who have particular
Friends, gave of this Herb to their Husbands, mixing therewith other Drugs,
which is such that the poor Husband falls into a Fury, and Raving, snatches
Strange Actions.
up a Pike or Hallberd to guard the Door, without saying a word to such as come
either in or out: Then the Seniora or Lady, sends for her Gallant, and passes
the time in presence of the Husband until the Operation of the Drug (which
continues about 24 hours) is over: He who has taken it, not remembering what he
has seen or done, so mightily are his Thoughts and Mind agitated and troubled
with this Herb.

As for the Slaves, it is pity to see the Cruel Chastisement to the Slaves.
cruel Chastisements they give them* For they run them through with double
Irons, then give them with a Cudgel, 500 blows at a time, and make them lie
along the ground on their Belly, and then comes two, who by turns strike the
poor Body as a Log of Wood, the Master Portugal or Metice being present, counts
the Blows with his Rosaire: And if by chance they who thus strike are not
strong enough to his mind, or have an inclination to spare their Companion, he
causes them to be put in the place of the Patient, and to be soundly banged
without any Mercy.

As I was in my Lodging at Goa, I heard nothing but Blows all the night long,
and some weak Voice, which Breathed a little, for they stop their Mouth with a
Linen Cloth, to hinder them from crying out. After they have been well beaten,
they cause their Bodies to be sliced with a Razor, then rub it with Salt and
Vinegar for fear it should Fester.

They have another sort of punishment which they call Pingar Viue, which
Cruelty of the Portugals.
is to drop Lard put into a red hot Pelle, upon the Body of the poor Patient,
stark naked and lying upon his Belly. The Parents of these miserable Wretches
are sorry they brought them into the World, to feel such Torments, which
pierces them to the very Entrails.

I have sometimes seen part of these Barbarous Cruelties which afflicted me so
much, that I have still a horror when I think thereof. There was one day a
poor Indian Girl, who came running to my Lodging, crying out for help, and
praying me to be a means to obtain Mercy; but I could not save her, to my great
Sorrow; For she was taken and laid all along on the Ground and Bastinadoed
without pity.

There was a Metice Woman who had by these horrible Chastisements killed 5 or 6
Slaves, which she caused to be Buried in her Garden; And one day as she ordered
another to be thus punished, he who gave her the Blows going to leave off, the
miserable Creature in the mean time Died; and when (...), i.e. ^ive it her ^ive
it her, (...) an old ^^x.
he told his Mistress that she was Dead; no, no, she answered, she
counterfeits, Daly Dalyes, Rapose Veille, that is to say, Lay on, lay on, it is
an old Fox.

Another had a Slave who was not vigilant enough; and ready to rise when she
called her, her Mistress caused an ^^heard of (...).
Horse-Shooe to be nailed upon her Back, insomuch that the poor Creature died
some time after, the place thus abused being invaded by a Gangreen.

Another, for not being nimble enough, had her Eyelids sowed to her Eyebrows,
which had like to have cost her her life, her Face being swelled so.

One day I heard another young Indian or Chinese Woman, who was Chastised after
the same manner, the blows sounding very loud, but she did nothing but groan,
so low that one could scarce hear her very cry, saying, Ja Ja Me Signoe: I then
demanded of Ja ja mi Senior.
my Host's Brother, what it was, who told me, 'twas a Slave a Chastising, and
that she would have three times as much if she complained, and that this was
nothing to what others endured; and that there was another of them who was
hanged in a Chamber by the Hands, for 2 or 3 days together, and that for a very
small matter, as for letting fall some Milk as he thought; Portugals without
Compassion.
for they would have made him believe he drank it: And having asked him if they
ever let him down to give him any thing to Eat, he told me, no, but some times,
as a great favor, would let him a little lower, just to give him a little Rice
sopt in Water, and presently hoise him up again: But that this would not be
all, for after that he would be well Banged, and that they only tarried for his
absence, that they might begin again this cruel Chastisement.

He told me also, how his Brother, who was Master of the Lodging, having one
day bought a Japan Slave, a beautiful Girl, and how in Dineing with his Wife,
he happened to say in Jesting, that this Slave had exceeding White Teeth,

fall^ it; So that I was forced to let them alone* For it is not the custom
there to (...).
succor such, except one has a mind to ^ight and be killed by them afterward,
so mischievous and perverse is this Nation; Insomuch that a Portugal-Gentleman
being in bed with his Wife, in the Night Dreamed that she committed Adultery
with one of his Friends, after he was awaked, he was so Transported with Rage
and Jealousy, that he killed her at that instant with his (...) Portugal
Poynard as she slept, and then fled away to the main Land of Goa, and from
thence to the Court of Dialcan; in whose service he put himself, in the City of
Isapor. For this King seeing him a Cavallier of good fashion, received him into
his service, giving him means to entertain himself, and to be Lodged near his
own person, and also hoping to make him deny the Law of Jesus Christ; and
embrace that of Mahomet, he gave him one of his Sisters in Marriage, but for
all that the Portugal would never Apostatize whatsoever Dialcan or his Sister
could do, which this Prince seeing, was resolved to put him to Death; But she
having notice of it advertised her Husband thereof, advising him to save
himself with all possible speed, and he asking her if she would follow him, she
made Answer that she willingly would with all her heart; so that one Night
having provided a great Number of precious stones and other Riches, with two
good horses, they set out upon the high way, and made such haste that they soon
arrived at Pichelin, and from thence passed to Goa where this Cavalter so
ordered the business by Friends and Money; that he had his Pardon for the
Murder he committed upon his first Wife, excusing himself to the Justice that
she had dishonored her self.

In the mean time, Dialcan seeing the next Morning that neither this Portugal,
nor his Sister came to ^isit him as they were wont to do, soon doubted of the
business, and having understood that they were fled, sent a great Number of
Horsemen after, to catch them, but all in vain, for they were already out of
his reach: This mightily vexed Dialcan an Enemy to the Portu*
the Prince, and caused him to be a greater Enemy to the Portugals, than ever
he formerly was: For they have no greater Adversary than he, who has several
times befieged them at Goa, but at present they have made truce together, and I
saw an Ambassador from him at Goa, when Andre-Furtado commanded there, who
Marched about the City in great Pomp and Magnificence, after the Moorish Indian
manner.

I saw also other Ambassadors from (...) Go^.
Pegu, and Calicut, and it was a very fine sight to see them March, in order
with their Guards about the streets, who carried Bows and Arrows in their
Palanquns, going with this Ceremony to find out the Viceroy in behalf of the
Kings their Masters, to confirm the Peace in their Ports and Coasts, as far as
their power permitted 'em to do. But Andre-Furtado, being Exasperated against
the King of Pegu, would not so much as read his Letters, but tore them, telling
the Ambassador that he would come and visit him within a few days; and that he
remembered how he had given Port, and entertainment to the Hollanders their
Enemies, (...) of Andre-Furtado.
against what had been concluded upon by the Peace and accord made betwixt
them: And that he had also an intention to visit the King of Achin in Sumatra,
for he had also received the Hollanders into his Ports to Traffic, tho he at
the same time knew that they were their Sworn Enemies: The Ambassador of Pegu*
was not a little ashamed at this reception, to see himself thus rejected of the
Viceroy, and returned very sad and discontented to his Master: These designs
of Andre-Furtado were never effected, for not long after came an other
Viceroy, who was more intent in filling his Coffers than the War, during his 3
years, which is commonly worth to them above six hundred thousand Crowns;
especially those who cruelly Tyranize over the poor People.

As for Andre-Furtado, he had done (...) qualities of Andre (...).
great exploits in the Wars of the Indies during his Life, and had acquired
such Renown that all the Kings, as well Gentiles, as Mahometans, trembled for
fear when they heard that he was declared Viceroy: He had taken and chained a
King Named Cognale, very strong and puissant, whom he led to Goa, where he had
his head choped of, bringing thereby no small terror and fear upon all the
People of the Indies.

He had also given Testimony of his valor against the King of Achin, when he
bravely besieged him in the City of Achin in Sumatra, and I have oftentimes
heard him relate this exploit, Siege of Achin*
when I returned from the Indies with him, telling me amongst other things how
in this siege, there came such multitudes of Sumatrans upon him, that not being
able to resist with so few Men, as he had, he was forced to raise the siege;
but after such a manner that he first embarked all his Canon, and then the most
part of his Men, by little and little, not making any show of retiring, but
leaving some of them all the while to skirmish; himself encouraging them to
stand briskly to it, and to retire themselves gradually and orderly toward the
Sea: Insomuch that he ordered the business thus, that he carried of and
embarked all his Men, as well Dead, as wounded and sound, and was himself the
last Man that embarked; thus dexterously deceiving the Enemies, who questioned
not but to have had them all that same day in their Power.

He told me also of the memorable siege of Malaca, which he had defended, Clege
of Malaca.
being then Captain against the whole Holland-fleet, and about 14 thousand
Gentiles, there being ten or twelve Kings of those Countries, at that time
Naval sight twice the Portugals and Hollanders
assembled there with them, and how the Hollanders had Landed a great Number of
huge pieces of Canon for Battery, wherewith they fired without intermission: In
short* he was besieged both by Sea and Land, without any hopes of Succor, not
having 50 white Men with him in this fortress, where he was forced to watch Day
and Night, which had caused him to have a dangerous Distemper, of Melancholy
an Oppilation of the Yellow Jaundies for some space, and yet every where giving
such good orders, he had remained Vanquisher of all his Enemies, until such
time as to Succor him, came the Viceroy, Dom Martin-Alfonce, who hearing
thereof, at the siege of Achin, where he was, immediately hastened thither with
all his Fleet; of which the Hollanders being soon advertised, presently
reimbarked their Canon, and the Indian Kings were retired each one into his own
Country: But in the mean time the Army of the Hollanders being come to
encounter that of Portugal, and thundering their Canons at one another, setting
fire to each others Ships, burning some and sinking others. But in the end
after a long fight and great loss on either side, the Viceroy saving himself
from the conflict, had fled to Malaca, where he died of sickness and grief:
Thus much this Valiant Captain Andre-Furtado related to me a little before his
Death at our return; being then at the hight of St. H^lens, for I took care of
him in his Sickness, and being retired into his Chamber, discoursed with his
Gentlemen and Soldiers of all his Wars, Adventures and Conquests in the Indies;
and I certainly believe that had such a Man continued Viceroy, a little longer
there, he would have amplified the Christian Faith amongst these Infidels.

It was told me amongst other things, that in this Naval Fight of Malaca, there
was a Portugal, Captain of a Galion, named Louis de Sosa, who escaped from the
Fight, and flying away with the first, left his Ship, and saved himself in the
Boat on Land: Then he made such have that he arrived in the night time at Goa,
without making himself known; and entering his House, his Wife being in Bed,
whether he suspected she played false, or for some other cause, he ran his
Sword quite through her Body, she casting her self at his Feet, desiring him to
have a care what he did, but this softened not his cruel Courage, for all that
he left not off his purpose, showing himself more cruel to his Wife than the
Hollanders his Enemies; after having left her Dead upon the place, he fled to
the Main-Land, and tarried till all was quiet, and then returned to Goa.

Since, as I returned from Reys Magos, with one of his Servants, who had put
the Irons about my Neck at Mosambique, being then Merigne, or Sergeant of the
Ship, but afterward at Goa, had put himself into the Service of this Louis de
Sosa, arriving both together very late at Goa, I went to Sup at the House of
the said Sosa, who made me very welcome, upon the acquaintance he had with this
Servant; and desired me also to visit a Nephew of his, who had a Wound with a
Pike in the Groin, when he went to see the Women; 'Twas then I learnt the
History of this Louis de Sosa of my Host, who told me several other things, too
tedious to relate.

But since I am upon the Discourse of the cruel and strange Deportments of the
Portuguese at Goa, and of the rest of the Indies, I will relate some Histories
that happened in or before my time.

A Portugal Soldier falling in Love Tragi^^l History of a Portugal Soldier.
with a young Woman at Cochin, Daughter to a Portugal Married there; he so
bestirred himself that he accosted a Maid Slave of the House, telling her, he
was of a very good Family, and mightily Enamoured with her Mistress, and
entreated her to acquaint her of his good Will and if it was possible, so to
order the business that he might speak with her* The Slave gained by Words,
but more especially by Presents, which is the best means in those Countries to
have what you please with the Women, gave her Mistress to understand that a
Gallant young Portugal Gentleman was mightily Enamoured of her, and ready to
Die for Love* The young Woman allured with this discourse, was mighty curious
to know who he was, and how he came to see her; for in that Country the Maids
and Women of Quality are seldom seen, for they go about the City in
Palanquins: At last, she so ordered the Business, that her Mistress promised to
speak with him at a certain hour in the night, which being come, the young
Portugal having discoursed with her of his amorous Passion, she was no less
enflamed than he, being of an Age fitting to pass her time, and in a Country so
hot, that where any Man can only have the means to speak with a Woman or Maid,
he is sure to obtain of them what he desires, if the least occasion present it
self: In short, they both resolved to fly away together in some clear night,
with the Woman Slave, which they after performed, and the young Woman taking
her Rings, Jewels, and store of Silver, they Embarked for Goa, where being
come, and having taken a Lodging somewhat private, they there for some time led
a very pleasant Life: But the Soldier, who was mightily addicted to Gaming,
soon found an end of what his Mistress brought with her, and beginning to be a
weary of her, he conspired the Death of these two Women, seeing they had no
longer wherewithal to keep him in his Rioting; and having sent the Slave into
the City, he Strangled the Mistress, and hid her; and the Slave returning, he
did the same to her, and Buried them in a private place in the Lodging. These
Murders continued a long time without being known, until the same Wretch was
taken for another Crime, and Condemned to be Hanged, as he was upon the Ladder,
he confessed this lamentable and cruel Tragedy, which mightily astonished all
the People, and heaped an eternal Regret upon the Disconsolate Father, who had
made search in every place for his dearly Beloved Daughter*

I saw another at Goa, who often came to the Lodging where I was, who
suspecting that his Wife had played a false trick with a Mate of a Ship, so
watched his opportunity, basely disguising himself, Another Tragical Act.
that he caught the other near the Church of Misericordia, and Stabbed him with
a Kni^e in the Groin, when he was not at all thinking of him; though he had
notice enough of the other's intention; and for this cause wore a Coat of Mail,
with two Pistols* but that stood him in no stead: For the Indian was more
nimble in Stabing, than he to avoid it; and from thence went straight home to
his House, to do as much to his Wife also, who was soon advertised of the Death
of her Friend, and seeing no way to save her self, her Husband being already
come to the Door, out of Despair, she cast her self out of the Window, where he
receiving her upon the point of his Sword, left her stark-dead on the place,
then he retired into the Main-Land, until they had need of Soldiers at Goa; for
there are Edicts and Proclamations of Pardon made for all those who are accused
of any Crime whatsoever, so that they may return securely to their Houses: Such
is the Justice of those Countries, where they kill one another for every small
trifle.

If they have a Quarrel with any one of low Condition, and but little Credit,
they take not the trouble to be Revenged upon them themselves, but send their
Slaves to Slash or Cudgel with a Bamboo, those who have not saluted them very
low, or unawares have not taken of his Hat before them: They are Covetous of
such Vanities, with which they feed themselves very much.

To this I will add that of the Daughter of the King of Siam, who having a
White Elephant, a thing very rare in the Indies, the King of Pegu his
Neighbor, made cruel War upon him to have him, and had him in the end,
overcoming Adventure of the Daughter of the King of Siam.
this King of Siam, whose Daughter was taken in the War, and carried Captive to
Goa, where I have often seen her, she being then not very young, and came to
see my Hostess, who was a Chinese, for they were great Friends, and commonly
Eat with us, comforting her self at the recital of her Miseries, and how she
had been sold to a great Portugal Lord by one of those of Pegu, who had first
taken away from her all her Jewels and precious Stones, she not being then
above 8 or 9 years of Age; although great search had been every where made for
her, but that the Soldier not having a mind to discover her, for fear of being
constrained to restore all these Riches, had come to sell her to the Portugals,
her Father's great Enemies, who also uses them no better when he can catch
them: For some of them he causes to be put starknaked Cruelties of the King of
Siam.
in Frying-Pans of Copper, upon the Fire and thus to be roasted by little and
little: Others he causes to be put betwixt two great Fires and set down, and
thus to Die in Torments; others, he exposes in the Park of his Elephants to be
crushed and knocked down by by them, and a thousand sorts of barbarous
Cruelties, which he exercises upon these poor Portugals.

This King of Siam once having a mind to make War upon another King his Enemy,
was resolved to send for some of the greatest Lords of his Kingdom to be
Commanders of his Army; But some making show as if they were* Sick, by the
Counsel of their Wives, who could not endure them out of their sight, of which
the King being advertised, sent for these Women, and having caused their Privy
Parts to be cut*off, and to be fastened upon their Husbands ^trange Cruelties.
Foreheads, he caused them thus to walk about all the City, and then to have
their Heads choped of.

This same King hearing that, his Concubines exercised amongst them the Sin
against Nature, with Counterfeit Members, he commanded them to come before him,
and having caused every one to have a Viril-Member to be painted upon their
Thigh, forced them thus to go about the Streets, and than commanded them all to
be burnt: Thus you may see what cruel Punishments these Gentile Kings exercise
without Pity upon those whom they have a mind to be Revenged on.

It was a Chinese, named Joan-Pay, Secretary to Don Andre Furtado, who related
to me all these Histories, to which I will add what was told me in those
Countries of the Kingdom of Pegu, next to that of Siam, where had happened some
years since the most strange and prodigious thing in the world: Some Sorcerers
and Witches so, ordered the matter with the King of Pegu, that he took such a
hatred against his Subjects, that he was resolved utterly to root out and
extirpate them; to bring this to pass, he expressly commanded that none on pain
of Death should either Plough or Sow the Land for the space of 2 or 3 years.
The Ground having thus continued Incultivated for some years, without Reaping
any thing, there fell out such scarcity and necessity amongst these poor People
of Pegu, that having consumed all their Victuals, and all Horrible Famine.
other things fit to be eaten, they were forced after the manner of the
Anthropophages, to Eat one another. And what was most prodigious and terrible,
and never before heard of, to keep public Shambles of the Flesh of those they
could catch about the Fields, the strongest Killing and Massacring their
Companions to have a share of them; insomuch that they went to hunt after Men
as some Savage Beasts, and made Parties and Assemblies for this end. During
this horrible Famine, the People of the Kingdoms round about being advertised
of this extreme necessity, equipped a quantity of Vessels laden with Rice, and
other Victuals, which they brought to Pegu, and sold it there for what they
pleased: Amongst the rest, there was a Merchant of Goa, who arriving there with
a Boat laden with Rice, as he went Sad History of a Peguan Damsel.
from House to House to put off his Merchandise, taking for payment, Money,
Slaves, or other things they could give him: He happened upon a House where
they had not wherewithal to Buy so much as a Measure of Rice, and yet ready to
Die with Rage and Hunger, but they showed this Merchant an exceeding Beautiful
Woman, whom her Brethren and Sisters had a mind to sell for a Slave for certain
Measures of Rice; the Merchant offered 2 Measures, or Bushels, and they would
have 3, Remonstrating, that if they killed this Girl, the Flesh would last them
and nourish them much longer than his Rice; At last, when they could not agree,
the Merchant went his way, but no sooner was he gone, than they killed this
young Woman, and cut her to pieces: But the Merchant being not a little
enamoured with this Maid, and besides having Compassion of her, mightily
desired to save her life, soon returned again to give them for her what they
demanded: But he was mightily astonished and sorry when they showed him the
young Woman in pieces, telling him that not thinking he would return, they did
it to satisfy Hunger: Such was the end of this Peguan Damsel, and many others
had the same Fate. This Merchant-related this Tragedy to one of my Friends, who
passed from Portugal to the East Indies in the Galion of Good-Jesus.

Now to return to those of Siam, the cause why the King of Siam so barbarously
uses the Portugals, is, that they Cru^lties of the Portugals*
use the same Treatment toward his Captive Subjects. I have seen one of them
at Goa, above 90 years of Age, a Joyner by Trade, and Slave to a Portugal
Gentleman, to whom this poor Man was forced to render every day to the value of
two Tangues, whether he wrought or no; and went thus to seek work about the
City, with his Tools: My Host having one day called him to make something for
him, he told me all the Cruelties which was used against him: For when he
failed to pay his two Tangues, his Master tied him like a Beast to a
Staircase, and gave him so many Blows with a Stick, that he left him bruised
and maimed; and told me that he had been a Slave for above 40 years, and had
gained his Master good Money; and yet he gave him to live upon but a measure of
Rice raw every day, without any other thing, as they do to all the other
Indians, and sometimes two Baseruques, (which are some two Deniers) to have
some Caril to put Miseries of the Slaves.
amongst the Rice.

Thus you may see, how these Slaves live, without either Bread or any other
Meat but (...) boiled in Water; insomuch that several die with Hunger and Work:
They lie upon the Ground, on little Esteres, or Matts, made of Bullrushes, or
the Bark of Trees.

The Portugals acquire much Reputation of making good Christians; for having
caused them to be Baptized, they thus make them Die miserably: Also the Japans
knowing their Letchery and insatiable Avarice, seem to have had some reason for
their rising against them: For these, who are a subtle and wary People, seeing
that the design of the Portugals, after having made them Christians, was to
dispossess them of their Lands and Goods by all Inventions; therefore they did
not care for their Amity, much less did they desire 'em to Domination of the
Portugals what?
Govern, and this perhaps was one of the causes that they have Martyred so many
Jesuits who were utterly innocent of all this: For these Japans are mightily
Jealous of their Wives, and the Japans jealous.
Portugals had no other aim but to gain them, especially those of the greatest,
with whom afterward they do what they please; which was the reason that moved
these People to so much Cruelty.

I have found out in the Indies, that the Whoredoms, Ambition, Avarice, and
Greediness of the Portugals, has been one of the chiefest causes why the
Indians become not Christians so easily: This is the Reason why the People of
the Portugal Churches, who are in those parts, mightily desire some French,
Dutch, or Scots to be with them, because these People lead a life less impure
and scandalous; which is the thing that most chiefly maintains and upholds
Religion in that part of the World. I Religion how and by what maintained
have there known a Father Jesuit of the Country of Artois, who lived in
Salsete, which is a little Isle not far from the main Land, depending upon Goa;
he was there as Curate in a great Parrish, and understood very well the Indian
Tongue: But afterward the Jesuits took him from thence to send him to Chaoul;
and I then saw the poor People of his Parish, who mightily lamented that they
had lost him, some saying that they had rather have had their Arms cut off,
than have seen him taken away from them: For they feared to have some Portugal,
who would Tyranize over them.

Thus ye may see what honest Men can do amongst the very Infidels, who know how
to discern the good from the bad.

As for the Father Jesuits, they pass as far as China to make there some fruit,
Jesuits in China.
and fit their beards and hair after the Chinese manner, and have their Clothes
made after the same fashion, and Learn the Language to Accommodate themselves
the more easily thereto; but they dare not Preach the Gospel there but in
private, for fear of being put to Death: I have been told at Goa that they have
Converted great Numbers of them, yea, the very Mandarins themselves, and
Governors of Provinces: They have a Church, and College at Macao, an Isle and
City of China, and there they Learn the Chinese Language:

This is about 45 Leagues from Canton one of the greatest Cities in all China,
Canton a great City.
where they go through a great River, much bigger than the Seen at Roar, and is
joined with the Sea.

At the Port of Canton are continually above three or four thousand very large
Boats; and there a great Number of Birds of the River retire themselves (...):
which they leave in the Morning to go into the fields to seek their Living,
some on one side, and some on the other; then when the Night comes, the Chinese
sound a little horn, which is heard at a great distance, and then these Ducks
return every one to his Boat, where they have their Nests, and Ducks of China.
hatch their young ones.

A Man who shall have a Boat garnished with these Ducks is rich; For they sell
'em raw in the Market, and some they also Roast to sell.

A Portugal told me at Goa, that going from Macao to Canton, he had been
Cozened by a Chinese after this manner; for having bought one of these Roasted
Ducks at a Cooks shop, seeing it look well, and appearing to be very fat, he
carried it with him on board his Vessel, to eat it, but when he had put his
knife within it to cut it up, he found nothing but the skin which was upon some
paper, ingeniously fitted up with little sticks, which made up the Body of the
Duck; the Chinese having very Guile and deceits of Chines^.
dexterously plucked away the flesh, and then so well Accommodated this skin,
that it seemed to be a true Duck; of which the Portugal was so ashamed that he
durst not say a word thereof to any one for fear of being Laughed at, both by
the Chinese, and his Companions; and so eat the skin alone of the Duck without
making any further ado.

These People of China are very subtle, and great cheats, patient in Labor,
they wake all the Night long: And when two or three are upon one piece of work,
some go to sleep whilst the others work, they come to relieve one another
Chinise^ cuning Merchants and desirous of Money.
by turns. If they see any Merchant that has Money to lay out, they do all they
can to have his traffic* fetching all sorts of Merchandise, if those do not
please they go for others, until they have catched his Money.

There the custom is for all People of the same Office or Trade, to live
together in the same street, as all the Painters in one street, all the
Shoe-Makers in an other; and so also the rest of the Tradesmen, the persons of
honor are in one street, the less Noble in an other, and never mix together,
thinking that a great shame and disgrace: They also bring up their Children in
their own calling and no other, and observe this very strictly: When they have
a mind to marry their Children, they cause them to come all to a certain place
designed ^arriages ^ China.
for that purpose, which is a great Hall, and there put all the Males on one
side, and the Maids on the other directly over against one another: The young
women have their faces covered with a Vail, and the Boys go to choose which
pleases them best, and keep to those whom they have taken by the hand; this is
the manner of their Marriages: The Portugals are mighty desirous to have these
Chinese for Slaves, because they are not only faithful and industrious, but
also very active in business.

When the Portugals come to Canton there are Chinese on purpose, who make it
their Trade to go into the Country toward the Habitations, and Villages: And
when they see there some pretty little Boy or Girl, they entice them away with
little toys, promising them more; then when they see them at a little distance,
they carry them away by force, and hide them in certain places waiting till
Night comes, and then come to the Sea side, where they know there are
Traffickers, to whom they sell them for 12 and 15 Tays a piece, which is about
25 Crowns.

My Hostess at Goa told me that she Chinese, ^ow ^tole away.
had been thus deceived by a Chinese, at 8 years of Age: A young Chinese Slave
gave me an account returning from the Indies, how he had been also thus
trappan'd by a little Cake, which had been given him, made of a sort of paste
fried, of which they make very much use.

In China are a great Number of Hogs like wild Boars, of whom they make Gammons
to sell to those who belong to the Sea, and especially to the Portugals who
come there; and have also the same cunning tricks with the Roasted Ducks, to
pluck away the flesh, leaving nothing but the skin, which they fill with black
Earth, with the bones therein, then rub it so well with the fat that it seems
to be the flesh it self: They sell this by weight, and it is no easy matter to
discern the right from the wrong: Nay, if you put your knife in it, if it be
but as they cut it in slices: you may perceive the deceit*

In the Isle of Macao, where the Chinese and Portugals inhabit together, Trick
put upon a Portugal*
there was a Portugal Merchant very rich, who being in Love with a Chinese
woman that was Married, used all the Solicitation and Courtship he could to
oblige her to condescend to his will, but not being able to bring his designs
to pass, he continued to importune her, insomuch that she declared it all to
her Husband, who prudently told her that she should permit him to come at an
hour appointed, and that he would make show of going abroad, and then presently
return and would knock at the Door: Having thus agreed betwixt them, it was put
in Execution and the Portugal had assignation of the Lady, who failed not to
come at the time appointed, not a little Joyful of this good fortune at last.
But no sooner was our Gentleman entered the House the Door shut, than the
Husband knocks at the Door, at which the Good Wife seeming to be mightily
astonished, prayed the Portugal to hide himself* in an open Tub or
Pourcelainfat, and having caused him to enter therein, and Locked it fast,
opened the Door to her Husband, who without making show of any thing, let him
there soak till the next Morning, when he ordered this Tub to be carried to the
Market, or Lailan as they call it, saying that there was some of the finest
sort of Pourcelain therein to sell, and that there was so many Courges, or
Dozen, and carried a sample thereof in his hand: When he had agreed with some
one for the price, they opened the fat. And then appeared the poor Portugal
ashamed, and almost starved, and every one mightily astonished to see him there
in that condition, and the Chinese himself pretending great wonder thereat, and
the Portugal had his belly full of Jearing and hissing at, without any other
harm.

When the Chinese can catch any Portugal, they use them very scurrilously as
Treatment of the Chinese toward the Portugals.
it happened to a Portugal Captain, who going from Macoa to Canton, the
Mandarin Governor of the province sent for him, telling him that he had been
advertised that the Portugals had carried away a great many Chinese Captives,
and for that cause he must be content to be put to Death, and have his Ship
Consiseated: The other thought this very strange, and began to entreat the
Mandarin as well as he could with fair words and promises to let him go* but
the Mandarin not having a mind to quit him at so easy a rate, commanded him to
be stripped stark naked; and to lie along upon the ground as the Portugals do
to their Slaves, and others, then caused him to have three blows with a Cane
sl^t in two, and then was let go.

Now when there arrives any Ships in the Ports of China, to put off their
Merchandise, the Chinese coming for the custom, take the length and the
breadth of the Ship, then after that they know within a very small matter what
the Ship carries, they pay accordingly without regarding what the Merchandise
is.

As for the Chinese at their meat, they eat like Gluttons, and with an ill
grace, as I have often taken notice of, in eating and drinking with them. They
have this custom, never to touch the meat they eat, but have two little
spatules of hard wood very neatly made like forks, which they hold betwixt
their fingers, they eat the flesh of Dogs, which is a great dish amongst them,
they are also mightily used to Rice, and little Bread. As for their Houses,
they are very sumptuous, and adorned with all sort^ of pretty Devices: They
also are very Voluptuous, as well Men as Women.

But to return to Goa, I think it not much amiss to relate what a Portugal
Gentleman told me of their Adventures, which was that once going to War toward
the South Sea, with the Naval Army of Galiots, (which every year go out against
the Malabars) about the middle of September, when their Winter is past, and at
the same time another Army goes out to the North Sea, which is toward the Red
Sea.

The Captains of the Army held Council together to go into a Habitation of the
Gentiles, along by the Coast near to Cochin, to take away by force a Golden
Pagod, very great, with other little ones, who were in a certain Temple there:
But forasmuch as these Gentiles were Confederates with the Portugals, they
would not do this enterprise in the daytime, but went one night to go ashore
in this little City, not far from the Sea, where the Pagod was, and setting
foot on Land, they set Fire in every place to fright these poor People, and so
went straight to the Pagod, but the Fire passed so quickly, that before they
had Power to take the Idol it forced them to retire a little faster than they
came, and had no more time than only to snatch the Pendants and Rings from the
Ears and Fingers of these poor Religious Women, who were shut up, Dancing all
the night in their Pagod, according to their Custom: They were near 500, and
seeing the Enemy entering, they all assembled themselves together, fastening
their Legs and Arms one within another, that 'twas impossible for the Portugals
to draw so much as one of them out: But seeing the Fire at their Heels, they
only snatched away the Jewels from their Ears, their Fingers they cruelly cut
off to have the Rings, and they made such a lamentable noise, that 'twas a
great pity to hear them: The Portugals flying away from the I^ire, left all
these Religious young Women to be Burnt, none being able to succor them; and
thus cruelly do the Portugals treat their best Friends and Confederates: He who
related to me this pitious History, was named Don Louts Lobe, who was of this
enterprise, and told me, that this uproar moved him from his very Heart to Pity.

As for what concerns the City of Goa, and the Country round about, I pretend
not here to make an exact and ample Description; yet I desire the Reader to
take notice, that that little which I speak is no more than what my Memory was
able to furnish me withal; for being upon the places, I was so carefully
watched, as are all Strangers, and especially the French, that I could put
nothing in Writing; And this was the principal cause of my Imprisonment at
Mosambique, being accused of having made a Ruttier of the Sea, which thing the
Portugals fear the most, not being willing, that the French, English, or
Hollanders, should know any thing of those Countries.

I will say of Goa in a few words, that it is a City excellent well situated
in an Island, environed with the River, some part level, and other mountainous,
and may be about as big as Tours, but Peopled with all Nations of India: It is
very well built, in its Churches, Hospitals, Colleges, public Palaces, and
particular Houses of the Portugals and Natives, which are of a reddish Bastard
Marble, and Freestone: The other Houses of the Indians are like Cabins built
with Earth, and some Stone: They have a great number of Gardens, with Tanques,
or great Ponds to Bath in, and many Fruit* Trees: The Country is good and
fertile, bearing Rice twice a year: The Gentiles have liberty of their
Religion, but are not suffered to have any Pagod or Temple within the City, but
only in the main-land, and out of the Isle.

When these Gentiles and Idolaters come to Die, if they leave little Children,
the Jesuits are careful to take and bring them up, and instruct them in the
Faith; and therefore for their Pains, they seize upon their Lands,
Inheritances, and Goods* My Host, a Christian Indian, told me, that he had been
served after this manner, without being a jot the better instructed.

As for the Men of War, they are about 1500 or 2000, according as the Fleets
arrive. I saw a General-Muster of all the Inhabitants bearing Arms, as well the
Portugals as Natives and Indians, and were sound to be about 4000: They did
that, being that time in fear of the Hollanders, who scowered the Sea with a
great number of Vessels. I neither knew nor met with any Frenchman there, but a
good Father Jesuit, named Estienne de la Croix, Native of Roan, of whom I
received no small kindness: I also saw 3 others, who had escaped from the
Maldives, amongst whom was one named Francois Pirard, a Briton, who has Writ
the History of his Voyages: I was told that 3 Months before I arrived at Goa,
there went away from thence, a French Gentleman named de Feynes, ho caused
himself to be called the Count of Monsert: He was mighty skillful in the Art of
Blowing up places; which was the cause of his Misfortune; for coming from
Persia to Ormus, as he was discoursing there* that he knew the way of Blowing
up a Fortress, was it never so strong, he was presently laid hold of as a
Prisoner, and carried to Goa, where he was kept in Prison for fear he would
observe the Fortresses; and the first Fleet that returned to Portugal, he was
sent therein, and kept Prisoner at Lisbon, until Monsieur* du Main went into
Spain, who obtained his Deliverance.

As for what concerns the Fertility of the Land of Goa, and what it produces, I
remit you to what has been written by the Portugals; only I say, that the Fruit
most necessary for the life of Man, is that of the Palm. This Tree is Spongy,
having little Strings or Veins environed with a Pellicule, and draws its
substance from the Sandy-Earth, from which it also draws great abundance of
moisture, which is necessary for the greatness of the Fruit it bears, and the
quantity of Esura or Wine which this Fruit renders. Of the Nut of this
Palm Tree, so celebrated in the Indies, they draw abundance of Meat and Drink.

There a^^ plenty of these Coco's, or Maldives; but amongst others, they remark
one sort thereof which comes from the bottom of the Sea, the Fruit is bigger
than the common Palm; it is also very dear amongst the Portugals, who suppose it
to have a great Virtue for the Disease of the Lungs, and for the Astmatiques,
or Shortness of Breath, and against Poison. The Nut thereof is very great, long
and black, in form of a Gondale; The Tree that bears this Fruit is not to be
seen, growing at the bottom of the Sea: but when the Sea is agitated, the Fruit
is born from the bottom to the top, and is found upon the Shore.

I come now to my return, when the Senior Andre Furtado de Mondoso returning to
Portugal, sent for me to go with him. We parted then from the Bar of Goa the 2d
of Jan. 1610. Being Embarked in a Ship called Nostra Segniora di Beigna di
Francia, which was very heavily laden and cumbered, insomuch that 'twas no
small confusion to be there; Andre Furtado was very sick when he Embarked. At
last we set sail with a great deal of trouble, because the Ship had Cinnamon
almost as far as the middle of the Mast, every day taking care to put by so
much out of the way.

The 16th of January we saw the Deserts of Arabia, and sailed with a very good
Wind as far as the Land of Crimbe, or Country of the Abassins, and passed along
by the Coast the 9th of Feb. But the 11th we feared to be lost by a contrary
Wind, the Ship beating upon the Sea, and drawing in much Water. The Senior
Andre Furtado sick as he was, seeing this extremity, got upon the Deck to order
the Ship to be lightened and pumped, and about 300 Black Slaves, with some
Mariners, were 3 days and nights, and had much ado to empty it.

The 15th of Feb. we saw the Isle of St. Lawrence, mightily covered with Fog,
and bearing about to pass the Cape of Good-Hope, with a favorable Gale of
Wind, we passed it the 16th of March.

Being at the height of the Isle of St. Helens, we were in great doubt whether
we should go on Shore to take there some fresh Water, and the Passengers and
Mariners disputed stiffly against the Master and Pilot, but they put it all to
the Sieur Andre Furtado, who was then mortally Sick, and who said that he had
no Orders from the King of Spain to go to the said Isle, except it was in case
of great necessity, and that he feared to find there some Enemies, who might
give them trouble, it being the place where they commonly came: Thereupon he
commanded a review to be taken of the fresh Water that remained, to know if it
would hold out for every one to have half a Pint a day for 4 Months, for we
reckoned we had so long to sail: This enquiry exactly made, 'twas found within
a very small matter of this measure; so that we made the best of our way, the
Wind being favorable. We could not persuade Senior Andre Furtado, tho he was
sick, to repo^e himself in this little Isle of St. Helen; so that in the end
this poor Gentleman, being weakened and overcome with sickness, died the first
of April: His Body was Embalmed that it might be carried to Portugal, for in
the Ships there is never want of Camfre, Benjoin, and Aromatical Things for
that purpose: There was a Portugal Barber, who knew only how to Shave and let
Blood; and having a mind to make Balm, in causing the Benjoin to be melted, and
to fill the Body therewith: I releived him from this trouble and apparent
Error, and made him acknowledge his Fault; and so having Embalmed the Body, and
put it in a Coffin, It was laid up in the Guard-Robe of the Chamber, with a
lighted Lamp by it, and we carried it without any smell or inconveniency as far
as Lisbon.

We passed close by the Isles of the A^ores and along by them, were great
debates betwixt those of the Ship, some were resolved to go on shore by force,
which the Captain, the Master and Pilot would by no means yield too: This came
all from the passenger Soldiers, who came to dispatch their business in
Portugal for Recompense of their Services in the Indies: For then the King
gives them some Captain-ships of Fortresses in the Indies: But the Captain
caused some of the most Mutinous to come before him; (for they were ready to
lay hold upon their Arms, and made no small stir and ado, thinking themselves
still in the Indies) but he soon made them to know their duty; and persuing our
course with a very good wind, we arrived at Cuscais* the 2d of July, and the
next day I went on shore, leaving all my things on Board, which were there
above a Month without being able to get them out; there being Guards which
stole them all away. At the Months end the Kings Duty being paid, the small
things were brought on Shore, and there was several who found their Chests fast
shut, but nothing within them: I was one of those also; but it was small loss
to me, not having brought back any thing of value from those Countries, where I
had nothing but bad fortune; and was very well content that I was safely
returned tho I was not a little indisposed in my person, because of these salt
and spiced waters, which I had then been forced to drink till they so heated my
Stomach, that my mouth cast out burning Vapors, and I could scaree quench my
thirst.

At length being restored to my health by cooling remedies, and seeing my self
strong enough to reassume the way to my dear native Country, where I had a
great desire to see my self again after so many satigues and dangers, I
embarked the 17th of August in a Ship belonging to one Picare Simon of
Rochelle. and in our Company was another Ship called also the Dauphin of
Rochelle: But being in the Sea, we were so beaten with Storms, that the
Dauphin, mightily desired us to keep by them; but one Night in a very great
Storm, her Sails split and tore to pieces, they were forced to bend their main
Top Sail in stead of their main Sail, insomuch that in the Morning we saw her
at above 3 Leagues of us, and had put abroad their Ensign to cause us to come
up to her; which we did as soon as might be, and coming near her, we saw them
crying out for Misericorde, or mercy, for they were sinking: We boarded them at
the Poop, and they saved themselves, who could in our Ship; it was a great pity
to see them in this extremity: I saved one of them along by the side, who fell
from the Stern of our Ship: Thus was the Ship lost and all the Merchandise that
was in her; and afterward we arrived at Rochelle the 3d of Sept. from thence I
came to Paris the 23 of the same Month, when our young King Lewis XIII. (whom
God preserve and prosper) was gone to be. Crowned at Rheims.

I had heard no News of the unhappy accident happened in the Person of King
Henry the Great, my good Master, until we were in sight of Lisbon; for then,
according to the custom, there came a Caravel from the Port to see and know who
we were, who told us that sad History, which I could scarcely believe, but
coming to Land it was too much confirmed, to my Eternal regret and sorrow.



THE TRAVELS AND VOYAGES OF John Mocquet, INTO Syria, and the Holy Land.

BOOK V.
HAving returned to Paris from so many long and troublesome Voyages after the
Death of King Henry the Great, whom I can never sufficiently lament, and all
other good French Men, I had a desire to make a Religious Voyage into the Holy
Land, there to go pay (like a good Christian) so many Vows I had made to God
for the innumerable Perils and Dangers, from which it has pleased him,
mercifully to preserve me so often.

In this Resolution I parted from Paris the 19th. of July, 1611. and took Coach
to Marseilles, where I arrived Embarkment at Marseilles.
the 14th. Day of August, and tarried there for some Days to wait for passage,
which at last I found in a Ship of Toulon, called the St. Francis, belonging to
Ode Bergue, and Vander Strate, Merchants of Toulon, and Marseilles: There
embarking, the 8th. of September, we set sail, and the 12th. saw the Isle of
Sardania, which Sardania.
we left on the North-East; and the 15th. we saw the Coast of Barbary, passing
near the Isle of Guerite, which Guerite Isle.
is a little Island not far from the main Land, where the Robbers and Pirates
lurk, as well Turks as Christians; we had this Isle toward the South-West.

The 17th. we passed along by Malta, Malta.
then by Sicilia, where we found a Sicilia.
Ship in the fashion of a Galiot, who came directly toward us to know if they
durst engage us; but when they had perceived our Strength, they tacked about,
taking their course toward Barbary, seeking other Prey more easy to surprise.

The 21st. we passed along by Candia, Candia.
where there is a little Island called Agose Isle.
Agose, which advances into the Sea with a Point toward the South: Then the
27th. we went to the Isle of Cyprus, toward the City of Bafe, Cyprus.
not far from the Coast, and went to pass the Cape de Gate, designing to go to
Famagusta: But having a sharp Gale, and good for our Voyage, we continued our
course, bearing toward Tripoly in Syria, where we arrived Arrival at Tripoly.
the last Day of September; the next Morning, the 1s^. of October, I went on
shore to lodge in the City, in a Campo near the Juderie, or Jews-Place: Campo.
These Campo's are great Houses, with large Courts and Fountains, where
Strangers retire themselves for shelter, like Inns. These belong to some great
Person, who letts them out; and he who is the Porter thereof, whom they call
Boabe, receives the Money of the Passengers, and gives it to the Master, of
whom he holds it upon Rent.

Having tarried some time at Tripoly, Voyage to Mount Lebanon.
I had a mind to see Mount Lebanon; and for this effect took a Turk, with an
Ass to carry our Victuals: We left the City the 11th. of November, and went
over very high Mountains, and troublesome to pass, and in the end arrived at
the Lodging of a Chaldean Archbishop, called Father George, who received us
after the best manner he could. His House is right above Mount Lebanon; his
Church is under his Habitation, and a Water-mill underneath his Church. I saw a
good Father, a Chaldean Priest, and Kinsman to this Archbishop, who came from
grinding his Corn, as he showed us by his Visage all white with Meal; and
seeing him in this case, we knew him not to be of the Church, until the next
Morning, which was Sunday, when I saw him go with the Host in his Hand from
thence to a Village, there to sing Mass. The Father George lived there with his
Mother, Sisters, and Nieces, making one and the same Family altogether. He
showed me a Chapel above his House, upon a little Rock, right under Mount
Lebanon, and told methere was there a Hole, out of which every Year, upon the
1st. Day of May only, gushes an abundance of Water, at such time as they sing
Mass in the Chapel. The Mountain is covered all over with Cyprus-Trees. The
Place is very agreeable; but the Winter is there very troublesome, because of
the excessive Cold, and great Snows, which mightily afflicts these good
Fathers, so that they are constrained for that cause to pass the Winter near
Tripoly, and return there again in the Spring.

The next Morning after we had heard Mass, we set forward toward the Place
where the Cedars are, about Cedars.
Three Leagues from thence; where being come, we had such a cold blast of Wind,
that my Turk blew his Fingers: I ordered him to get upon a Cedar-Tree to break
me off some Branches, but he tarried there not long; for the Cold soon made him
to descend, that he could not get me so much as I desired. But I feared he
would tumble down, being half frozen; and besides, he had not eaten his
Breakfast, because of their Romadan, Romadan, or Fast.
in the which they fast till Evening, not daring to eat any thing upon pain of
Death, except it be in private, and those who observe not strictly their Law;
and when I saw him tremble in good earnest, I presently made him come down,
fearing to lose him.

From thence we reassumed our way to return to Canibi, which is a Place Canibi.
belonging to the Chaldean Patriarch, and had very bad Weather of Rain; so that
we arrived there late in the Evening, after having passed many little
Habitations, situate for the most part upon the side of inaccessible Rocks, and
are almost all Chaldean, and Greek Christians, with some few Moors amongst
them. We were there very well received, and drank excellent Wine, which grows
in these Mountains.

The next Day having heard Mass, we returned to Tripoli, where I passed a very
troublesome Winter, because Inundations.
of the great Inundations of Water which came from the Mountains, and so
swelled a little River which runs through the middle of the City, that it bore
down part of the Houses, with great loss of Merchandise, and Water-mills, which
it carried quite away, with the Stone Bridge. This was the cause that Bread was
there very scarce and dear, that we had much ado to get a little black
Biscuit, half spoiled, which was sold me by weight, and at what rate they
pleased, and that by halves; and the People already began to cry out for
Famine. The House of the Consul of France fell upon him, and killed him:
Several other Houses fell also by this disaster of Inundation, which came in a
Night without so much as dreaming of.

The City of Tripoly is situated in a A Description of Tripoly.
Valley below Mount Lebanon, and has still an old Castle with square Towers,
built formerly by the French, the then Lords of the Holy Land: There is at
present a Garrison of Turks. The City may be as big as Pontoise, and there is
but a small River that passes that way, which is very subject to break out of
its Banks when the Snows of the Mountain melt, and then does a thousand
Mischiefs, as I have seen when I happened to be there: All the rest of the time
one may pass almost dry upon the Stones. The City is very well built; the
Houses low, except those of the Great Ones; and there inhabits a great Number
of Grecian Christians, Jews, some French, and Italians. Those of Marseilles
trade mightily there.

There is also a Bassa, or Governor, who, in the Summer, goes with his
Nobility to lie in Tents in the Meadows betwixt the Port and the City, and
there exercise themselves at the Lance, and Sword. This City is about Nine
Days Journey from Aleppo.

The Spring being come, I began to Parting for Jerusalem.
think of going to Jerusalem; and for this purpose, parting the 9th. of April,
1612. with a Mouquary, or Turkish Carrier, we took our way toward Damascus,
and the first Night lay in a little Meadow by a Riverside, where we endured no
small cold, because of the Winds which come from these Mountains laden with
Snow. The next Day we raised our little Caravan, which consisted of Turks and
Jews, and a Greek Christian and his Sister: This young Grecian Girl was not
above Twelve Years of Age, and was very virtuous and brisk, being mounted upon
her little Ass, which was led by her Brother. We passed many Mountains, and
arrived at a Habitation of Arabians, where we had but very bad Lodging, lying
along the Walls of the Houses which are in very dirty Places: I made my Pillow
of a Stone.

The next Day we went to Dine at Armel, a little City of the Arabians, Armel.
and then retired into a House of Pleasure very stately and magnificent, but
there was none in it; it serves only for a retiring Place, and Lodging for the
Caravans, they giving so much to the Porter who is the Keeper thereof: This
House is furnished After the Moorish manner.
a la Moresque, and strong enough to hold out an Assault. A certain Turk who
returned from the Bassa of Tripoly caused it to be built after this manner: The
Bassa commanded him to be taken and brought into his presence, telling him,
That being his Subject he was greater than he, in regard of the sumptuous and
strong House which he had caused to be built, that he might rebel against him;
and thereupon commanded his Head to be chopp'd off in recompense of several
good and notable Services he had done him.

Parting from this Place, we went along by a Rivolet to lodge upon a little
Hill within the enclosure of certain Walls very low, where there was a small
Cottage of the Arabians: We lay along the Wall, and passed the Night with great
fear of the thievish Arabs. We parted from thence betimes in the Morning, and
came to Bailbec, a very ancient City, where Bailbec.
formerly lived Christians, the Ruins of a Church remaining there yet. I went
into the City with my Mouquary, which was the Turk, that furnished me with a
Horse to ride upon, and there we sought for a little Wine, but privately, it
being forbid to sell any: We found some White, very good, at the House of a
Grecian, who earnestly desired us to hide it. They failed not to come to search
our Clothes, and other things, but they could not find it, for we had locked it
fast up. We lay without the City along the Walls which are made of great
Stones, not of Masons Work, but roughly set one upon another, each one above 12
or 15 Foot long. The Bassa of this Place went out about Noon with all his
Cavalry and Infantry, going to some Place, not far from thence, upon a Quarrel
which he had against the Bassa of Damascus. He marched in excellent good order,
especially for Turks and Arabians to observe.

We dislodged from this Place two or three Hours before Day, passing by Rocks,
of which the most part were Aquaeducts.
broke and thrown down, and the Veins and Pipes bigger than ones Arm are still
to be seen, through which flowed the Water before they were broke down: There
is amongst others one of these Rocks slit in two, about 3 or 4 Leagues from
Damascus; and the River of Jordan, which comes Jordan.
from Mount Lebanus, passes with great swiftness very near it, there is a
Bridge over which we passed: Along by this River are places cut like Caves
within the Rock, where lived formerly certain Hermits; and truly the Place is
very proper for a solitary Life, being exceeding desert, and of difficult
access. We went to lie in a certain Habitation, and the next Day we arrived at
Damascus, which was on Palm Sunday Damascus.
Eve, the 14th. of April. I went to take a Lodging in the House of one Ibrahim,
a Rabbi of the Jews, to whom I had been recommended by a Cousin of his, which I
had known at Tripoly. He received us after the best manner he could; but we
supped but badly, because it was the Day of their Sabbath, in which they dare
scarce touch any thing. The next Day I so ordered the Business with this Jew,
my Host, that he gave me one of his Servants to conduct me, and help me to buy
an Ass. They were at that time making Preparations for their Passover, and I
saw them buy Sheep in a Market for that purpose, Passover of the Jews.
and this Servant chose the fattest for his Master; so that I had much ado to
hale him to the place where I knew there was an Ass to be sold, which had been
brought from Tripoly with us: I bargained for it for 19 Pataques Pataques.
and a half one, for the Jew: I exchanged my Money, taking for Spanish Money,
Pieces of Albouquelque, to give to the Cafars, and gained 55 for 50; for the
Cafars go for as much Cafars.
as those of Spain. Albouquelques are pieces of German Money, having the
Albouquelques.
mark of a Lion; the Turks take it for a Dog, and therefore call them
Albouquelques or Dog-pieces. I desired also my Jew to find me out a Turk, which
he did, and promised him a Patache a Day, but he was to find himself with
Victuals.

As for this City of Damascus, it is very fine and pleasant, having most
delicate Gardens, and is seated in a Valley, as it were in the middle of a
Meadow; and there is a Lake and a River which pass cross it, with many
excellent Fountains: Amongst others is to be seen that of St. Paul near to a
Mosque.

This City is divided into two, by a great Churchyard of some 400 Paces,
Damascus described.
after the Moorish manner: The whole City may be as big as Orleance. It is of
great Trade; and amongst others, there is a great Street, where there is
nothing but Merchandice of Drugs and Spices. This City is encompassed with
Walls, but not round about, and has a very strong Castle, and great number of
Gardens in the adjacent Parts. There is a Bassa, or Governor, and a multitude
of Greek Christians there, but no French. It is about Three Days Journey from
the Sea, and Five from Jerusalem: Formerly it was the greatest Commerce of the
Indies, Persia, Chaldea, Armenia, and other Places.

We left Damascus the 16th. of April, and went to Sassa, where was a Cafar,
Cafars, or Toll.
or Toll: But my Turk, to save me from paying any thing, and thinking to have
the half of that which belonged to the Cafar, put upon my Turbant, which was of
the Greek Color, another of white after the Turkish manner, and passed thus
without being taken notice of by the Cafars, or else they were asleep in their
Houses; for we saw none coming toward us as we passed over the Bridge which is
there: So that we escaped, and went from thence through a very bad way full of
great Stones, where I endured no small pain, scarce being able to draw my self
out from amongst them, because of the Water and Mire which are together; and
this bad way continued almost the whole Day. But as we were a good way in these
Boggs and Quagmires, we saw coming toward us a Turkish Cavalier, with a
Harquebuse at his Saddle-bow, and Adventure of a Turk.
passing near to me, he demanded, An ta Frangi? if I was a Christian; and
having answered him, Yes, he returned in a Fury toward my Turk, who was before
me, and held his Sword at his Throat to kill him, had not a poor Arabian, who
was at work hard by, run to his succor, praying this Cavalier to be pacified;
and from thence he came to give me a Blow with his Sword, but I gat my self out
of his way, and he spurring his Horse upon me, cried Rou, which is to say,
Return; but my Turk so ordered the Matter, that he was content to take a Piece
of Money, and the Arabian also mightily desired him. After that, my Turk took
away my white Turbant, showing him that I had one of the right Color
underneath, and that this which he had given me was to keep me from the Sun.
This, with the Money, contented him, and preserved us from the Danger of being
soundly beaten, and also of returning back to Sassa, where the Cafars and
Soubachins.
Sub-Bassa's would not have pardoned us. I then threw away his white Cap,
contenting my self with my own, not having a mind ever to rely any more upon
what he told me. We were in continual fear lest these Cafars should come after
us, upon the Information of this Cavalier, but they did not; yet my Turk was
under such a mortal Apprehension that they would, that he turned about ever and
anon, and pricked on the Ass as much as he could. We went to lie at Conetra in
a Campo, where we paid a Cafar. Conetra.


The Chelubin, which is to say the Lord of the Place, who understood a little
of the Gemique Tongue, (which is corrupted Italian,) spoke for me to the
Cafars, that they might use me kindly, and take no more of me than he ordered
them. He came with other Cavaliers of his Company to discourse with me where I
was with my Ass in a Court; and having perceived my Kit or Gittern amongst my
things, he desired me mightily to play upon it, which I willingly did, and
presented him with a curious great Pomgranate, which had been given me by one
of the Bassa's of Damascus's Gentlemen. He was very well content therewith, and
thought himself well paid for the Kindness he had done me with the Cafars.
These Cafars Cafars, or Toll-gatherers.
are the Farmers and Toll-gatherers of the Turk, and are always Three together;
one for the Grand Signior, another for the Soldiers of the Country, and the
third for the Soubachin, or Governor of the Place. I lay there in a Stable of
Mules and Camels, upon a little Grass which I had bought, having no better
Lodging that Night than my Ass.

We parted from thence about three Hours before Day, and found the Company
which was going after the Chec-Marabou, who parted from Damascus Chec*Marabou.
two Days before us, whom we overtook along by the Sea Tiberiades. This
Chec-Marabou goes out every Year from Damascus, to go in Devotion to Salomon's
Temple in Jerusalem, and those who go with him, (which are they of the
Country,) pay nothing; they are sometimes 5 or 6000. I was very glad to find
this Company, for fear that my Turk should play me some Roguish Trick, though
the Jew, Ibrahim, had made him put his Hand upon mine, promising, upon the Law
of Mah^met, to guard and protect me as himself, and to bring me back again to
Damascus, or at least a Letter from me to this Jew: But yet I trusted not so
much to that, as to make me neglect being upon my guard, knowing well the
Humor of this cu^sed and unfaithful Race of People, who will kill a Man for a
small matter, and especially the Turks Covetous and Wicked.
Christians, whom they greatly hate, and serve them only for their own Profit,
of which they are as greedy as Hell can make 'em.

We passed then a great Number of Woods, and at length came to Jacob's -B^idge,
where there was a Cafar, through which passes a very swift River, which is that
of Jordan, and which Jordan.
runs from thence into the Sea Tiberiades, not far distant from thence. These
Cafars were Arabs; and my Turk thinking not to pay so much, to save something
for himself, endeavored to persuade them that I was a Jew, and that I was
going to Zaphet where their Synagogue Zaphet.
is; but these Arabs, who were very cunning and subtle, saw by my Looks that I
was not like a Jew; and an old Man, all scorched and burnt with the Sun, asked
me, Hady Frangi? which is as much as to say, if I was a Christian? My Turk, and
another of our Company, earnestly entreated them not to take much of me, and
that I was a poor miserable Wretch, and made me pass before with the others,
they tarrying there to pay; but for all that, they paid much more, (or at
least made me believe so) than I had done: But it behoved me to pass that way
whether I would or not. When you have passed the Bridge, you see in this River
a little Island, where there is an ancient Building, which they say to be
Jacob's House. Jacob 's House.


From thence we passed through Deserts, where was a great Number of Tents of
the Arabs on each side, and began to mend our pace for the great Fear we were
in, without resting or refreshing our selves at all; and I was very angry with
my Turk, who would not give me time to eat a bit of Bread, being very weak,
having set out a little after Midnight, and made so much way; and besides, our
evil Fortune was not to find the least drop of Water to drink. When we had
passed all these Habitations of Arabs, we went to pitch along by a Rock, where
it was exceeding hot, and there seeking for Water we found some, though very
little, which was Rainwater kept there a long time. We had a mind to taste of
it; but it was so bitter and stinking, that it was impossible to swallow the
least drop thereof, though I formerly had drank that which had been very bad, and
fancied that the Lizards, Serpents, and other venomous Creatures, which are
there in abundance, had come to drink, and to plunge themselves therein. Our
Turks, though they are exceeding dry, and are rustical and rough in their
manner of living, could not drink the least drop thereof. By good Fortune I had
still a Pomegranate or two left, of which I gave to every one a little bit to
refresh their Mouths, not daring to eat any thereof before them, without giving
them some, though I had very great need of it my self: But it behoved me so to
do, if I had a mind to live quietly; my endeavor being to humor them as long
as I was with them.

Thus passed we this troublesome Way as far as the Cistern of Joseph, Cistern
of Joseph.
where we drank some of the Water, which is very good and fresh, and filled
also our Teronques therewith. This Cistern is a little Place raised up, where
there is a Building, in which live certain Arabs: It is covered with a Cupolo,
sustained with Four Pillars of White Marble; but at present there is but Three
entire, the other being broken.

Having drank enough, we went on our way; but these Arabs striving to force us
to give them something for this Water, my Turk ran to hinder them from taking
my Bread which I had brought from Damascus, where I was furnished with
Provision for several Days; but at last it behoved us to give them something:
And thus escaped we from their Hands, passing along Valley of the Five Loaves.
by the Valley of the Five Loaves, where our Lord wrought that famous Miracle:
From thence we came to the Sea of Tiberias, the 18th. of April, Sea of Tiberias.
and found the Chec-Marabou, who was going to Jerusalem to the Temple of
Solomon, accompanied with 4 or 5000 Persons of all sorts. The Place where we
were, was then called Lameny; there we pitched our Baggage hard by Lameny.
a Bush, and in the mean time I went to bathe in this Sea, to ease and refresh
my self a little: I found the Water thereof very sweet and still, and excellent
good to drink, having a very soft Sand at the bottom. The River of Jordan
passes with a very swift course just through the middle, without mixing it self
therewith, and from thence runs into the dead Sea near Jerusalem, from whence
it is plainly to be seen from Mount Olivet; for it is in a Valley, having the
Land of Arabia very high, and Desert on the other side, as I saw from Mount
Olivet.

This Place of Lameny has Cafars, but I met with none of them: I there saw all
these Marabouts Santons, who dance before the Chec's Tent; and it is a fine
sight to see them perform their Ceremonies and Follies, ranging themselves
Strange Danc^s.
all into a Ring, as in a Dance, then clapping their Hands, and crying Nila
Nilala; then bowing, and heaving themselves up with a great force: There was a
San^o^ that led them by Signs of his Hands, Gestures, and Motions, like a
Master of Music, and who was in the middle of the Dance, following with his
Face toward them. It would be impossible to represent all the great Follies
and silly Tricks which they show in these Dances; for there are some of them,
who going out of the Dance, cast themselves all along upon the Ground; then two
of these Santon-Marabouts take him, one by the Head, and the other by the Feet,
and stretch him out as far as they can; after that, this Man pretends himself
dead, and makes as though he had great Convulsions and Tremblings, shaking
himself mightily two or three times, then seems as if he gave up the Ghost; the
Marabouts seeing that he neither stirs nor takes his Breath, look upon him as a
dead Man; he who is at the Head, takes his Right Hand, and puts it upon his
Face, then does as much to his Left, and after that, puts them upon his Belly;
he who is at the Feet plucks him very hard, and the other holding him by the
Head raises him upon his Feet; whereupon presently this dead Man reviving, runs
to dancing with the others: They employ themselves thus 4 or 5 at a time, one
after another, going to this fine Sport.

As I was beholding these Fooleries, there was a Mo^^ish Woman hard by me, who
seeing all this, entered into such a Fransie, that she fell to shaking and
crying out like the rest, so that they had much ado to quiet her, making as if
she had been ravished into an Ex^asie.

The Evening being come, they all fall to their Sala or Prayers, and light a
great Number of Lamps before the Tent of the Chec-Marabou, who is the Captain
of the other Santons and Marabous, placing before his Tent all the Standards,
where there is writ in Arabic Letters something of the Law of Mahomet:
Afterward in the Morning, when the Caravan comes to decamp, all these Santons
take every one, one of these Ensigns, and go singing before the Chec, who is
encompassed about with these Standards; then he mounts upon a fine Horse, with
some other Cavaliers that accompany him, and march thus in great Ceremony
before the Caravan.

As we thus parted from Lameny, my Turk took me out of the way of the Chec,
telling me, That in the way where the Chec was to pass there was abundance of
Water, which my Ass could not pass over: He thus deceived me on purpose, to
make me pay the Cafars, with whom I believe he participated. We went over
Mountains very high, and almost inaccessible, with no small trouble; and there
was also some Turkish Men and Women with us, who had taken this way as the best.

At Night we arrived at Eonjar, Eonjar.
which is a place some two Musket Shot from Mount Tabor: We thought Mount
Tabor.
the Chec would have come there also, but he came not that Day; which those of
the Campo seeing, they caused us to enter into the Court for fear of the Arabs;
and there I accommodated my self in the middle, with my Ass close by me. There
was some Greeks who invited me to sup with them, giving me some Rice and
parched Beans. After Supper, as I was going to sleep hard by my Baggage in the
Court, a Janisary, who came along with us that Day, with 3 or 4 Turkish Women,
sent for me, (he being under a Vault, with a great Number of Arabs,) and
invited me to eat some Almonds and Raisins Turkish Courtesy.
with him; and besides that, spoke for me to the Cafars, so ordering the
Business with them, that I should pay nothing, telling them that I came in
Company of the Chec, where all was frank and free: But I was since showed the
contrary at Nabelous.

We parted from that Place before Day with Three or Four Turkish Merchants (the
Janisary staying there to attend the Coming of the Chec) and came to Gigny,
passing on Foot over Mount Th^bor, which is very high, and elevated, covered
with Trees like Oaks, bearing Acorns, with Leaves which prick like Holly-Oak.
This Mountain is above a League high, and the Circuit of it is near Three, the
top whereof is plain, and had formerly some sort of Building and Dewlling Place
for Hermits, but all is ruined; the Country round about is nothing else but
Woods.

Gigny is a little City; where being Gigny
come, we went to put our selves into the Court of the Castle during the great
Heat of the Sun; and being there, a great many Arabian Cafars came armed with
Bows, Arrows, Rude Treatment of the Author.
Darts, and Harquebuzes, who encompassed me about like ravenous Wolves, crying
out Alcafar ard Drehen, Give us Money. I excused my self after the best manner
I could, that I might not give them all which they demanded; but the Master
Cafar, without saying a Word to me, at my first Refusal, gave me such a Blow
upon the Shoulders, that he broke his Staff, and presently sent for another as
big as his Arm, with which he treated me so cruelly, that I was forced to give
them as much as they would have. My wicked Turk all this while was gotten far
enough from me, and caused this Tragedy to be acted, having for that purpose
led me out of the way of the Chec, that he might the more easily rob me: When
he was returned, I gave him Money, telling him that he might go his ways where
he would, and that I would have no more to do with such a wicked Man in my
Company: But he told me that he was obliged to bring me safe to Jerusalem, and
to bring News from me back to Damascus, if I returned not with him: Finally, I
was forced to bear with this Tyrant, who was never content with what I gave
him, and besides denied what I had given him at Damascus for Advance, and that
which I gave him also at Gigny, thinking to have it over again.

We departed thus from Gigny the 22d. of April, and came to Caranouby,
Caranouby.
a Place of the Arabians, in the Country; and there the Arabs came from all
Parts to see me, being on Horseback, with Lances in the manner of Pikes, for
that is their ordinary Arms: They endeavored to rob us; but some of them were
pursued by those of the Caravan, who cast Darts, Stones and Clubs at them, and
the Arabs rode away like Lightning through the middle of the Fields. There was
one of them taken, who was led before the Chec, who caused him to be soundly
Bastinado'd for his Theft.

Now my Turk who sought nothing more than to ease me of my Money, stirred up
two Arabians to demand Alcafar of me, or Tribute. I was not a little surprised
at that, seeing my self in the open Fields, where there was not any appearance
of a Cafar; however, I told them that I owed them nothing in that Place: But my
Turk, who had brought them, urged me very hard to pay it, that he might have
his Share thereof, yet I would not give them any thing; and seeing my self near
the Tent of a Turkish Gentleman, I took the more Heart, knowing very well that
he would not suffer me to be abused; so these Arabs were forced to go their
ways as they came. But my Traitor, the Turk, bore me a Spite, and acted the
same in a very base manner; for the next Day parting from Caranouby, and
passing through the City of Herodes, where St. John was beheaded, and where
still a great Number of Marble-Pillars are standing, and Olive Trees very old,
we came to Nabelous, a great Nabelous.
City, which is said to be Samaria. The Chec went to pitch his Tent in a great
Enclosure, a quarter of a League below the City; and then my Turk putting me
close by an Olive Tree, with my Baggage, and my Ass, went straight away to give
the Cafars notice: I was a good way from the Tents, and this Villain had
separated me from the Company of Three Turks that were Brothers, very civil
Men, where I was left alone amongst the poor Arabs who followed us to
Jerusalem. As I was thus under the Olive Tree, eating of that little which I
had; for I could find nothing, save a little Paste fried in Oil, two Arabian
Cafars came to Cafars Tyrannous toward the Christians.
me, and without a Word speaking, one takes me by the Throat, dragging me
along, and the other belabored me with a Cudgel behind, making me go by force,
pretending to lead me before the Soubachin at Nabelous. I could do nothing else
in this Extremity, but call God to my Succor, and He forsook me not: For at
that Instant, a very honest Turkish Gentleman seeing me thus basely used by
these cruel Rascals, came out of his Tent, and took me by force ^ut of their
Hands, demanding of them what they would have for their Right? they asked Seven
Sequins; which was a vast Sum out of the little Money I had remaining. At last
this Turk so persuaded them in my Behalf, that they were contented with Six
Pataques, which are worth about a Crown apiece, which he caused one of his
Servants to carry for 'em. But afterward one of these Cafars returned again,
demanding of me half a Pataque more, and that by the same means I should go
thank the Chec, the which it behoved me to do, by the Counsel of this Turkish
Gentleman; and this Cafar gave me a little Paper, wherein was imprinted the
Grand Signior's Mark. Behold the Treatment which I had at Nabelous, where the
Christians are extremely tyrannized over.

A little below this Place is a very fine Fountain, adorned with Marble and
Stone; they say it is Jac^b's Well, or that of the Samaritan Woman. In the
Evening my Turk came to me again, pretending ignorance of what had happened:
But it behoved me to endure that also, and overlook it as my best way. The Chec
continued two or three Days at Nabelous touching the Sick; for they present
these sick People to him, and he stretches out their Arms and Legs: then for
his Pains he has Money given him, which his Secretary receives, giving little
Tickets like Countercharms, and Notes for it.

We had there great Rains, which we were forced to endure Day and and Night
very patiently, without having any thing to shelter us: But seeing it continued
without ceasing, I placed my self with these Three Turkish Brethren, not
trusting my self any longer with my Turk, and followed them into the City, with
my little Baggage, not knowing then where this my gallant Mouquary was. We took
up our Quarters in an old Vault full of Spiders: This Vault is An Ancient Vault.
so ancient, that they say it is above Three Thousand Years since it was made.
In this Place lodge the Camels, and the Caravans, which go and come. I tarried
thus in this dark Hall amongst the Mules and Asses, not having my self so much
as a Wisp of Straw to lie upon, and being so crowded that I could not lie down,
but was forced to remain close by my Ass, who was very impatient; for I could
get him nothing to eat.

Having there passed this bad Weather, the next Day my Turk came to seek me
out, pretending himself to be mighty busy in looking for me; but he was a
Drunkard, and minded nothing else but drinking of Shirbet, which was sold in
the Tents, from which he never stirred all the Day long, nor the very Night,
and would fain have persuaded me also to go there to drink of this Liquor,
which they swallow down hot: It Is of a very unsavory Taste, and blackish
Color; the Syrians call it Cody. In Tripoly are a great many Vaults like
Taverns, where they most commonly go to drink this Shirbet, which is made of
Seed and Water boiled together.

Leaving this Place, we went to pitch our Tents two or three Leagues from
Jerusalem, in a Place where formerly was a Chapel, which is half ruined, and
there is a pleasant Fountain hard by upon the way.

The 27th. of April, 1612. we arrived Arrival at Jerusalem.
at Jerusalem, and were there first: Not far from the City I met with the
Soubachy, or Governor, who came out with a great Number of Cavaliers, and all
in good order, going to meet the Chec-Marabou. This Soubachy asked me if I was
a Christian; and having answered, Yes, he commanded my Turk to take me to the
Gate of Jafe, and to leave me there at the Gate until he had fetched me a
Trucher-Man, which was a Greek, belonging to the Cadi or Judge. My Turk failed
not to do what the other had commanded him, and made me tarry at the Gate of
Jafe, where I was a long time waiting for the Trucher-Men, and an Officer of
the Cadi, to visit my Baggage. They being come, caused me to enter into the
City, and led me where the Religious dwell, where they viewed my things,
leaving me with these good Men, whom I saluted. After Dinner, they gave me a
Greek Trucher-Man to accompany me to Bethlehem, whither Bethlehem.
I went, passing by the Fish Pond of Bersabee, and drank at a Fountain which is
upon the Bridge: From Description of several Holy Places.
thence we went to the Turpentine-Tree, where the Blessed Virgin reposed her
self, going from Bethlehem; then to the Cistern, or Well, where the Star
appeared to the Three Kings going to Worship our Lord; my Trucher-Man made me
to drink of the Water which is very good: Not far from that Place we saw
Jacob's Tower, which is almost quite ruined; after that, the Place where the
Prophet Ely slept, upon a Rock along by the Highway; they showed me still the
Mark of his Body in the Rock: From thence we went to see the Field of the
Shepherds, and near to that, the Five Cisterns which David caused to be made;
there are Three of them open, and the other Two stopped up; they are all round
in a Ring, some Three or Four Foot one from the other, about a little
Stone's-cast from the Highway: We there found some Grecian Women, and Maids,
who were drawing Water, which my Trucher-Man caused me also to drink of, being
very excellent. When we came to Bethlehem, we went into the Monastery of
Bethlehem.
Monastery, which is a Place very agreeable; and then the Father Guardian, a
good and devout Religious Old Man, put on his Ornaments, and gave me a lighted
Wax-Tapor, showing me all the Holy Places, and amongst others, the Place where
our Lord was born; then the Place where the Three Kings worshipped, and and
that where St. Jerome was buried, and other Places: But should I give an
Account of all, I would never have done; I therefore remit my Reader to the
more particular Descriptions which have been made of these Places.

After having visited this Holy Place, on Saturday Morning the 28th. of April,
and heard Mass, which was said upon the Manger, and bought some Beads which the
Greeks make there, I went to see the Grotto where the Virgin fled, when Herod
slew the Innocents. As I was coming out of this Place, I met some Greek Women,
who came to desire me to give some Remedy to their sick Children, because they
had heard that I was a Haquin, or Surgion. I instructed them, according to my
small Capacity, and as that Place would permit. Round about the City of
Bethlehem are Vineyards: It is now nothing but a lttle Village, full of old
Ruins; and not far from thence is a Monastery, the Ruins of the City of
Bethuly, where there is no Habitation. Bethuly.


As for the Place of the Manger, it is at this Day nothing but an old strong
Vault, sustained with little Pillars of Marble to keep it from falling: The
Vault is gilt with counterfeit Gold; they descend by ten or a dozen Steps: In
the Place of the Manger is a great Marble-Stone.

After that, I reassumed my way to Jerusalem; where being come, it behoved me
to sell my Ass to maintain me, as well at the entrance of the Holy Sepulcher,
where I was to give 14 Sequins, which are about Twenty Crowns; as also to give
my Turk, who so insulted over me, that I could scarce find Money enough to
content him: He brought one of the Citiers, or Sergeants of the Cadi, to have
me before his Master. When I had paid him by the Hands of my Trucher-Man, yet
he almost denied that I had given him any thing, and would have done it, had
not this Trucher-Man been with me to witness that I had paid him; and he was
then contented: yet he alleged, that he had bought me an Ass, not having Money
enough to pay for him, as if it behoved me to pay it, as if I had been obliged
thereto, and that I had not given him enough for the Courtesy, which he would
show to be as much as the Principal which I had agreed with him for a Month. In
the end, seeing my self so pestered with this Man, who threatened to have me
before the Cadi, or Judge of Jerusalem, I was forced to pluck a Ring from my
Finger, and give it him in the presence of the Trucher-Man. But I saw him no
The Author quits his Turk.
more, since I gave him a Letter to the Jew, Abraham Rabbi, to show him that he
had put me safe and found in Jerusalem, as he had promised.

The Saturday following, in the Evening, some Pilgrims that were there, and I,
went to the Holy Sepulcher to do our Devotions; the Governor of the City
having sent the Keys upon Request that was made to him, being there were lately
Pilgrims arrived; and in entering the Church they cried to me Hada, which is to
say, that I came the last; for the others had been there already to do their
Devotions some Days before, and were minded to return there again upon this
occasion: Being there, we went all in Procession; and the Father Bucher, a
Cordelier, made a Sermon, showing us every Place where our Savior had suffered
any Pain; as the Place where is the Pillar to which he was tied and scourged:
Then we went to the Holy Grave, where he lay and was buried; this is like a
little Cupolo, having within, a great Number of lighted Lamps, and an Altar
where they say Mass, which is upon the Sepulcher it self: From thence we went
to Mount Calvary, and saw the Hole where the Cross was fastened, which is
garnished on the inside with Silver; the Rock hard by, is slit to the bottom;
there are some Signs of a Chapel below. After having heard there a short
Sermon, we went to the Place where our Savior was set, having the Crown of
Thorns upon his Head; then where he was put Prisoner to wait for his Death and
Passion, where he was anointed, which is a Stone of Marble as big as a ^omb,
compassed with Bars of Iron; and in short, all the Holy Places of Devotion
which are within the Enclosure of the Holy Sepulcher. After that, at
Break-of-Day, I heard Mass in this Place of the Holy Sepulcher, Confessing my
self, and Communicating as devoutly as I could, in a Place so Holy and
Venerable, and that with so much Contentment and Satisfaction, that I don't
believe I ever received the like; rendering infinite Thanks to my God, for
having preserved me from so many Perils and Dangers, and for having brought me
into this Holy Place, here to do the Duties of a good Christian and Catholic.

Having thus finished my Devotions, I returned back to the Monastery, and after
Dinner taking one of the Religious, with one named Grand Fills, a Parisian, who
was also there: We went to the Street which is called Dolorous Holy Place.
through which our Lord passed, bearing his Cross; we there saw the Place from
whence Veronica threw the Linen from her Door upon our Lord's Face; then where
Pilate said Ecce Homo; and the Places where St. Paul was put into Prison, where
St. Stephen was Stoned, where the Virgin Mary was Buried; the Sepulchers of
Joseph, and St. Anne; the Place or Mount of Olives, where our Savior ascended
into Heaven, leaving the Prints of his Feet in the Rock, but at present there
is nothing left but the print of his Left Foot; the Turks having transported
the Right into Solomon's Temple, as I was there told: Then the Place where our
Lord wept over Jerusalem; the Place where Judas hanged himself, where Lazarus
was raised from the Dead, where the Three Mary's went to seek our Lord, to
desire him to come to see their Brother; and the Stone is still to be seen
which our Lord sat upon: Then the Castle of Eniaus, where he made the Feast,
where he healed the Blind, where St. Peter wept for his Fault: Then the
Sepulcher of Absolon, which is cut in the Rock like a Tower, having upon it a
Head of a wonderful bigness, and there is a Window on the side toward the
Valley of Jehosaphat, through which they say the Children still cast Stones as
they pass by, out of disdain that Absolon had made War upon his Father: Then
the Place where our Lord fell into the Torrent of Cedron, the Marks of his Arms
and Hands still remaining upon the Rock: Then where he was Interrogated under
the Golden Gate; where he was put in Prison, in the House of Ann, upon Mount
Sion; the Olive Tree to which he was tied, which is still green, and raised
from the Ground round about; the Greeks hold this Place: Then the Stone of the
Sepulcher, the Place where St. James was Beheaded, where Abraham would have
sacrificed his Son Isaac, which the Aethiopians keep, and which is near to the
Sepulcher. In short, all the other Holy Places which are in Jerusalem, and
thereabouts, as they were showed us by these Religious who conducted us.

Now for the City of Jerusalem, as Jerusalem Described.
it is at this Day mightily diminished, from what it formerly was, it may be
about as big as Blois, and is situated upon a Height amongst Mountains, not
having any thing of plane but toward the side Jafa: It Is encompassed about with
good Walls, built not so much in compass as was the ancient City, which was
very great, as the Circuit and Ruins do still show: They have left Mount Sion
out, to take in that of Calvary. All the City is full of Ruins, and ancient
Vaults, and inhabited by People of all Nations and Religions, as Jews, Greeks,
Latins, Moors, Turks. The Governor of the City is called the Soubachin, who
depends upon the Bassa of Damascus The Temple of Solomon is built very great
and high, covered with Lead, and gilded; and all round about is built Places
like Chapels: It is built with Freestone. This Place serves them for a Mosque,
where the Turks will not suffer either the Christians, or Jews, to enter. The
Country round about, as all the rest of the Holy Land, is incultivated and
desert, full of old Buildings, and Ruins, and is very stony. In short, it
thoroughly feels all over, and in every Place, the grievous Curse of Almighty
God, for the Iniquities of the People whom he so loved, for whose sake he
rendered this Country the most Agreeable and Fruitful in the whole World. This
may serve for an Example to us Christians at this Day, who do so badly observe
his Holy Law, to which, by his Grace, he has called us in the room of those
whom he has cast off, for their Disobedience and Ingratitude. When I had
satisfied my curious Devotion in all this, I came back to the Monastery, and
the next Day I prepared for my Return, taking a Mule of the Atelas, and a Guide
and Trucherman of the Christians, who was a Greek, to whom I gave Seven Sequins.

I then left Jerusalem on a Monday, Parting from Jerusalem.
and passed through the Valley of Terebinte, where David overcame Goliath. In
this Place we found a great Number of Cafars, but the Atelas spoke for me to
them, and so freed me from that Penalty.

From thence we passed by the House of Jeremiah, from which runs a pleasant
Fountain, which Passengers drink of: Then we came to Ramah, Ramah.
a little City, where we lodged at the French Consul's House, and the next
Morning went to Jafa, tarrying there Jafa
all that Day, waiting for the next Morning; we lay under an old Vault along by
the Seaside. This was a great City, and a good Port, but now all in Ruins,
and there is but Three Towers to be seen entire, and some little Houses: There
is here nothing to be found either to eat or drink, and you must bring your
Provision if you have a mind to eat. The Morning being come, the Atelas giving
order for our embarking, and having given us a Greek, with a great Boat like a
Patache, we parted from thence the 1st. Day of May, and came to the City of
Caesarea, which is quite ruined, Caesarea.
and went to cast Anchor near Caiphas, in a Place where was formerly a
Monastery. We went on shore to look for some fresh Water, and were refreshed by
bathing our selves: There was with us a Turkish Chiaux, and a Janisary.

The next Morning leaving this Place, we went and cast Anchor a little below
Mount Carmel, where Elias Mount Carmel.
made his Abode; then passing along by St. John of Acre, formerly P^olemedes,
Acre.
a very pleasant City, upon the Seaside, and where dwelt formerly the Knights
of Malta; then we anchored before the City of Tire, where some of us went on
shore for Victuals, and Tire.
to see the Place where, they say, Sampson threw down the Temple upon the
Philistines: This Place is all desert and ruined, and there is a great Number
of Marble Pillars, and amongst others, one of a wonderful length and breadth,
very smooth, and almost Seven Fathoms about, and seems as if there were Three
in one, it is broke at one end: They say it is that which Sampson cast down, but
that is false; for the Scripture tells us, that this was at Gaza, another City
far from Tire; so that these Pillars must be of some other ancient Building. We
took some Refreshments in the House of a Greek, who makes Brandy under an old
Vault. At Evening we returned to our Petache, designing to set sail after
Midnight. As for the rest, this City of Tire, or Sur, is quite ruined,
inhabited only by some Moors, and Greek Christians, which live there in Vaults
under the Ground. There is to be seen a great Number of Marble Pillars which
keep up the Walls, being placed and laid cross one upon another, to hinder the
Sea from undermining the Walls. This City was once of a vast Extent, but at
present is like a Desert.

Parting from this Place before Day, we cast Anchor at Sydon, or Sayette, Sydon.
where we saw upon a little Hill the House of the Canaanite, hard by the
Seaside. We went on shore for some Refreshments, and dined in the Warehouse
of the Christians, with the Consul of that Place, who told me that some Days
before came there a Ship Fortune of a Ship of Malta.
of Malta, who had a Protection from M. Joseph Facardin, Governor of Sydon, and
that this Vessel returning into the Sea to look for some Prize, had met with a
Turkish Caramousin, whom she took, and boarded her with some Knights and
Soldiers, who leaving their Admiral some Leagues from thence, came to Sydon to
take in some Refreshments, and by chance the Brother of him who had lost the
Ship was there at that time; who, when he saw his Brother's Ship, he cried out
to the Moors of the City, How was it possible that they would suffer those
Dogs, the Christian Robbers, (for so they call us,) to come thus within their
very Port, after having taken their Goods. Whereupon those of the City
immediately ran to Arms, and leaping into Boats, fell upon this Caramousin, and
fought them on all sides: They within defended themselves valiantly, as long as
their Powder lasted, but the most part of them being killed or wounded, the
rest were forced to yield, and be carried into the City, where they had their
Heads chopped off, being 16 in all. A few Days afterward the Admiral sent his
Boat to Sydon, to enquire after his Men; but there was Seven or Eight of them
arrested and made Prisoners while I was there. The Consul told me moreover,
That M. Joseph Facardin had promised him to let them escape in the Nightime,
without the Knowledge of the People who were exasperated against them.

This Emir Joseph, commonly called the Ermine of Sydon, or Emir de Sayede, is
very courteous and kind to the Christians, and is said to be descended from
those ancient Kings of Jerusalem, who were of the Blood of the Princes of
France; and this is he who is said to be since come into Tuscany to the great
Duke, with an Intention to become Christian, and to propose Means to the
Christian Princes how to chase the Turks from those Parts.

Leaving Sydon, we went to lie at Baruth, which is a Place very pleasant Baruth
and delectable, having two little Fortresses upon the Seaside. They say that
this Baruth is the Place where St. George slew the Dragon, and delivered the
Maid, as the Pourtrayes show which are made thereupon.

The next Day, the 6th. of May, we arrived at Tripoly, where I continued
Tripoly*
for some Days, employing my self in gathering certain curious Plants, bearing
excellent and odoriferous Flowers, of which I gathered a great quantity upon
Mount Lebanus, and about the City of Tripoly; all which I laid safe up to
carry to the King, as at my Arrival at Paris they were planted in the Garden of
the Lovre which is before His Majesty's Chamber, whom I showed several
excellent Flowers.

The Bassa of Tripoly is a Man very Proud and Cruel; and I was told there, That
once he being amorous of a very beautiful young Woman of one of the best Houses
in the City, and seeing that he could not bring his Desires to pass by any sort
of Artifice, he resolved to use Violence; and watching his opportunity when she
went to the Stoves with her Mother, as it was their Custom; where presently
going, he took this poor young Barbarous Cruelty of a Bassa.
Woman by force, and having-had his Will of her, he took his Gangear, or Knife,
made in the form of a Croisant, and ripped her open quite from the Privy-Parts up
to the Neck. Behold how these Barbarians give Satisfaction to their desires,
how horrible and wicked sover they be!

I was also told how that this Bassa, at the Arrival of a certain French Ship,
called the Dauphin, belonging to the Sieur de Moisset, had a mind to go on
board her, where having been treated with all the Complaisance imaginable, at
his coming out from thence one of his Favorites reproached him for eating with
the Christians; at which he was in such a Fury, that he cast his Gangear at
him, with which he so wounded him, that had not the Surgeon immediately dressed
him, he had died thereof upon the Place. They relate several other cruel Acts
and Violences of this Man, which are very ordinary and common to all these Race
of Infidels.

After having tarried some time at Tripoly, I parted from thence the 18th. of
May, and embarked to return to France. We passed along by the Isle of Cyprus
the 21 st. and the 25th. we saw the Coast of Turkey, then the Mounts of Phenico
and Sately, and not The Mounts of Phenico, and Sately. Rhodes. Candia.
far from the Isle of Rhodes, which we left toward the North-West. After that,
we passed by the Isle of Candiae, where we espied Two Turkish Caramousins,
driving full sail upon us; but when they saw themselves too weak for our
Vessel, they tacked about again: We chased them with our Shot, but Night coming
on, they escaped us; they being in great Fear, and using their utmost endeavor
with Sails and Oars to get themselves out of our reach. From thence we passed
along by the Isle of Malta, and the 12th. Malta.
of June faw the Isle of Sardania, which Sardania.
we left to the North-East; and in the end, by the Grace of God, arrived at
Arrival in France.
Marsailles the 19th. of June. I made not long stay there, but only to carry a
Letter which I had for Monsieur the First President of Varix, at Aix, from
whence I returned again to Marsailles, and from thence came straight to Paris,
where I arrived the 24th. of July, 1612. For which, God be Praised for evermore.

END of the FIFTH BOOK.
THE TRAVELS AND VOYAGES OF John Mocquet, INTO SPAIN. Being designed to travel
to other Places, and the Causes which made him desist there from.

BOOK VI.
BEING returned from Syria, and the Holy Land, with quantity of curious Plants,
and other rare things, which by my diligent Search in several Places I had
procured to present to the King, and Queen-Regent, I failed not, so soon as I
came to Paris, to go do my Reverence to Their Majesty's, who were very glad to
see my Rarities, and commanded that a fit Place should be given me in their
Palace of the Thuilleries, Cabinet in the Thuilleries.
there to frame a Cabinet of all sorts of Rarities, and other curious things
which I had gathered together in all my Travels throughout the World. But after
having so well begun what I had at that time in hand, I judged that to pursue
it according to my Desire, it would be necessary for me to undertake some more
Voyages, and I had no less design than to encompass the whole World, first by
way of the Occident, and from thence by the Orient to return again into our
Occident; an Enterprise, I must confess, so great, that the only Presumption of
so much as ever having it in my Mind, I believe would have gained me Glory
enough; and yet I hoped, that by the Grace of him who had always conducted me
every where, I should have been able to have brought it to pass. But I was
defeated of these my Purposes by the Occasions following.

With this Intention then I left Paris, and followed Their Majesty's to Tours,
in the Voyage which they made there in the Year 1614. in July. From thence I
embarked upon the River Loir, to go to Nantes, and to St. Leiger, to wait for
occasion and convenience to pass to Portugal, from whence I was to pursue my
Designs. But having put out to Sea, the Wind turned so contrary, that we were
forced to draw back to St. Leiger, though not without a deal of Trouble; and
there hearing that the King was at Nants, I took the Occasion to go there to
furnish my self with some Passports which I had forgotten, and which I judged
needful for my Voyage.

This being done, I returned to St. Ledger, but I found that the Vessel in my
absence had set sail, having a right Wind; and which was worse, had also
carried away all my Provisions which I provided for the Passage, with some
other things, which I never could hear of since. This was a great Hindrance to
me, and also an unlucky Presage for my grand Design. Yet it hindered me not from
embarking as well as I (...) into Spain.
could in another Ship of Aulonne which was going to Andalusia: The Ship was
called the Florisand, and the Master Franchois Micha^d. We first of all put in
at Aulonne, then with a right Wind we set out Seven or Eight in Consort, for so
many Ships we were in all, bearing to wards Spain; and having continued some
time upon the Sea, and given chase to some Cruisers, we arrived in the Cape of
St. Vincent; and taking Cognizance of the Cape, we ran along by the shore near
the Port des Algerves, where some of our Ships anchored to Traffic, and the
rest bore to San Lucar de Baramede, where our Ship was bound, being laden with
Cloth.

Being arrived in this Place, I began to think of some way how to transport my
self to Sevilia, to get Knowledge as well in Physic, and the Art of
Apothecaries, (of which the Practice is something different from ours,) as also
to find means to pass to the East Indies, and accomplish the Voyage which I had
proposed to my self; Design of the Great Voyage.
which was to go straight to Mexico, and from thence to embark for the Coast of
the South Sea, and so to follow the Coast of the East Indies, along by China,
Camboja, Siam, Malaca, Peru, Bengall, Coromandel, Malabar, Goa, Diu, Ormus, and
from thence to return by Land through Persia, and Babylon, to Aleppo, and from
thence by Sea repair to France, my own native Country; thus to accomplish so
great a Voyage, and by the Example of those famous Heroes, Magallan, Drake,
Cavendish, and Oliver Van d^r Nort, to encompass the whole Universe. But God
had otherways disposed thereof, and for my own Good; his Pleasure being always
Just, for his own Glory and our Salvation.

Parting then from San Lucar, following the Mareme, along by the great River
Guadalquivir, I came to Seville, Seville.
and immediately placed my self in the Shop of the most famous Apothecary of
the whole City, in the Street called di los Francos: The Master was named
Alonso Rodrigo, a Portuguese, with whom I continued for some time, both to
learn the Language, of which I had already some Knowledge, and to have also
some Knowledge of Drugs, of which this Man made the greatest Traffic: For he
had Two or Three great Magazines in his House, and as much or more in other
Places of the City, where his Children put off the Drugs.

After having tarried some time with him, I left him, for the great Desire I
had to find an Occasion to embark; but I was still detained by another, named
Juan Sancha, who had also dwelt with this Rodrigo, and was Apothecary to the
Army, and the Frontier Cities in Africa, for the King of Spain: He was to have
a Shop at Marmorre, a Place which the Spaniards had newly taken in Barbary, and
labored mightily to perfect this Shop which he was to send to this Fortress. I
tarried then to help him, and continued there from the 3d. of November to the
8th. of January, until his Shop was finished. From thence I went to walk in the
Fields to take the fresh Air, because of the great Filth of this City of
Seville, which causes there a very bad Air, which is pursued by a great Number
of Diseases.

As I was traversing on Foot some Mountains, to observe the Nature of Trees, I
met with an honest Cavalier, named Pedro Sancha, as I knew since, who
courteously invited me to come and lodge at his House in a little City called
Corea, or Coria, not far from thence, which I could not well refuse. He
entertained me very kindly, and I stayed there till the next Day; then I
reassumed my way to the Mountains, where I was for some Days taking notice of
the Plants, and found store of Rosemary, and a great quantity of Mastick-Trees,
with which the Country is mighty abounding; amongst others, I gathered some
Thistles called Chameleonis-Ally, some Flowers of Narcissus, and some
Mandrake-Apples, which they call S^bollas de Villana: After that, when I saw
that I had but bad Entertainment in these Deserts, where most commonly I found
nothing but Water, and some Raisins to eat, and sometimes a little Bread, in
the Shepherd's Cabins, I returned toward Corea, and visited my honest Host,
the Sieur Pedro Sanche, who was very glad to see me, and made very much of me.
He afterward came to see me at Seville, to have the Interpretation of some
Receipts which had been given him for his Wife who was with Child.

From thence I returned to Seville, where the Sieur Juan Sanche, the
Apothecary, would have persuaded me to tarry with him; but I had my Voyage of
the Indies so in my Head, that I had no mind to tarry there, but took my way
straight to St. Luear, and sailed along the River, with a great many other
Persons for Company in a Boat.

We arrived in the Nightime at St. Lucar, and I went to lodge with my former
Host, who was called Bastanuil Biscain. I continued there for some Days to wait
for an Occasion to embark: But my bad Fortune would have it so, that the
Vessels which were then in the Port, durst not venture out, because they had
Advice, that from Argier, and other Places of Barbary, were put out to Sea near
Fifty Vessels, who guarded the Coasts, and were separated 10, 15, and 20 Ships,
toward each Height and Cape, where they thought they were to pass; so that
they took all they could meet with.

Seeing my self thus retained, and without much Commodities to live by, having
already spent the most part of what I had, I was constrained, in expectation of
better Convenience, to place my self with an Apothecary of St. Lucar, who made
me promise to serve him for some time. But as Fortune never left Persecuting of
me, so this poor Man returning one Night from Supper in the City, was arrested
Prisoner by the Command of the Duke of Medina Sidonia; and after that, the
Justice came to his House and seized upon all his Papers, where the Alg^aziles,
or Sergeants made a strange Ravage. They accused him for having made some Libel
against the Duke. I spent this Night with no small Trouble and Uneasiness.

The next Day I went again into the Fields to go toward the Port St. Mary,
where I made so much have, after having passed many Places by Water, and bad
way, that I arrived there at Night in Company of a Religious Jacobin, who
showed me a great deal of Courtesy, and caused me to lodge with him in the
House of a Muleteer. The Day following, I took the way of Xerez de la Frontera,
and had no small Trouble before I could come there, for the great Abundance of
Waters which I found by the way. At last, having escaped them as well as I
could, and being very weak in regard of the great Hunger I endured, by good
Fortune I met with two Men in sight of Xerez, who courteously invited me to eat
with them; and being sat down to eat, they fell to discoursing of several
Things, and amongst others, came upon my Subject, speaking of Hunger, and that
it is the most easy to be supported, when one stirs not from a Place without
doing any thing, or when one is at Work, and thinks of doing some other thing:
At last one of them concluded, that he was sensible of more Hunger when he was
doing nothing, than when he was at work, and found that there was some reason
for it, in regard that Action diverts the Thoughts: And I remembered that I
heard reported, how that the several sorts of Plays, as Cards, Dice, Tables,
and others, were at first invented to amuse Men during a great Scarcity of
Victuals, and by this means to divert them from thinking upon their Hunger. And
therefore it is said, That Drake, that samous English Captain, returning home
from his great Voyage about the World, (which he had encompassed,) one Day, as
he found himself in great necessity of Victuals, and saw his Men ready to
starve with Hunger, he caused them to play to divert themselves; and when they
were thirsty, he advised them to sleep to refresh themselves. This Scarcity was
so great, as I have heard some English say, That they were forced to eat some
Blacks which they had brought along with them, and having found near England a
Vessel loaded with Victuals, they eat so much thereof, that the most part of
them died by over charging themselves.

But to return to Xerez: Being arrived Xerez.
there, though not without abundance of trouble, passing through the City* I by
chance found my self near the Shop of an Apothecary, where there was some
Surgions discoursing together. When they saw me, they cast out some Words of
Mocking, because of my Garb, a la Francois: But I returning toward them, told
them a few Words of Surgery in Latin; which they being ignorant of they knew
not what to answer, except by naming to me, to surprise me, a certain
Composition called Hieralogod^i; but I asked them, if they knew not whether it
was Hierapachii? which is one and the same thing; at which they were put to a
Nonplus. And thus I left them there, and kept on my way, and by good Fortune
met in this City with a French Man, a Britan, who lived with a Cavalier, and
took me along with him, where he made as much of me as he could. There I found
a Persian Slave, who hearing me speak of his Country, and the East Indies, was
so overjoyed, that he called me his Kinsman, and made me as good Cheer as he
could in this House, where he had much Credit.

This City of Zerez is situated on high in a very pleasant Country, as all the
rest of the Province of Andalousia, and is not far from the little River
Ovadal^t, famous for the great Battle fought there, where Roderick the last
King of Spain lost his Life, with all his Nobility, at which time the Moors
rendered themselves Masters of all Spain. The Soil is very fertile in Corn,
Wines, Oil, and all sorts of Fruit, and produces also those excellent Horses
called Gennets.

When I was there, I was told how that the Judge of that Place, whom the King
of Spain had established there, not having a mind to do a piece of Injustice,
as the Gentlemen and Hidalgo's of the City desired him, they had invited him to
a Supper, with an Intention to put an Affront upon him; but he doubting of
their Ill Will, would not go to them: At which they being vexed, made his
Image, and burnt it in a Fire before his own Door in a Bravado; and in the mean
time, he not daring to stir out of his House, which was as it were besieged by
them. Upon which, his Wife went strait to Court, to make her Complaint to the
King, and to demand Justice of him, which was granted her: For the King of
Spain commanded these insolent Hidalgo's, or Gentlemen, to come before him, and
ordered their Process to be drawn immediately, and condemned them every one to
have their Heads chopp'd off. But when they said for Excuse, that they were
drunk when they put this Affront upon the Judge, they were pardoned, and had
his Grace, except Two Brothers, who never would confess themselves to be drunk
when they played this Prank, and were so glorious, that they chose rather to
have their Heads cut off, than to confess the same, as the rest had done. And
hereupon came the Proverb, That Los Hidalgos di Xerez Son Borrachos, The
Gentlemen of Xerez are Drunkards.

After having tarried some Days at Xerez, I returned to the Port St. Mary,
expecting to find an occasion for my Embarkment: But being there, I could not
by my utmost Endeavor, procure License to pass to the Indies, in regard of the
rigorous Injunction not to suffer any Strangers to go to the Indies, but
especially the French; yet if I had had Money to give, perhaps I might have had
this Permission; but I had not so much as a Maravedis, nor Hopes to meet with
any there, besides that I found my self somewhat indisposed. All this, with the
bad Entertainment which I received amongst these People so Uncharitable and
Discourteous, gave me cause to desire my Return, and thought to embark my self
in some Aulonno^^ Ships, to return with them to France; and indeed I gathered
together some rare Plants, which I put into a Vessel, with some other things,
of which I never since could hear any notice, but that they had cast all into
the Sea. In the mean time I wondered why this Ship did not set sail, but she was
hindered by the Decrease of the Moon; for the Sea does so follow the course of
this changing Planet, that it is taken notice, that the Ebbing and Flowing is
in the height, when the Moon is in Conjunction.

This Ship of Aulonne which I waited for, was called the Gift of God, and
belonged to one Peter Bled: In the mean time the Vessel departed without taking
me in, and I remained there in no small trouble and misery; and had no other
Recourse, but to put my self into a Boat which I found going to Calix, not far
from thence; and nevertheless we had no small Trouble in our Passage, because
of the contrary Winds. We at last went on shore in a desert Place, about a
League from Calix, to which Place I went on foot along by the shore: I there
found Acquaintance, but I could not stay there long, because the City was
filled with Soldiers belonging to the Army of Dom Lous de Fajardo, Admiral of
the Spanish Fleet, who was just returned from Mamorre, which he had taken from
the Moors, and had there found a great Number of Pirates, of whom some he had
hanged, and put the rest to the Oar; the rest were partly sunk, and some burnt
themselves in despair, rather than thoy would yield.

This Ci^y of Calix, or Cadis, was Calix.
the Gades so famous in ancient times, Gadis.
where it is said that H^rcules, after having overcome the Gerions, planted his
memorable Pillars, as being the end and utmost Bounds of Navigation at that
time; but since, in these last Ages, the P^rtugals and Spaniards have happily
found the Plus Vltra, which has given them Passage at their Pleasure through
all the Orient and Occident. These Gad tan^an Pillars were upon the Two
Mountains Abyla and Calpe, placed upon the Extremities of the Straights, one in
Africa, and the other in Europe side, now Ceuta and Algezira; or else the true
Ceuta.
Pillars composed of Tin, Gold, and Algezira.
Silver mixed together, which were by Hercules put into the Temple of the
Parques, and afterward in the Temple Parques.
dedicated to him in the City of Gades. This Straight has since been called
Gibraltar, or Gabel-Tarif, which signifi^s Mount of Tarif, in Memory of that
Renowned Captain who commanded in Chief in the Saraz^n War, which began the
Conquest of Spain.

The City of Gades in ancient times was not very Populous, and is at this Day a
little City, celebrated for the Salt Pits, and Almadraves, or the Fishing for
the Tonny. This was formerly an Isle distant above 700 Paces from the main
Land; but at present there is only a little Causey which separates it therefrom.

Seeing then that I could not conveniently tarry at Calix, I went into the
Fields toward an old ruined Tower, which they call the Tower of Hercules, not
far distant from the Straights. I found there some rare Plants, which I loaded
my self withal, and saw this Tower, into which I entered, though not without a
great deal of trouble, because the Sea beats against it; and besides, there
came such a furious Wave, that I thought it would have carried me away. This
Building is so well wrought, and appears so entire, that it seems not to have
been 20 Years since it was built. Now, as I was amongst these Ruins, I saw a
great Wolf approach toward me, which I thought at first to be an Ass; but
after having known what it was, I kept my self still, and let it pass along by
me, without stirring a Foot, for I saw that it was looking for Food. Not far
from these Ruins I found a Temple, where I entered, and it looked like an
Azoy, or Mosque, after the Turkish manner; yet there is an Altar set up, where
sometimes they say Mass.

As I was returning toward Calix, I found the Sea mightily risen, so that I
was a little wet in repassing the same; and had I stayed but a little longer, I
had had a bad Nights Lodging there: At last I passed over, and found in my way
a good old Man, who discoursed a great while with me about all these
Antiquities; and how that in those Days there was more Men morally Good than
now, though they (...) and from thence I came to a Place named Chipione, where
having gotten some Money by certain Cures, I returned to San Lucar, and from
thence to Sevillia, where I was forced to continue for some time and joined my
self with a certain Apothecary, who lived in the Triane, or on the other side
of the Bridge. This Triane is a Suburb on the other side the River of
Qu^lquiver, which has a Castle, where is the Inquisition, or Holy-Office, as
they call it. This Apothecary made Profession of Christianity, but was held for
a Jew, as he made it appear to me; for he treated me but scurvily,
notwithstanding the Service that I did him in his Alquitarres, or Limb^cks. I
endured a great deal of Hardship with him, and became extreme sick with a
Vom^^ing, and a Bloody Flux, so that I thought I should have died, and had no
small trouble to recover my self; never receiving Help from this Jew, or any of
his.

Whilst I was there, I remember that they of the Parish of St. Ann, or the
Suburb of Triane, made a Procession on Palm Sunday in the Evening, carrying all
lighted Wax-Candles, and sung a Hymn in Honor of the Blessed Virgin, to show
that she was conceived without Original Sin; to which they applied the Words of
the Royal Psalmist, Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei; and in sole posuit tabernaculum
suum, etc. and other suchlike things. And hereupon the whole City of Seville
was in an Uproar, and there were some Priests themselves put into the
Inquisition, because they had the Boldness to maintain, that the Virgin was
conceived in Sin; insomuch that there was likely to be a great Tumult; and my
Jew was then in such fear, that he durst scarcely stir out of his House, though
he was of this same Parish. There was some, who either out of Fear, or
Devotion, wore, writ upon their Hatbands in great Letters, these Words, Sin
pecado Original voto a tal: to show that they believed, or would have others
believe. At the same time they caused to be out before the great Church in
Seville, upon a Marble-Table, in golden Letters, Concebid^ sin pecado Original.

Leaving then my Apothecary, still sick as I was, having found some Friends who
lent me Money, I returned toward San Lucar, in Hopes to find Means to embark
my self, not for the Indies, (of which I had lost all Hopes,) but to return
into France: But as my bad Fortune would have it, not far from San Lucar I was
Robbed in the Pinars; and coming to San Lucar, I soon found out who it was that
had robbed me, but I du^st scarce speak thereof for fear of worse; besides
there, as in other Places, Justice is very difficult to be had without Money.
At last, having found an Opportunity to go for France, we parted, (Ten Return
into France.
Ships we were in Consort, and held our course far out in the Sea, for fear of
the Ships of Tunis: The Ship wherein I was, was of Incuse in Holland, and the
Captain was named Jan Taye.

Now one Day, when it was a great Calm, this Captain invited on board his Ship
the Admiral, and Vice Admiral, with other Captains, who had treated him before:
And after having made good Cheer together, and drunk plentifully of these
Spanish Wines, they withdrew themselves each one on board his own Ship. In the
mean time the Wind began to rise, and we were forced to change the Sails; but
all the Mariners, and the Pilot himself, were so drunk, that they knew not what
they did: When he who was at the Helm commanded to set to the Larboard, they
haled to the Starboard, having the Wind in their Faces; one cried this way,
another that way, it being the greatest Confusion in the World, not one
understanding what another said. When I saw that, I took the Helm my self, and
brought the Ship fairly before the Wind; then came a French Mariner, who was
just come out of Captivity from Barbary, and had not drank so much as the rest.
I quitted the Bar to him, because I was bid to beware of the Captain, who was
in a great Rage against me: Nevertheless that hindered me not from going to find
him out upon the Deck, where he was still emptying some Bottles of Wine with
his Mariners. As soon as he saw me, he began to mutter something to himself;
whereupon I took up a Cup and drank to him, which pacified him a little, and
told me that he was very angry with me; and having asked him the Cause, he
showed me his Arm, scarce being able to speak, meaning to tell me that I had
never a Lancet to let Blood. Hereupon I doubted that a wicked Norman had told
him of that; for in parting from San Lucar I had told him how I had been
Robbed, yet I had made Provision of Medicines to cure the Sick when there
should be occasion; and I had cured the Captain's own Brother of a certain Pain
that he had in his Legs, which was no small Help to me; for ever since that
time he was always my Friend against those who had a mind to do me any wrong,
and especially this Norman, who made it his chief Business to exasperate these
People against me, to the end that they might do me Mischief; but God preserved
me from them. The next Day they took a poor Boy, a Fleming, who was a
Passenger, and tied him fast to the great Sail-yard, to duck him into the Sea,
because, as they said, he had been drunk, and had spoiled the Deck: He was thus
hoised up Three times by the Sail-yard, and so duck'd in the Sea, after the
Captain had first drank to him, which he pledged. 'Twas a great Pity to hear
the Cries and Complaints of this poor Boy, and I was not able to behold a
Spectacle so cruel, but withdrew my self below Deck, where in the mean time I
heard them murmuring against me, at the Inspiration of this Norman, who had
been Captain of a Ship in the Newfound Lands, and was now a Passenger in this
Vessel, having more store of Crowns than Goodnature.

After having sailed thus for some time, we arrived happily, by the Grace of
God, at the Havre, the 15th. Day Arrival at Paris.
of August, 1615. and from thence I went straight to Paris, which was the Term
of all my Voyages, and of this last Peregrination, which was more troublesome
and incommodious than long. But God be praised for all, to whom I render
infinite Thanks that it has pleased his Divine Goodness to preserve me from my
Infancy to this time, from so many several Misfortunes and Difficulties which I
have met withal: For I was but at my Mother's Breasts in the Year 1576. when my
Father was Imprisoned at Meaux for being Surety for a Debt, which he was
obliged to pay; and whilst he had Permission to provide accordingly, it behoved
my Mother to supply his Place in the Prison with me; and thus began I betimes
to resent the Miseries of the World, which since in greater Age ^ have
experienced more fully, and more roughly, in regard of my almost-continual
Absence from my native Country, in strange Lands, and remote Places, devoid of
all Comfort, and exposed to all sorts of Miseries that could befall any Man;
and moreover, since my Return into mine own native Country, I have not been
exempted from the like Misfortunes and Calamities, having had but very little
Support from Men, assisted only by the Providence of my God, who has never
forsaken me, but has caused the Afflictions which he has pleased to send me,
to be an Object to several Persons of Honor to exercise toward me their Good
and Laudable Charities.

FINIS.

