Mr. Smyth's Discovery OF THE Popish Sham-Plot IN IRELAND, Contrived to
Correspond with their Sham-PLOT IN ENGLAND. By which it appears, that it has
been the joint Design of the Papists in both Kingdoms, to make People believe
their Real Plot to be a Sham-Plot, and their Sham-Plot a Real Plot.
Necessary for the Information of all His Majesty's Protestant Subjects.
The Discourse that past between one Father St. Laurence and William Smyth,
Gent, at the said Smyth's Chamber, on or about the 7th Day of July, 1681. in
the Kings-Arms Marshalsea, in Dublin, VIZ,

AFTER many discourses between him and me, in which he seemed to be
compassionately concerned for my having been a prisoner so long (which I told
him was nigh Four years both in Waterford and here,) he adding; said, he much
lamented my misfortunes, by reason that my face promised that I was no ordinary
person, and that there could be no greater torment in the World than for a
generous Soul to be debarred of liberty, and pent up in a close, stinking and
loathsome confinement. He went on, saying, I would soon procure you as much
Money as will set you at liberty and put you in a good equipage, if you will
condescend to some things to be by me proposed; In answer whereunto, I said I
should willingly embrace the offer, provided it was both legal and possible;
and so bad him continue his discourse, who replied, you must First take an Oath
of Secrecy, it being a matter of Weight and Consequence, and without which he
durst not acquaint me with it. After a short pause, I imagined by his preceding
discourse that it might be some grand Design he had to inform me of, whereupon
seeing me at a stand, he then said, you seem to be scrupulous of what I
endeavor for your enlargement; but be assured, if you will be ruled by me, you
are and shall be a happy Man; and so he drew out of his pocket a small Bible or
Testament, and administered to me this following Oath, viz.

I Conjure you by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by his bitter death and
passion, by the Blessed Virgin Mary, and all the Blessed and Holy Saints and
Angels, by the Holy Mother the Church, by this Sacred Scripture, and as you
hope for Salvation, if you do not act what I shall by and by tell you, at least
that you keep it concealed during life without any Equivocation, Dissimulation,
or mental Reservation, so help you God and all his Holy Saints. Amen. After
this he said you cannot but be sensible that the Church of Rome is the only
Catholic, Apostolic, and unfeigned Church, and the Pope, being God's
Vicegerent on earth, has power to pardon and forgive all sinners that are
members of the said Church, be their sins never so great and heinous; I
question not but you believe all this, and that there is not, nay cannot be any
Salvation for any one but such as die in the Roman Catholic faith, therefore
consequently whoever believes any other than what is allowed by the said Church
are not only Heriticks but damned to the pit of Hell, as being the just reward
of their demerits; for as there is but one God so there is but one Church of
which the Pope is Christ on earth. Now to swear any thing against any of those
Heretics for the Catholic good is to do God service, and that Oath being
taken upon a Protestant Bible needs no scruple of conscience nor inward
remorse, it being all one as to swear on an Aesop's Fables. Besides, what you
swear in the behalf of the Catholics (especially in these times) though never
so false, yet by a power from the Pope to every Priest in Orders is fully,
clearly and absolutely pardoned and forgiven by their absolution, after
Confession to any such Priest. Now what I would have you to do, and whereby you
shall obtain your liberty, is as follows. In primis, you must swear that
several Heretical Ministers, viz. One Parson Jack and Dr. Harrison, since your
being in Prison here in Dublin, came to you and offered to pay your debts, and
support you with Money to carry on your designs, if you would make Affidavit as
follows, and that they brought it to you in writing, and caused you to copy it
out, and took the original along with them ( The words) That there was a Popish
Plot, and that they desired you to swear that some Priests and others (naming
any one that you know) told you that the Duke of York was so far concerned in
the Plot as that he sided with the Pope and French King, to introduce the
French to invade the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and to put the King to
Death, and to murder all Protestants in his Majesty's Dominions, and to bring
in the Popish Religion; and that they, the said Heretics, should farther
require you to say, that you have diverse times heard Papists declare that they
would bring it about to be a Presbyterian Plot, and so subborn Witnesses
against the Earl of Shaftsbury First, and then against the Duke Monmouth and
diverse other Protestants, and bring their Heads to the Block. He farther said,
that the King would easily believe this Information, by reason he would gladly
have any occasion to destroy them, as being the People that murdered his
Father. Also he said, you must swear that the said Ministers, viz. Jack and Dr.
Harris, or Harrison, called his Majesty Papist, that he designed the
Destruction of his Subjects, and to establish the Popish Religion in his
Dominions, and that they plainly perceived his intention was to bring his said:
Subjects under a Tyrannical Government, and that they and the rest of their
Brethren intended e're this time to have had him (meaning the King) in their
power, and to have disposed of him at their pleasure, nay to have made him
shorter by the head, if he had not condescended to all their designs; but
failing in their designs were resolved to spend their lives and fortunes to
make it out a Popish Plot, by which (said the above Father) we will make the
world believe there was no Popish Plot but a Presbyterian Plot, and they will
be utterly confounded, and we cleared, and all Presbyterians and other like
Dissenters, be accused not only of the said Plot, but be reputed guilty of all
the Blood that has been spilt. If you will undertake this, you need not doubt
but that you shall have the Prayers of the Catholic Church to prosper you; and
besides other Witnesses shall be procured to second this your Information
without any show or color of suspicion, if by Gold and Silver they may be
obtained.

Further, said he, the Catholic Lords in the Tower have already given large
sums of Money, to subborn Witnesses against the Earl of Shaftsbury; forty will
appear against him, and see how it is likely to go with him; and you will be
assisted beyond expectation; for we are all resolved to make it a Presbyterian
Plot; and it is as easy for you to carry on this business, as it is for you to
say the Paternoster. So I told him I did not know the above Parson Jack or Dr.
Harris, or Harrison. Then quoth he, you must write to them, and in your Letters
say, that you have been a lewd and wicked Sinner, and that you have been a long
time out of the way, and now, God touching you with an inward Remorse of
Conscience, you desire them to come to you for Christ Jesus sake, to administer
some Spiritual comfort to you, and you will be sure to have them come to you, they
being the notedst of their Function, where they are: And after they have been
with you, and been seen with you by others in this House, it is enough for this
business, and will turn to the ruin of themselves, and many thousands of them,
whose Blood I hope to live to see spilt by the hands of the Catholics; and I
am certain, in three years time, things will be so effectually done, that there
will not be a Protestant living in England or Ireland. After you have made this
Affidavit to the King and Council, there shall be a large allowance, during
your Life, given you; for the Pope, Jesuits, and our Clergy will contribute
largely to any one that will prove so faithful, as to prosecute any thing in
the like kind; and for your part, you will meet with no Opposition, but be
credited, you being an Englishman, and none in England knowing you to be a
Catholic, which you must always deny, and you will be dispensed with for your
so doing. Moreover he would now take his leave, and leave me to consider of it,
and that he expected I would give him an absolute answer the next morning, but
I desired seven days time, which with much ado he consented to, putting me in
mind, for my Souls sake, not to reveal it, if I would not do it; but said he,
if you wll do it at the seven days end, after you have confessed and received
the Holy Sacrament of Christ, to be true and just in this affair, you shall
know from me more at large, and be at liberty, and have Money and Clothes like
a Gentleman: so he made a short extempore Prayer, exhorting me to a true
performance, adding, how dangerous it would be for me to prove false, and so
went away. But coming at the seven days end, I told him my Conscience could not
do it: Well, said he, (after a deep sigh) you are damned to Eternity if you
disclose it (which indeed I promised not to do) then he told me that they must
get some other, for they had enough to do it at their command, and taking his
leave, he bad me to send to him for any thing I wanted, and I should have it
freely. I do acknowledge all this to be an unfeigned truth, and that I never
saw or heard from the said Jack or Dr. Harris, alias Harrison, all my life
long, but when I had spoken to one of my Fellow Prisoners, of this business,
one Captain Page being told of it, came to me, desiring this Relation: But I
never saw them; yet it is true, I cannot be positive in the day of the Month,
but God knows it is exact, as near as I can call to mind: And I declare to the
World, there is nothing causes me to do this but a good Conscience, and to make
known the obscure and Villainous Crimes of the Papists.

And for the Testimony of the Truth and satisfaction of the World, I hereunto
set my hand and Seal; this 14th day of September, Anno Dom. 1681. William Smyth.
Francis Cook, George Harrison, Daniel Blackmore, John Page,
Witnesses.

Elizabeth, the Wife of John Welton, Cordwainer, brought the abovenamed Father
St. Laurence to me.

This Plot was contrived in the Kings-Arms Prison, in Dublin, by Father St.
Laurence, an Irish Secular Priest, and one William Smyth, an Englishman, but a
Roman Catholic, then Prisoner there, about the Month of July, 1681.

The Lord Primate and Council have this Information before them, and have
examined the Priest, and committed him to safe Custody, the 17th of September,
1681.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin, 1681.


