Mr. RIDER's ANSWER TO The False and Scandalous Reflections and Allegations in
Warner's CASE; and PETITION of the Mayor and Jurors of Deal.
THE two first Paragraphs relating to Warner's Project, begun without any
Grant, or Lawful Authority, contrary to the Letters Patents granted to Mr.
Burditt, and Mr. Rider, in order to destroy their Right, having been debated
and determined already by this Hourable House, will need no further Reply.

And although Mr. Burditt's Name, as a Promoter of this Undertaking, be first
mentioned in the Grant; his Share, by Agreement, is and was to be but one Fifth
Part, after all Charges and Expenses are deducted; for by Mr. Rider's Interest,
and with his Money, the same was procured, who is not only concerned as a
Patentee, but, till his Mortgage be satisfied, is also the sole Proprietor
thereof, in his own Right, and not my Lord Griffin's, as is falsely suggested.

That the Granting Patents for New Inventions, and Works of this nature,
together with the liberty to break up Highways, Streets and Passages, for
Public Uses, notwithstanding Warner's Opinion to the contrary, are Rights
belonging to the Prerogative of the Crown; and without breaking up the
Highways, Streets and Passages between the North River and Deal, the said Town
and Port cannot be supplied with Fresh Water, as it has been represented to
this Honorable House already, when Warner's Bill was rejected, to make way for
Mr. Rider's.

It Is a sign of a very bad Cause, when false and scandalous Reflections and
Allegations are made use of the support it; and of a worse constitution, when
Interest, which is too apt to blind Corporations, can prevail with them to
commit such gross Mistakes under their Hands, as are contained in the Petition
presented to this Honorable House by the Mayor and Jurors of Deal, to obstruct
Mr. Rider's Proceedings.

But plainer Proofs, and stronger Evidence cannot be had to justify the
Patentees Proceedings, and confute and detect the False and Scandalous
Reflections and Allegations in the said Petition and Case of Warner's, than the
very Proposals and Contracts to which they referr themselves, Subscribed by One
Hundred Sixty Eight of the Inhabitants of the said Town of Deal, made between
Edmund Clifford of Gray's Inn, to whom the Patentees Assigned their Interest,
and the said Subscribers only; notwithstanding what is alleged and insinuated
in the beginning of the Petition, and middle of Warner's Case to the contrary.

Nor were there any other Person or Persons employed in the proposing,
procuring or taking the said Subscriptions, than Mr. William Feudall, His
present Majesty's Store-keeper at Deal, and Mr. Robinson, who was not sent
thither on this Account, as is falsely alleged, but had been there some Months
before, in order to retrieve a Houy sunk in the small Dowas, and therefore
recommended by Henry Sawyer, Esquire a Councellor of the Temple, as a proper Person
to Supervize this Work, and Assist Mr. Feudall in procuring the said
Subscriptions; as by the Testimony of Captain Smith, who engaged Mr. Feudall in
this Undertaking, and was twice down himself during that Transaction, to view
and lay out the Ground between the North River and Deal, will appear.

Which Contracts and Subscriptions were taken on or about the 13th. of
December, 1694. and were in the following Month of February finished, and sent
up to Mr. Sawyer, as by the Dates of the said Contracts and Letters from the
said Mr. Feudal and Robinson most evidently appear, which was Twelve Months
before the late Plot: And yet it is positively affirmed, both in the Petition,
and Warner's Case, That the said Subscriptions were taken by Cole, alias Hall,
together with Robinson and Gellibrand, at the time of the late Plot when search
was made after them, and by no other Person.

What Credit therefore can be given to Men who take the liberty to asperse
others in so false and scandalous a manner? And to make this more monstrous,
Twelve of the Subscribers to the Petition are Subscribers to those very
Contracts which apparently contradict the Petition in Point of Time, and Matter
of Fact.

That Robinson's Name is mentioned in Sir John Friend's Trial, on Examination
appears to be true, but not as a Party concerned in the Plot, as is alleged:
But suppose he had been employed about the time of the Plot, and had been
guilty to Treason, Murder, or any other Capital Crime, that ought no more to
affect this Undertaking, than Mr. Rider's Confinement in the Fleet that time,
with many more innocent Gentlemen; unless his being deprived of his Liberty
then, can be thought a good Argument now to deprive him of his Right also,
though never concerned, directly or indirectly, in any Plot or Design against
the King or Government.

The next Paragraph contains a false Recital of Mr. Rider's Case, and from an
Inference grounded on that Foundation, Warner would Insinuate, that the 2500 l.
raised by Mr. Rider, some months before the Revolution, to defray the Charge
and Expense of the Patent, and Undertaking, was applied eight Years after in a
Correspondence with France; which no body sure but Warner would offer to this
Honorable House, for a Reason to obstruct Mr. Rider's Bill, brought in by
their Order, after the Matter of Right had been contested and determined by
them.

And that no New Objection of Warner's may be left unanswered, Mr. Sawyer
beforementioned was the Person who proposed to Mr. Rider to Raise Money to
Carry on and Accomplish the said Work and Undertaking; and upon that score
became concerned in the Management. But a Dispute arising between them, Whether
the Money that had been Raised, or what was to be Raised, should be first
satisfied; for want of an Accommodation in that Point, the Work was obstructed,
after the Engineer had made his Computation, the Ground was laid out, and the
Subscriptions were procured, as by the several Draughts, Computations, and
Subscriptions most plainly appear. Which Objection is now out of doors; since
Mr. Rider is Resolved, and has Undertaken to Carry on the said Work himself, in
a better and more certain manner, for the Use both of the Town and Shipping,
than Warner can pretend to; whose chief Expense has been in sinking a Well;
which, in the Opinion of the most able Engineers, will never supply both the
Town, and Shipping with fresh Water, when any number of Men of War and Merchant
Ships are riding and abiding in the Downs.

And unless better Arguments can be produced, to support this Inconsiderate
Undertaking of Warner's, than hitherto appears, Mr. Rider hopes he shall not
meet with more Obstructions to deprive him of his Right, and hinder so good and
necessary a Work; which is the Design of that False and Scandalous Petition,
and Malicious Case of Warners.


