Mr. Sadler, SADLED, IN The Vindication of Mr. R. Cranmer Of London Merchant:
AND CONFUTATION, Of the Abominable Untruths, and Falsehoods, of ANTHONY SADLER
of Mitcham, Clark; Contained in a Letter and Petition Directed to the Right
Reverend Father in God George, Lord Bishop of Winchester; and afterward
Publshed to the world in Print.

By a True Lover of Truth and Justice.

Quos vult perdere Jupiter prius dementat. London, Printed in the Year, 1665.

Mr. SADLER, Sadled, In the Vindication of Mr. Robert Cranmer of London,
Mercht. etc.
FOr our more Orderly Proceeding in this business, we will take these Steps. 1.
You shall know how Anthony Sadler, came to be Vicar of Mitcham, and when. 2.
You shall know Mr. Cranmers Carriage and Conversation toward him. 3. You shall
understand Anthony Sadlers Demeanor toward Mr. Cranmer, and diverse others of
the best of his Parishoners. 4. And lastly, You shall understand the Necessity
and Justice of Mr. Cranmers Proceedings against Anthony Sadler for his removal,
for the Future Settlement of the Peace and Quiet of that Town and Parish of
Mitcham.


For the First, You must know, that about the Year of our Lord, 1660. This
Anthony Sadler being very Poor, but well stockt with Wife and Children, went up
and down a Birding for a Spiritual Benefice, or Living; Some that knew Anthony
Sadler, requested Mr. Cranmer, the rightful Patron of that Vicarage, to let
him Preach at Mitcham, in order to his settlement in that Place in case his
Preaching was approved of. Anthony Sadler did accordingly Preach there an
Approbation Sermon, which well pleased Mr. Cranmer, and the Rest of the Parish;
but it being told him that it was but a small subsistence, worth not above 40l.
per annum, the Vicarage house much out of Repairs, and that it had not been
Inhabited by diverse of his Predecessors before him for many years. Anthony
Sadler replied, He would willingly accept it withal Faults, and bless God and
his Patron for it: Whereupon the Patron Mr. Cranmer, did freely Present him to
the then Lord Bishop of Winton, Bishop of the Diocese; And Anthony Sadler was
Instituted and Inducted accordingly. And thus began the name and Relation
between them of Patron and Vicar.

2. For the Patrons carriage toward him and his after this, the Patron thought
he had not done enough by this public provision of maintenance for him, and
his; but Invited him daily to his own house and Table, where Anthony Sadler was
as it were Commoner, and had the freedom to come when he pleased: Provided him
Wood, Coal, and other necessaries for him at his own Charge; Sends him
Cordials and other Physic in times of sickness, Commends him, and his, to the
Love and Respects of his Neighbors; At their weekly Neighbourly meetings; the
Vicar was a constant invited Guest among them, where he had many times Meat,
Drink, and Money; and as a farther Testimony of the Patrons and Parishoners
care of him, they had consulted to Rebuild the Vicarage house at their own cost
and charges; for that purpose the one subscribes a Contribution of Bricks,
another of Timber, a third of Money, and were putting the same in Execution;
but then comes next to be considered the said Anthony Sadler, his Carriage
toward the Patron, and Parishoners, which diverted these good intentions, and
so leads you to the third Step.

3. As soon as Anthony Sadler had heard that there was Forty Pounds, or some
such like Sum of Moneys subscribed, toward the Repairing and Rebuilding of the
Vicarage house; He goes to some Evil Counsel, (as Anthony Sadler himself has
since Confessed,) who advise him, To furnish his House with the Money, and to
Commence a Suite in the Prerogative Court against his Patron, Mr. Cranmer, for
Dilapidations: This advice pleasing his Hot and Heady Temper and Disposition,
he presently puts in Execution. Cites his Patron into the Court of Arches, and
there Libels against him for Dilapidations, contrary to all presidents of
former times, that a Vicar should Sue his Patron for Dilapidations, who had so
freely presented him to the Vicarage, and did confidently persuade himself of
Victory in this cause; When this was noys'd abroad, the Chief of the Parish
advised the said Anthony Sadler to desist from this unjust Prosecution of his
Patron, who had deserved much better at his hands; but as a man Obdurated and
Hardened, he stops his ear to their Advice; Breaks all Correspondency with his
Patron; Reviles him, and Vigourously Prosecutes his Suite in the Arches against
him; Which the chief of the Parish observing, they e-strange themselves from
the said Anthony Sadler, and do adhear to Mr. Cranmer, who by the general Voage
was the Suffering Party, and had received the Wrong; Anthony Sadler hereupon is
no more an Invited Guest to their Tables; And they have no more to do with him,
then to hear him in the Pulpit; Where Anthony Sadler Acts his Part most Rarely,
as you will perceive by the ensuing Discourse; Preaching up himself in these
Words, I was, and am for the Liturgy of the Church of England: You were, and
are for the Covenant; I was, and am for the Government of the Church of
England; Your were, and are for Presbytery; and so runs on in a very
unprofitable discourse, Extolling himself, and Reproaching his Parishoners. But
you shall see by his Practice, what a Dutiful Son of the Church he is; It was
observed by some Persons who had been at Mitcham but three Sundays, that two of
those days, Anthony Sadler Read Prayers without a Surplice, and frequently
Baptizeth Children without it and Preached in his Cloak, both forenoon and
afternoon; oftentimes neglects the Duty of his Place, four or five Sundays
together: Some Sundays when the Bells have Assembled the People, his Maid is
sent to the Clark to Dismiss them; either because it is Cold Weather, and the
Vicar loves his Bed well, or else he is straggling Abroad, where he is not to be
found. Upon the last Anniversary day the Thirtieth of January, Appointed by Act
of Parliament for our Solemn Humiliation, for the Murder of our late KING of
Blessed Memory, there is by the Church set Prayers appointed for that Occasion,
yet there was neither Praying nor Preaching that day at Mitcham, by this
Dutiful Son of the Church Anthony Sadler: When Anthony Sadler is in the Church,
he more observes the Behavior and carriage of his Parishoners, then his Text,
and squares his Matter more to his own Jangling humor, then to the Edification
and Profit of his People. And yet they must come to Hear him too, else to the
Bishops Court he goes, Presents them, and troubles them with Citations, Witness
Mr. Cranmer his Patron, whom he Prosecuted to an Excommunication for not coming
to Mitcham Church, when the Gentleman is usually at his house in LONDON, upon
those days; if any chance but once to sit with his Hatt on, though he be at
that time indisposed in Health, yet he shall taste of the same sauce, Witness
Sr. William Green of Mitcham Baronet, who for such an Offense, Anthony Sadler
caused to be cited into the Bishops Court, by the Name and Style of William
Green Brewer of Westminster; Edward Brigstock one of the Churchwardens of the
Parish of Mitcham, this Anthony Sadler Presented, because he would not Present
what and whom he pleased; and caused the said Edward Brigstock to be
Excommunicated thereupon; upon the Week days You shall find this Anthony
Sadler in the Alehouse Drinking, and Wantonly Discoursing of Women beyond all
Bounds of Civility, or Railing against his Patron, or Enticing poor People to
Subscribe their Hands, or set their Marks to some stuff that Anthony Sadler
has prepared and drawn up before hand against his Patron; or telling strange
stories of himself of his Sufferings, and of his Learned Works, in which
Discourse must be brought in by Head and Shoulders, the Inquisitio Anglicana,
which Anthony Sadler calls his, though many have affirmed that it was not his,
but made at a Club of Divines, and that Anthony Sadler being the Boldest and
most Confidentest of them, did first Adventure to Print it.

Thus you see how Arrogantly Anthony Sadler Imps his Wings with other Men's
Feathers, and has not the Ingenuity of the Prophet to say, Alas it was
borrowed; We need not mention his frequent Swearing by the Name and Attributes
of God, his Drunkenness, and other of his Personal Vices, which declare him not
to be a Moral Man; and which are attested under the Hands of diverse of the
Inhabitants. His familiar Conversing with the Basest and Meanest of the people;
If you will view him in his Acts of Justice, we will cite you but one, that is,
Hemings his Case, to whom Anthony Sadler was indebted for a horse, and gave the
said Hemings Bond for the Money. Hemings being in much want, came to Mitcham to
Anthony Sadler to desire his Money, Anthony Sadler denied that he owed him any
thing (though the Money had been many years due) but sends for a Martials Man,
and in a great pretended Action Arrests Hemings, who for want of Bail was
carried to the Marshalsey, and there detained for the space of Eighteen Months,
till the poor man was almost destroyed with Vermin; and unless Hemings would
release the Debt, Sadler would not discharge his pretended Action. And thus you
have a taste of Anthony Sadlers Demeanor at home and abroad, in the Pulpit and
out of it, to his Patron and Parishioners, and to a Stranger: Ex Ungue Leonem.

Now we are come in the Fourth and last place, To set forth Mr. Cranmers
Proceedings against Anthony Sadler, the matter of Fact was thus:

Mr. Cranmer, Sir William Green, the Churchwardens, and diverse others of the
Parishioners of Mitcham, being upon the Information of Anthony Sadler, cited to
appear before Sir Mundyford Bramstone in November last, in the Court held in
St. Mary Overyers Church, they did appear accordingly. At which Court was also
Anthony Sadler, with his Procter Richardson, who took upon him most Impudently
and Falsely before the Judge, to affirm that Mr. Cranmer was an Excommunicated
Person; which Sentence is of so high a Nature, that it Excludes a man from the
benefit of Gods Ordnances, and from the benefit of the Laws of the Land, from
the Burial of a Christian, if he dies without Repealing it; which did very
highly provoke Mr. Cranmer, to hear such a matter in the face of the Court of
Justice, and in Gods house, and before his Neighbors and Countrymen, so
falsely and scandalously objected against him. Whereupon Mr. Cranmer who had
hitherto only acted the defensive part, upon good advice, did now become
Plantiff, and entered an Action against this Richardson in the Borough Court in
Southwark for the Scandal, and another against Anthony Sadler for his unjust
and malicious Prosecution, upon which Actions they were both Arrested;
Richardson puts in Bayl, and so had his Liberty; Anthony Sadler could find no
Bayl, and so was kept in Custody; Mr. Cranmer with Mr. Hooker the day
following, went to the Prison where Anthony Sadler was in Custody, and sends
for Anthony Sadler, where after some choler spent on both sides, the Patron
and the Vicar came to some quiet terms, and could drink to, and pledge each
other; and Anthony Sadlers fury was much abaited, and began not only to
confess his former wrongs done to his Patron, but to have some kind of sorrow
and remorse for the same, and Mr. Hooker observing some easiness of Temper in
the Patron to remit and forgive; though it is somewhat preternatural in him to
forget: thought it a fit time to strike a peace betwixt them, for this purpose,
proposes Anthony Sadler his Relinquishing of the Vicarage, as the means of
their Reconciliation; Anthony Sadler consented to it, and the Patron accepts
it; but said Mr. Sadler, Sir, I cannot do it presently: I owe Money and have
contracted some debts upon me, by the long and chargable Suite I had with you
in the Arches, and therefore pray let me have the benefit of the Easter book
before I go; Moreover (said Anthony Sadler) my wife is with Child, and I
cannot with any convenience remove my Family till she be delivered, which will
be about Easter, said the Vicar; Pray set your day, (said the Patron) when you
will leave the Vicarage, and give me security for your Performance, and all is
ended. Said Anthony Sadler, Sir, I will give you my Bond of 500l. to leave the
Vicarage of Mitcham, and the Town too, by the 10. of April next, which will be
in the Year of our Lord, 1665. but said Mr. Hooker, will you give a Warrant of
Attorney to confess a Judgment upon the Bond, as of the next Term of St.
Hillary. The Vicar replied, I will willingly and freely do it; upon this the
Bond and Warrant of Attorney were drawn, and afterward showed to the Vicar,
who in the presence of Mr. Hooker and diverse other persons, did soberly and
deliberately Sign, Seal, and deliver the same as his several Acts and Deeds
unto the Patron, and for his use. After this the Patron withdraws his Action
against him and sets him at Liberty; The Vicar very much pleased with this
Agreement, goes the day following to his Cure, and on Monday following returns
to London, brings his Presentation with him, and in the presence and hearing of
diverse persons delivers up his Presentation to his Patron, Congratulates Mr.
Hooker as the blessed Instrument of peace betwixt them, lays the load of all
his former miscariages upon his Evil Counsel; professes a great deal of hearty
love and affection to his Patron, prays for him in public, and for his Wife,
and Family in very Pathetical expressions; gives God thanks in a neighbor
Church upon the Lords day, for this work of peace wrought between his Patron
and himself.

Preaches a Sermon upon this Text, How happy and how pleasant a thing it is,
for Brethren to agree together in Unity; and makes the Union between Him, his
Patron, and Parishioners to be the Subject of his Discourse; and incites the
whole Congregation to Prayers and Thanksgivings for the same. And in like
manner, the Patron, he takes all occasions to express his love to the Vicar,
and restores him by his mediation and example to the former respects of his
Neighbors and Parishioners, to whose Tables he was again invited after a long
estrangment; and they began to be again as well open handed as open hearted
unto him: But what use does Anthony Sadler make of all this? he is lifted up
with these kindnesses and respects showed him; and his Jealousies and
Apprehensions not being quite extinguished, they take Life and Head again; he
repairs to his own evil Counselors (one Thomas Witherden Cammel-keeper of
Mitcham being the chief of them and they hunt together like Bell and the Dragon
after al occasions to traduce Mr. Cranmer; and gather up all loose reports, let
them come from any foul mouth whatsoever, and how mean and inconsiderable
soever the persons be, that are the Authors, it matters not, and with these
they Stigmatize him as Treacherous, Barbarous, and Oppressive, both to the
Right Reverend Bishop of that Diocese, and to the World in Print, in that lying
Legend of his, styled Strange News from Mitcham in Surty; wherein he makes the
Churches Jurisdiction, and Discipline, and the Churches Freehold, and his
Preaching up the Regal Authority, and Mr. Cranmers Injury and Disobedience to
all, to be the ground of his Law-Suite and Presentiments; but this man must
needs be reckoned a stout Champion and firm Asserter of the Churches Rights;
when, under his own hand directed to his Procter Richardson, he gives him order
to withdraw the Cause, and to stop all further proceedings upon the
Presentiments; And gives Mr. Cranmer his Bond for the payment of Thirty Pounds
for costs of Suite for his unjust Prosecution; This is that well known Minister
Anthony Sadler, who in his Petition to the Reverend Bishop attests Mr. Cranmer
to be a public Oppressor and notorious in Oppression, and why? Because when
he had been in law two years and a half with his Patron about Dilapidations,
and had there unjustly oppressed him, (as appears by his withdrawing the Cause
and giving Bond for Costs, and because he was in person to prosecute his unjust
Presentiments in the Bishops Court against his Patron, which afterward he
withdrew) his Patron arrested him there; as if for M. Cranmers legally and by
due course of Law to seek his remedy against Anthony Sadler for the damage he
has sustained by him, were to oppress Anthony Sadler; and if Anthony Sadler
had not taken that opportunity in Prison, to make his Atonement with his
Patron, by securing him that he would leave the Vicarage, at the time prefixed.
It is to be believed that Anthony Sadler had long ere this, at the Trial of
that Action been convinced, that he himself was the Greatest and most Notorious
in Oppression. That Anthony Sadler was cast into Prison and lay there a day and
a night, was not his Patrons fault, but his own, for if he had put in Bayl, his
person would have been presently discharged, and he needed not to have entered
the prison door, nor have been kept one hour from his Family and Study; but
that which is the most Stupendous untruth in the whole pack, is that Mr.
Cranmer his Common Lawyer should cause Anthony Sadler to Subscribe and Seal a
Blank paper, or papers, which paper or papers Mr. Cranmer and his
Common-Lawyer, report to be a Judgment and a Warrant for the payment of 500l.
to Mr. Cranmer; And thus he would persuade the world that he was consulted
against, imprisoned, and complotted to be ruined; the truth of the matter of
Fact, you have heard before; the penalty in the Bond was indeed 500l. but
conditioned, that if Anthony Sadler should deliver up his Presentation by such
a day, and resign the Vicarage into the hands of the Bishop, that so his Patron
might freely present another Person, and should also by the 10th. of April
next, remove his Wife and Family out of the Parish, then the Bond to be void;
A. Sadler is both able to write and read, and knew what he did, before he
delivered it; the other paper was a Warrant of Attorney to confess a Judgment
upon the same bond, which A. Sadler did Sign, Seal, and Deliver in the presence
of very many persons. Yet this well known Minister has the Impudence to affirm
to the world, that to his best remembrance they were Blank papers; the world
may well think that Anthony Sadler has lain in bed so long this cold Winter,
that he has forgotten what he did Engage to perform by the 10th. of April
next; and now being awakened and finding the day approaching, he would
willingly cast off all his Engagments, by calling them Blank Papers; or else
does implore Episcopal assistance to enforce that, which is against the Laws of
the Land; (for so is his express word in his pretended letter to the Bishop, (
that his Lordship would send for Mr. Cranmer and enforce, (indeed the next word
is (Equity,) but the meaning is, his Security from Mr. Cranmer; And if that
will not do, then comes the Petition directed to the same Right Reverend
Bishop, to implore his Favor to have Mr. Cranmers Security, (which he calls
Papers) to be produced before the King and His Council; It is a sign that this
Anthony Sadler is distracted or quite mad, to think that the King and His
Council have no more to do, then to mind his pitiful stories and wranglings
with his Patron and Parishioners. But all this while we do but contend with a
shadow; For he declares that his Letter and Petition were directed To the Lord
Bishop of Winchester, but does not affirm that he sent either; and it is
believed that he durst not for fear that he should be disowned for a Son of the
True Church, being so unlike his Mother, both in speech and carriage, or at
least censured for a disobedient Son, in not obeying his Mothers commands, and
unlike his Brothers in those qualifications set down by the Apostle St. Paul to
Timothy; That they should be blameless, sober, of good behavior, not given to
wine, patient, no brawler nor no vice, nor lifted up with pride; That Mr.
Cranmer should be injurious to the Churches Freehold, is inconsistent with his
own interest, having purchased the presentation in Fee, and is the real Patron
of that Vicarage, and called Patron, because it is his duty to defend the
Churches Right, and as well his Interest as his Duty; Now to injury the
Churches Freehold, is to make Mr. Cranmer a Felo de se, which no man in his
wits can well imagine, that Mr. Cranmer should be disobedient to the Churches
Discipline, is as little imaginable, when in the worst of times he presented
very able and orthodox Divines, and such as were most conformable to the
Discipline of the Church, to the Vicarage of Mitcham, witness Dr. San^iland,
and Mr. Welden; and not only favored such most in his Judgment, but was most
charitably disposed to the destressed and sequestered Clergy, yearly
distributing large portions amongst them; as is very well known to some Persons
now of great Eminency in the Church; which is not mentioned by way of vain
glory, but to take off those aspersions cast upon him by Anthony Sadler.

To conclude, by which has been already alleged, it would be thought Strange
News indeed, or News with a Witness, and a wonder to the World, that there
should be at Mitcham, one Anthony Sadler, that styles himself the Vicar of
Mitcham, and a Dutiful Son of the Church of England, that does neglect his
Ministerial Office, and disobeys the Churches commands, disturbing the peace
and quiet of his Parishioners, and by his evil and bad conversation is most
likely to corrupt the people to the dishonor of Religion, to the reproach of
the Ministry, to the contempt of the Discipline of the Church of England, and
yet to be so bold, as to appeal to the Learned and Right Reverend Bishop of
that Diocese for his (...) and Protection.

Lond^n, Printed by Thomas Ma^b at Paul's Whaiff, 1664.


