To the Right Honorable JAMES Earl of Perth, Lord Drummond and Stobhall, etc.
Lord High Chancellor of the Kingdom of Scotland, AND JOHN Earl of Mellfort,
Viscount of Forth, etc. Principal Secretary of State for the said Kingdom;
Knights of the most Noble and most Ancient Order of the THISTLE: AND Of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy-Councel, in both Kingdoms of Scotland and
England.
May it please your Lordships,
THe Illustrious Character, you deservedly bear, is no less demonstration of
the King's profound Judgment, and Affection to His People, than marks of Honor
to your Family, or Favor to your Persons. It is the Felicity of the Nation, as
the King makes no Impress but on the finest Metals, no more does he employ
Ministers, but such whose intrinsic Worth justifies His prudent Choice, and
Endears Him to His People: We find by your faithful Management of the great
Trust you have, that State Ministers are not now, as in some former Ages,
Screens to the Prince, to keep off the popular Hatred of those Discontented at
the Government: But rather like those reflective Glasses, which, by
intercepting the Love of His People, double the same toward the Sovereign. The
Interest your Fidelity to the King's Concerns has given you in his Majesty's
good Opinion, you have Improven to the King's Mind, for the Happiness of His
Subjects: The Boldness with which you assert his Right, the presence of Mind
with which you unfold the well-mean'd Overtures, but not so Happy, of others:
The dexterity by which you manage your better laid Proposals; the unbyassedness
of your Temper, which no consideration can induce to wrest Justice; the Zeal
wherewith you encourage the Loyal, and dishearten the Factious; the Humanity,
wherewith you receive Addresses from all, without respect of Persons, has a
very auspicious Influence on the whole Nation, to confirm it in its Duty to the
King, and Obedience to the Government.

Virtuous and excellent Pesons, as they are more easily Exalted, and that with
more Honor to the Prince, less Envy to the Court, and Grumbling to the People;
so they prove more Faithful to their Trust, more Grateful to the King the
Fountain of their Advancement, more Serviceable to the Public, more Acceptable
to both God and Man: Hence it is, the great Figure you make in our Horizon is
so little spoken against; Although the Conjunction of such Dignities in two
Brethren at one time, has as rare Presidents in our Historians, as there are in
them Examples of such a Constellation of Virtues, or the present Age affords
Instances of such singular Accomplishments.

He who knows and considers, K. Rob. III. Married to Arabella Drummond,
Daughter to Sir John Drummond of Stobhall; She was Mother to K. James I.
how congenial Loyalty must needs be to your Noble Family, which has the Honor
to be so early allied to the Crown, will less wonder yet at the benign
Influences of the Throne, toward Persons, whose Integrity to the King, is not
only conveyed with Their blood in a long Series of worthy Progenitors, but is
the result of Conscience and sense of Duty: Yet do not I think, it was the
Advantage of your Quality and Blood, so much as the Eminence of your Endowments
has attracted the Kings Good Will toward you: His Majesty, as an Angel of God,
discerns where Heaven qualifies and prepares fit Instruments for his purpose
and his Peoples Weal: And, as an observant Vicegerent, He seconds the more
Curious Ingravings of the Divine Hand with some Strokes of his own: And where
these concur in State-Ministers, the Kingdom is more Happy, than when according
to Plato's Model, Philosophers govern, or Governors aim to be such.

It is no small Joy and Satisfaction to all honest Hearts, and it has
wonderfully revived the Spirits of the Loyal in the Nation; to see the Favor
of the Court run in so right a Chanel toward persons of such untainted
Loyalty, Ability and Interest, who are no more united in Blood than in Noble
Designs, for the Honor of the King, the Security of his People, and the
Interest of his Service: No small Prognostic of perpetuating our Happiness
under so Wise, so Gallant a Prince, and such Excellent Ministers.

We now see these Happy Days, in which the Kings Favor is not made mercenary,
nor due Rewards of Loyalty mis-plac'd on Intriguers with Faction: and that none
can obtain them, but by his Fidelity, or retain them but by perseverance in his
Duty.

My Lords, It may be thought strange, considering how zealous a Protestant I
am, I should have made bold to implore your Patronage, and perchance there will
not be wanting some, who will whisper against it: But I dare openly own, what
they dare but privately condemn, as no difference of Religion can alienate my
affection and duty from my Prince; no more will it make me omit my respect to
His Ministers, regard to their Authority, or obedience to their Command; my
zeal for Religion will not raze the esteem I have for Worth and Virtue, so
eminently set: And where could I dedicate a Discourse better, than to such
conspicuous instances and promoters of it? I once entertertain'd the Vanity to
have addressed it to His Sacred Majesty, whose Title to the productions of our
Brains is no less, than to those of our Loins and Fortunes; But considering
Princes are not to be rudely accosted by mean Persons, but to be approached
with profound Reverence by the Mediation of others, I have presumed to publish
this first Essay under your Honorable Names, which if it be so happy as to
touch the Kings hands, or get a glance of his eye, I am more rewarded than I
could expect, or can deserve. I remember an expression of that Prodigy of
Piety, Constancy, and Eloquence, King Charles I. Scrini Sacra.
in a Letter to the University of Cambridge, approving their Election of the
Duke of Buckingham for their Chancellor, upon His Majesty's Recommendation, He
says, We shall ever conceive, that an Honor done to a Person We Favor, is
out of a Royal Respect had to Our Self: As my respect to the King put me on
this Service, so it has induced me to this Dedication, upon which account it is
only acceptable to your Lordships, who make Persons affection to to the King
the measure of your favor toward them: By which the World sees, the Kings
concerns go nearer you than your own; to promote which, as there are none more
sincerely set than you are, so there is none more cordially Prays, you may
Live long for his Majesty's Service, for the Ornament of your Families, and the
Happiness of the Nation, than

My Lords, Your Lordships Most Faithful, Most Humble, And most Devoted Servant.
JOHN MACKGUEENE.

Psalm 2.62. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion.


SOme Virtuoso's of the Heathen World, who were puzzled at the unequal
distribution of Things, resolved the events of this Life into mere Chance, or a
Fortuitous concourse of second Causes: Others of them more Studious, and so
more refined, attributed the good or bad success of Human Affairs, to the
swinge of a fatal necessity; some looked no higher than to the Will, Conduct,
Liberty and Wisdom of Man, as the great disposer of our Concerns: But those of
greater perspicacy, and more elevated reason, referred the accomplishments or
frustration of Men's Designs to a higher Hand, Natura, Fatum, Fortuna Casus,
omnia unius ejusdem Dei nomina.
even Divine Providence, which they meant under the various shapes and Names,
the Vanity of some, the Ignorance of others, or the Superstition of a third
Party gave it: And we, who have a more sure word of Prophecy, a clearer Light,
and a surer guide, revere as the sole Arbitrator of the Emergencies and
Transactions of this World, that superintends all our Actions and Contrivances,
sometimes prospering the most unlikely, sometimes defeating the most promising,
attempts, even those which have wind and tide, (so to speak) a concatenation of
all necessary Causes, a concurrence of all probable Circumstances, to make them
Auspicious, and Crown them with successful Issues: To convince us all, Jer.
10.23.
That the way of man is not in himself, that it is not in him to direct his
steps. And though Man proposes, yet it is God disposes, a clear instance of
which, we have in this Psalm, and more particularly in our Text, Yet have I
set, etc.

This Psalm, as many others, represents to us mystically the Success of
Christ's Kingdom, and the security of his Throne, maugre all the opposition of
Men and Devils; but literally David's establishment in his Regal Office, and
Royalty; after all his Troubles, in despite of all the Difficulties which lay
in his way; and how fitly applyable to our Sovereign's advancement will anon
appear.

I will at this occasion confine my self to the Literal Importance of the Text,
and consider from it: First, The peculiar Interest God claims to himself in
the Setlement of Kingly Government. I have set my King. Secondly, The Wise and
Powerful Conduct of Divine Providence in making good his special Care of Kings,
and bringing about their Settlement, notwithstanding the Rage and Malice, the
Power and Plots of Enemies, whether the Contrivances, Wits, or Conspiracies of
Grandees: Whether the Fury of an Heady Multitude, or vain Madness of Popular
Faction; all which is expressed, or couched in the preceding Verses,
recapitulated and wrapped in this short adversative Particle, Yet; Which how
small soever it appear to you, is very Emphatick: The Filings of Gold are
precious, and so are the least Expressions of Divine Writ: As we hang great
weights on small Pins, and set large Wheels on work by little Springs, so, much
is included in this small Syllable Yet; That is, Maugre all the rage of the
Heathen, and the vain Imagination of the People, in despite of the Power of
Adversary Princes, and the Policy of Rulers: I have accomplished my Purpose,
and consummated my Work, Yet have I set my King, etc. I have laughed at their
close-lay'd Projects, and derided their Counsel, I have blasted their Attempts
with the breath of my wrath: I have quelled their force, and broken their
Bands; I have mastered their Power, and daunted their Courage, and owned my
Anointed: And instead of their breaking our Bands, or casting away our Cords, I
have broken them with an Iron Mace, and crushed them as a Potter's Vessel; So
much is imported in this Yet, Yet have I set my King, etc.

As to the First, The peculiar concern God takes for Kingly Government: The
general Providence of God is conspicuous in the Order and Variety, the Beauty
and Harmony, the Diversity, yet Uniformity, observable in the frame of Nature:
The Universe is no greater Monument of his Power, than it is a Mirror of his
Providence: But his special Providence signalizes it self in the Care of Kings,
and Fate of Kingdoms; in disposal of Crowns, and conferring of Scepters, in the
mighty Revolutions of Government: As it is a great Diminution of the Reverence
we owe the Deity, to ascribe every petty Chance, every trifling Emergent to a
special Surveyance; so not to range the Momentous transactions of the Lives of
public Persons under his peculiar Inspection, not to attribute the signal
Benedictions of Nations to his Conduct, is Profaneness or a piece of
Presumptuous negligence. Well then may God claim a peculiar Interest in the
establishment of Regal Authority so beneficial to Mankind, and advantageous to
Christian Society. Kings are the chiefest Objects of Gods choicest Care, whom
he tenders with more than ordinary Affection; It is he that advances them to
their Thrones and establishes them thereon: This appears, Dan. 2.21. and 37.
verse.


1. Prove. 8.5.
From the Divine Institution of this kind of Government, God says, By me Kings
reign, and Princes decree Justice: Whatever Phanaticks or Republicans say,
Kings derive their Authority from a higher Fountain than the People, they have
their Commission from Heaven, are God's Delegates, and Vicegerents, not the
Creatures of the multitude: And as Monarchy has its Original from God, who
settled this Model amongst his own peculiar People; so it carries more lively
Vestigies of his Government of the World, than any other: Hence it is God
communicates his Name, as well as Power to Psalm. 82 6.
Kings: Cujus jussu and homines nascuntur, hujus jussu and Reges constituuntur
apti iis qui ab ipsis regnantur, lib. 5. cir^a finem.
Iraeneus tells, Kings are constituted by the very same Authority and Command,
by which Men are made and born, for the benefit of them over whom they exercise
Jurisdiction: Kingly Government is no human Invention, for modelling the World
into Order, no politic Contrivance for Disciplining mankind into Society:
Much-lefs, an Artifice to gratify the Ambition of any who would vapor it in
Pomp and Splendour: No, its Pedigree may be traced higher; it brings its
extraction from Heaven and the state of Innocence will not exclude it.

The general custom of Nations in owning and retaining this form, speaks out
its Divinity, and the peculiar Interest of Providence in maintaining it; even
these Nations, that are not more distant from others in Situation, than they
are different in Manners; how wild soever the Soil be, without Culture; how
Savage the People, without Arts, are yet under Monarchical Government: This
Omni autem in re consensio ^mnium gentium lex natura putanda est Cicero.
Universal Harmony is no small Testimony to its Divinity; it must be some
Extraordinary Beauty that conquers all Hearts, and sets it Trophies every
where; which not only the best Polished and Civilized Nations in the World, but
even Barbarous Scythians, rude Affricans and Wild Indians are enamored with:
It must be Heavenly Manna that can satisfy every Palate, considering the
contrary Tempers and different Dispositions of Men. It must needs be more than
Human, that is revered in the dark Corners of America, as well as in the
refined parts of Christendom.

2. The peculiar Interest of Providence in reference to Kingly Government, may
be demonstrated from the Proviso's scattered up and down his World, for the
Security of those entrusted therewith: By which we see the Spirit of God
strangely super-intends the Cause of Kings; Moses lays a Bridle on our
Tongues, Exodus 22.28.
That we speak no Evil against them; Eccles. 10.20.
Solomon will dive deeper, and not so much as allow an Evil Thought, not a
Whisper or a Mutter, though in the secretest recess of our Dwellings: The
Gospel is no less friendly, St. Peter and St. Jude go further, they conclude an
inward Despection of them Criminous; surely if they would have the Tongue
curbed from speaking, the Mouth from muttering, the Mind from conceiving
Disloyalty: They would not have the Hands lift up against them in Cruelty and
Blood: Jeremiah commands the Jews to pray for the Life of the King of Babylon:
St. Paul exhorts Supplications to be made for Nero: Is it likely, they would
allow their Subjects to petition them in Tumults, to starve them by Votes of
Preclusion, to conspire against their Persons, or bandy against their
Authority, to Invade their Territories with force, and dye Scaffolds with their
Blood: No, no, it would extremely detract from the Divine Wisdom, to establish
a Polity, and make such Cautionary Laws for its Safety, and then approve the
Seditious Fetches by which some Demagogues would undermine it, or the open
Force by which some Saucy Encroachers would invade it: This were to counter-act
his own Ordinance, and to resemble Charles the V. his Disingenuity, who
commanded Public Prayers to be made for Clement the VII throughout all his
Dominions; when by his Authority his Captains held him Incarcerated.

3. The Preservation of this Model in the World, from its beginning to this
very time, notwithstanding of all the attempts of men to break it, or shake it
off; is no small indication of God's peculiar concern for it: Absistens a Deo
homo in tantum effebit ut in omni inquietudine et homicid vel avaeritia
versaretur, Iraeneas lib. 5. cir^a finem.
He that considers, how that since Lucifer's Fall (who was the first Rebel and
Incendiary, let factious Schismatics and feditious Boutefeaves glory if they
can in their common Father,) and Adam's Miscarriage, the whole race of Mankind
became Turbulent and Ungovernable: How Contentious are some, and Ambitious are
others: How Discontented are some, and cunningly Seditious are others, to work
on their Tempers: He that considers the Inconstancy of the Populacy, the envy
of Powerful Competitors; the Conspiracies of Grandees; the Jealousy of some
State-Ministers among themselves, and their Treachery toward their Sovereign:
Est in omni populo quid malignum and qu rulum in Imperantes. Tacitus.
The Skittishness of People, and the Natural Untowardness that is generally in
Men against their Governors: That notwithstanding all this, Monarchy should
keep footing in the World: We may conclude, there is more than an ordinary
Providence in it, and say in an Ecstasy, It is the Lord's doing, and is
mavelous in our Eyes: It is he that gives Salvation to Kings, and the
Shields of the Earth belong unto God.

4. The special concern of providence in behalf of Kings, appears in the sad
and deplorable end of those, who either by open Violence, or secret Treachery,
invade their Authority, or disturb their Government: God will not suffer such
violations of his Ordinance to escape signal tokens of his displeasure; nor
have there been any sinners more remarkable instances of divine vengeance, nor
human justice, than such; witness Corah, and his Confederates; Absalom, and
Achitophel; Zimri, and Joab; Sheba, and Amasa; our own Chronicles and Times
afford fresh bleeding Examples, of the calamitous fall of some Families, once
illustrious, but now levelled with the ground, with ignominy, and disgrace, as
the just reward of their unjust aspiring, and rebellious opposing the Regal
Authority, Jude 1.11.
these perished in the gainsaying of Core: Let all Rebels and Seditious
Persons be afraid, since they trace the steps, they will taste the punishment of
such Criminals; Sedition is as odious now as ever, and the Divine Providence as
ready to detect, and crush it, as ever.

I will not entertain you with a politic Lecture on Government, this is not my
province; nor will I so far disparage Monarchy, as to make any Comparisons
betwixt it and any other Form, being fully assured no other Model has such a
stamp of Divine Approbation, a King being the clearest reflection of the Deity
upon Earth; nor will I adduce these irrefragable testimonies from the Hero's of
the Church, who determined for Kingly Government, in an Age they were shattered
with its frowns, more than cherished with its smiles, and felt its Prosecution
more than Protection; nor will I heap up those Elogies, with which the great
Masters of human policy have raised it, beyond all saucy competition of
inferior Models; only mind you of a pretty similitude of one of the Glories of
his Age, the great Nazianzen, who speaking of the necessity of Government, and
how Rulers are the Vicegerents and lively pictures of God; he says, ordinary
Magistrates are a contracted Character of God, or his Picture drawn to the neck
and shoulders; these above them were his Picture drawn to the middle, but the
King was his Portraiture in full length: And for the preference of Monarchy,
i will assert, it is the most Ancient, the most honorable, the most advantageous
to the ends of Government, and happiness of Societies.

1. Kingly-Government is the most ancient, even as old as the World, and in
despite of all the haters of it, with it, and no sooner shall it receive its
Funeral; though it may be rationally conceived, the World is near its
dissolution, when so considerable a Pillar of its standing, is so barbarously
attacked, and rudely inveyed against, by the enemies of all Order; indeed
things that fortuitously start up by the policy of some Ages, or the custom of
particular Nations, acquire not that Universal Reputation, or perpetual
continuance, wherewith Monarchy has, and is like to keep footing in the World.
Cortum est, omnes antiquas gentes regibus puruisse. Cicero.
It is beyond all peradventure, all Nations, any way famed for Antiquity, were
in subjection to Kingly-Government, the Foundation was laid in Adam, nor did it
expire with him, but was entailed on his Eldest Son, who, though short of his
Brother Abel in piety, yet did not lose his Superiority over him, for it is
said, his desire shall be to thee, and thou shall rule over him. Dominion was
not early founded in Grace, according to the whimsey's of the
Fifth-Monarchy-Men. It is certain, a Commonwealth without a King is the
natural offspring of Ambition, and the product of a teeming Faction.

2. Kingly-Government is the most honorable; blessed art thou, Eccles. 10.8.
O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles; upon this score we may vie with
all the Kingdoms in the World, none of them can boast such a Series of Princes,
such a Lineal Succession of Kings, in a regular and orderly Descent; what
interruption of the Monarchy, what bandying of the Scepter into different
Families, without Alliance and Blood interest betwixt them, to the grievous
convulsion of the Estate most Kingdoms in Europe have undergone, How
short-lived has the Royal Power been in some Families, like a glazing Meteor or
blazing Comet, whilst Ours, by the Divine Blessing, has been a fixed Star, or
like the Sun, rather casting the benign influences, to the Elevation of our
Nobility, the Cherishing of our Clergy, the Establishment of our Gentry, the
Protection of our Commons? We admire a stately Palace for the orderly variety
of its parts, and the beauty of its structure, but we so much the more regard
and commend it, that it has stood out against wind and weather, and the injury
of time, so many Ages. And certainly, since a special providence has through so
many successive Generations signalized its care of our Monarchy, to the envy of
our Neighbors, and astonishment of our Enemies, and transmitted the Crown in
its Right and Lineal Course, to His Head, who now carries it, (who though it
were not by inheritance, as it is indisputable, yet were it by merit His Right
to wear it,) we may expect no common or ordinary Blessings, from One, to whom
the Virtues of those Princely Hero's, are conveyed with their blood.

You of the Nobility, my Illustrious Hearers, may be encouraged here-from, to
Submission and Loyalty; You serve a King who is the Son of Nobles, who was Born
to command you, and from his very Cradle has an Air of Greatness; Plutarch
says, there is a certain Greatness, and innate Gallantry of Spirit, (...). Plut.
in those Descended of worthy Progenitors; such have spirit and courage for
Heroic Atchievments, whilst these Terrae Filii, these of obscure exstraction,
have a great deal of Copper or Dross mixed with their Ore or Argent, are by
Nature destined to low or sordid Imploys: You serve no upstart of the Rabble,
or creature of the Populace, nor a King by chance, but one who has all the
Majesty of a Prince, and the Gallantry of a Hero. It was the favor of His
Predecessors, distinguished yours from their Neighbors, the Dignity of the
Subject being a Ray from the Sovereign, as His is a Beam of the Divinity. How
can you look on your selves, and these Badges of His favor, by which you are
Elevated above others, and not reflect Honor to the Original of your Grandeur?
you should consider, that as the Painter consulted best for perpetuating his
memory, when he indented his own Image in Minerva's Picture, that the one could
not be erased without defacing the other. There is such an Union betwixt His
Majesty and you, that an injury done him reflects as much dishonor as
Ingratitude on your selves, and the more the Sovereignty is depressed, the more
you will ever be trampled upon; so that it is an equal wonder, a Nobleman
should ever be a Traitor, as a Son become a Parricide, or a Wife Murder her
Husband.

3. Kingly Government is most accommodated for the safety of the Subject,
(...). Polyb.
and the preservation of Peace and Prosperity in a Nation; the great Bulwark of
a Kingdoms Felicity, are in Polybius's Opinion, Concord at home, and Strength
against Foreign Invasion: Monarchy prevents the Emulations and Clashings of
Subjects for Priority and Power; and so secures the State from Civil
Commotions: And by uniting the Subjectsunder one common Head, it provides best
against Foreign Encroachments.

We our selves know, that the short Mis-rule of our late Demagogues produced
more mischief to their Nation, than the worst of our Monarchs ever did, when
they most out-stretch'd their Power: And there are rare Instances upon Record
of any of our Lawful Sovereigns, whose Miscarriages were not more than
pre-ponderated by the Advantages of their Government: Neither Aristocracy,
which is but the Grandees bandying into a Faction; or Democracy, which is a
confused Popularity ranked into a Sham-Order, can ever make the Subjects so
Unite at Home, or so Formidable to their Neighbors as Monarchy will make them;
upon which account we may safely and firmly conclude, it is best accommodated
for the Honor and Strength, for the Safety and Prosperity of a People.

And were it not so, the Divine Providence, which disposes all things by the
highest Wisdom, exactest Reason, and profoundest Justice, would not so signally
own it; and this leads me naturally to the second Head: And that is, the
Mysterious, Wonderful and Powerful conduct of Providence, in making good his
special Care of Kings, and bringing about their Settlement, notwithstanding all
opposition to the contrary; all which is included in this adversative Particle,
Yet will I set my King, etc.

I see Almighty God, not only Accomplishes his Work, but Magnifies and Extols
the same; takes complacency in viewing the Parts, in recounting the several
Circumstances that may enhance the same: That it may become at once the Object
of his Enemies wonder, and of his own rejoicing; of their Shame, and his Glory:
Here in a Holy Triumph, he boasts that maugre all the rage of the Heathen,
maugre all the Power of the Kings of the World, the Policy of the Rulers of the
Earth; the Combination of their Associates, maugre all their Craft, and
Cruelty, maugre their Spite and Strength, he did his work, Yet have I set my
King, etc.

Indeed the Divine Providence is conspicuously Triumphant in baffling the
Attempts, and conquering the Enemies of Kingly Government, Yet have I set, etc.
The Rage and Plots of Gods Adversaries are Illuminating Shades to the Honor of
the Victory; and the Glory of the Conquest, he obtains in behalf of his
Anointed: O! the Mysterious Conduct of Divine Providence, which sports with the
Strength, laughs at the Spite, makes a game of the Policy, and a pastime of
the Power of poor Mortals; when levelled against his Purpose, and overrules
their Counsels and Actings, to further what they intended to defeat: The
Providence of God never appears with greater Luster, his Economy is never more
wonderful, than in Converting the means of crushing, into occasions of more
signal consummating his Work; as here, this magnifies his Wisdom, and exalts
his Power, that he may well, like a triumphant Conqueror, brave it over his
mastered Foes, or like as a Mariner (solaced with the after reflections on the
past dangers of his tedious Voyage,) sits down and exults at the whistling of
the Wind and the noise of the Waves, when his Ship is securely Harbored, and
he himself past danger, Yet have I set, etc.

This is our Kings Birthday, and I know nothing more suitable to this days
Solemnity, or the Text, than a few Reflections on some Circumstances relating
to his Advancement to the Throne of His Ancestors, which may raise our esteem
of Gods Wisdom, and beget some Joy and Satisfaction in Us; in the survey of the
Conduct of his Providence in subduing his Foes, we are not only truly Thankful
enough, except we expand our Thoughts, and stretch our Fancy to contemplate the
several Methods, by which the Factious Party sought to Justle Him from His
Right: The viewing these in their just Dimensions, may conduce to the further
Magnifying the Wisdom, and admiring the Righteousness of God.

God should not lose his Honor, by omitting any remarkable Passage, or by a
careless touch or superficial mentioning of these Stratagems, whereby they
sought to cross his Providence, or frustrate his Council, in the Opposition
they made against the King: And that the Conduct of Providence may appear in
its Beauty; let us take a view of those Difficulties which seemed to obstruct;
of these Intricacies which way laid; these Mountains of Opposition which
withstood, these Intrigues and Cross actings which were like to Baffle our
Sovereign's Ascent to the Throne; let me rip up the various Scenes of the
restless Faction, by which they sought, and thought to stop His Passage thereto.

1. The ordinary Prologue to all Mischief, the Embrio of Sedition, the
Cockatrice Egg of Rebellion; repining Complaints, malicious Murmurings,
discontented Whispers; laden with which, Designing Men sent to the several
Corners of the Nation, to alienate their Hearts from the King, that Then, and
now is; and dispose them to take Fire against a fit opportunity for the common
Cumbustion of the Kingdom. The Devil, who himself was the first Rebel, inspires
his Followers with cunning, and slight enough to manage his Treasonable
Intrigues against Kings: And these Hellish Instruments vent Speeches of
doubtful Construction, that like their Masters Responses may be interpreted
either to good or evil Purposes in promiscuous Companies: They make such
Insinuations against the Government, with Ifs and Ands, with Winks and Nods,
and a thousand Grimaces, with Sighs and Sobs, that some well-meaning People are
wheedled to think Them the only Patriots, the best Repairers of our Breaches,
the fittest Redressers of our Grievances, and Reformers of our Disorders; If a
Happy juncture of Affairs could promote such to bear sway: In serendo querelas
and ambiguos de Galba sermones, Tacitus.
Thus Otho by his sligh Hits at Galba, and ambiguous Expressions concerning
him, paved the way to his ruin: O! the pious Regrets, the heavy Sighs, the
mournful Complaints these Hypocrites have belched out, with lifted-up Eyes and
Hands, with mortified Looks, but Cruel Hearts for the Oppressions of the Land:
And when they have made Trial of Peoples Tempers, and disposed some by this
previous Art to be of their Party, they advance a step further.

2. These hollow Blasts and secret Whispers bluster out in scurrilous Libels,
pestiferous Pamphlets, and licentious Invectives; whereby the King is Traduced,
His Ministers Defamed, His Government Aspersed; These are the little Beagles,
the Cruel Hunters, the Ringleaders of the Party, heat and ply the great Beast
of many Heads, and few Eyes, and little Brains, (the Populacy with,) before
they let go their great Buckhounds, or appear with Cannons in the Field: These
are light Forerunners of Fatal Conspiracies and Tragical Events, the ordinary
Premises of Rebellion: Malicious Incendiaries will ever find or fancy Matter
for Quarrel in the best modeled Government upon Earth: These who make bold
with the Kings Name, will not spare his Person, if a concurrence of
advantageous Circumstances fall in to second their Hellish purposes: When
People are shaken from that Reverence to the King's Name and Person, which is
no less the Bulwark of their Safety, than it is the Guardian of the Sovereign's
Dignity; there is an open door to all Insolent Invasions on his Authority: The
Faction, knowing the Empire our Monarchs have in the Hearts of their People,
(beyond any other Kings in the World) have ever labored by Reproaches and
Calumnies to Alienate their Affections from them: This is indeed no new
Stratagem of the Party; for as our Savior says, So Persecuted they the
Prophets that were before you: So Maligned they with their Libels and virulent
Tongues the former Kings; so did they Slander their Ministers of State,
Mis-representing their Actings, and Plotted against their Lives.

3. There is a Damned Conspiracy under the Flag of a Sham-Popish-Plot, set on
foot, and carried on with such Hellish Artifice, as blinded the Wisdom of the
Nation: And the Leaders of the Faction in this out-did their Predecessors, who
seemed to have been but Puny-Pioneers for undermining the Government, in
comparison of these Engineers: How far the King was Imposed upon, and his
Parliaments deluded, the Issue (in the sad Executions, which if continued, had
exhausted some of the Innocent and best Blood of the Nation,) has left upon
Record: And if the Wisdom and Courage of his present Majesty had not a wak'ned
the King, and the Honest of the Land to look about them, and detected the
Cheat; We had been destroyed before we had apprehended any Danger: It is an old
Remark, Quibus de conjuratione comperta non creditur nisi occisis. Livius.
Conspiracies against the King and Government are not believed till
perpetrated: One of the neatest Historians of our Nation, has this Politic
Reflection on the Conspiracy against King James I. Which the Universal
Benignity of his Nature, being one of the most Accomplished Princes, and best
Loved by his People in the World, would not suffer his Council to believe any
durst have attempted against so good a Monarch, though yet he perished by it:
He says, Will. Drummond History James 1.
People believe not any Conjure against his Prince, till they find the Treason
take effect; and distrust the Plot till they see him Dead: But the Death of
such who are suspected to be Authors of Disorders in a Commonwealth, spares an
infinite number of Lives, and much Civil Blood, when they are first surpised;
neither are too strict Circumstances of Law to be observed, when a small delay
may abolish all observing of Order and Laws: And indeed too much caution is
needless, where necessity requires speed; dilatory Methods against Traitors has
diminished the Authority of the Monarchy, and given too much time to its
Implacable Enemies, to gather strength, and make head against it, to its
dissolution.

When Sedition peeps out through the crevis of Pamphlets and Libels, or shows
its Horns in Tumults, it is in its Infancy, and may be suppressed with less
expense of Blood and Money: But if it be permitted to commence to its full
stature, and break out in a Monstrous Rebellion, the Actors are Burnt with the
Flames of their own kindling, and Severity against the Ringleaders, is the
Security of the Throne, and the Safety of the Government.

4. The Party becoming bold, if not impudent with their Success, they will scorn
to deliver their Mind in Slie-insinuations, or ambiguous Phrases: They Will pull
off the Mask, they will quarrel at the Kings Prerogative, limit and curtail it by
Votes, Exclude the Righteous Heir, and Starve the King by discharging any to
supply Him by Loan, or advance on His own Revenue; A Cruelty the meanest of the
Nation would have justly counted intolerable; we may rationally enough
conclude, these, who would have famished the King, would have cut his Throat if
they could; and these, who would not permit him to improve His own, would never
help him with theirs in his extremity. God knows, if the King were of such Men's
Dyeting, how slender would His Fare prove, how nigardly His Commons, and sorry
His Allowance? He would have been little better than another Lazarus at the
Gates of these Diveses, only with this dissimilitude, Dives denied but his own,
but these Cormorants, would Judas like carry the Purse, snatch at Crown Lands,
and swallow Bishoprics, but starve their owners, as the Defenders of the Good
Old-Cause did before.

Concerning their unmannerly meddling with the Kings Prerogative in their Votes,
I will only say, if the King had taken advantage of the Offers, which that
transport of joy, affection, and zeal, at his Restoration, would have inclined
his people to make him; (for then we were as men in a dream, as the Psalmist
says, we had such sorrowful Resentments of our petulant encroachment on the
Sovereignty, such severe reflections on our Dis-loyalty, that we thought though
we parted with all, we could not over-do, or over-act for the Interest of the
Monarchy, which we found by the want of it, was the best preservative of our
own,) there had not been room now for these Debates anent Prerogative and
Privileges, Arbitrary Government, etc. and what not, which are so Seditiously
set on foot, and managed so malapertly.

I will not rake any further into the proceedings and practices of a strong
Party, in the grand Assembly of the Nation, and other Courts, I find them set
out to my hand very lively and justly, Miles Burn's Sermon before the
University of Cambridge, on September 9.
by a neater Pen, who has represented with equal Eloquence and Ingenuity, the
devices and pragmatical fetches of the Faction.

I Will only mention one Vote that passed the House, it was, that if any mischief
befell the King, be sure the Papists would bear the blame of it, and undergo
the punishment, whereby, any Phanatick Miscreant might securely prove Regicid,
for by this he was sure not to be questioned or quarrelled; poor Innocents,
be it to bear the infamy of the Fact, and fall Victims to expiate the guilt of
others. The Papists, or any suspected to be so, were marked out to fall as
Sacrifices to the cruel Saviors of the Nation; for a slander and suspicion,
was suffiient probation against these or the Kings best friends, when great
Degrees of Treason and Sedition in others were minced into Misprision of
Treason, little Aborrations, and I know not what.

This Vote was much like Nostredamus's Sons Prophecy, who foretold the City on
such a day should be burnt, and accordingly set on fire, there want not some
who Prophecy the very mischief they intend to perpetrate, there are who even
wish these Confusions, they would bear the World in hand, they desire not to
come to pass, and by faint speaking against slily animate people to these
Seditious Methods and Treasonable Practices, they pretend to abominate; they
give Life to these dangerous fears, unjust jealousies, and malignant
discontents, they seem to harangue and remonstrate against. This is a refined
piece of knavery the party has often used, even to wound the Government with
such seeming kind, but venomous, Insinuations, and vent their malice in
Charities Livery; how like this is to his Hypocrisy, who betrayed our Savior
with a kiss, I leave you to determine.

If it be now questioned, whether the Popish, or Phanatick Party, be most
dangerous to the Government? or which of these, was the late King, or his
present Majesty is in most hazard? To this I say, we all know who acted upon
the Father, what was alleged others Plotted and Contrived against the Son;
have not our King, our Nobles, our Priests, been dragged to Gibbets, haled to
Scaffolds, made Tragical Spectacles of Ignominy and Dis-honour, by the cruel
malice of the One, while the other ventured their Lives, and wasted their
Fortunes, to serve and save oppressed Majesty, and support the Throne, when it
was tottering? Did not some of the Romish Communion cleave to the King in His
extremity, when, Loyalty was a Crime, and Rebellion Triumphant, while the other
tacked about with the Times, stooped to prosperous Villainy, and Adored the
mock-Idol of Tyranny and Oppression, of their own setting up. Have not
State-Committies of Safety, and Kirke-Commissions for Reformation, belched out
as cruel Edicts against Men's Persons, Lives, Liberties, Offices, and Estates,
and put them in Execution, with as much severtiy, as ever the Spanish
Inquisition? Have not Home-Conventicles, and Republican-Clubs, sent out
sparks, to the disturbance of the Peace, and the shaking of the Government,
these several years, beyond any thing the Romish-Conclave was able to
effectuate.

If the one twit the Papists with a Jack Clement, who Murdered a King, they will
tell you of a more daring wickedness in Jack Presbyter, who Murdered another,
but with some more ceremonious Sanctity, mock-Justice, and such like shameless
Circumstances of damned Hypocrisy: One of the Murderers of the Archbishop of
St. Andrews.
If you tell them of a Ravilliac, they will answer, a Rathillat no more resembles
the Name, than transcribed the Villainy. And now shall we think the Principles
of Deposing Kings more Savoury in the Mouths of Phanaticks, than in some
Popish-School-men? Shall we think the practice of King-killing and
Assassinating Bishops, when it is for Religion, more Hallowed in Schismatical
Butchers, than in some Romish Miscreants? Yet the Actors of these Barbarities,
are the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, the Patrons of Gods Cause, the
Precious ones of the Lord, the Saints and Martyrs of the Faction: But if these
be the Prime Candidates of Heaven; then Shimei and Rabshakeh, Corah and Judas,
and all the men of Belial need not question Assurance.

5. The Faction think not themselves secure without a Covenant; they had
experience of the Serviceableness of this to their Hellish Purposes: This was
the Gideon Sword, with which they Thresh'd the Monarchy, and Sequestered the
Church, cut off the Crown, and threw down the Mytre: But they knew the Name was
odious, and the Court would scent the Design, that well-meaning People would
startle at the mention of a Word so Fatal to the Nations; as we cannot see the
very Instruments wherewith our Friends are Butchered; and there is something I
know not what in the Names of venomous Creatures, that grate our Ears, fret our
Blood, and touch us with a secret Horror, so the Word Covenant would Alarm the
Loyal of the Land, it must be smoothed and minced for these Ostrich-stomachs,
tender of any thing but Monstrous Villainies, for these delicate Ears only
erected for Seditious News, into an Association: But as Pirates change their
Flag, but not their Purpose; Highway-men their Habit, but not their Practice;
Beasts of Prey their Habitations, but not their Savage Nature; so Rebels,
retain their Bloody Designs under all Disguises: And as their Arch-leader
Cromwell would not be called King, that he might act the Tyrant, and play the
Destroyer in a Protectors habit; so the Covenant must be Antiquated, and an
Association substituted in its room; and these are as like one another, as
Judas and Iscariot, as Convertible as Cromwell and Usurper.

It was truly strange, that after all our dear bought Experience, after the
Blessings of the Restoration of the Monarchy, and our own Restitution to our
Rights and Liberties thereby; after all the Discoveries of the Party, which a
little glance backward might give people; any should have been deluded twice in
one Age, by the very same Stratagems: There is a certain fascination in
Sedition, when it can so successfully erect its Trophies on Peoples Credulity,
and Debauch a Nation twice in one Age by the self-same Methods.

All Grand Conspiracies against the Government are carried on under a Sham-zeal
for Religion, a Counterfit Affection to the Public, a Crocodile Pity for
oppressed Liberty, an earnest desire to Redress Grievances, and when these are
managed with a Stentorian Voice, and Senatorian Gravity, with Shaftsburian
Harrangues, and Cromwelian Devotions, with Long Parliament Preachments, and
Assembly Fasts, with Misplaced Curses, and Misapplied Texts; with an O Yes, O
Yes, the Cause of God, the Cause of God, and the other circumstances of
Pageantry, which were tedious to rehearse; down must all go without pity, and
the Work goes bravely on, though the King be Butchered, Religion Destroyed,
under pretense of Defending of it it, Property fall Victim to the keenest or
longest Sword, and Arbitrariness Introduced under a counterfit Flag of staving
it off.

When the same Antimonarchical Principles Jealousies and Pretenses, (the Blinds
under which Treason and Murder made their advance formerly) are now set on
foot, though some of the Actors be changed, the same fatal Game is certainly
intended to be Reacted in the Nation: This is not the Fanciful Idea of a
Cloistered Monk, or the Chymerical fear of a Melancholy man; this is not the
contemplative Notion of a sarcastical Wit, this is not a remote possibility, or
uncertain contingency, but what we have heard with our Ears, saw with our Eyes,
felt on our Backs, and known to our Cost.

6. Sedition produces not all its ill Effects at once, but mends its pace by
degrees, till it burst out in Thunder and drop Blood; thus impudently (after
these several steps) it shows it bare face in a formidable Rebellion, Private
Whispers, Licentious Invectives, Secret Conspiracies, Pragmatical Medlings,
Presumptuous Encroachments, Factious Bandyings ushered an open Rebellion in
both Kingdoms. I will not interrupt the Joy of this day, by grating your Ears
with recounting the dismal Consequences had issued upon the success of this
Rebellion; if Providence had permitted so far the punishment of our Sins: Nor
will I expatiate in aggravating the Injustice of the Attempt, or the perfidious
Ingratitude and Treachery of the Actors; the Skars we yet retain of our late
unhappy Troubles (which the signal Advantages of the Restitution of the
Government, the Clemency of the late King, and the Conduct of our present
Sovereign, (who then bore a great part of the Care without the Crown) have much
worn off) are no sadder Indications of what is past, than Prognostics of the
Calamitous events we had groaned under, if the Rebellion had prosper'd: And
that will easily appear, if you consider these two particulars.

1. The respite the Loyal of the Land had by the Blessings of the Restoration,
has set the Teeth of Rebels on edge, who like Tigers and Woolves, and such
Savage Creatures, have their edge whetted by being withheld so long from their
Prey: And God knows, if they should Triumph over our Liberties and Trample our
Honor in the Dust a second time, by a Prosperous Rebellion, without any
Metaphore, our latter end would have been worse than the beginning: O what
Cruel Imposers on the Consciences of others? What Violent Invaders of Property?
What Insolent Oppressions of our Freedom, have they formerly proved, by which
we may rationally conjecture, as they are improved in Cunning and Impudence for
carrying on the same Villainous Methods, there cruelty were no less, if put in
the same circumstances of Power and Opportunity.

2. As their Malice was increased, so was their Hypocrisy, and Rebellion never
marches more furiously, or Harasses more cruelly, than when it strikes and
Fights in the Name of the Lord; when it comes with a Curse ye Meroz because
they came not to help the Lord against the mighty; And Cursed be he that does
the Work of the Lord negligently, or keeps back his Sword from Blood: A
Religious Rebel, a Seditious Saint, a Gifted Brother, a Godly Schismatic with
the Bible in one Hand, and a Dagger in the other; with the Kingdom of Christ in
his Mouth, and Spite against the King in his Heart, will exceed a Jew in
Obstinacy, a Turk in Cruelty; yea, out do an Indian in Barbarity.

Thus I have drawn a Scheme of the Actings of the Party, unfolded their
Windings, diffected their Artifice, by which they sought to Dethrone the King
that lately was, and Exclude His present Majesty, in whose Exaltation to, and
Preservation on the Throne, in despite of all the Machinations of the Faction,
God has signally vindicated his Providence, and manifested his Care of Crowned
Heads: That now like a triumphant Conqueror in a Holy Boast, he may say, Why
did the Faction rage, and the People imagine a vain thing? Why did Grandees
Combine? And Rulers take Council together? For all their Opposition, Yet have I
set my King, etc. And we may say, He that sits in Heaven has Laughed; the
Lord has had them in Derision, he has spoken to them in his Wrath, and vexed
them in his sore displeasure.

We now see God suffers Rebellious Contrivances to go on to some pitch of
Maturity, and make some Progress, as the gradual steps of Advancement the
restless Faction made; but it is for the further Confusion of the Actors, and
the Illustration of his own Glory, in their more signal overthrow: For if such
Courses were nipped in the Bud, or made too soon Abortive; it would bring less
Shame to the Authors, less Terror to others, fewer Admirers of his Providence,
or Reverers of his Justice: And this is a signal indication of God's peculiar
Interest in our King, and special Care over him: That when the Party had
closely and cunningly laid their Projects in their Clandestine Cabals, and
brought them to the point of Execution, He disappointed their Devices, Job.
5.12.13.
that their Hands could not perform their interprises; He took the Wise in
their own Craftiness and precipitated their Counsel: Yet have I set my King
upon my Holy Hill of Zion.

As God rejoices in bafling the Attempts, detecting the Cheats, confounding the
Policies, and Conquering the opposition of His and the King's Foes, here, Yet
have I, etc. So, let us in such miraculous trains of Providence, whereby the
Plots and Power of the King's Enemies are defeat; let us Glory and Boast in the
Name of the Lord, Who gives Salvation unto Kings, and stilleth the Tumults of
the People: Let us Triumph in such events of his Providence, as seal particular
care of the King, his Affection to his Person, his concernedness for his
Interest; with whose Preservation the Security of our Laws, the freedom of our
Religion, the Honor of our Nation is twisted. Let us say with Ahimaaz, 2 Samuel
18.28.
Blessed be the Lord which has delivered up the men, that lift up their Hand
against my Lord, the King: Now know we, that the Lord saves his Anointed; he
will hear him from his Holy Heaven; By the strength of his Right hand he has
wrought Salvation for us: Some trust in Chariots, Psalm. 20.
and some in Horses: But we will remember the Name of the Lord our God: They
are brought down and fallen that rose up against us: But we are risen and stand
upright. Behold, as Aged Men are revived with a present solace at the
successful Encounters, and mastered Misfortunes, of their Youth: Or Travelers
ravished in their Repose, with rehearsal of their toilsome Pilgrimage; so may
we rejoice in consideration of the mysterious Conduct of Divine Providence, by
which our King and the Nations have escaped.

From the Conduct of Divine Providence in Settling our King on the Throne of
his Ancestors, maugre all the opposition to the contrary: Let no cunning
Achitophel flatter himself in his close-laid Designs; or Treacherous Absalom
pride himself in his Power or Popularity: We see God either frustrates their
Devices, Job. 5.12.
or weakens their strength, that they cannot accomplish them, or ensnares them
in their own Craft, or precipitates their Counsels to their own undoing. The
Policy of Man is too shallow to grapple with Infinite Wisdom; and his Power too
weak to oppose Omnipotency. God beats men often with their own Weapons, and
turns their Stratagems against themselves to their ruin, plays his Game by
their Hand, when they least intend it; causes their Policy to counteract it
self, in accomplishing what it was designed to baffle, as in the case of
Joseph, Moses, Jonah, and our Sovereign; we may transfer to the fraudulent
practices of the Enemies of the King, what Jethro said of the Egyptians, in the
thing they dealed proudly, God is above them; in the thing they dealed
treacherously, God was above them: Yet have I set my King, etc.

Let these who took encouragement to persist in their Villainies from the
success of their Rebellion, and aspersed Providence upon this score, as
approving their Treasons, like that Atheist, who, upon his fair gale, after he
plundered the Temple, cried out, O behold, how God loves Sacrilege: Let them
now behold, how God vindicates himself; and dashes their confidence, in
detecting their Plots, and baffling their Attempts, in infatuating their
Council, and crushing their Power; and now quit all Enterprises against that,
which God so signally in the issues of his Providence takes under his Patrociny
and favorable Protection: Let them now see their Argument turned against
themselves; we see the Chase is quite turned: And though Providence suffer
Treason and Rebellion to vapor it for a time, and bear all like a torrent
before them: Yet she will not prostitute her self to befriend them still, she
will not be violent'd long to favor Rebellion with success, or crown Treasons
with Triumphs: God has more than sufficiently vindicated his permissive
Providence in winking at the Indignities done Charles the I. by his special
care of his Posterity, in preserving them in their Exile; in returning them
with such universal Acclamations, in advancing two of them peaceably to the
Throne of their Ancestors, for all the Plots of their Foes, the policies of
their Heads, the malice of their Hearts, or opposition of their Hands; And next
the Miracle of the Restoration of Charles the II. The advancement of our
present Gracious Sovereign to His Throne, through so many Difficulties,
Intricacies and Obstacles, is matter of astonishment to all considering
Persons; and speaks out a Chain of special Providence that encircles Kings: We
may say, Psalm. 118.23.
It is the Lord's doing, and is mavelous in our Eyes; we will rejoice and be
glad for it.

The consideration of the Mysterious tract of the Divine Providence in behalf
of the King, in mastering all the Lets, and conquering the hindrances of his
just and deserved Exaltation to his Throne, may encourage Him and Us to trust
the Divine Goodness for His Majesty's future Prosperity: These Oppositions in
the Morning of his Reign, were but mists, through which he has broken
Victoriously with Splendour: And we may rationally hope the rest of his days
will be more Serene, and his End, like the Sun's Declension, in a beautiful
Cloud: We need not fear his future Peaceful Reign; Seditions, Conspiraties,
when they are detected, Popular Tumults, when they are suppressed, Intestine
Insurrections, when they are crushed, Sham-Plots and Sancy Competitions, when
they are basted, are the Security of the Throne, and the establishment of the
Government: These are like Winds, which shake and threaten to pluck up Trees,
yet strengthen their rooting; or like these morning Clouds which Eclipse the
Sun, or darken the Air, but leave the one more sprightly, and the other more
clear: That Chain of Providence which preserved him in his Exile, where the
disaster of his Fortune did not depress the Gallantry of his Spirit, (as
usually falls out in persons of an Ordinary Elevation) but it broke forth in
his Military Encounters, to the Conquest of his Enemies, and the astonishment
of his Beholders, and wonderfully restored Him and his Sacred Brother to their
undoubted Rights, will not desert Him: These former instances are Ensurances to
Us; He is God's darling, and the Object of his special Care, happy Presages of
the same Providence, watchful Eye and tender regard of him still; We may allude
to what David says, 1 Samuel 17.37.
He that delivered him from the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the
Bear, will not leave him in the hand of the Philistines: 2 Chr. 1.10.
He that has delivered him, and does deliver him, will make his Days Many, His
Reign Prosperous, His Enemies As straw trodden down for the Dunghill, Isa. 25.10.
His Subjects Happy, His Crown Flourishing, and his Armies Victorious.

And it cannot be doubted but it will be so, if we answer the Design of
Providence, and our Duty in Loyalty and Obedience; we should convince the
World, that though the King be of a different Religion from us, yet Loyalty
toward Him is an essential Ingredient of ours: Let us labor to exceed Papists
in Affection to his Person, Obedience to his Laws, and Concernedness for the
Safety of his Crown, and the Happiness of his Reign, that we may vindicate our
selves and our Religion from the unjust Aspersions of any Adversary: So the
King, like a Loving Father, will make no discrimination, in the distribution of
his Favor and Protection, for the different Features of his Children: We see
this, and thank the King for it already; and we need not jealous the
continuance of it, so long as we persevere in our Duty: Nothing can make us
unhappy under his Government, or obstruct from us the benign Influences of the
Throne, but our own ungovernableness: Let us, by all Offices of Humanity and
Charity, treat our Fellow Subjects without distinction, since we all Worship
one God, and serve one King, and hope to meet all in one Heaven: Let us forbear
bitter Railing and Reviling, for there may be more of a hellish Spirit in that,
than there is of Antichristianism in some objects of our Rage: And since our
Hearts and Affections, our Prayers and Devotion meet in one Center, as to the
Kings Welfare and Happiness; let this unite us in Love and Peaceableness
together; let our contest be, which shall exceed one another in Loyalty and
Humanity; not like the Briar and the Thistle, which shall rankle one another
most, or fret our Superiors; but let it be, like that betwixt the Vine and the
Olive, which shall be most beneficial; like that of Aristides to Themistocles,
Plutarch vita Themist.
Laying aside private Piques, let us study which of us can be most Serviceable
to our Country, most Dutiful to our Sovereign, and helpful to one another.

And to rivet this Loyalty in your Hearts, let me offer some Considerations
from Nature, from Reason, from Religion, and Interest. First, what Curtius
observes, Ingenita quibusdam gentibus erga reges suos veneratio. Curtius.
That some Climats and Nations are naturally more disposed to revere and affect
their Kings, than others, is true of the Body of our Nation: And of all People
under Heaven, We are under the greatest Obligation to our Monarchy, and to
assert the Kings Right; for two thousand years we knew no other Government, and
the Reins were held in a Lineal Succession by the Forefathers of his Sacred
Majesty, who now Happily sways the Scepters over us: The Scottish Nation has
been famed all the World over for its Loyalty and Courage; this was the Genius
and Complexion of our Country, until our late unhappy Times; a Scots Traitor
was of Old as contradictory, as a Drunken Christian, or an Innocent Robber: And
it had been so still, if a new Sect or Hotch-Potch Party had not sprung up
here, and in our Neighbor Kingdom; who could reconcile Godliness and Villainy,
Sacrilege and Saintship, Religion and Rebellion; great pretenders to
Strictness, but affectors of Looseness; of strong Faith, but little Charity; of
great Devotion, but little Honesty; of specious Names, but vicious Natures; of
fair Pretenses, but foul and abominable Practices: These, these, were they that
debauched the Nation from its Integrity, and depraved some People with
Disloyalty; God grant, we may recover our Ancient Reputation, and repair the
Credit of our Country, by a steadfast Adherence to the Crown; Nunquam libertas
gratior extat quam sub re^epto. C^audia.
and make some Compensation for the Indignities done the Father, the Disservice
done the Son, the Ingratitude done the Duke, by a Dutiful Allegiance to the
King.

2. We have the greatest reason in the World to engage us to persevere in
Loyalty; In regno naei sumus ubi parere est libertas. Seneca.
We live under a Monarchy that is the best tempered in the World, our Liberty
and Happiness depends on our Obedience; and these are so twisted with the
Sovereignity, that they stand or fall, live and dye together: We have a King,
whose tender years have not been corrupted with Luxury, but one who bore the
yoke in his youth, and has been early disciplined to Hardship, in whom there
is nothing of Softness or Effeminacy to encourage the most daring Rebel: We
have a King, who is no Novice to the Intrigues of State or Mines of Policy, one
that will not be imposed on by the Craft of any Achitophel; one who is
habituated to the difficulties of Government, whose Vigilance eased the Care,
whose Policy prosper'd the Reign, of his Royal Brother, whose Sagacity detected
afar off the Rebellious Designs of a Monstrous teeming Faction then, whose
Courage and Resolution dashed their Impudence, and crushed their Insolence
since: We live under a King, whose Stoutness and Conduct, whose Valor and
Gallantry, has made him the Terror of his Foes, the Envy of his Neighbors, and
the Darling of his Subjects. The Benignity of the Kings Temper, the Clemency of
his Nature, the Gentleness of his Reign, (which perhaps is beyond parallel;
that for the Rebellion lately commenced, none fell in this Capital City, the
seat of Public Justice, but two, by the Hand of the common Executioner) the
firmness of his Word, which he signalized to the exasperating of a daring
Faction; these, with the constellation of the other Royal Virtues which adorn
his great Soul, are Presages of more Prosperity to those Nations from his
Government, (though he differ from us in Points of Faith and Matters of
Worship) than could be expected from a Spurious Competitor, or a Protestant
Usurper: And when I have said so, I have wronged none by the Comparison but the
King, and I am at his Mercy for it: But still I Will assert, we have all the
Reason imaginable to maintain his undoubted Title with our Lives and Fortunes,
against all the Protestant Rebels in the World: And that because,

3. Our Religion ties us thereto, Loyalty is the Glory of the Truly Protestant
Religion: And these who act otherwise, have its Form, but not its Power, and
treat it no otherwise, than Joah did Amasa, under color of affection to its
Name, wound it under the fifth rib. No Religion in the World, no System of
Divinity, no platform of Morality, no model of Policy, which the Sages of
Greece, or the Senators of Rome ever invented, pressed Loyalty from such
convincing Topics, or rational Arguments, as our Religion: Our Duty to the
King stands on the same Basis in our Religion, with our Duty to God; its
performance encouraged with the same Eternal Reward, riveted with the same
weighty Considerations, its omission or neglect attended with the same
Penalties and Dangers, that are entailed on contempt of God, or the greatest
wickedness: Our Religion is no more positive against Whoredom and Drunkenness,
than it is against Treason and Rebellion: And among us a Rebel against the
King, under whatsoever pretense, is no more an Unnatural Scot than a
Hypocritical Protestant: And so long as we Live and Act according to the
Principles of our Religion, our Zeal for that will never make us Factious or
Seditious: And the King will be encouraged to protect us in the Exercise of it.
Therefore,

4. Interest, which in this Selfish Age preponderates all other Considerations,
should have a mighty influence on Loyalty and Peaceableness; Liberty and
Property, the Darlings of Mankind, the Hue and Cry of the Faction, are never in
hazard; but when the Sovereignity is invaded, and Prerogative impaired: We
rebelled our selves into Tyranny and Slavery, into Rapine and Oppression,
Arbitrariness and Irreligion: He, that would comfortably enjoy the Fruit of his
own Vine, and sit with Ease under his own Fig Tree, can do it most contentedly,
when the King, like the Sun in a serene day, diffuses his warm and kindly Beams
without disturbance: Our Liberty consists in our Obedience, our Submission to
our Sovereign's Will is the rise of our Felicity: These, who seek to better
their Estate by Sedition, are often undone by their Rebellion: We have bleeding
Instances of these, who have fallen from their Legitimate Grandeur, by
affecting and aspiring after unjust Greatness.

For Conclusion, let me add these three Directions, which may be helpful to
preserve us in Loyalty to the King; and they are patly adjusted to what I have
already said, and to our Circumstances.

1. Let us not entertain in our minds Discontent at the public Administration
of Affairs; It is out of the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks, the
Hand acts; if our Hearts be seasoned with Affection to the King: Neither
Murmurs nor Invectives will find matter within us to work on; People may be
overaw'd from Seditions Speeches and Practices by the Severity of the Law, and
the Watchfulness of Rulers: But if Discontent be harbored in our Spirits, it
will break out on the first opportunity: The more wary we are this way, the
Government is more Safe, and we the more Happy; People that resolve within them
prejudice against their Rulers, are driven to shoot beyond their Mark, and
commit Outrages they never dreamed, nor thought possible for them once to have
fallen into: I believe Judas never intended to commence Traitor, when he began
to play the Thief, nor did his Followers purpose to bring the King to a
Scaffold, when they first indulged themselves in Maligning his Government, and
Aspersing his Person; but in no Sin more than in Sedition and Treason: They
must needs run whom the Devil drives; Beware then of Discontent, the very first
Seeds of Mischief.

2. Let us never be Imposed upon by the same Stratagems, by which we were
formerly deluded; the Clamorous Harangues of some Factious Demagogues against
Tyranny and Arbitrary Government; which were never felt till the King was
dethroned and Rebellion Prosperous: The great Darlings of the Populacy, are
Religion and Property; and these cunning Men that ride it as they please, make
Zeal for these, a Coverture for their Covetous Projects and Ambitious Designs:
And People are so easily tickled with the Beauty of the Pretense, that they are
precipitated or e're they are aware into dismal Courses, destructive in the
Issue to both: So that they are made to truckle under their Usurpation, who
pretended the greatest affection to their Liberty, and vapor it with the
property of the Subject, and the Sacrilegious Spoils of the Church: Tyranny is
a Child of the Crowd; and never any have more furiously Spur-gall'd that great
Beast, than those who have crouch'd and faun'd to cajole it; and when it is
wheedled out of its Wit and Interest, as well as out of its Submission and
Obedience; there is something set up like Massinello in Naples; something, as a
Judicious and Loyal Author has it, That is a King Incognito, Nalson's common
In^erest cap. 4.
or in Disguise, or a Tyrant in the Dress of a private Man; though he were
called, The Protector of the Nation.

As Satan is never more to be dreaded, than when he transforms himself into an
Angel of Light; and is never more a Devil, than when he appears a Saint: So the
Enemies of the Government are never more to be suspect, than when they speak
much good of God, and ill of the King; and think their Zeal for the former, a
Passport for Injuries done the Later; whereas God in his Word, makes Obedience
to our Superiors, the Test of our Dutifulness to himself: Do not think, after
our dear-bought Experience of the Hypocrisy of the Party, that their specious
Pretenses for Religion and Liberty will justify, yea or extenuate our sordid
compliance, for all our good meaning.

There is not the least question, but as in Absalom's unnatural Rebellion, some
in the simplicity of their Heart went with the Drove; so in our late Wars, many
well-meaning persons were cheated out of their Duty and Loyalty, who came too
late to their Wits, the just conviction of their Folly, or a due sense of their
Sin, when they found they were deceived; their honest Meaning mis-improven,
their Help mis-apply'd, even to the ruin of what they intended to maintain and
promote: Yet what the better was the King of their Honest Intentions or Loyal
Affections, when they were active Instruments of bringing about the Mischiefs,
under which He and the Kingdoms were Oppressed: Their Honest Meaning might
extenuate their Fault, and blunt the edge of their self-stinging Reflections,
and put them in probable capacity of God's Mercy and the King's Clemency;
because they might say with the Apostle, They did it in Ignorance; But in the
Issue there was no difference, God and the King, Religion and the Government,
Liberty and Property, suffered by the Zealous mistakes of the deluded
Innocents, as well as by the furious practices of Designing Incendiaries: Nay,
the more really Honest some were, who were stolen off their Feet, the more
Pernicious was their Error in Debauching others from their Duty; the more
influential their example to the detriment of the King, and the ruin of the
Nation.

Let us reflect on the Tragical Catastrophe, and dismal end of Treason and
Rebellion; Consilia callida and inhonesta prima front festa, tractatu dura,
eventu tristia. Live. lib. 31.
seditious Attempts and Designs, how pleasing soever they seem to be in the
beginning; how promising and flattering soever they appear in their first
Aspect, yet in the Progress they prove dangerous, and in the Issue fatal. The
fond hopes of aspiring Spirits, by which they build Castles in the Air,
flatters them to their undoing, like some Serpents, which tickle and wound at
once; and that which in the Project promises them a great reward and advantage,
is in the Issue full of danger and difaster: The fair Designs of Traitors, are
but the haught and painted Images of a deceitful Dream, instead of which they
meet with an inglorious End. Many Instances from divine and human Stories could
be adduc'd of this kind; ambitious Men, who leap to Greatness too soon, repent
their Madness too late, and often Hopp without Heads; but few read their own
Destiny in such sad Presidents as are on Record, or look upon such fatal
Examples as their own Mirrours, though few or no Sins bear greater Stigmas of
Divine Vengeance, or marks of Human Justice than Treason and Rebellion; the
Fomenters or Promoters of such Villainies are scorched with the Flames of their
own kindling: And were there no more to caution us against such Practices, than
the tender consideration of our Families, who would embarke with a Factious
Party, if it were no more but for this, that the Dowry and Inheritance he
leaves his Wife and Children, are Poverty and Infamy; and though the Clemency
of the King forgive the Guilt, yet this removes not the Ignominy. Well! let me
shut up all with Solomon's advice, Fear God and Honor the King, and meddle not
with those that are given to Change: Prove. 24.21, 22.
For their Calamity shall arise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both.

FINIS.

