The true NONCONFORMIST In Answer To the Modest and free Conference Betwixt a
CONFORMIST And a NONCONFORMIST, About the present Distempers Of SCOTLAND. By a
Lover of Truth, And Published by its order.

HEBR. XII. Ver. XIV, XV. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord, looking diligently lest any man fail of the
grace of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby
many be defiled. Printed in the Year 1671.

To the AUTHOR OF THE CONFERENCE.
ALthough I judge it no less of my concernment then of yours, to be concealed
and unseen in this undertaking; Yet seeing, that I do not captate the empty
praise of an affected modesty, I am resolved in liew of your Stationer to the
Reader and Friend to the Stationer, to give the following Sheets this direct
and immediate adress.

And to begin with my self, as your Friend does with you, really I think I
should have had nothing to say of such a nothing, were it not in opposition to
that Character wherewith he pretends to honor you. He says, You are a person
of extraordinary Moderation and Peaceableness; And no doubt these qualities
understood in their due mediocrity and subordination, are of notable value: But
that you can allow any difference of opinion but such as is incompatible with
the peace and quiet of the Chuch, is an ampliation so little favorable to
truths preference, and so inconsistent with these Scripture intimations of
Heresies and divisions through man's corruption inseparably attending it, that I
cannot otherwise esteem it to be extraordinary, then as it is excessive. If
truth do allow, nay require a synathletick zeal, which error does no wise
warrant; to accommodate their contradictions by an easy indifferency, is more
agreeable to the love of this World, then the love of God. And verily your
Friends excusing the tartness of some of your expressions, from a zeal that he
allows against that uncharitable Spirit, which can suffer nothing that is not
exactly of its own way, is not more calumnious in its insinuation against us,
who desire utterly to disclaim self conceit in all their matters, then
unjustly restrictive of the true zeal of God, no less enemy to an irreligious
lukewarmness, the apparent measure of your latitude, and the extreme now so
dreadfully prevalent, then an humorous severity so little at present to be
apprehended. But let all who desire to be found of a true Christian temper seek
first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and as his peace and the
love of the Brethren cannot be wanting, so the quiet of the Church is best
submitted to his good pleasure.

For the occasion of my writing, the account which your Friend gives of the
occasion of yours does equally justify it. The English Dialogues please you,
and I assure you, both they and their answer are displeasing to me. I reflect
not upon the method of Dialogues; Nay I am so far from censuring it, though I
relish it not in their matters, that I am confident, that had you and your
English pattern managed it sincerily, it had proven the ruin, and not the
support of your design. But finding the English man so insolently scornful, as
not to rest satisfied with an answer, which by taking sanctuary in the Act of
Indemnity, and other such fearful and fainting shifts, did rather bewray, then
vindicat the commoun cause, and perceiving, by your little essay, the humors of
the unquiet Spirit in both Nations (as you are pleased to speak evil of the
uprightness of such who run not with you to the same excess of ungodliness)
not to be more the same, then it is the same strange Spirit of Hypocrisy and
irreligion that at present abounds so much in these Lands, to the perverting of
both truth and righteousness, I was moved by these considerations to make you
this free and round reply. Your Friend says, you designed not vanity by your
few sheets, written almost as hastily as they could be transcribed: And the
truth is, I am so much convinced of it, that I am more inclined to apologize
for the seriousness that I have used in confuting such a trifling babble, then
to purge my endeavors of any such suspicion. Only, because he says, You wish
that every one may see the weakness of these grounds upon which such specious
structures are built, which, when they come to be examined, prove but painted
sepulchers, I thought it worth my pains, by clear descriptions, and firm
demonstrations, both of the solidity of the foundations, and beauty of the
superstructure of the work of God, to check the tumor of this insinuat boasting.

But in the next place, we have your great design in your small Book, and it
is, To let some well-meaning People, who have a love, to godliness, see that
Religion is not at all concerned in things wherein they do concern themselves
very much, and that in contending for the shell, we are like to lose the Kernel
of Religion. Why herein is a mavelous thing, if I may use the blind man's
words, since I think you would almost have me to lose that sight which he had
then lately received, while the things wherein we did concern our selves were
sincerily owned and improven, Religion flourished, holiness was in request,
profanity was ashamed, and iniquity stopped its mouth; and since by you and your
partakers, they were subverted and decried, wickedness only has exalted it
self, and its blasphemous Impieties and violences have abounded, to the very
horror of every ingenuous man: And yet we must believe that Religion is not at
all concerned in the change. And your Friend does attribute to you the
confidence, not only to write, but to direct your writing to well-meaning
People, Lovers of godliness. For this effect, I shall not anticipate my
performance in the ensuing answer; only, as I have singly aimed at the
establishment of the Lord's faithful remnant in this hour of great and manifold
temptations; so I am hopeful, that eternal life, and the means thereof, the
Gospel and its Ordinances, shall never be so divided in this Land, as to
separate the things that they and I do contend for, from Religions real and
true interest: Your Friend says, They are but the shell, and not the Kernel of
Religion. And if I may press his lame similitudes, I would enquire, whither he
call's them so because of their use for conservation, or their superfluity when
broken off? And though it be manifest, that this later sense can only warrant
his undervalue, and is indeed a proper allusion for such who have not stood to
devour that which is holy, and after vows to make inquiry; Yet I am assured,
that unto his second thoughts its absurdity will appear so palpable, as by
forcing him to the first meaning, it will constrain him rather to contradict
his asserting of Religious inconcernment in these matters, being the special
means of its preservation, then profanely to despise them as rejectaneous
trifles.

The language and manner of my writing is such, as I conceived to be most
proper for my purpose; if the prosecution of your particularities, specially in
an essay, pretended indeed to be equally managed, but without question
unequally designed, for the parties therein contending, prove irksome and
tedious to others, as it has been to my self, I have no Apology, but the
necessity of a full reply, as well to deliver the true Nonconformist from your
disingenuous imposings, as to refute your Conformist's Objections. As for other
matters, I referr all to the Reader. There is one thing only I would entreat,
and that is, that if in the perusal of what I have written, you do find any
thing that may move you again to take up your pen, you would not employ it in
any further continuation of this dramatick way of scribbling: But seeing truth's
interest is that which both of us ought to regard, let the differences in
controversy be fairly stated, propositions clearly drawn forth, and by you
either defended or impugned, according to the exigence of your cause, and I
promise you either my assent, or the reasons of my dissent without passion or
partiality. Now as to your language and manner of writing, your Friend says,
It is accommodated to these meaner capacities, who are most apt to be abused,
by such as care not, nay, which is very sad, but too true, wish not Religion
nor godliness to prosper in the hands of those who differ from them in opinion
about external things, which are not of great moment. Sir, this is a charge of
too high an import to be let fly at random. There are, I confess, amongst
us, who do apprehend, that both the opinions and practices of you and your
Associats do directly tend to the debauching of Conscience, by the false
pretenses and undue extensions of Civil Obedience and Allegiance, the
perverting and destroying of Gospel Ordinances, not only of Church Government
and a sent Ministry, but even of the two Sacraments, by turning their divine
institution into ecclesiastic custom, and lastly, to the subverting of the
very foundation, Justification through faith in Jesus Christ, by the
superadding of our own to his righteousness, and who therefore justly fearing
that your coloring and covering of these most momentous points, as if
different opinions about things external were all the controversy, to be only
a turning of things upside down, and a seeking deep to hide your Counsel from
the Lord, do wish that the Lords people may bewar of such deceivers, specially,
seeing their universal perjury and intrusion, their common profanity and
ordinary insufficiency, are obvious to all men: But that there are any of us,
who care not, nay, wish not Religion to prosper, even in the manner here
represented, is not more groundless, then it is most certain, that the
prospering of Religion and godliness would be the most effectual mean both to
ruin your course, and establish what me maintain.

But let us hear how your Friend makes out his accusation; and he says, it may
appear from their persuading poor souls to take for a mark of zeal that which
in all christian Nations is looked on as a very great mark of impiety, to wit,
not going to Church. A mighty conviction, and worthy to be write in greater
letters. But where did he learn, that not going to Church, in the meaning only
pertinent to his reflection, viz, our not going to the house appointed indeed
for public divine worship, but invaded and usurped by perjurious Intruders,
for the most part, as palpably wicked and naughty as their intrusion is
undeniable, is looked on in all Christian Nations as a great mark of impiety? Or
how will he make it out, that we persuade not going to Church, that is, to the
assembling of our selves together for the more solemn worship and adoration of
God, and hearing of our lawful Pastors, though in corners, as God gives
opportunity, which is most certainly all whereunto Christianity does oblidge?
Let him prove either, and then let him boast himself: But seeing either of
these demands must of necessity sink him into perpetual silence, how foolishly
does he second his allegeances? He subjoynes, that you mean no prejudice to any
person in writing of it (viz.) your DIALOGUES, and that it is only published to
inform sincere people. Whither it be so or not, let the work bear witness; As
for my intention in answering, I have already declared it, and I hope the
answer it self will not contradict, I wish indeed it had been more timous: But
as I affect not hasty productions, so there are many other reasons, easily
supposible for the delay: If it may give any light for establishment in this
evil time, I know it is not yet unseasonable: And in this single and earnest
desire, I recommend it to all that love our righteous Cause, and wait for the
Lords appearance.

A short INDEX Of the chief things handled in this Treatise.
DIAL. I.
NOn-Conformists vindicated from some groundless and odious charges suggested
in the entry. Page 2, 3, etc. The sound and clear rule for Christian practice
in the point of Separation, with the true reason why Non-Conformists cannot
join with Curats. 6, etc. The work of God which Non-Conformists own no
Rebellion. 9 Whether that argument, taken from the Prophets their not exhorting
to Popular Reformation does militat against Subjects their fighting for
Religion. 10 Positive grounds from Scripture warranding Subjects to defend
Religion by arms 11, 12, etc. The Peoples obligation to Popular Reformation
cleared. 16 The example of the Maccabees a good ground for Peoples maintaining
Religion by arms. 18, 19 The invalidity of these Objections, taken from the
mortifying design of Religion and our Lords beginning the Gospel with
suffering, discovered. 20, 21, etc. Whether that injunction of our Saviors to
his Disciples not to draw for him, and his words to Pilat, John. 18. 36. does
militat against the defending of Religion by Arms. 24, etc. Whether the
Practice of the Primitive Christians be a sufficient argument to condemn
fighting for Religion. 29, 30 Why N. C. cannot keep the Anniversary day. 32 The
Public course against the adversaries of the Covenant and Work of Reformation
vindicated from the Calumny of Cruelty and rigor, and proven to be most
rational and righteous. 34, 35 A short account of the barbarous and inhumane
Cruelty of the Prelates and their party, against innocent Non-Conformists. 36
Ministers cleared from that charge of Meddling in State or Public affairs. 39
Superstition how unjustly charged upon N. C. 41, etc.
DIAL. II.
A discovery of the evil of the new convenient contrivance of Religion. 52
Kirk-Sessions vindicated. 54, 55 Their excellent use for suppressing
ungodliness. 57 The Ministers liberty and manner of reproving sin vindicated,
also their carriage toward the late King. Ibid. Their Preaching vindicated. 60
Communions vindicated. 67 Of the posture in time of public Prayer. 70 Family
Worship and private meetings vindicated. 71, etc. The Divisions charged upon N.
C. whence they did proceed. 75
DIAL. III.
PResbytery and Prelacy how falsely said to be only mere distinguishing names.
78 The present looseness most unjustly charged upon Non-Conformists. 79
Unanswerable arguments against Episcopacie. 84 Whether this Title of Lord be
due to Bishops. 85 That Scripture 1. Pet 5. 3. cleared from the false Glosses
of Adversaries. 87, etc. The Ius Divinum that Presbyterians plead for, together
with these things that do fairly exhibit the Platform of Presbyterian
Government. 90, etc. Of Lay Elders. 96, etc. Of Deacons. 99 Of Diaconesses. 102
Of Evangelists. 103 Of the Classical Subordination of Sessions to Presbyteries,
etc. 104 Of Discipline and whether the Penitence of Lent, the Table altarwayes,
and officiating in a surplice may be as lawfully appointed by the Church, as
the circumstances of public repentance to wit, so many days, a place of
repentance and the use of Sackcloath for scandalous persons. 109, etc. Of the
decree of the first Council at Jerusalem. 113 Of the washing of Feet, where you
have the Conformist's design of resolving the necessity of Sacraments into the
arbitrament of the Church discovered. 115, etc. Anointing the sick with oil why
not used by N. C. 117 Of the change of the Sabbath. 119 Whether the Scriptures
contain direct Rules for the Churches Policy which is wholly Ecclesiastic. 121
Of the Kingdom of Christ, and how the Officers, Laws, Censures and Order of his
House are by himself established. 126, etc. Whether the Angels of the Churches
assoord any ground for Bishops. 144 The plea of Antiquity for Bishops, together
with a short delineation of the rise, progress and product of Prelacy in the
first Churches. 144, etc.
DIAL. IIII.
SUbmission to, and compliance with, the present Prelatick Government cannot be
without sin. 165 Whether Paul's conforming to Jews and Gentiles does enforce
Compliance with Prelacie. 166, 167, etc. Whether it be unsufferable
Peevishness, if the Magistrate enjoin a thing, declaring it free in itself, and
only necessary because commanded, upon that score to refuse obedience. 170 Of
Christian Liberty, and wherein it stands. 174 Prelatick exactions high
impingements upon Christian Liberty. 175 Why Non-Conformist's cannot join in
Prelatick Courts for Church Discipline. 181, 182, and 376, etc. The
Conformist's reasoning for joining answered, where that Question, why ought we
not to submit to the Bishops, as well as to the late Usurpers in the State? Is
fully answered. 182, etc. The just ground People have of disowning Curats, and
charging them with that Schism whereof they would make N. C. guilty. 189, 190
The Conformists arguments for owning and hearing Curats fully answered. 192,
etc. How and in what cases Children are bound by their Fathers Oath. 205, etc.
That charge of breach of Covenant in some things, viz. silence and not
declaring against the Apostasy, Tyranny and Perjury of the Usurpers, and a
faint giving over to pray for the King, answered. 219, 220 The National
Covenant vindicated. 222 etc. Whether the Laws annulling the Covenant does
loose its obligation, where you have a plain account of the Nature and
obligation both of Vows and Laws. 230, etc. The Conformist's allegations for
justifying the King's setting up of Prelacie false and calumnious. 236
DIAL. V.
THe grosness of the Conformist's persuasion of extemporary prayer redargued.
244 That Q^estion about the composing and imposing Set-forms fully handled,
246, etc. The Conformists reasoning against extemporary Prayer answered. 258
Whether singing Psalms and Scripture-songs be a restraining of the Spirit. 272^
Why all David's Psalms is used in Praising, together with the right way of
singing Psalms-prayers. 274 Of the English Liturgy. 285, etc. Of the 5.
Articles of Perth. 288, etc.
DIAL. VI.
ANent the name and Principles of Latitudinarians. 305, 306 The opinion of the
Author of the Dialogues anent Justification ^xamined and found unsound. 313,
etc. The men of the Latitude more inclineable to favor Papists. Arminians or
any Sect or party, rather then Conscientious Non-Conformists. 345, 346, etc.
DIAL. VII.
WHether the Conformist does sufficiently purge himself of Socimanisme, Popery
and Arminianisme. 365, 366 Non-Conformists unjustly charged with the progress
of Quakerisme. 369, 370 Whether the Prayers and actions of the Prelatick
Conformists evidence any tenderness of Love toward Non-Conformists, 378, etc.
Naphtali's Doctrine vindicated, specially his Doctrine upon Phineas his Act.
382, etc. The Surveyer's calumnies and objections against Naphtali removed.
393, etc. That Doctrine concerning private Persons their punishing of Crimes in
case of the Supinnels of the Magistrate cleared. 401, 402 That Religion was
maintained by resistance, is no vulgar error, but a thing undeniable, 1. From
the Waldenses their resisting of the King of France. 418, etc. 2. From the
Bohemian wars under Zisca. 424, etc. 3. From the wars in Germany. 427, 428 4.
From Sweden. 441 5. From the Practice of Helvetia and Genev^. 442 6. From the
Practice of Basile. 444 7. From the wars in the Netherlands. 446, etc. 8. From
the Civil wars of France. 454 That allegiance, that the Church of Scotland was
condemned by the Churches abroad, for her maintaining Reformation by Arms,
shown to be false. 460, 461 That the Pop's usurpation is not abolished in
Britain and Irland, but in effect only transferred from him to the King. Of
the Supremacy, and whether it takes away the Churches intrinseck power. 472,
473 Arguments for the Supremacy answered. 479 What account is to be had of the
Indulgence as flowing from the Supremacy. 487 Whether there can be an
accommodation with the present Prelatick party. 493, 494 Whether Peace, Love
and Charity be due to Conformists. 496
READER, Ere thou read correct with a pen these Errata as follows.
Page 9. Lin. 6. read mightily. p. 17. l. 18. r. directions. ibid. l. 19. r.
out. p. 23. l. 17. r. it is. p. 25. l. 12. Peter. r. Pilat. p. 26. l. 19. is r.
it. p. 31. l. 12. r. off. p. 33. l. 22. r. stipend. p. 34^ l. 30. r. suffering.
p. 37. l. 22. r. in. p. 38. l. 24. r. into, in. p. 41. l. 22. r. thought. p.
45. l. 28. r. place. p. 50. l. 33. r. poenitentem. p. 56. l. 6. r. the. ibid.
l. 32. r. are. p. 62. l. 12. r. your. p 65. l. 5. r. Preachers. p. 66. l. 20.
r. acknowledge. p. 82. for first Dialogue, r. third Dialogue. p. 87. l. 16. r
benches. p. 90. l. 33. r. least. p. 97. l. 1. r. inconsistence. p. 101. l. 12.
r. least. p. 102. l. 1^. r. (...). p. 103. l. 3. r. do p. 112. l. last. r.
continued. p. 127. l. 12. r. Kingdoms. p. 130. l. 29. dele whrest. p. 133. l.
9. r. purity. p. 135. l. 4. r. the. p 137. l. 7. r. appointment. p. 146. l. 22.
r. contrary. p. 147. l. 32. r. perceive. p. 154. l. 21. r. thing. p. 162. l.
28. r. restless. p. 196. l. 32. r. subjected. p. 199. l. 1. r. out. p. 207. l.
33. r. concerned. p. 208. l. 32. For, r. To. p. 215. l. 17. r. fealty. ibid. l.
34. r. and any. p. 217. l. 3. r. That. p. 220. l. 2. r. our. p. 228. ^l. 9. r.
1590. ibid. l. 10. r. doubted. p. 242. l. 8. r. on. p. 252. l. 9. r. one. p.
253. l. 7. r fervent. p. 269. l. 29. r. pattern. p. 284. l. 17. r. ridiculous.
p. 341. l. 16. r. mostly. p. 387. l. 6. r. mitigated. p. 391. l. 31. r.
ashamed. p. 572. l. 14. r. this. p. 496. l. 8. r. maintained. p. 502. l. 17. r.
convinced. ibid. l. 18. r. qualifies.

Reader, what others thou may find through a letter wanting, or redundant, or
one for another, or through a comma, colon, or the like misplaced or wanting
thou may correct as thou read.

The first DIALOGUE Answered.
SIR, If I premise, that your modest and free conference does obviously appear
to me, to be rather a fantastic rancountre of a mocking Conformist, and a
Mock-Non-conformist, it is not from any design to preoccupy, by so severe a
character; but only to releeve both you and my self, of the fruitless
observation, and tedious prosecution of the many impertinencies incident to
such a practice: and therefore, as you are not to expect my particular noticing
of the high pretensions, weak replies, faint cedings, ridiculous evasions,
plain concessions and flattering insinuations, whereunto you prompt your
Puppet-non-conformist, either for your own advantage, or diversion; so, in the
tracing of these things that seem to be more serious and important, in your
Dialogues, I promise you all the candor and calmness whereof I am capable: Yea,
though your double dealing in this cause (which not content to impugn as a
Conformist, you go about also as a Nonconformist to betray) might well warrant
a more sharp and large animadversion, both upon your end and method; yet,
being only desirous of truths vindication, and in the occurrence of so many
temptations justly jealous of my own infirmity, I do here frankly cease
from, and lay aside all wrath and bitterness, that I sin not; and shall, as
sincerely and distinctly as I can, review and answer your reasonings, as they
ly.

Before you fall to your direct accusations, you suggest 1. That the
Non-conformists do boast of their way as the Glory. 2. That, their Ministers
tell them only of Christ's death, which is not to preach him. 3. That they study
more to convince them of the need of Christ's Righteousness, then of having an^
of their own. 4. That Non-conformists think they may quite the Communion of the
Church, if, in their opinion, no^ in the truth, in every point. 5. That in
former times they repressed some sins, specially of the flesh, but scarcely in
a Gospel way: and as for other sins, were very gentle to them; Nay were
themselves guilty of them. Sir, were I not very loath to irritate you in the
entry, I would tell you, that to commence your conference, with such
groundless, odious and incoherent hints, which you dare not positively affirm,
is more agreeable to a design of prejudice, then to the charity you so amply
profess. But to particulars, and to the first, that the Non-conformists do
boast of their way as the Glory. 1. We bless our God our Glory, who has made
all the manifestations and means of his Grace Glorious: these are the
overflowings of the excellent Glory, by the streams whereof all our gloryings
and praises ought to be carried back to, concentred in, and swallowed up of the
Ocean-fountain, whence they proceed. 2. The Scripture is plain, that Jesus
Christ the Prince of Glory, in the revelation of his Glorious Gospel, has
made the ministration thereof so far to exceed in Glory, that, even he
himself accounts the Messengers thereof his Glory. Whether these things be
not sufficient to justify both the Non-conformists boasting and regrete,
needs not my assertion. Sure I am, if a pure Ministry, not modelled by the
policy and pride of man, but singly squared to our Lords institution; if able
Ministers of the New Testament declaring all the Counsel of God, and imparting
the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel; And lastly, if the growing and
Multiplying of the word of God, and his peoples desire after, and rejoicing in
it, have any luster of this Glory, the present sad catastrophe, whereby all
these have been so wickedly and woefully changed to their contraries, may more
justly move every concerned and serious soul to a lamentation for the departed
glory, then these occasions that first produced that complaint. If you judge
these to be swelling words of vanity, remember that, as I do speak the true
Nonconformist, so it is your part, by this your conference more solidly to
redargue him.

The second thing you suggest, is, that the Nonconforming Ministers tell us
only of Christ's death which is not to preach Christ. Sir, this allegiance,
short as it is, presents it self with a disgust, that I can scarce express; Not
that I think the Non-conformists are thereby in the least noted: Nay, on the
contrary, I am confident that, in whatsoever sense you are able to render the
accusation pertinent, the Non-conformists are most free to deny it, and that
with the universal evidence of all their unprejudicate hearers, and the
unanimous testimony of all their confessions and writings extant: And whether
this be more to their advantage, or your dishonor, I hope you will consider:
But that which in my heart I detest, is to hear the glorious subject of the
precious death of Christ so both slighted, and narrowed within its Scriptural
acceptance, by such a Cold restrictive. If the Apostle Paul desired to know
nothing but Christ and him crucified, and Gloryed only in his Cross, If the
death of Christ does necessarily suppose; and did certainly confirm his
preceding Testament; nay, if in the Gospel it be often mentioned, as the
substance and root of all, had you no fitter words for your intended accusation
of N. C. then that they tell us only of Christ's death? I know your meaning viz.
That to tell people only of an interest in Christ, while they are strangers to
his Laws and Gospel, is to deceive them, is as sound, as it is untruly charged
upon the Non-conformists. Neither would I have taxed an innocent lapse in the
phrase observed; but its too visible tendencie to the discredit of the
doctrine of Justification by the blood of Christ, and to the new rational
Method of more exalting our righteousness, to an equality with his merit, then
pressing it in Conformity to his life and love, is the cause of my aversion.
The Non-conformists therefore do indeed tell us of the death of our Lord Jesus,
not with your ill appropriat and restringent only; but do preach to us always
and principally this doctrine of his Cross, as that whereby, both the great
mean of our reconciliation ^ and the strongest motive, best pattern, and most
certain assurance of our dying unto sin and living unto God (wherein our
Sanctification consists) are held forth.

3. You say, that you fear the Non-conformists do study more to convince us of
the need of Christ's Righteousness, then of having any of our own. It Is
answered, this your suggestion is a great confirmation of my reflection on your
last passage: I have already showed, that the fear whereby you usher it in,
has no real nor palpable ground, none were more serious, sound and powerful,
in the pressing of holiness, then the men you would accuse: Neither do I stand
to appeal to the fruits of their Ministry, notwithstanding of your cavilling
at our practice; but I have a greater fear of your fear, that it prove only
proud reason, spurning at the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and aspiring to
add a Mantissa, an addition of your own, to his sole purchase: If I could
conceive you a man to propose fears, both groundless and designless, I might
be judged uncharitable; but the certainty of the first, by removing the second,
too plainly justifies my apprehension: beside your fear is so solicitous for
your own righteousness, that it does not so much as allow the righteousness of
Jesus Christ to be more pressed; and yet you know that not only his
righteousness, as being the price, spring and acceptance of ours, does
therefore acclaime an infinite preference, but that the conviction of its
necessity, by reason of the untoward reluctancie of the pride of reason, and
blindness of unbeleefe, does require a more powerful persuasion. And therefore
I must again tell you that I almost suspect your insinuation of a very deep
tincture of a greater Sophistry then that which you give warning against; but
seeing you do profess to believe that Christ came to lay down his life a ransom
for our sins: and Non-conformists are persuaded, that without holiness we shall
never see the face of God, it is certainly the better part for me to applaud
your good agr^ement: Only that you may be assured of this necessary holiness,
and also of its acceptance, see that you hold fast Jesus Christ as the sole
foundation; for he it is who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness,
and Sanctification, and Redemption. And remember, that although Non-conformists
love not to talk much of their own righteousness, at best both freely
bestowed, and, as in us Viatores, while we are in the way, such, as of it self,
can no ways endure the consuming fire of divine jealousy; yet they not only
subscribe to your necessity of holiness, but further do believe with joy, that
it is impossible for any man to lean truly and entirely unto Christ, who does
not embrace him, and have him both his Red^emer, Lawgiver and Sanctifier.

4. You suggest, that Non-conformists think, they may quite the communion of
the Church, If, in their opinion, nor in the truth, in every point: at least
you will have this to be the case, betwixt you and your Nonconformist. Really
might it not offend your reverence, I would remit you to Ephesians, 4. 25. and abide
the reproof of the 26. without more answer, but, because it is like the
sottishness of the person you confer with, has induced you to this mistake,
believe me in name of all true Non-conformists, that as they do not think they
may quite the Communion of the Church, if in their opinion, not in the truth,
unless the difference be both real, and in profession and practice; so it is
not every real difference, in profession or practice, that they hold to be a
sufficient cause; Nor do they judge that, even the cause being sufficient, the
separation should be always carried to the extremity; but the sound and clear
rule which they propose for Christian practice in this matter is, that where
the controverted difference is such, as would render a conjunction therein
either sinful or contagious, then a just and proportionat sepa^ation, precisely
and with all tenderness, Commensurate to the exigence, is the safer course. As
for your conceit, stating the cause of Separation, upon difference of opinion,
in a truth of greater importance then the article of our faith, the Catholic
Church, the communion of Saints; the examining of it, by what I have said,
plainly discovers both its mistake and ambiguitie. In the next place let me
tell you in behalf of honest Non-conformists, that the true reason of their
present withdrawing is none other then what you allow: That they account
themselves bound to obey God, in adhering to their true Pastors, and disowning
Intruding-hirelings, rather then man commanding the contraire. I will not
digress to a more particular inquiry, since you are pleased to carry your Non
conformist by it: but if you had made him give this answer together with a
clear condescendence, I doubt not but either he or I had made it out: I might
here take notice how smoothly and perswadedly you suppose, that Non-conformists
do separate from the Church, although they for the most part think your
conceiting your party to be the Church, no better founded then the rest of
your usurpations, but because this point will again occur I proceed to your
(...) hint, that in former times Non-conformists repressed some sins specially
these of the flesh, but fc^rce in a Gospel way, and for other sins, were very
gentle to them, nay, were themselves guilty of them. Sir, your suggestion
being so general and groundless, I only wish that its latter part were as void
of malice, as its former is far from truth: I know that all men are sinners,
and heartily desire that all Non-conformists may be serioussly warned,
thoroughly and impartially to search, and examine their ways, and unfainedly to
repent of their transgressions. Nay, though the frequencie and high import of
your general accusations render the sincerity of your meeknes, in forbearing
particulars, many ways suspected; yet I urge it not: Only remember, that as I
disown the Patrocinie, either of men's failings or infirmities, so I do as
little hold the work of God chargeable with any such extrinsick and accidental
objections, but should thy impudence make men hold their peace, and when thou
mockest shall no man make thee ashamed, When you offered to reflect upon the
infirmities and failings of former times, might not, and should not, the
present irreligion and wickedness, every were abounding, which are not only
connived at by your Churchmen, but do visibly go forth from them into all the
Land (for they commit lewdness and walk in lies, they strengthen also the
hands of evil doers, that none does return from his wickedness) have
confounded you unto silence? Certainly this your procedour cannot but suggest
to all sober men, that too applicable passage of the Gospel, And why beholdest
thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that is
in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye,
and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.

And thus, Sir, I am arrived at your plain and set impugnation of the N. C.
courses: And to begin the matter, you make your N. C. in place of a solid
representation of the truth controverted, rap out an indigested heap of Pompous
titles, and, by this personat blustering, you take the occasion, very kindly to
commend your own personal modesty: whether this be not more invidious then
ingenuous dealing let others judge; certainly if you had used that candor which
you profess, your N. C. would have told you, that the work of God we desire to
own, is that inlightning grace, and assisting presence of God, whereby, after
that the Lord had caused his people to receive the truth in its power, he
mightly stirred them up, and enabled them to resist the growing corruptions,
and shake off the heavy yoke of wicked Prelacie; to restore and establish his
ordinances, specially the Ministry, and Government of his Church, in purity;
to maintain and defend the same against the violence of Adversaries; and to
direct all these endeavors and seize to the advancement of our Lords
Kingdom, over the hearts and consciences of men, and the prospering of his
pleasure in these Lands, and that by such righteous means and methods, as are
clearly warranted and approven, by Scripture, Reason and many uncontroverted
precedents: This is the truth your Nonconformist ought to have witnessed, not
more confirmed by the public writings and actings of these times, then
indelebly sealed in the hearts, and by the experiences of many thousands of the
seekers of God; but seeing I am astricted to follow you, I return to your
objections.

And first, you say, Rebellion was the Soul of our whole work, and our Covenant
a Bond to cement us in it, and, in an excess of fair dealing, not questioning
the particular merit of the hypothese of our cause, you demand one place in
both the Testaments, warranting Subjects their fighting for Religion, and say
plainly you can bring many against it. Sir, if you had thought it convenient, I
judge it was proper for you, to disprove, from Scripture, Subjects their
fighting for Religion, and not to require your Nonconformist to prove it, for
seeing you know that quae sunt juris permissivi, such things as law and right
permit, if not prohibited, (...) su^ficiently understood to be permitted, any
N. C. by an undeniable subsumption may easily evert your argument. If a
miserable Melancholian, falling in disgust with certain necessary means of
(...), should affi^me that it is unlawful to use them, because he finds not one
place in either Testaments expressly warranting it, would you account his
reasoning conclusive? I am confident you would not: wherefore then do you urge
us with his dreams? Now your negative objection a Testimonio negato, from a
negative Testimony, as they say, being such a notorious fallacy, I need say
nothing to what you add of the Scriptures silence, of the Jews and Israelites
their not rising up against their apostat idolatrous Princes, much less can
their omitting what they might and ought to have done be of any import. If you
could bring an example from Scripture of a King polluting the Sanctuary, and
the people offering to oppose him, restrained either by rational persuasion, or
the Lords plain prohibition, that only were apposite to your purpose. But you
say, The faithful Prophets their not exhorting to popular Reformation, or
resisting Princes, does evidently show that the omission of it was no sin. It Is
answered, to make this argument better then your last, it is not enough to
allege, that the Prophets did not provock to such courses, unless you add,
that they did industriously forbear so to do, even in its season. You know so
well the necessity and beauty of tide and season to every purpose and work,
that your inconsideratnesse in this point is scarcely excusable. The Scripture
tells us most frequently of the perverseness and bentness of that peoples heart
to Idolatry and Rebellion against God; And no doubt in public defections they
were either the Kings entisers, as Hos, 7. 3. or did willingly walk after the
Commandment. Hos. 5. 11. What wonder then if the Prophets did forbear to ply
them with any such express exhortation, let be, that you should account their
simple omission, as you love to speak, or rather the Scriptures silence in the
thing, of any force: And here I cannot but note the unequal dealing of the men
of your persuasion, who notwithstanding of their clamorous arguings from the
silence of the Prophets, against Subjects their taking Arms; Yet, when, in the
case of the ten Tribes their falling away from Rehoboam, by them condemned for
Rebellion; by others justified as warrantable, they are pressed, not with a
bare negative silence, which is all that you object, but with a silence of
reproof, circumstantiat with all that could render it significant, they wave it
as of no strength. But lest you should think me too rigid, in insisting only
against your methods, I proceed to give you, though not obliged, a positive
return to your demand, and to show you some of the positive warrants that I
find in Sripture, for Subjects their sighting for Religion, and although, as
doubtful of the old Testament, you seem to alleviat its testimony by terming
its dispensation more carnal and fiery; yet, I hope, you are persuaded, that
change of dispensations does no ways alter the truth and righteousness of God.

The first ground therefore which I take from Scripture, is, from the Law of
Moses, where I find the keeping of the Lords Covenant not only injoined to the
People of Israel, as one body incorporat, under the highest perswasives, and
strongest Sanctions that can be conceived, and established to be their supreme
Law; but also its vindication and execution recommended to them, in such a
manner as does clearly evince, that it was the constant duty of the faithful
amongst them, all other regards set aside, even by force, to have asserted and
maintained it: If salus populi, the safety of the people, under the
interpretative notion and force of Suprema Lex, Sovereign Law, have in all
just exigences, in all ages, amongst all Nations, licensed and warranted a
defensive resistance and control against their King and Rulers, can Religion,
infinitely preferable in it self, and confirmed by such an express Law, be
thought destitute of this prerogative? It is in vain to allege a disparitie
from the inconsistencie of carnal weapons with the spirituality of Religion,
this is already obviat by the Lords own determination Deuteronomy 13. 12. If Israel
was to animadvert with the sword against any city turning aside to Idolatry,
can we doubt that it was lawful for them, in the same manner, to defend the
true worship? Do not recurre and say it was certainly lawful in many cases,
but not against the Prince? For, if you allow Religion this weapon, I have
already proved its right and privilege, by a higher title, and clearer
evidence, then any other received cause of defense can pretend to: But if you
utterly disallow defensive arms against the Powers, you destroy Nature, deny
Reason, contradict Scripture, pervert the subordination of Laws, prefer
midses to their end, and repugne to the unanimous consent of all Nations, as
you may elsewhere understand.

The next ground I allege, is from Deuteronomy. 17. verse 18. 19. Where you have the
Law of the Kingdom delivered and committed to the people, and in it an express
provision, that the King to be set up, should keep all the words of this Law;
and these statutes to do them: whence I infer, that, as the delivering of the
Law to the people does undeniably import, that they were to be its keepers and
exactors; so the Prince his deportment, in conformity to this part of it, did
in such manner belong to their cognition and oversight, as he could not,
impune, without danger of punishment, mal-verse, much less subvert Religion,
and persecute its true Professors without control. The only difficulty in this
argument is, whether the tuition and custody of this Law be, by its address,
entrusted to the people? I may not stand upon long elucidations, but if you
consider 1. That there is not an jota of the Law of God in vain. 2. That this
directing of the Law to the people can have no other signification. And 3. That
both the continued tenor of the words, and the just Analogy of reason, must
make the oversight appertain to them, to whom the election, and setting up is
so expressly given, your hesitation, if prevalent, can only appear obstinacy.

3. As the frequencie or infrequencie of instances does wholly depend upon
matter of fact; so one clearly found in Scripture, I know, will be to you as a
a thousand: I shall therefore content my self with the case and practice of
Libnah. This city being a city of Judah, and also of Priests, Ios. 21. 13. in
the reign of Iehoram, a wicked and idolatrous Prince, and one who compelled
Judah to the like abominations, revolted from under his hand, because he had
forsaken the Lord God of his fathers. Say not as the Surv. of N. profanely
alleges, that this was a city of Priests seditiously inclined, or that the
revolt was only providentiall, like to that of Edom, and not lawful, by-reason
of the Kings apostasy. If you but read the Text, bearing that Edoms revolt was
from under the hand of Judah, without any motive annexed; And then, in a
distinct Period, mentioning Libnahs to have been from under Iehoram's hand, (
not Iudahs, intimating plainly their resistance to an Idolatrous Tyranne,
without any Apostasy from the Commonwealth, which Edom did make) and because
he had forsaken the Lord, you will discover both his unsincere handling of
Scripture, and the clear evidence of this passage, specially if you remember,
that thereafter under better Kings, we find Libnah returned to her subjection,
and affoorded a wife to good Josiah. If it were needful to superadde more
examples, I might add another Scripture, 2 Chronicles, 25. 27. Where you may read
how after that Amaziah did turn away from following the Lord, they made a
conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish: but they sent to
Lachish after him, and treated him more severely then I love to mention: and
really were not this story too tragical for me to dip in, the justice of the
cause, the generality of the concurrence, and the impunitie of the actors,
specially adverting to the difference of this case from that of the Fathers
exit, may be so evidently held out from Scripture, to the advantage of my
assertion, that any reply, which you could make from the application of a
dubious word, Conspiracy, would prove a poor relief. With these might also be
remembered King Vzziah's elevation in a pretended Supremacy, and his invasive
attempt of the Priests office, with the noble resistance made by Azariah and
the fourscore valiant Priests, who went in after and withstood him. It Is true
it broke out into force upon a second occasion, which I think I cannot so
fairly urge, yet if you consider their number, character, and peremptory
manner of speech, so particularly noted by the Spirit of God, I doubt not but
you will grant that the same force was very agreeable to, if not influenced by,
their first resolution, but it is enough.

4. Though I have already told you, that the Prophets their not provoking unto
popular Reformations is no argument for you, unless you could represent their
om^^^on in an opportune season, as well as a clear exigent, yet now I further
add, that the frequent exhortations made by the Prophets to both King and
People, as, in the first place, they have a respect to every ones proper
station, so, by reason of their principal intendment of the great end, to which
all Politic degrees and their order are subordinate and do refer, in the
deficiencie or perversion of the more immediate midses, they must of necessity
lay a subsidiary obligation upon the people, as succedaneous, in that exigence.
If the nature of this discourse did allow me to enlarge, I could confirm this
position 1. From Nature, which, in the perturbation of its established
harmonic, forcing things, for the good of the whole, contraire to their proper
tendencies, exhibite^a clear emblem of these vicarious assistances. 2. From
things rational, wherein the Prevalencie of the end, and its obligation, does
always overrule the order and regard of the midses, to a convenient
subserviencie. 3. From the received acknowledgement of a twofold calling,
appertaining to every man, one General, flowing immediately from the end, and
exerting it self in extraordinary emergents: another Particular, aranging to a
certain fixed station, in the regular course of ordinary events. 4. From the
approven instances of many extraordinary stretches, in the case either of our
own, or others their unforeseen, and imminent dangers, specially from that most
apposite example of the noble effort of Saul's Soldiers in rescueing Jonathan
from his fathers unreasonable violence, without the least imputation of a
transgression. 5. From this plain supposition. A certain King commands a body
of Soldiers to chose their own General and other Officers, and march against
one of his Provinces apostatized to Idolatry, severely injoining unto both
General officers and soldiers the execution of his pleasure, under pain of
death: In the expedition, the General chosen and others with him, forgetting
duty, fall away and join with the Idolaters, whereupon the remaining part of
the Army, although in a sufficient capacity to have effectuat their Prince
his Command, yet deserte and return, making no other pretense then that they
were not free to exceed their private vacations, whereunto they held themselves
absolutely confined: Would this be sustained for a good defense, and not rather
looked upon as a cowardly, and lasie shift, taking refuge in the words,
contraire to the certain meaning of the orders? Let any man judge and apply.
But leaving all these grounds to your better improvement, the plain and obvious
reading of the Scripture is my entire satisfaction: And really when with these
warnings generally made, I also take a view of the commensurat threatenings
wherewith they are enforced, and the suiteable execution ordinarily ensuing, I
almost marveile that the obvious connection, adequating the guilt and
punishment, does not discover unto all this secondarie obligation incumbent to
the people, in its punished and therefore sinful, omission. I know the
Soveraignity of the most high, and the nothingnesse, and noughtinesse of all
flesh in his sight, will be alleged sometime to justify the extent, not only
of his judgments, but also of his threatenings, beyond the desert of the formal
express provocation, whereby they are occasioned, without the least shadow of
unrighteousness. But (that I may forbear lanching forth unto that unsearchable
deepth) to recurre to these Mysteries, when both the strain, and reason of the
exhortation do lie so fair for the obliga^ion pleaded, is visibly to enervat
the aw^ and dread of the Lords Commandments. Do not allege, that to persuade
this Subsidiarie call and engagement to Popular Reformations, is not only to
put tender Consciences upon the rack, of a continual scrutinie into public
affairs; but to draw them altogether out from the inward and most important
duties of Christianity, unto an overcurious search, and consequently a
sinistrous jealousy, of the actions of their Rulers, of all practices the most
pernicious, both to Religion and Peace: for as at best, these are only the
pretensions of men, upon the other extreme sunk into themselves, and wholly
devoted unto their own ease, so, the very consideration of Man's Politic as
well as private capacity, with the many incontroverted precepts and directio^s
pertaining to it, do necessarily hold ont a laudable Mediocrity^ I have already
told you, that these exhortations do, in the first place, oblige every man to
procure the trust of his own proper assignement, and you cannot be more
desirous then I am consentient, that private men abstract from officious
meddling, forbear presuming censures, and render unto their Rulers, with their
due obedience, all the honor, esteem, submission, charity and tenderness,
that both their high dignity, insuperable infirmities, and manifold
temptations call for, But as these duties have their proper limits, in matters
secular, known and acknowledged by all, so, I am confident, that to hold them
illimited in matters of Religion, no less privileged and defined, by most
certain and evident rules, is a most manifest inconsequence, either of
Ignorance or Malice. Then indeed is a Kingdom truly happy; when all, in their
several Orbs, do observe their proper motions about the same common Center of,
the glory of God, and good of the Public, without any other communication then
that of benign influences, and due assistances, and this though without the
reach of hope, ought not the less to be our wish, and the pattern of our
endeavors: and therefore in these inevitable jarrings, whereunto we are
subject, the next remedy is certainly in the applications of Charity, first,
covering as much as is possible, then by its gentle means of Entreaty and
Counsel, curing these disorders, that cannot be hid; but if the evil proceed to
the endangering of the whole, and all the more moderate courses become
desperate; As it were vain, in that case, to allege men's visible and felt
discoveries, to be curiosities and jealousies; so the extraordinary and
resolute interpositions of the sounder part, is assuredly the only probable
safety of the Commonwealth. To these grounds adduced from the Old Testament
for Subjects their fighting for Religion and Popular Reformation, I take leave
to add one more from the Apocrypha: and that is the Example and History of
the Maccabees. I need not narrate the matter of fact, how the King polluted the
Sanctuary, and persecuted the poor People of the Jews unto a conformity with
his abominations; and how Mattathias, first resisted, then killed the Kings
Commissioner, with the whole sequel of these wars, all is evident upon
record. That it exactly quadrates to the case of our Controversy, is apparent
from the single proposal. If you deny it, it is your part, and I am sure, will
prove your singular wit, to show a disparitie. These ordinarily objected by the
men of your opinion, are either that Antiochus was not the Jews Lawful King,
or that the opposition was made in the Spirit, and under the dispensation of
the Old Testament, and is not approveable by the New. As to the first, Grotius
thinks the contraire so clear, from the plain phrase of the Books of the
Maccabees, wherein Antiochus is frequently termed the King, that he adds no
further confirmation: If this do not satisfy it may be considered that
Antiochus his title to Jurie, is not obnoxious to any particular exception,
which does not equally implead his right to all his other Dominions: for seeing
the Land of Judah was first by the Lords gift, Ier. 27. 6. 12. 16. 29. 2.
Zedekiahs Covenant with Nebuchadnezar, ratified and confirmed by the Lord,
whereby the Kingdom became base, Ezekiel. 17. verse. 12. to 22. 3. By right of
Conquest upon the revolt, Ier. 39. and 4. by Cyrus his restitution, restoring
the jews to their own Land, Religion and Laws, but only with a provinciat
liberty, as Ezekiel: had prophesied, and is most apparent from the Books of Ezrah
and Nehemiah, unquestionably an annexed part of the Babylonish Monarchy,
Antioc hus his clame to it and his whole Realm, is evident by the same; Nay
though you could prove him an Usurper of the principal Monarchy, as you
cannot, the violence of the first Conquest, being by long Prescription, and a
fair succession wholly purged; yet you must remember, that, that would not
al^er the condition of the dependent Provinces, nor render the Usurpers right,
as it respects them, in the least debetable. Let not the Law of the Kingdom,
delivered by Moses, demurre your persuasion: it excludes indeed a Forrainer
from the Peoples free Election, but does no way limite the disposition of
Divine Soveraignity. As to the second objection made, that the resistance of
the Maccabees was Old Testamentaire, and now antiquate, seeing it has no
contingence, either with the nature, or reason of the things innovate by that
change, you cannot allege it, without express warrant, which notwithstanding
Grotius his attempt, is yet undiscovered. What your invention will further add
against this passage, I cannot conjecture. I know you think it mavelous
dealing in your N. C. to tell you of the Law of Nature, and possibly may call
it Monstrous for me to use the Apocrypha: But not to trifle, either with your
quiblings, or the respect that your Prelatick Church bears to these Books,
when I consider, that the History of these worthies, is not only honorably
pointed at by the Prophecy of Daniel, cap. 11. 32. 33. But also appears to be
with applause commemorat by the Author to the Heb. chap. 11. 33, 34. I look
upon it as an Argument, not more strongly founded in Reason, then firmly
established by the unite Testimony of both Testaments. Here I might take notice
of what you say of the New Testament, viz. that its whole strain runs upon
suffering: but seeing your insinuation is General and inconcludent, and that
afterward, you do more particularly object from it, I proceed.

Having thus at some length supplied your N. C. omission, in the next place I
come to the Argument where with you furnish him, viz. That the law of Nature
teaches us to defend our selves, and therefore there is no need of express
Scripture for it: In Answer to this, having broke your j^ast, You begin very
Magisterially with your N. C. and tell him, that he is a stranger to the very
design of Religion, which is to mortify Nature; that it is a thing Super
natural, that the Scriptures are strangely contrived, ever telling us of
suffering, without the exception of resistance, if in a capacity; you appeal
to Conscience if either ^ighting, which a carnal man may do, or suffering,
which he cannot do, be the likelier way to advance Religion? whence you
conclude; That it is not to be defended or advanced by rules borrowed from
Nature, but from Grace. Fie upon you M. Conformist, where is ingenuitie? Your
N. C. says that Nature teaches us, To defend against injuries, though
inflicted for Religion, and you tell him that Religions desig^^ is to mortify
Nature, and that it is not to be defended or advanced by natures rules. Is not
this strangely contrived reasoning? The N. C. is as persuaded as you are, that
the Grace of God bringing Salvation, has appeared unto all, teaching us to
deny ungodliness and wordly lusts, and so to mortify corrupt Nature; but does
it therefore contradict pure Natures light; or warrant us to destroy our
selves? If any private Person should injuriously impose upon and invade another
for Religions sake, were it not lawful for the Person thus injured to defend
himself? Or were this contraire to the design and nature of Religion? you
cannot say it.

I know the Magistrate invested with authority, is no private Person: but
remember, that you now argue from the Supernatural quality of Religion, and not
from the character of the Magistrates power: and therefore as upon this subject
I would tell you, that notwithstanding the Magistrate, by reason of his place,
may deserve a greater (though no illimited) forbearance, yet he has as little
warrant for, and greater sin in persecuting then a private person; so in the
case in hand, it is evident, that if the mortifying design of Religion reject
all Natures assistances, in must of necessity do so as well against a private as
a public person. And verily if this be your understanding of the design of
Religion, you are too forward to teach others: but what you lack in skill, you
endeavor to make out by cunning. The N. C. asserts Natures warrant only for
defense which you perceiving Religion not to control, draw out a fair
conclusion, not against Defending, but against Defending and Advancing of
Religion by Natures rules. Sir you know so well the difference of these two,
Defending and Advancing; and that Non-conformists are no Turks, that I wish my
charity could hide your calumny. Setting aside therefore this your foisted
in, Advancing, which all Non-conformists do disown, let us hear what you add
against Defending? You say The Scriptures do ever tell us of suffering without
the exception of resistance when in a capacity, I grant the Scriptures do
speak of many and great sufferings, according to the holy Counsel of God, and
frequent lot of his Saints; that all that will live godly, must suffer
persecution. They contain also many precepts, and excellent encouragements to
Patience under Suffering: but that they do hold out any direct Command to men
simply to Suffer, abstracting, from patient suffering, or the least
insinuation, that, though in a full capacity, they should not at all resist,
which in effect does little differ, the many passages adduced by me in the
contraire, with the advice of Flight often given, show to be as remote from
Truth, as requisite to your inference. As for your appeal to Conscience,
Whether fighting or suffering be the likelier way to advance Religion? I appeal
to common Sense, if it be pertinent to contest for that, which your Adversary
does not deny. The glorious power of the grace of God, in propagating Religion
by the weakness and sufferings of his Servants, is the great miracle of the
Gospel, and the praise of all Saints: and yet if at any time, the Lord in pity
to his afflicted, did raise them up a Savior, or give them a banner for Truth,
was this blessing therefore despised, or the means of it condemned^ God forbid.
The works of the Lord are all holy, beautiful and well consistent, and in this
the Non-conformists do experimentally joy. As to your close of this passage,
That a carnal man can fight, we know that spiritual men have done it also,
Heb. 11. 33. And where you add, that he cannot suffer, it is no further my
concernment, then to bid you be more advertent, seeing you tell us in the very
next leaf, of some Murderers that suffered gallantly, and that the seal of a
Martyrs blood is not always the seal of God; and to ponder the native import
of 1 Cor, 13. 3.

Now, as if you had demonstrate the unlawfulness of fighting, you still your
N. C. regrate, for the neglect and ruin of the work of God, by the
Consideration of Gods Power and Providence; and tell him, that to defend
Religion by force, is but the wrath of man; that Religion was first propogate
by suffering, whereas fighting has been ever fatal to it. Its answered, as it
is but to tempt and mock God and his Providence, to neglect the means of
preservation allowed by him? So in the love of his Glory to appear for his
interests against Persecuters and Subverters, with the hasard of all our
worldly concernments, is not the sinful and selfish wrath of man, but the very
power and zeal of God. That Religion has been much propagated by suffering, is
already acknowledged: but that fighting has been ever fatal to it, is
manifestly contradicted, by the establishment of almost all the Reformations in
Europe. But you go on and tell your N. C. that our Lord did begin the Gospel
with Suffering, when he could have commanded Legions in his defense, and when
you have made him to mutter out, That Christ knew it was his Fathers will, you
proceed to tell, with compassion for his ignorance, of Christ's injunction to
his Disciples, not to draw for him, and add his words to Pilat, not only as an
evident assurance of what you assert, but as a manifest conviction of the
coldness of your Adversaries. Sir, such is the hight and severity of your
conceitednesse in this place, that if the aversion I have for all things like
it, did not restrain; I should hardly forbear to give you a humbling
retaliation: But all I desire is, that by descending a little from it, you may
be in case to receive a sober answer. That our Lord, did not only begin, but
found the Gospel upon his most Voluntary, free and desired, as well as
commanded suffering, is a Truth so high and precious, and justly accounted
inimitable in substance, that I strange you should debase it, by making it a
part of your Argument, when you know that Christ came into the world, that he
might freely give himself a ransom; and that therefore he neither would be
diverted, nor use the flight which he had formerly both commanded and
practiced, do you rationally argue, that because he thus suffered, so ought we
to do: or because he refused his Disciples endeavors of rescue, that therefore
Christians in persecution should neither give nor admit of assistance. I grant,
that if God so order it, in suffering, we ought to imitate his patience, 1 Pet.
2. 21. But what makes this for you? You insinuate, as if his not commanding
Angels to his defense, had been a mere effect of his patience; but as this
opinion is not countenanced by the description thereof given by the Apostle in
the place cited, so, I pray you hear our Lord himself, Think thou that I
cannot (which I am certain sounds plainly May not) pray to my Father, and he
shall presently give me etc. but ho^ then shall the Scripture be fulfilled,
that thus it must be? here then is the reason of our Lords forbearance, presume
not to fancy another. But you say he forbad his Disciples to draw the sword in
his defense, whith a severe threatening, for all they that take the sword shall
perish with the sword, Take you this to be a threatening against the Disciples?
which for their comfort is so plainly spoken against the traitorous band that
came against him, upon whom also it was most dreadfully accomplished. Thus
Grotius upon the place, though in the point of defense he be very inconsequent;
if you cannot understand it thus from the context, I desire you only to read
it in a parallel application, Rev. 13. 10. He that kills with the sword must
be killed with the sword; here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints? are you
not then ashamed to make it their threatening and fear? Next you add, that what
our Lord said to Peter, my Kingdom is not of this world, etc. is so Plain
language, that you wonder it does not convince all. If I were to oppose
confidence to confidence, I should make no other reply, then that this is
indeed so plain language, that I wonder what Conviction you mean; but because
this is the ground of your proud and vain boasting which you are not affrayed
to seal with the veracity of God, let us hear the words at length John. 18.
where our Lord being questioned by Pilat, art thou the King of the jews ver.
33. returns the direct Answer. ver. 16. thus, My Kingdom is not of this world
if my Kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should
not be delivered to the jews: but now is my Kingdom not from hence. In which
words, as he witnesses his Kingdom, so, to remove the jews accusation, and
Pilats jealousy, he declares the quality of it viz. That it is not of this
world, that is, a worldly Kingdom, to be exercised as other Kingdoms of the
world are in out ward power and splendor, and therefore can neither interfeere
with, nor diminish Caesar's Empire and grandour; and this he confirms by a
most plain and convincing argument, If my Kingdom were of this world then would
my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the jews: that is, if I
designed a worldly Kingdom, I would have gathered followers; or rather
(according to the assistance mentioned by him at his first taking) called
Angels my servants, to fight for my rescue^ but since I employ no relief, but
willingly give my self unto the death, now is it plain that my Kingdom is not
from hence. Thus I have set down both the plain language, and I hope the plain
meaning of the place but whence it is that you derive your advantage, I protest
I cannot divine. If the Lord prove his Kingdom not to be a worldly one, because
he employed no aid for his rescue from the Jews, does it therefore follow, that
all persecute Christians should reject all assistance, and deliver themselves
up to suffering after the same example? Are you not yet satisfied that the
manner only, and not the act of our Lords suffering, is proposed to our
imitation. Believe me Sir, I have been often serious to find out wherefore
this text is so much talked of by the men of your persu^sion; but unless is be
that men who would be content that Christ's Kingdom were not in the World, do
love to hear a phrase so near it, that it is not of the World, or that the
great Devotionaries of ease, without adverting to the reason, and making an
Emphasis in that which is a clear speciality, would force from the words,
contraire to their plain tenor and scope, this general Rule, that his Servants
fight not, no not (as they would read it) for his rescue. I could never attain
to a better conjecture. It comes in my thought while a writing, that it is
possible, that in reading the words forward, you may understand them backward;
As if our Lord in saying, If my Kingdom were of this World, then would my
Servants fight, had reasoned thus; because my Kingdom is not of this World,
therefore my servants do not fight: But seeing his Argument is evident as the
Meridian Sun, My servants do not fight for my rescue, therefore I pretend to no
worldly Kingdom, the force of the inference is no more clear then it is
certain, that the spirituality of his Kingdom neither is in this place, nor
can be at all used to astrict his followers to his unimitable example, in this
his free and voluntaire suffering: But because I am resolved to constrain you
to an acknowledgement, that the Non-conf. Answers to your Scriptures, are
neither irrational nor ridiculous as you allege, I shall enlarge a little more
upon this subject: Some men of your way say, that seeing Christ does here
declare his Kingdom not to be of this World for the clearing of Pilat and all
Powers of the Jealousies, which such a thing might raise, of necessity the
inconsistencie and prohibition of fighting (the great fear of the Princes of
the Earth,) must be imported: It Is answered, our Lords answer is no doubt
framed and suited to the Jews accusation, which beyond question; both in Pilats
and in their understaning, was his affecting an outward Kingdom in prejudice of
Caesar, and, as of this he does unanswerably purge himself, and, thereby fully
satisfy all the just fears that could be objected, so, to imagine that his
purpose was to remove all the false apprehensions, and restless inquietudes,
which only the wickedness and violence of Tyrannes do suggest^ and thereby to
gratify Tyranny, is, both groundless and impious: But to convince you plainly,
that the spirituality of Christ's Kingdom does not restrain Fighting for
Religion^ I ask you in a word, what is the reason that the Christian world,
does not patiently stretch out its neck to the Turkish Cruelty? Sure you are
not ignorant that the pretended cause of his invasions, has often been to
destroy the Christian Faith: if then the spirituality of Christ's Kingdom does
altogether prohibit his Servants fighting, wherefore do not Christian States
and Princes lay down their Carnal defensive weapons, and rest quietly in this,
that God who governs the world can maintain his own right, and the wrath of man
does not work his righteousness, as you are pleased to Cant to your N. C. I
know the only reply you can make, is, that the case of free Estates and
Sovereign Princes against foreiners is very different, from that of Subjects
against their Rulers; but does not this plainly discover the Sophistry of your
Method, you tell us, first, that Subjects may not fight for Religion against
their persecuting Prince, because the spirituality of Christ's Kingdom forbids
all fighting upon that account. And then when you are urged with the
incontrovertible practice of Christian Kingdoms, you just recurre and say,
that the instance not being of Subjects against their Prince, does not quadrat,
and not remembering that this is the very quaes^^um, you make the vain and
empty assertion of the irresistibilitie of Princes, without any proof, both
head and tail of all your reasonings: I may not insist to tell you, that if the
spirituality of Christ's Kingdom did cause the King of Kings, and him, who even
on earth owned himself greater then Solomon, to suffer without resistance; The
Soveraignity of Christian Princes cannot give them a contrary privilege. I know
these of your way, and many others also, carried away with their error,
forgetting both the Authority which Christ exercised, and for which he was
questioned by the jewish Rulers, and also his own most express words, no man
takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self. I have power to lay it
down, and I have power to take it again, stick not to make an obligation of
subjection to the then Tyrannes and Murderers, an ingredient in his
submission: but I am tedious, More consideration of the worth and wonderful
love of our Lord Jesus Christ, would teach you no doubt, both a better
understanding in the Truth of God, and more reverend and tender vindications
then these you make of the True and Faithful Witness.

You proceed in the next place, upon occasion of your. N. C. alleging that you
condemn our first Reformation, carried on by Fighting, to tell us, that the
ages immediately after Christ afford the best examples, in these the Christians,
though suff^^iently numerous, and cruelly irritate, did onl^ increase by
suffering, and not by fighting: the force used in our Reformation was the
enemies tares, and no precedent of men is to be opposed to the expresse^ word
of God. Sir, to begin where you leave, I hope I have already fully cleared,
that the express word of God is against you, and not for you: neither will I
expatiat upon the undeniable Necessity, Righteousness, Reason and evident
blessing of that Force used in our first Reformation, by which our Religion,
Liberty, yea the Royal line and Crown, were under God only preserved^ Nay
your reprochful likening of it to the devils tares, is so far from lessening
the evidence of that Spirit, which after having resisted unto blood, and
wrestled through many great and strong persecutions, did animate the Lords
people to a very noble defense, countenanced by all the then Reformed Churches,
that it does not so much as demurie my charity, that if you your self had been
in these days, you had taken part with the Congregation: That which I shall
stay a little upon, is the practice of the Primitive Christians, whereby you
think fighting for Religion, to be as much condemned, as suffering is highly
commended. And because this objection does lead unto the delightful search and
vindication of the works of God, for answer, I observe first, that as in the
holy and determinate Counsel of God, it became the Captain of our Salvation to
be made perfect through suffering, so it pleased him for the greater
manifestation of the power of his Grace by the Foolishness of Preaching, and
Weakeness of Suffering, to render the propagation of his Truth more glorious,
and thus in the first times of the Gospel, the greater the cruelty, and the
more ineluctable that the necessity of the suffering was, the more
inexpressible was the glory of that presence and the joy of that consolation,
whereby the Church in its deepest distress did most highly triumph. 2. So
unspeakeablie did the power of this assistance prevail, to the dispelling of
the fear, and removing of the horror, of all these torments and afflictions,
that many instead of flying, incontrovertibly lawful, did directly run to
suffering; and to a great part, the Garland of Martyrdom became a most
Ambitionat Crown; by the mistake of the exuberance of which assisting grace,
not only many odd practices in precipitating themselves unto suffering and
death, but Opinions also then held, such as that of the unlawfulness of all
resistance for Christians, even against Robbers and Murderers, can only be
excused. 3. But if the beauty and splendour of this grace did in some measure
dazzle the eyes of its more immediate witnesses, how much more did it astonish
its more remote and after admirers, who receiving the report with fames
increase, and taking their measures, more from their own good design, then the
exact simplicity of truth, by their pious and affectionat Rhetorications,
stopped not to strain matter of fact, sometimes beyond probability. If you be a
stranger to this truth, advert how the almost immediate after Age magnifies
their Patience and Sufferings, such as veflra omnia reple^i^us, with more then
one grain of allowance. 4. As this was the dispensation of the first ages of
the Gospel, so, when the Lord advanced the Church to a certain and visible
capacity of defense, peruse Histories, and you will find plenty of instances of
Christians their fighting for Religion. The Armenii very early even before
Constantine his Empire, Libertatem exercendi Christianismi Armis vindicant,
Clade afficiunt Maximinum as the History bears, and how the persecuted
Christians, under the Persian and Arrian, did implore and receive the aid of
the Roman and Orthodox Emperors, would be superfluous to narrate.

By these few reflections as I have cut of from your argument all the necessary
suffering and strained capacities of the Primitive Christians, so I have given
you such a full and evident account of their not searching after, or improving
sooner, any real measure of sufficiency for defense, which probably they did
but little mind, that this their omission cannot without manifest calumny, be
adduced to disprove, either their immediate after^ practices, or the agreeable
and universally approven examples of our late reformations. Now if for proving
their more early capacite for, or express dissent from Defensive Arms, you do
further urge particular Authorities, when you have answered all my just
scruples against the former, and satisfied me in all their other opinions in
the matter of Arms, then you shall have my Answer: but in the mean time
pardon me, if while I do indeed admire and praise the Grace and Glory of these
Primitive sufferings, I be neither too credulous of the mistakes of men, nor do
condemn the diversity of the operations of the same God, which works all in
all, specially seeing that by the same sufferings whereby you go about to
impugn, he has so signally confirmed these practices, which I do maintain.

But to this last you answer, that you are far from thinking the better of a
Cause because some die handsomely for it: Neither Atheis^, Heresies nor
Murders want their pretended Martyrs. Sir, I neither approve your too much
magnifying. page 7. nor your too much undervaluing, page 9. of men's sufferings:
And therefore as at best I account them only a confirming and accessory, and
not a principal and leading argument; so I must tell you that I conceive the
force of its inference to flow from a certain luster and insinuation of grace,
which your jejune Epithets of handsomnesse and gallantrie do but meanly
express; whether or not this appeared in our late Sufferers, I wonder nothing
that you deny it: but sure I am that all the sincere lovers of the Truth, have
to their joy both acknowledged it, and been established by it.

After this by a transition of your own framing, making your N. C. faintly and
childishly disown and wave bygones, whereof, to deal plainly, I do as little
fear the odium, as I account your A^ologies, taxing them of Rebellion, to be
most odious, you come to enquire wherefore we keep not the day of thanksgiving
for the Kings restoration? and seeing you are not pleased with your N. C.
answer I will give you mine. And first, it is not because you make it a holy
day; I know this is as much above your power, as your act is presumptuous in
ordaining it to be observed, and your practices are far from keeping it as a
holy day; Nor do I now debate the Magistrates power in appointing pro re nata
days of solemn thanksgiving, wherein it is more then certain, that the
apparent abuse that has been in institutions of this kind, and the end and
design of the appointment, do give the Church a very necessary interest of
advice. Nor lastly will I detain you in the application of the difference of
designing a day as a Circumstance for thanksgiving to be performed on it, and
dedicating a day to be kept as Holy in Commemoration; a Popish error,
expressly by us abjured and by you revived; he who desires a full clearing in
this matter, with a satisfying answer to all objections, may find it in the
English popish ceremonies; but the great reason wherefore N. C. neither do nor
ought to keep that day, is because you have assigned for the cause of it, not
only the mercy of the Kings return, but also the wicked overturning of the
work of God; and that with such a libeling preface of blasphemies against God
and his cause, and vile reproaches upon the whole Nation, that no true hearted
man can read the Act, without abhorrencie. Now before you reject this my
answer, I only desire you to peruse and consider the Act, and I am almost
certain that although perhaps, you will not come the length of the character I
have made of it, yet you will think it strange that men accessorie to many of
these Righteous things, against which it so foully railes, should have been on
the one hand indulgently indemnifyed without any acknowledgement^ and on the
other obliged, under the pain of losing their s^ipends, to a thanksgiving,
expressing the highest recantation. Are these ways equal? Think not that my
indignation against this Act, is all and only from my disaffection to your
establishment, that is indeed one cause, sufficient to produce a just detest;
but ingenuously I have so much of true Loyalty to my Prince and affection to
my Country, that the disservice done to the King, in rendering the celebration
of that day (which in its righteous and proper use might have been an
acceptable and kindly warming of his Subjects affection) a very odious
provocation to aversion and alienation, is to me not a more just then powerful
incentive: but such were the healings of these violent Physicians, and such
have been and will be the effects.

Again, making a stepping stone of both your N. C. and his cause, after you
have made him confess disloyalty, because you are not able to prove it, you
hold out his way to be evil, because of its cruelty and rigor in forcing men
to take the Covenant, and punishing such as refused. and your N. C. granting
this to be a fault also, you charge it home very odiously against our Leaders.
as Men unacquainted with the meek spirit, and obstinat in those severities. Its
answered, whether these things be objected or not in a meek spirit is more your
concernment then mine, who regard not your bitterness in any dress? That
which you call cruelty, if counter-ballanced with the guilt of the recusancie,
will quickly be alleviat to moderation: If the Covenants (for I shall touch
both) pressed, had been new Oaths arbitrarely imposed; there were some ground
for your challenge: but as to the first, was it not the same, wherein the
Nation stood engaged from the first beginning almost of the Reformation; and if
after a great and visible defection it was, upon our returning, renewed, and
with a more express application against these corruptions, whereunto we had
backslidden, required to be taken by all, who could not decline without a
manifest declaration of both their unsoundnesse and insinceritie in the Oath of
God? call you this Rigor? And as to the second, the League, if the Communion of
Saints, and that sympathy we ought to have with all Christ's sufferings
Members, did persuade it as a duty, and if your then ejected Prelates, did by
their restless instigations, and the breaches of Faith, and Hostile invasion
from England thereby procured, render it convincingly a most necessary mean,
for the preserving and prosequuting the ends of the first, was it not both
rational and righteous that they, who stood thus obliged, by virtue of the
first Covenant, to take the Second, upon their recusance, should be proceeded
against as Deserters: And the truth is, as they were not many that were
troubled simply, for not taking the Covenants; so there were but few, if any,
who refused the second, who either before were not, or thereafter became not,
directly opposite to the First; Nor did these few refusers subsist in a quiet
dissatisfaction; but for the most part turned violent and bloody Enemies, or at
least partakers with such Adversaries, Notwithstanding of all which perjury and
wickedness, the procedour against these recusants, or rather Apostates, was so
little adequate, either to their guilt or number, that upon a considerate and
impartial review, I am assured, all the excess that can be qualified will not
suffice to purge your objection of Cruelty against the public courses of these
times, of plain Calumny: I say the Public courses; for as to the particular
practices of private persons, although the corruption inherent to the best, and
the many and rapid Temptations of times of division and wars, do offer me large
matter of Apology; yet I do rather wish that the outbreakings which we have
seen, and felt, of the Lords holy jealousy, may make both the Lovers of his
work to remember their provocations, and tremble before this holy Lord God, who
will be Sanctified in them that come nigh him: And also the haters of his Name
to consider how much more upon such he will be Glorified: But you, not content
to pervert the Righteous ways of God, go about mainly to represent his
Ministers as bloody men, rejoicing and obstinate in blood; certainly such a
grievous and horrid accusation ought to have been evidently instructed; but
since it is impossible to imagine the least shadow of ground for it, unless
that sometimes his Servants, either in the more eminent and signal appearances
of Gods vengeance upon his bloody and perfidious Adversaries, have joined their
praises with Heavens Alleluiahs, for the manifestation of his true and
righteous judgments, or that when the Lord called to punish, they have
regreted an unseasonable and partial excess of Lenity: Are not these arrows,
firebrands and death, which you throw in your pretended meekness, like to the
symptoms of Madness?

And now Sir, since you will have it so, give me leave to manage the retortion
for your N. C. You accuse our times of cruelty, for forcing men to take the
Covenant; though in effect it was only to make them stand to an Oath, whereby
all were antecedently obliged; but have not you and many of you, such as
formerly were very forward to press it upon others, Now, without either reason
given, or repentance so much as pretended, been most violent to have all men to
renounce it? I will not mention the exclusion of all Non-renouncers from
Public Trust, and the first Arbitrary fining, and remitting or abating, upon
condition of the Declaration, Temptations not only unjust, but no less
powerful, and a hundred fold more extensive, then all the certifications
execute upon simple Noncovenanters: the very instances by you given shall also
serve my turn: Are not to concur in the present Church Government, and to
promise submission to Episcopacie, certain reductive disclamations? And yet you
cannot deny, that for the refusing of these things many hundred, of Ministers
have been thrust out, and in such manner vexed and tossed with imprisonments,
banishments, consinements, and proclamations upon proclamations, that if the
Lord had not provided, your mercy in sparing their Lives, had been only the
complement of your Cruelty: Its true that Ministers are not made to swear to
Maintain the present Establishment; but if they be required to break a former
lawful and approven Oath, where is the disparity? As for the People, you tell
us they are desired to do nothing, but live peaceably, and join in worship: And
verily though this were all, and though your Public Peace were not so
perverted, as it cannot be subscribed unto, and your Worship so polluted, and
profaned, as may give too just occasion of scruple, it were easy to
demonstrate, that such has been the Rigor, and violence of your Methods, that
it is a wonder that a hundred to one have not been thereby irritate to more
unpeaceablenesse, and greater desertion: but because you have brought against
us and our leaders, the odious accusation of Blood, although I have already
removed it; yet in pursuance of the parallel I must further tell you, that the
Blood of the former Times, abstracting from its justice, was in a manner the
Blood of War i^ War: but in your Times we have seen; over and above its
injustice, the blood of War shed in Peace, and that of such Persons, for such
Causes, and with such Circumstances, as time does only increase and not
diminish its astonishment: next, the tragedy of these poor harmless persons,
who by your insufferable insolences and exactions were provoked to take Arms,
is yet recent. I shall not resume particulars but I am confident, their cause,
their number, their condition and their rout being considered, the tortures and
bloody executions that ensued, not upon the chief Actors and instruments, but
upon the inferior yea meanest of these Innocents led out to the slaughter,
without choice, are hardly to be matched: what hand your Lords of the Clergy
had in these things; how suift their feet were to shed blood, and how Burnet
the A. P. of Glasgow, taught the Executioner to truss him up with a pulley, who
for weakness could not be otherwise execute, and the Army Officers commanded
drums to be beaten to drown the Testimony of the Lords dying witnessess, is
well known. Nay it is more then probable that if the King had not put a stop to
that but cherie, and these oppressions and barbarities wherewith the West was
afterward aflicted, your Prelates had not given over, until that party had been
utterly cut off, and that whole Country laid desolate for their cause: I might
further tell you of your other severities, and how by your rigid exceptions and
other ensnaring Acts, not only the intended favor of the Kings Indemnity was
corrupted; but also its very design and effect frustrat: But what need of many
words, let the fervent and conspiring desires of the 1659, and the more
ex^lting joys of the 1660. with the many disappointments, grievances and
exactions that ensued, together with the present Universal coolness,
dissatisfaction and distraction, and unsettled condition of the Kingdom be
considered, and impartially searched into their proper cause, and if Prelacie
be not found the only marrer of our joy and quiet, ferment of our distemper and
moth of our Loyalty, then rejoice ye in the Bishops, and let them also rejoice
in you: but if thus it be, then etc. Thus you have forced me to retaliat your
provocation, and I am more then wearied of the subject.

In the next place you tax the N. C. of great hight and insolency, in
assuming the big Names of the Godly Party, and the People of God, and calling
their way the cause and Kingdom of Christ. Sir if they did indeed contend for
the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ; And that for the vindication of his
Power and Government over his Church, and the Prospering of his pleasure, I
think truly they had good right to all these names: but that they did vainly
and arrogantly use them, it is more then you have proven, or I do remember:
And really J am in the opinion that upon search, it will be found, that the
Titles of the People of God, and of the Godly Party, were at first not so
much assumed by the asserters of our cause, as appropriat unto them by the
reproach and mocking of their Adversaries: As for after contests (if any were)
among their own subdivisions, they were no doubt the sad consequents of other
evils, wherewith it pleased the Lord that his own should be tried; but if you
think that for all the competition the Titles, are still vacant, I wish from my
heart that both you and your party may be thereby animat to put in, and to
shame and exclude all loud Pretenders, by real demerite.

To this you subjoin another great Article, that Our Ministers who complained,
of Bishops, their meddling in matters of State, when the scene turned, did
therein absolutely Govern: And to this challenge you make your N. C. return
the Popes Answer for his Usurpations: viz: that all was done in order to
Religion, on purpose that you may make the reply, That the Pope and
Presbiterians do much agree in Politiques. Sir, waving the immodest term of
impudence and other arrant peccancies against truth, where with you set forth
your Modest representing of faults, as you are pleased to call it. I return
shortly for answer this clear and certain position, wherein I am sure we
cannot disagree viz. that as the direction of Conscience appertains to the
Pastoral charge, so the Ministers of Gods Word ought both to advise, exhort and
warn thereanent, according as in every occurrent, the circumstances of the
thing which make its season, do thereto clear their call and access: This
truth is evident in its own light: whoever owneth Conscience, the Word of God
to be its Rule, and its Ministers to be our Teachers and Guides, cannot deny
it. All the diffic^ltie is in the right performance; the exceeding goodness
and rare beauty of a word in season, is no ordinary attainment; because to
every purpose there is time and judgment; therefore the misery of Man is
great upon him. If I should ascribe the exactness of this observance to our
Ministers, I should forget them to be Men: but as to the instances, which you
allege of their warnings given against the Engagement 1648 and all deeds
directly relating to it, And of their Ministerial accession to a prudent
exclusion, in the year 1649 of such as had proven Unfaithful: their singular
importance as to the very sum of the work of God, has been so signally
comprobat by after events, that if upon the matter, you do condemn these
practices, you in effect do adjudge Ministers to absolute silence, at least in
opposition to State determinations, whatever be the concernment of the Cause of
God, or good Conscience: It were superfluous to mention the difference of
Prelatick medlings, or what are the Popes invasions: the meanest capacity may
easily distinguish a Ministerial advice in point of Conscience, all, either
attribute to, or assumed by Ministers in State, or any other extrinsick
affair, from these corrupt practices: And with the same facility join Prelacie
and Papacy in their common pride and usurpation. You add a particular reason
wherefore Ministers should not meddle with war and matters of blood, because of
its contrariety to the Pastoral duty, which obliges to feed and not to kill.
But as none has been more guilty of this Sanguinary meddling then, these who
with most ceremony would appear to observe the letter of the Rule; so,
considering what I have lately touched of your Clergy, and who did principally
direct the suppression and executions of the late Risers in Arms, I am in the
opinion you designed this reflection more for your own Lords, then our Leaders:
but it is enough I agree with you fully, that Pastors ought not to be Criminal
Judges, far less instigators to war and blood; yet if in these matters you
allow to Conscience any place, they are no doubt Subjects proper both for
Ministerial warning and advice.

For a conclusion of your charge, ye surprise both your N. C. and me with a
challenge of Superstition, whereof you say we are in many things guilty: sed
quis tulerit Gracchos de Seditione querentes. Sir ye are not so witty in this
anticipation as ye trow; for tho ye have taken the first word of fliting; yet
the success is rather a foaming out your own shame, then the fixing of that
reproach upon us, which was the mark ye yought to hit. What? Sir, did ye dream
by this device to terrify your N. C. into a forbearance to charge you with the
guilt of Superstition? or did you think by this artifice to vindicat your
party, and be avenged at once on these great Worthies, who have so manifestly
laid open unto the World the Superstition of the men of your Kidney and Gang;
that though they have traveled to Rome to fetch water to wash these spots, and
have put their invention upon the rack to palliat them with all imaginable
pretenses; yet the shame of their Nakedness was so unfolded by these searching
Seers, that it could never be hid. But Sir, are ye in good earnest? or have ye
been in the foregoing lines so transported with rage in fighting against
Defensive Arms, and wresting the sword of just defense out of the hands of
poor Innocent and oppressed Subjects, that in this paroxysme ye have forgotten
to be honest and rational at once? Did you believe that you spoke truth when
you represented us as such? If I thought ye did, and continued to do so still,
I profess I am so little your enemy that I would pity you, as one who walks
in the darkness of gross delusion, and knows not whether he goes, because
the darkeness has blinded his eyes. But I would gladly know how ye make out
the charge: Ye did wisely only in one thing, to condescend upon none of these
many things, wherein you say we are guilty of Superstition, when ye make your
charge good ye will be admired for your invention; till then, it will neither
be shame nor reproach to the N. C. to be silent, or laugh at the audacitie of
such a Novice. But to be serious with you, Sir, if ye would not take it amiss
to be Catechized in the Chair, do ye understand what Superstition is, that ye
call us so? Are we such to you in many things, because in every thing we own
the Scriptures as the Rule of Faith and manners, and assert that there is a
sufficiency in these to make wise to Salvation, and that, without the wild
mixture of humane inventions, they are able to make the man of God perfect,
thorougly furnished unto every good work? Is it because we own no
Office-bearers in the house of God, save such as are of his own appointment? Is
it because we judge the Episcopal Hierarchy Apocryphal, and cannot acknowledge
the Prelat and his juncto for the Courts and Officers of Jesus Christ? Is it
because we maintain that all things in the house of the God of Heaven ought to
be done according to the will of the God of Heaven, and because we stand fast
in the liberty where with Christ has made us free, and will not suffer our
selves to be imposed upon or entangled with a Yoke of bondage? Is it because we
maintain that no power upon Earth can make things Necessary which God has made
Indifferent, more then they can make things, indifferent, which he has made
Necessary? Is it because we know or will acknowledge no Lawgiver or Lord in the
house of God, beside our Lord Jesus Christ, and are bold to put all pretenders
to produce our Masters warrant when they call for our obedience to their
Commands, as not darring to make the will of a poor frail fallible creature the
Law of our Conscience? In a word is it because we dare not with you homologat
all the impieties of that Party, who have burst these holy bonds for
Reformation and Righteousness, wherewith together with us they had so solemnly
bound their Souls, and are now returned to their former vomit? Is our esteem
of, and adherence to, the ways of righteousness, an overrating of things more
then we ought? and are we only guilty of Superstition because we cannot be
Metamorphosed into a detestable newtrality and Gallio like indifferency in the
matters of God? Truly Sir providing our Zeal for these things were such as our
own heart did not reproach us for a sinful short coming and defect in, (as alas
it is not) we could bind al your reproaches, for what ye count excess and
over-rating, unto us as a crown, and indulge you a liberty to lay to our
charge things that we know not, and cast iniquity upon us, without taking
further notice of what ye have said, then thereby to be stirred up to pour out
our complaint before God, and Pray him that he would not hold his peace, since
the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful is opened against us,
and have spoke against us with a lying tongue. But I know ye follow your old
Leaders D. Mortown, D. Burgess etc. who had the same unhappiness to go before
you in accusing the Brethren, who could not be cudgelled into a compliance
with, nor cast in the mould of your Ceremonies, that you have in following of
such, who in this did not follow the Lord fully, and had not the lamp of the
word to shine in their way: They did plead innocent, asserting they were not
guilty of Superstition in using and imposing Ceremonies, but the N. C. were in
refuseing. But Sir, ye should either have had the head to have made the
insuficiencie of these great men's vindication manifest, or not have had the
forehead to renew the same challenge, without taking notice of their replies
which stand unanswerable to this day: your over-rating (...) the Doctors
reason, such as it is, couched in it: they alleged the N. C. guilty of
Superstition, why? because, forsooth, the N. C. (say they) place a special
piece of Religion in not using of these Ceremonies, and teach others to abstain
from using them for Conscience sake, and this is the vermiculation of your
pu^se too, But what would these Gentlemen have said, or what will the altitude
of your invention suggest to the Apostles words, why are ye subject to
Ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle not, etc. i. e. Keep you^ selves free
from these things which are after the commandments and doctrines of men, be ye
not subju^^^ as the servants of men to the observation of such things, which
are obtruded upon you as a piece of Religion, being mere human inventions
without any warrant from the Word of God? was there nothing of Religion in
abstaining from these? Sir ye and your Fellows have the unhappiness to be of a
different mind from the Apostle who had the mind of Christ. Are men's
Consciences nothing concerned to stand fast in the liberty where with Christ
has made them free, and to withstand, while a Dominion over their Faith is
usurped, and the thing intended is to wreath a Yoke of bondage to the Doctrines
of men about the neck of the Conscience? 2. If this be good arguing, may not
the profane multitude have the same plea against all who abstain from fleshly
lusts that war against the Soul? May not these I say be prompted by your ^ogick
to flout at all who run not with them to the same excess of riot, as
superstitious fools, because they place any thing of Religion in these
negatives, and suppose that conscience is concerned in that abstinence? Hence
3. we say that we look upon our abstaining from a compliance with the Commands
and Doctrines of men, from foolish and vain Ceremonies, from whatsoever is
obtruded upon us in the matters of God without his warrant, as acts of common
obedience, and as service to our Lord and Master; but we no more fancy this
abstinence to be an act of immediate and formal worship (as you would make the
world believe we do, to the end that believing us they may believe ye speak
truth and reason) then we do a keeping of our selves unspotted from these
pollutions and corruptions, which come not within the compass of worship; so
that we may be as well said to over-rate things Superstitiously, because we do
not drink, who^e, lie, steall, break Covenants, persecute the People of God,
who desire to hold fast their integrity, while broken in the place of dragons
and covered with the shadow of death; as, because we cannot we dare not comply
with abjured and wicked Prelacie, Lording it over Gods inheritance, and
recuiring obedience to their vain inventions. I must tell you moreover that I
do not admire your definition of Superstition, ye had it, I grant, from your
friend Doctor Hamond, and to make it your own, you have supplied the Doctors
Nimiety with your over-rating: But if you think it not an honor to err, and
be put to a disadvantage with the Doctor, you should have guarded your self and
your party from the rebound of your own blow. Sir, what your over-ratings of
foolish Traditions and vain Ceremonies are, has been at a very dear rate
experienced, by the bleeding and weeping People of God, in whose blood, exile,
bonds, spoilings, persecutions and afliction, you have made your mind and
exorbitant esteem of these things legible: Your most bigot and fond Conformist
must grant, that the things ye plead for, Patronize and press, are not
necessary in themselves, and have no connection with the Salvation of the Soul,
by way of midse, or by virtue of divine precept; and that all the degrees of
necessity they can pretend to, is only from the will of the imposer. Now Sir,
may a man ask you without putting you in^o a chafe, what an over-rating of
these things is it, for you to debar, eject, vex and smite faithful
Shepherds, scatter the Flocks, turn such Laborers out of the Vineyard who
have a seal of their being the sent Ambassadors of Jesus Christ upon the Souls
of many, and a Testimony of faithful servants in the Consciences of some of
their grand Opposites, as has been found when their Conscience began to speak,
and they saw themselves ready to be sisted before the righteous Tribunal of
God, and that for no other cause, but because they durst not do as you would
have them, in adoreing your Dagon; and upon the other hand, to complete your
wickedness, thrusting in Men upon these Flocks, who were bereft of such as did
stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, without any thing else to commend
or qualify them, save that ye knew them to be of such metal and complexion,
as they would not decline nor dispute your impositions, which is certain as to
matter of fact, that I might here appeal to your own Conscience and to the
Conscience of the chief men who are chief in the transgression, persecuting
them who adhere to their Covenant, keep the Commands of God, and have the
Testimony of Jesus Christ, because they will not ackowledge and submit to such
obtruded Intruders as the sent and called Ministers of Jesus Christ, if they
would committ the keeping of their dogs, the careing for their swine, or the
feeding of their horses to persons who had so little skill to do, and
faithfulness to perform it, as most of these have, to whom, the flock of God
purchased with his own Blood is committed. Sir, this is an over-rating with a
witness, and such as, if ye will rate right and reflect upon it, may, and
certainly will, f^ll your Soul, with horror: if the wrath of God be come upon
them to the uttermost, who forbid his Sent Servants to speak unto his people
these words, by which they must be saved, it only argues a judicial blindness
of mind and benumnedness of Conscience, in the chief of your party and
promoters of that interest, that their lyableness to the wrath of God Almighty,
for the desolations made in his Sanctuary by them, does not make them roar by
reason of the disquietness of their heart, and cry out as persons against whom
the terrors of God have set themselves in array. I might tell you of an
over-rating also, of which ye (as we have in part heard already) and your
companions glory, wherein the very fundation of our Salvation is struck at, viz
such an over-rating of works and our pitiful performances, as advances them to
the altitude of being the condition of the justification of a sinner before
God, and is utterly inconsistent with the teno^ of the Covenant of Grace; the
unhappie Author, whom we last named, has led you and your companions into this
ditch also, and ye glory in this shame; but I shall forbear the discovery of
your dangerous folly and false-hood, about this great foundation of Salvation
by you put out of course, till I come to examine your sixth Dialogue. It was
only fit here to give the Reader an hint, and let him see what over-raters ye
are. But Sir, why are ye so shye as to shun the true known, and common
definition of Superstition given by Godly and Learned Men: ye know that that
excellent definition, given by Zanchy, and followed by other great men, makes
Superstition to consist in the addition of Ceremonies in the worship of God not
instituted by Christ, as well as in the addition of more substantial matters;
but, easiely foreseing that this would not serve your evil design of loading
the Servants of Christ with reproach and calumny, and that the bulk of your
burdensome Ceremonies must be rejected as reprobate metal, if nothing pass for
current as a part of worship in the Church, but what has the Seal and impress
of God upon it, ye substitute in its place one wherewith ye are at present
better pleased, but with what advantage to your cause I leave it to be judged.
But sir, since you do not engage further upon the head of Superstition, then
first to cast it into such a mould as may suit your design, and having done
so, then to cast the iniquity of it upon us, I shall at present satisfy my
self with what is said, and for your further satisfaction I will give you all
the assurrances you can require, both in my own name, and in the name of all
the N, C. that when ever you are able to instruct your challenge, we will thank
you for your charity; And if your evidence as to proof answer your confidence
in the charge, ye shall find us so far from a pertinacious obstinacy, that we
will abandon with a blush, whatsoever of Superstition we might through
ignorance have indulged in our way, and in the mean time rest confident that,
as, in demonstration of my reality in what I undertake, I shall endeavor
henceforth to affect my own heart more and more into a deep abhorrence at, and
detestation of, all your abjured usurpations, Antiscriptural methods, and
Episcopal impositions, in the matters of God, and, so far as I am able, shall
interpose with all the People of God to do the same; Yet Sir, there is one
thing more before we part; I must tell you that when I consider your strain
through the whole, by the superstitious over-rateing of things, imputed unto us
in your first, and our being charged with our overprizing of Ordinances in the
next, with the neglect (as you say) of your Morality, and your stretch of
charity for Papists, with your insinuat censures of all who have stood up in
the defense of the absoluteness and immutabilitie of the Decrees of God, the
efficacy of his Grace etc. against Arminians, which is to your moderation and
latitude but a digladiation about niceties and curiosities; I say Sir, when I
consider these things, and grant you the common Privilege acclaimed by every
man, to be optimus interpres suorum verborum, the best expounder of his own
words, I must take this to be your meaning, that we are superstitious
over-raters of things in standing at so great a distance from Papists, and in
contending with Arminians, about these things in controversy betuixt them and
u^: and because we are not cast into that new convenient mould of yours,
whereby you can coutch under and comply with any mutation in the matters of
God, and in your profound heights, deep silences, abstractions and novell
latitude, ^ush at all these things as not to be contended for, and despise all
the men who are not cast in the new mould of your perfection, as pitiful
Puntes of the lowest sise; this we see is manifestly your meaning, and truly
Sir, I only regrate we are so little worthy of your indignation, and that the
truths of God are not more dear to us, and that the Zeal of his house does not
more eat us up. And while you contemn these things as not to be contended for,
to make the world believe your holy fire is not extinguished, though nothing of
its flame appear, about the conservation of these, (to us precious things
though to you despicable,) ye would make all these stirrings for them, and
striveings about them, to be the sparkles of a superstitious wild fire, and not
a flame of God. I cannot remember how Pliny, in his Epistle to Trajan, does
paint the tender and conscientious Practice of the Primitive Christians with
the same vermilion of Superstition; but I am apt to think, it is still the same
Spirit of opposition to the Purity of Ordinances, power and practice of
Godliness, which prompts men to these unjust representations of such, as dare
not run the same course with them, or who are constrained by the love of Christ
to hold fast that, which is below their Lukewarm temper to contend for. But I
need not be further solicitious in this vindication; being, confident that you
are not able to proselyte into a belief of this reproach any sober or rational
men, nor will I envy you the advantage you are like to reap as a just
retribution from every unprejudiced Reader; and that is, not to be believed
afterward when ye speak the truth, having with so much calumnious confidence
solicited them into the belief of what they know to be a falsehood. But Sir,
to shut up this Dialogue with you, though raro vidi Clericum penitentem I have
seldom seen a Clergy man a repenter has been mostly verified in the men, who
have perverted the right ways of the Lord; yet the Calumny is so gross and
groundless, that I would willingly ^latter my self into a hope, that when ye
think on what ye have said, ye will smite upon your thigh, and be brought to an
acknowledgement of the sin of unjust accuseing the brethren: And I assure you
Sir, our joy would be almost equal with your advantage, to see you weep over
the falsehoods, and calumnies, and evil design, of this first borne of your
strength.

The Second DIALOGUE Answered.
YOu begin with a question, What great goodness it was which so commended our
Party? and having made your N. C. make a pitiful simple vaunt, that you may
out-vaunt him, you proceed to accuse and censure, as you list. Sir if we dared
to make our selves of the number, or compare our selves with them that commend
themselves, we want not matter wherein we might indulge a little to the
foolishness of boasting; but seeing that he whom the Lord commends, and not
he who commends himself is approved, we will not boast of things appertaining
to our selves; but endeavor that all our Glorying may be in the Lord. I have
already told you, how God blessed us with his Ministry, and that Ministry
with Power and Presence: It was he who gave the word, and great was the company
of these that Published it; it was he who clothed his Priests with Salvation,
and made his people to shout for joy: It was he who in the more special times
and shinings of his love, made the Graces of his People to flow, and Souls were
ravished with these discoveries: And if not only in the Public Assemblies Gods
fear was Great, but Families also did seek him apart; If the vulgar whom you
undervaluingly so name, did greatly delight in the Law of the Lord, and the
Sabbath was called a delight, the holy of the Lord honorable, we cannot but
account these great matters, and the very paths and Methods which do most
assuredly lead to the great hights of Christianity; Yea surely these Gospel
Ordinances do lead unto the living God, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, and unto Communion with him, and the Participation of all Graces.

I know there is a shorter way, which too many take, who forming unto
themselves fair Ideas, and words of Self-denial, resignation, abstraction of
mind, and the like, do entirely and pleasantly rest in the fancy, and talk
of these things, and as much of a specious outward converse as may in some sort
salve their reputation, from these many forfeitures, which by the sinful
accommodations of their love of ease, they manifestly incur: and these men
commonly in their self-elevation, do not only slight the true Ordinances, and
from the infirmities of ^raile men entrusted therewith, do take advantage to
mock; but license themselves unto an absolute compliance with every mode and
dress, in Church Government and worship, which humane policy, or Satan's
Malice please to invent, nothing regarding how much thereby they may make
themselves partakers of the Perjury, Blood and Violence, which promove, and the
Profanity, that follows the courses that they approve; but as they prudently
provide for their own advantage and credit, by the abused pretext of an
illimited respect to Authority, so they easily quiet all the reluctancies of
their inward Light, with any verbal, slender, and inoffensive dissent. This is
the New convenient contrivance of Religion, which indeed desires to be admired,
for its pretended Mortifications, high seize, and peaceful enjoyments;
but in effect, does only recommend it self, by a lukewarm and quiet
indifferency in the Matters of God, a flattering and safe deference to
Authority, and a sinful and sweet veneration of outward peace, Whether your
discourse and practice do ^avour or not of this way, I do not judge: I hope the
serious seekers of God will still see and ask for the Old Paths, and do know
that it is the Good way, wherein neither by a Pharisaick show of external
devotion, not yet by vain and Notionall pretendings, but by humble and sincere
waiting upon God, in the means of his own appointment, they have really
attained to these graces in the names whereof you boast, and so do find rest
to their Souls: And certainly if to such the present sad alteration (which, for
the former light, power and frequencie, observed in the Assemblies of the Lords
People, has covered his house with darkeness, death and desolation) does
minister suitable reflections, it can be no matter of wonder: When David
remembered these things, and did consider the like changes, he poured out his
soul in him, because he had gone with the multitude, and went with them to the
house of God, with the voice of joy and praise: for this Ieremiahs heart di^d
faint, for these things were his eyes dim because of the Mountain of Zion
which was desolate, the foxes walking upon it: O what want had they of you for
a comforter, who could have carried them far above these external shaddows,
and taught them Resignations and abstractions, in such a hight, that neither
the corruption, nor the removing of Gods Ordinances, should have overclouded
their Easefull Serenety?

But you insinuat, that N. C. do overprize Ordinances, and undervalue
Morality. I have already told you, that this is but a calumny, and that an
holy and pure conversation, is the greatest and best part of Religion, is not
by us in the lest questioned; without the endeavor of holiness; the other
parts may possibly in Hypocrisy be pretended, but cannot indeed have any
reality, only remember that Christ Jesus who is our all, is also our
Sanctification, and let your Morality be indeed Christianity.

In the next place, you fall upon Particulars and allege, That our Discipline
was wholly different from the rules of the Gospel, and far short of that of
the Ancient Bishops; This you instance in our Kirk Sessions, which you say were
like Birlaw Courts. I will not examine your expressions, but your reasons. You
tell us first that the Church should only Meddle with Sins as they are scandals,
and not as they are injuries; whereas our Sessions cognosced upon wrongs which
belonged to the Magistrate. But pray Sir, May not the same Offense be both as a
wrong cognoscible by the Magistrate, for the reparation of the Plaintiff, and
punishment of the Delinquent, and as a scandal appertain to Church censure, for
the reproof and amendment of the Offender, reconciling of the offended, and
instruction of all? Certainly it cannot be denied: Now seeing our Sessions did
only meddle with Sins, under the second formality, what does your challenge
amount to? This matter is to me so plain, that I incline to think, that the too
Narrow acceptance of Scandal, for the offense of one Brother against another,
without any external injury, must be the only ground of your scruple; but as
all injury is attended with a very sensible Scandal, and every open sin has
also a General harding Scandal in it, for which it is to be rebuked before all,
that others also may fear, so its necessarily previous traill, cannot in reason
be separated from its commanded rebuke. But your next objection carping at the
dilations made to these Courts, because not preceeded by private Admonition
made by the party offended, shows more plainly your mistake, in as much as the
Gospel order of Admonition can only have place in private offenses, in the
which case it was also by us observed. But to require the like Method in
Public offenses, is manifestly to exempt from their censure all open sins,
which being equally offensive unto all, render this procedure wholly improper.
3. You object That our Church Sessions did exact Fines: but if you consider,
that these Fines which you mention are particularly imposed and determined by
Statute, and thereby appointed to be applied to pious uses: And therefore the
demanding and uplifting thereof only, as well for the more summare and effectual
restraint of sin, as for the end whereto they are d^stined, in use to be
exercised by Kirk Sessions, or rather by their Officers and Bedels in
deficiency of the Magistrate, who should have been appointed in every Paroche
for that effect, this your scruple must quickly cease: but if you still think
that notwithstanding both the manner and conveniencie of this practice, the
^amine is unsuitable to a Church Iudicatorie, do ye not strain at a G^at, and
swallow a Camel: nay a monstrous one Viz your Spiritual Lords in the highest
temporal Courts where both civil and capital punishments are irrogated and
inflicted. 4. You say that we forced people to stoup to our Discipline by
threatening them with the Temporal sword. Sir, this is a great untruth, we
never owned nor exercised High Commissions, And if obstinat transgressors were
then, and still be, punishable by the Laws of the Land, wherefore seek you to
make this our burden? 5. You say that the the time of our penance was short;
the ancient Bishops did separat offenders as many years, as we did weeks. Just
now you accused us of rigor, and here you complean of our lenity, And not
remembering that the Ancient Bishops, did not more exceed us in strictness of
Discipline, then we do exceed the Modern, You are not ashamed to make your own
sloth the Charge of our Mediocrity. However, the lawful, though various,
regulations of Prudence (whereof according to the diversity of times and
circumstances, things undetermined by Scripture are acknowledged to be capable)
may sufficiently reconcile any apparent discrepancie in our practice, from that
of the Ancients, 6. You say, we used Discipline to put a temporal shame upon
Offenders. Again we are too Rigid: but wherefore may not Discipline be used to
shame Offenders, as well as the disobedient are commanded to be noted and
separated from, that they may be ashamed? 2. These. 3. 14. And the Incestuous
person is ordained to be delivered to Satan for the destruction of the flesh,
1 Cor. 5. 5. As for your Fancy, that Penitents are more Gazed at, as you
phrase it, upon the high place you mention, then at the Church door, we are
not of your Opinion, and the Church door was ever thought a place of more
obvious observance, and severe penance, 7 You say we wretchedly abused
Discipline by subjecting people to Censure for trifling matters; and that
Ministers were more Zealous against opposition to their courses, then against
opposition to the Everlasting Gospel. But Sir as these trifling matters, which
I suspect you hint at, were no less then the whole import of the present
differences; so, whether the opposition you make so light of, has not in the
event proven a most pernicious opposition to the Everlasting Gospel let any
serious Soul judge?

This vindication, whereunto ye have engaged me for our Kirk sessions, obliges
me to add in their behalf, that although these Courts be very low, and plain in
themselves; yet has their excellent use, for the suppressing of all
ungodliness, been always very observable. I need not go back to former times,
nor adduce, as I may, even, K. James his express Testimony; to represent the
notable and effectual influence of their right exercise; the present increase
of Prophanity, through the ceasing of this remedy, and the most ordinary jeer
of dissolute Persons, taxing one another for their exorbitancies, with this
sco^^ing regrate, Oh for a strick Kirk! are too obvious confirmations: And
truly, as, I have often marveiled to see a thing so mean in appearance, so
much the eye sore and scorn of Proud licentious Persons; So I doubt not but
this consideration alone; by pointing out the reason, may abundantly satisfy
all serious scruplers.

From your dissatisfaction with our Kirk Sessions you go to tax our Ministers
their Liberty and Manner of reproving sin. And as to the first, you do so
invidiously exaggerat their dealing in order to the late King, and him who now
Reigns, that I cannot dissemble my surprizal, at your so excessive and
abusive Railing on the Ministers of Christ, and some whereof you your self say,
within two leaves, are very good men, fearing God, but all are here reproached
without distinction, as Unnatural Hams, Incendiaries, open Liars, inhumane,
unchristian and malicious Persecutors of the memory of a pious dead Prince and
that with the hight of insolency and barbaritie: Deliver my Soul o Lord from
lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue. Sir I pretend not to your Privilege to
scold in a meek spirit, and to lie walking in the Spirit and falsehood? But as
I cannot but commend your wisdom, in tristing the vent of your rage and malice
against the Lords Ministers, to such a subject, not more advantageous against a
retribution, then apt to point the keen arrows of your spite, with a most
mortal odium; so were it not for the real and high respect, that I bear to the
Person, and many excellent qualities of our deceased Prince; and the duty I
owe the now King, nothing else could refuge you from the full returns of a
just resentment. Passing therefore the many horrid Blasphemies, Lies and
Reproaches, wherewith your Clergy during these unhappie wars did not cease
continually to proscind the Cause and People of God, more precious to him then
all the Monarchs on Earth, and did most instantly labor to render both
detestably hateful unto the Prince, until they brought all to ruin: I shall in
a few sober words, vindicat the Lords servants from all these umbrages^ and
appearances, whereby you endeavor to set off your reproach. That the late King
by evil Counsel, specially that of unconscionable and ungrate Prelates, wickedly
abusing, for their own ends, a Conscientious Prince unto a fatal obstinacy,
was precipitat into many gross errors of Government, such as an excessive
indulgence to Papists, illeg^ll and violent exactions, many unusual and high
attempts against fundamental Laws and Liberties, a strange connivance at the
Irish Rebellion, and at length, a bloody and pertinacious war against his
Parliaments, his greatest and best friends and Counselors; it was not the
invention of evil affected men or Ministers, as you allege, but the sad
evidence of plain deeds, and the unanimous verdict of these most capable and
proper to discern. Now if in this state of things, the Lords Ministers,
favoring his righteous Cause, did endeavor, by a true representation, both to
avert the People from, and animat them against evil courses, destructive to
Religion and Right; wherein are they to be reprehended? You say they charged
the King with all; But know you not that as whatever passed upon the Kings
side, did bear the impresse of his Name and Authority, so they did continually
charge the guilt and wickedness of all, mostly upon bad Counsel, praying the
Lord uncessantly, with much tenderness to the Kings Person, that the Wicked
might be removed from about the Throne, that so it might have been established.
And as to what you allege, That contraire to Humanity and Christianity they
did Persecute the memory of that Prince after his death and that with the hight
of insolency and barbaritie, in the presence of his Son, who now reigns. It
is a calumny, which you are not able to justify: Its true they wished and
moved the King to repent, of his accession to, and mourn for the opposition to
the work of God, violence and blood, wherein his Father was unhappily engaged,
and from which the Throne, except by serious Repentance, will never be purged.
If this be the Inhumane, Insolent and Barbarous raking into his ashes which you
lay to their charge, you remember little, and fear less, the jealousy of God,
who ^isiteth the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children to the third and
fourth Generation: Neither do you consider, that the stain of Blood is such,
specially upon a Throne, that the unfeigned tears, even of the Author, do not
wash it away. Ezrah and Nehemiah mourned and repented for the Provocation of
Kings and Princes, many Ages past, without the least reflection upon their
memories. Seeing therefore, that the practices whereupon you found these high
accusations, were altogether consonant to the Word of God, and the Principles
then acknowledged both by King and People, and to which in Conscience, we do,
and must still adhere, does not your apparent bearing with us in the main, and
yet so virulently inveighing against a clear dependencie, manifestly discover
more then an inveterate malice?

As to our Ministers their manner of reproving sin, you say they reproved not
in secret, but triumphed in the Pulpit without control, and against absents,
and that either out of Malice, or ostentation. Thus the tumor raised by the
poison of your last calumny does still swell, and you forget that you your
self are vainly triumphing in Print against a Mock-adversarie: But as you
cannot verify, that ordinarely, or allowedly, secret reproof was omitted,
where there appeared reason, and access for it; so, I am confident, your
allegiance has no better ground, then, that Ministers for the strengthening of
the Lords people, did freely hold out the Apostacy and wickedness of his
declared Enemies for whom such a reproof had been but in vain intended.

In the next place you tell us, that the Sermons of our Ministers, were no
Extraordinary things. Sir I will not compare, I am no lover of Extraordinary
things; but I heartily wish that such Preaching were now more Ordinary: to
believe, and therefore to speak, though with speech contemptible, is certainly
infinitely more graceful, then to speak, even Seraphickly, and in practice to
counter-act. There is a Foolishness of Preaching commended by Paul, above the
wisdom of man: Whether you would value it as an Ordinary or Extraordinary thing
I know not? But this Epithet of Extraordinary, which you seem to desiderat, is
very little consonant to Luthers Opinion, Hi sunt optimi ad Populum,
Conc^onat^res, qui pueriliter, populariter, and quam simpli^issime docent.
These are the best Preachers unto the People, who teach in a plain, homely, and
most simple way, You add, that their Sermons were half stuffed with Public
Matters, nothing concerning Souls: Why do you Hyperboliz^ so widely in
prejudice of Truth? You know public Matters were not meddled with, but in a
clear exigence, and if some did exceed, others were defective; and these were
the infirmities of both; but you tell us, That these things concern not Souls.
This is a touch of your Convenient Religion. Pray Sir, are Public Matters
transacted without private men's accession? or in this accession, has
Conscience no concernment? Nay are not the solid practices of Christianity,
such, as the contempt of the World, for the most part, most necessaire and
conspicuous in Wrestling with, and overcoming the great and frequent temptation
of a public sinful course? But O the rare temper of this New device, that both
inwardly elevats to the highest Spiritual abstractions, and outwardly smooths
to a most easy temporizing compliance?

You say further, that the solid Practices of Christianity were scarce ^ver
named, and that virtue was little Preached by us, and far less Practiced: but
why do you make so little Conscience of truth? Your often touching upon this
string, with the presumption of Common ingenuity, which I have and desire to
retain for all men, have made me apply to all conjectures, to find out your
ground for this allegance; but in the end I see it is a plain forgerie. The
Lord knows that I am far from boasting of former Practices, but that in this so
visible a change, attending the present Establishment, from the General
restraint and aw of Sin, that before did oblige even the most profligat, unto a
seeming conformity, unto these confessed aboundings of all manner of
profanitie, which do now fill the Land, you should have the confidence to say^
that virtue was by us little Preached and far less Practiced, is that, which,
I am sure, these of your own way do laugh at, and which, if ever ye return to
the right way ye will weep at.

And yet you proceed, to oppone to us our Saviors Sermons, Particularly that
upon the mount: I will not contend with your Mockeries. I wish that both yours
and ours may reflect on short-comings, and endeavor amendment according to
that pattern. Next you say, That the true hights of Spirituality were as little
preached as the living in abstraction, silence, solitude, and the still
contemplations of God, the becoming dead to all things, and being much in
Secret fastings. Sir you are so much upon your hights, that you see nothing
about you. Pray descend a little and consider that your own Ministers are as
great strangers to these fine expressions of yours, and you and they to the
things signified, to say no worse, as ours are, and much more: And in effect
seeing that you only measure your self by your self, you are not wise; and this
affected noveltie of words does argue little sincerity. But if Communion with
God, fellowship with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ, a heart and
conversation in heaven. Christ our Life, dying daily, victory over the World,
and the like, may relish with you, in this, if Courser, yet Scriptural style,
our Ministers, I am sure, were not unfrequent in pressing of them, and secret
prayers and fastings also, and, I am confident, their Ministry has a seal yet
abiding, which may witness that it has not been unfruitful.

I cannot follow you in your again repeated accusation, as if our Ministers had
only preached a Pharisaick observance of Ordinances, and a bare relyance on
Christ without obedience to his Gospel. These are only your allegeances
destitute of truth. Your next charge is that our Ministers handled nice
subtilties, which they called Cases of Conscience. But Sir, as you grant that
some devout people may be under doubtings, and fears; so in reason, you must
allow, not only a private application for their remedy, but also Public
Doctrine, both necessaire for prevention, and conducible for cure: that in this
there was an excess, I believe few would have imagined, unless you had said
it; Yet when I call to mind, what men of Conscience the generality of your
Party are, and how in effect, unacquainted with, nay declared Enemies to, all
tenderness thereof, if you had termed Conscience it self, and Melancholy
Imagination, as well as Cases of Conscience, nice subtilities, it had added but
little to my wonder. As for what you add That it is unsufferable to hear
people who led but common lives talk of such things: It is a truth which I
have often heard our Ministers assert, as also, that the best way of silencing
all doubts, is, as you speak, to act Faith, renew Repentance, study Holiness,
Humility, and the other great practices of Christianity: Why then are you so
Divisive, as to object things to us, wherein we do not differ? But alas the
reason is too evident; the design to render us Odious must be observed, and
pursued by all Arts; And therefore, when you cannot contradict the Power, that
appeared in, and the fruit of Conversion and Edification, which accompanied our
Ministers preaching, Yet your eye being evil, by carping hints at Methods, and
by unnecessary cautions, you suggest the things, which you have not the
confidence to object: Thus you bid your N. C. See that by Power, he do not mean
a Tone in the voice, A Grimace in the face etc. and by Conversion a change in
Opinion, or outward behavior, influenced by Interest; But Sir, as both in
Power and the fruit of Conversion, our Ministers have been througly made
manifest amongst us; so I must add for their Voice and Gesture, that although
some of them might have been rude in speech, yet not in knowledge: And if your
better breeding, and sight of the Scene, have modelled your Tone and action,
above the rate, as you fancy, of both yours and ours, you but the more mar
its ridiculous gracefulness, by undervaluing others. And as for the
Conversions attending our preachings, many of them are tried and cannot be
blasted by your mocking. I Grant some were proselyted, in whom the Evil Spirit
having by Apostacy re-entered with seven more, they are become more the
Children of the Devil then they were before; but seeing they are now yours,
make them not our reproach.

Your next challenge, is, that we termed our Preachings the word of God, and
you tell us that to call them so, and yet to confess that Ministers may be
mistaken in them, is a Contradiction; But why do you not rather accuse us
plainly, for terming our Ministers the Ministers and Ambassadors of Christ? If
their Preachings be not his message, no doubt they are not his Ambassadors:
and if they be his Ambassadors, how can you deny their preachings in his Name,
to be his Message? These things have such an evident, and convertible
coherence, that I am in a suspense whether to impute this passage, to your
mistake, or not rather to a design to subvert the Ministry: And as many of
your way would have it, to turn all Christ's Preaches unto Royal Orators. As
for your Contradiction, it does no more impugn Preachings then Preachers: for
to call Preachers the Lords Ambassadors. And their Embassy the Word of God,
have the same appearance of inconsistencie, with the infirmity of Mistaking,
wherein you fancy your repugnancie to lie; the truth is then first, that
Ministers are the Lords Messengers; Next that their Preachings in his Name, and
conform to the Warrant of his Word, have not only that derived Authority,
which the Scripture equally imparts to all Rational and sound deductions made
from it, but also, a particular superadded obligation from the Lords
Commission, wherewith the Preacher is Ministerially clothed, whence it clearly
follows, that, as all true Ministers, their Preachings are in his Name, and
ought to be agreeable to his Truth, so, the Preachers their admixed mistakes,
are of no more force, either to deprive Preaching of the name, or these things
therein, that are sound and true, of the special Authority of the Word of God,
then the accidental miscariage of an Ambassador, to make void his mission, in
other things consonant to his instructions. How unsound then is your
insinuation that The text indeed is the Word of God, but Ministers Glosses, (by
which term you mockingly understand all Preaching or Expounding) the words
only of fallible men, as if a Ministers sound interpretation and application
did partake of Nothing special from the Character which he sustains, whereas
you know that not only his Mission, does impresse his words, with his Masters
Authority; but has also many and great Promises of a suitable assistance:
Having thus cleared the Common Cause of the Ministry, and that their
Preachings when sound, are from a special ground the Word of God: That which
you subjoin of Ministers their usurping this name to their Preachings by Way of
Artifice, that thereby they might procure the credit of the Infallible and
Inspired Prophets, is as far from truth, as their diligence in searching of,
and their care of confirming all their Doctrine by the Scriptures, with their
frequent and continual intimations, that the People ought to build all their
Faith upon that sure foundation, are notourly known.

But you have not yet done with our Ministers, you tell us again, that our
great Men were meddling Men, and most of them were very little spiritual in
their conversation, and Seldom in the Commendation of God and Religion to the
People. Sir, omitting your insinuate distinction of Greater and Lesser
Ministers amongst us, which you know we acdnowledge, no further, or otherwise,
then the Lords free Grace and gifts do make it: and passing your accusation of
Meddling, which I have already answered: As to Spirituality of converse, it is
indeed a thing so excellent, and beautiful, that it can never be enough
studied, never enough practiced, and never enough pressed; but the manner and
design of your reflection considered, it is so void of truth and charity
toward Non-conformists, whereof so many have been burning and shining Lights,
and so sadly applicable to your Clergy, the very scume of Men, let be of
Christians, that I can only marvel at, and regret the excess and confidence of
your Malice. Pardon me, if the strangeness of your procedour force me to such
expressions: I protest sincerely, your Methods are so perverse, that I have no
greater difficulty then how to find civil terms, sufficient to detect them:
Thus after you have delivered a groundless and calumnious challenge of our
Leaders, their want of Spirituality, in ordinary discourse, you hold out its
singular usefulness: And falling to question us, as wholly strangers to these
great things of Devotion, and holiness, which you enumerate, you falsely
conclude, truly these things are as little among you, as any party I know:
Well Sir, as I wish heartily that they were more, and that they may still
increase, even to your conviction, which, I am certain, requires a degree
equal to, if not beyond perfection; so, my prayer is, that God who both knows
all the darring and open wickedness and ungodliness of these of your way, and
sees your heart, and weighs your words, may discover unto you the sin of
speaking wickedly, and talking deceitfully against him and his servants.

In the next place, telling us, that we seem very desirous to be noticed in
our Religion, You charge our Communions as tumultuary, disorderly, and
talkative. It Is Answered, that sometime they were numerous, is not denied; but
if you consure Great multitudes their following of Christ as tumultuary, and
disorderly, it is more then the jews ever did: That our running many miles to
them shows us to be Idolizers of Men, your objected opporrunity of the
Sacrament nearer hand, does not prove it: for as we were far from neglecting
nearer occasions, or undervaluing any of the Lords sincere Servants; so, to
acknowledge also and improve the difference of Gifts, which the Lord has
dispensed, savours nothing of Idolizing, and cannot, without palpable envy, be
dissallowed: If in other things I were satisfied, and in the liberty of a free
election, I am confident, that without slighting the call of nearer
invitations, I might choose rather to go ten miles to your Communion, then five
to another, and yet you cannot say that I Idolize you. As to what you object
That at our Communions, all our business, both in preparation and
Participation, was to hear and talk. it is but your misinformation or mistake,
I am su^e previous self-examination (whether by the names or Inward stillness
and recollection I do not indeed well remember) was always most seriously
pressed, and also much practiced, and in the action it self, a short convenient
silence, was the more general custom. As for your other alleged
inconveniences of Crowd and Distraction, these are but the peculiar aversions
of your particular Genius, other more strong and less delicate and nice
Spirits did easily overcome these difficulties.

You further say, that You cannot think them very devout, who love rather to
hear one talk, then to retire inwardly and commune with their own hearts; but
what esteem have you for him, who disliking the hearing of others, and
pretending to inward retirements, makes the talk of these things all his work?
And why do ye without ground accuse us of a preference, whereof we are not
guilty? As we hold both Hearing and Meditation to be duties, and beautiful in
their seasons; so, we endeavored to practice, without either the Partiality
which you object, or its contrary which you incur, O but you add that some
of us will be many hours in Public worship, and perhaps not a quarter of an
hour in secret. That there may be such amongst us, and worse, I nothing doubt;
but if you intend this for an accusation, either against our way, or the
Generality that own it, it is an allegiance, for which our Father who sees in
secret will in due time rebuke you.

Another fault which you find about our Communions is their i^^requencie as
being brought by us from the daily practice of the Apostles, and the after
frequent custom of the whole Church, to once a year. Sir, you know so well the
Churches power, and the differing observations that have been in use, as to
this circumstance of time, that I think although your disatisfaction had been
founded on better grounds; Yet you should have been tender to make of it an
objection. That the Primitive Church did soon f^ll from the first daily
celebration, your own Argument grants: what was the after practice, and is at
present your custom, I need not mention: it is certain that neither the one,
nor the other, do agree to your rule of Weekly Communions. Suppose then our
Church had by a suitable regulation of this matter, designed the greater
solemnity of Gods Ordinance, had this been a licentious admixing^ four own
devices, as you are pleased to term it: but the plain account of the thing,
is, that there was no positive Prescription, as to the times of this
observance, known amongst us. Only, as the Churches of old did Ordain that all
Christians should Communicate, at least once a Year; so our Church did appoint
that at least once, if not tuice, in the year this Sacrament should be
administrate: Now if we liking better a joint then a separate participation of
the people of the same Parish, and knowing that the particular exigences and
desires, possibly incident to private Christians, might be easily supplied in
other places, none being tied to any fixed time, did therefore not so often
celebrate, and for the most part but once a Year, truly I think that the
variation from the former frequencie, was visibly compensed with a greater
advantage of Solemnity^ As for your demands why the Communion was not keept
every Lords day? It Is answered, as there is no command for it, so you have
already heard, that we wanted not reasonable considerations, which did persuade
the contrary. For the hint you give of the strict notice should be taken of
receivers, I have often heard our Church charged with the excess, but never
before with the defect in this particular.

You fall next to censure the posture of sitting in time of Public prayer, as
very irreverent. Sir, not to detain you I am not far from your opinion: For my
own part, and I have many of our way assenting, I dislike sitting in prayer,
(if infirmity and other great inconveniences do not hinder it) and for proof of
it, I add to your answer made to the instance of David's sitting before the
Lord. 1 Chronicles. 17. 16. That he who considers the occasion of David's address,
even the gracious and high exalting message that the Prophet had delivered to
him, with the tenor of his words, expressing rather an astonishing Meditation
of wonders, not able to form it self at first into either direct prayer, or
praise, then any thing else, will find no difficulty to acknowledge that the
decent enough propriety, yea almost the necessity of sitting in such an
oppressing amazement, cannot rationally be drawn in consequence: but as in this
we agree, so I cannot but disagree from you in your overprising and exacting
the postures that you plead for: for though I am convinced that there is an
indecencie, and other inconveniences in sitting, for which I wish, that
wherever it may be, it were wholly disused; Yet I am far from offending at,
let be imposing upon, these who of no intended irreverence, but for the most
part from a just disgust of the too great weight has been laid upon such
circumstances, do innocently practice It. I confess that kneeling and standing
in prayer, are in the Scriptures very frequently mentioned: but as thereby the
thing is only circumstantially noted, and no where, no not in these
invitations, O come let us worship and bow down (where the Gesture is only
mentioned as the more Ordinary, and the substance exhorted to) designedly
pressed; So there are also upon record, such clear instances of an undetermined
liberty in these matters, apparent enough in our Lord his Disciples and
Company, their Ordinary sitting down to meat, and blessing and giving thanks in
that posture, that I cannot bu^ strange at your bringing any of these practices
under an obligation: But that which I do most admire, is, that you who just now
were telling us that even heavenly Public pra^ers, ^asts, Communions, keepin^
the Sabbath, and the like, are but external devotion p, 16. And spiritual
things of a very lo^ syze and degree^ such as cannot car^^on to perfection p
20. should on a sudden descend so far below your spiritual hights and great
Christian Practices, as to debate about Sitting or Standing, as the Cardinal
points of Religion Nay to such a heat, that though you do not say, you would
separate upon this ground from these Si^ters; Yet in substance you say no less,
then that you would be content that they did separate from You, and so do both
approve and wish for a separation: Sir, you are discovered beyond the
disguising of all your shifts: God grant you to consider it. And also how near
this does approach, to what our Lord says, in almost the like case, This
people honors me with their Lips, but their heart is far from me, howbeit,
in vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men: for
laying aside the Commandments of God, ye hold the Tradition of men.

Your next reflection is upon the Family Worship that was so frequent in former
times, and here you tax Masters of Families, For Expounding Scripture, and
wish that we do not overvalue other lawful exercises. Sir, as to what you make
your N. C. say of Expounding Scripture, I look upon it as a mere suggestion of
your own, that you may find something to reprehend even in our best
performances: You know all that was allowed in the directions for
Familie-Worship, was, that Masters with their Families should read the
Scriptures with understanding, and by mutual conference Edify one another,
neither are you against Expounding by Masters, who are very intelligent: And
for the practice, it was in effect so rare, and imperfect, that I am con^ident
your accusation of excess to most N. C. will only prove a check for their
deficiencie. As for your Wish I verily think it good, but no good wish. When
the calling upon the Name of the Lord in Families is now so universally and
irreligiously flighted, and by many openly mocked at, think you it a season for
such over-cautelous advices? Nay Sir, in the so sad and Lamentable decline of
this duty to the extreme of neglect and contempt, groundlesly to caution
against the other, of an overvalue, is but to harden the wicked, who forget
God, and weaken the hands of such as seek his face in sincerity.

From this point, in the eagerness of your pursuit of the people of God, you
pass to private meetings. And with you I can grant, that they have had both
their use and abuse, I can grant also that, in the settled plenty of pure
Ordinances, to bring Church-exercises to Chambers; or private conference to a
public confluence, is (in my opinion) superfluous and affected; Not that I
would have Religion wholly astricted in its exercises, to Churches, Families,
or to Men's Closets: but ^s I acknowledge a communication and speech always with
Grace, to be the very ^alt of Christians their converse, and would judge
nothing more becoming then to see Religion so seriously and constantly minded,
that men were pursuing and observing its occasions more then these, either of
bussiness or recreation; so I think to contrive and keep particular meetings
with a visible affectation of singularity were a thing justly to be avoided;
and thus in our better times, it was commonly both held and followed. But Sir,
ye must suffer me withal to tell you, that as Satan had a special envy at
these, perceiving how much, when in singleness and sincerity gone about, and
performed with just caution, they did contribute to the grouth, comfort, and
mutual edification of the Saints; and therefore to make the thing it self
odious, he abused the well-meaning honesty of some, and used the sinister
designs of others to a turning of these out of their proper channels, that so
they might miss of their just ends: though I must tell you, that to talk so
much of these justly reprehensible escapes, without encouraging to the duty,
whereby so many have reaped advantage, seems to be a fault no less
challengeable in a Minister of the Gospel, one part of whose work it is, if he
be a worker together with God, to exhort his hearers to comfort themselves
together, and edify one another, then any of these abuses amongst private
Persons in such meetings, against which you with so much eagerness exclaim: it
would no question much better become one careing naturally for ye flock of
Christ, and carrying as a faithful Feeder, to be assiduous in pressing the
duty, careful in directing, and deeply affected with any advantage that
Satan got over the Saints, in the use of such a mean, then to publish to the
world his victories, that the thing it self might pass for a vice. As for the
practice of Private Meetings in evil times, all your supposed and accidental
inconveniences, to which even the best of things are obnoxious, are far from
making me condemn that, which to the Lord is very acceptable, and to his People
profitable, Mal. 3. 16. So that, if the inten^^ment and application of your
Discou^se be levelled at our latter customs, seeing you cannot truly charge
them with any of these evils which you mention, and since your opinion does
clearly depend upon your different judgment as to the main. I must take
liberty to dissent from you, with the same confidence wherewith you assert it,
and withal tell you that I wish their frequencie did keep a proportion with
the deep distress of the People of God, in this penury of pure public
preaching; and then, I am sure, we should have ten for one, and if so, there
were ground of hope that they might, in these Private Meetings, pray your
Intruders out of their public capacities, that so these, who now dare not be
over^heard in their meetings to mourn for the desolation of the Sanctuary, and
the departings of the G^ory, might bless him together in these Assemblies, out
of which they are thrust and keept, and might once more, as of old, be made
glad in his house of Prayer.

For a close to this Dialogue, you make your N. C. boast of the glory of our
Unity, to the effect that you may the more foully set out the divisions that
fell out amongst us, and to do it with the greater advantage, you endeavor
prudently to remove by a preface, the suspicion of what you are resolved to
practice; and therefore you tell us, You love not the Spirit of detraction; but
whether you be acted by it or not, let these Epithets you give us, of
Unchristian, Malicious, Brethren in Cruelty, and Implacable, bear witness: for
my part, though I do so much detest divisions, that I am content to let your
representation pass, with all its excess, on purpose, that to all concerned
they may appear more odious, and that if it be the Lords will, even your
reproachful tongue, may smite the guilty into Repentance; yet for the
vindication of the truth, I must say, that such has been its bad fate, and
worse reception in the Earth, that I should sooner judge Division; then Unity,
to be the sign of Orthodoxie, to be found among a party; Perfect unity in
truth, is a blessing so great, that it is reserved for Glory: If you think that
our Lord came to send peace on Earth, remember his own words; I came not to
send peace but a sword, and to set a man at variance against his Father, etc.
Schisms must be, nay were the very first temptations and trial of the Church,
against which all the Light and Power of the Apostles could not guard it. As
therefore Sir, you do falsely make us to glory in our Unity, so, take head lest
by making division our charge, you do not far more calumniously reproach the
Christian Faith. Do not imagine that I do hereby patronize divisions; Nay I
know and am persuaded, that because there is nothing more repugnant to the
Genius, and hurtful to the progress of Truth, then Contentions, therefore it
is, that the Devil has even labored most to infest it: with these
temptations; but I would have you to understand, that seeing these strifes,
whereof you accuse us, did certainly proceed from the remaining dreg, and
adventitious mixture of ane Evil Spirit, relaxing former Engagements, remitting
the first Zeal, and not a little bending to your way, and from men's corruptions
on all hands, although that you could say that our course did take away Peace,
and in place thereof being War; yet it would no more infer the Spirit that
moved therein to be contentious, then you can justly object against the blessed
Gospel of Peace, these Schisms, hatred, and tumults, wherewith in all Ages it
has most ^^^ocently filled the World. As therefore our Lord does make it the
great characteristick of himself, blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended
in me, so let not the heats and contests about Tru^^, affright you from its
search, or foolishly induce you, unconcernedly, without disstinction, to
condemn all Contenders; but rather more engage you to seek and hold it fast,
and highly to esteem all its zealous adherents, where ever you perceive the
Devil to best^^re himself most actively against it: Surely if this disposition
were in you, the offense you seem to take, either at the greater oppositions
betwixt the Friends and Adversaries of the Lords work, or these humane
infirmities wherewith his Servants amongst themselves hapened to be exercised,
would soon be removed. As for you^ Veneration, whereof you judge us unworthy,
we acclaime it not, we wish your Most Reverend and Right Reverend did truly
merit it, which is all the Scolding wherewith I repay your Malice.

The third DIALOGUE Answered.
SIR, you cause your N. C. begin this conference with so just an animadversion
upon your ^eeming pretenses to some extraordinary sublime thing and real
deficiencies, not only in being guilty o^ our common evils, but also in ^ou^
want o^ these good things, which you acknowledge were amongst us, that I cannot
but wi^h you had reserved as much ingenuity to your self in your answer, as
you make, and acknowledge him to speak truth in his alledgance. But in place of
considering his challenge, of the ev^ls of your Way, and the sad and strange
alteration it has procured, in this poor Church, you subti^ly labor to evade,
by telling, That you are not so engaged, as blindly to desend any interest: you
are so far Episcopal, as to love the Order, and submit to it, but you have not
sworn fealty to any Sect: your prayer is, that all distinguishing names were
buried: you do not patronize, but mourn in Secret, for the sins, that are
amongst you, adding That Non-conformists are guiltier of the present loos^^sse
then perhaps they think. And thus, after that in your second Dialogue, you have
not only riped up, mis-construed, and exaggerated to the hight, the infirmities
of the Men o^ our side; but employed all the invention of calumny, to render
them odious, and then charged all these things directly upon our Way; when you
see a retortion appear, you instantly decline it, by insinuating the evils to
be the faults of men, and no ways chargeable upon your cause. I will not
complain of this unequal measure, neither shall I take notice, that, when you
apprehend a stress, for all your inveighing against the one, and love to the
other, you can for a shift alleviate both Prelacie and Presbytrie to Empty
names, and shreud your self in the Sanctuary of ease the convenience of your
new divised latitude.

But I must remember you, that as the thing we contend for is an Ordinance of
Jesus Christ, both institute for, and greatly commended by the effectual
propagation of the Gospel, and conspicuous advancement of holiness; so the
ignorance and licentiousness, which (as the shadow does the body) do attend the
prevailing of your Order, are not more the imputation of men, then the bitter
and corrupt fruits, that undeniably demonstrate the corruptnes of that plant of
Prelacie, not planted by God, whereby they are produced. ye shall know them by
their fruits is a Test for Courses, as well as Persons, and that a good tree
brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit, is no
less applicable to, and clearly verified in, the one then in the other. The
pure ordinances of a Gospel Ministry, and Church Government, according to our
Lords appointment; as they have his warrant and promise; so they may expect his
blessing; but Lordly Prelacie the unwarrantable invention of man, accomodate to
a politic or worse design, and carried on by palpable avarice, pride and
falsehood, for the reducing of the just liberty of preaching, and due respect to
Conscience, unto a subserviencie to men's lusts, and secular interests, cannot
be more attended, with the evil effects of ignorance, profanitie, and
irreligion; then it has a peculiar influence, directly productive thereof: and
therefore Sir, as you say that you are so far Episcopal as to love the order (I
suppose because it is Ordered) and submit to it, because you see that rest is
good; so ^ entreat you to be so far Rational, as to consider that Presbytery
and Prelacie are not mere distinguishing names; but such realities as have
even in our experience produced most Important and different effects, and then
I question not, but the sad and woeful consequences of that abounding Sin, and
Profaneness, which from your Prophets are gone forth into all the land, will
render you so far Christian as to know by such fruits, the corruptnes of your
Episcopacie, that has brought them forth^ and without adjuring you to any
Sect, turn you not only to be a mou^ner for the sins of your parti^ but a
serious supplicant, that the accursed cause thereof may be removed,

But you say that Non-conformists are guilty of the present loosnesse who. 1.
By making Religion a cloak to so many State-designes, make too many suspect
Religion to be but a design o^ it self. 2. by driving people to an outward
compliance in forms, cause them to nauseat at all Religion: but. 3. and
mostly, by their waxing cold in love, to which our Savior plainly knits the
abounding of iniquity. Sir, as to your two first reasons, If I should as
lightly deny them, as you do affirm them, you should be fully answered; but
this your accustomed confidence of objecting to Non-conformists these things,
whereof their Adversaries are mostly, if not only, guilty, obliges me to a
further reflection: That Religion may be made a cloak to State-designes, nay,
to the greatest villainies, is certainly one of the most grievous of these
offenses, because of which a woe is pronounced to the world; but that this has
not been so much the accidental practice of any Person of our way, as the very
substance of your whole course, is obvious to the meanest Consideration. How
austerly our first Reformers were denied to all Worldly advantages, and how
faithful to the Crown, and then infant King, I leave it to the candid and
impartial consideration of all sober Men, not preferring the vain pretenses,
made for perverted, yea profaned Authority in Odium of Truth, to the most
convincing evidences, of all impotencie and wickedness, that can be instanced
from any History: The next passage that occurres of these who on our part in a
most steadfast simplicity, did assert, and establish Presbytrie, until the year
1596. and of others, who on your part, by Fraud, Perjury and Violence, did, in
compliance with King James, his design of Complementing the English Clergy, on
the one hand, and attaining to a greater freedom, of indulging and gratifying
the Popish party, on the other (both supposed necessaire for assuring, the
then much courted Succession) endeavor, the overthrow of Presbytrie, as being
too straight for such crooked courses, is an instance against your first
reason, which I am bound in Charity to think, you did not call to mind: sure I
am, that which you object, of our aiming at State-designes, change but State,
into Court, and you will find it was so far from being our guilt, that it was
King James his regret, on our behalf, that honest Men would not be thereby
tempted. But it is like, the times you hint at, are these of our late Troubles:
Wherein, though I acknowledge, that the feigned concurse, and corrupt designs
of some, did in their occasion discover themselves; Yet, it cannot be denied,
that such was, and is, the truth of the work of God, and steadfastness of its
faithful Adherers, that even unto this day, through all the various
temptations of Malignancie, on the one hand, and Sectarianisme on the other,
both it, and they, do retain their integrity. Really Sir, when I consider, that
neither the tempting terror of the prevailing Malignant interest in the Years
1645. and 48. nor the succeeding victory, usurpation and very plausible and
insinuating offers of the Sectarians, with all these strange revolutions that
have since happened, have moved the Lords faithful remnant in the Land, from
that well tempered, and justly balanced fear of God, and honor to the King,
which from the beginning they professed, and do hold forth in the Covenant, and
all their Public actings, Your accusation of the work of God, as a State
design, appears to me a very palpable inconsistencie, and ridiculous calumny;
to design State changes or advantages, and yet, to omit and slight all the
probable, yea and possible opportunities, of compassing them, are things, which
Malice it self cannot affirm to be compatible. As for these, who not being
upright, nor stable in the Lords Covenant, have, according to the impulse of
their own worldly designs, turned and figured themselves, unto every sort of
compliance, they are now so unexpectedly, and wholly almost, become of your
way, that there needs no other evidence, of the easy accommodation, that all
self^seekers, and time-servers do find in it: but wherefore do I seek to
retort? Can there be any thing more certain, then that as corrupt Court
designs, have only imposed this heavy Yoke of Prelacie, upon the Lords Church,
and People amongst us; so such have been, and are the wicked and ungodly
practices of its Lords, and their dependents, and the vast dissonancie of their
lives, even from their own Canons and profession; that I do not so much wonder
at your impudence, in objecting against our course; The tempting of many to
suspect Religion to be but a design of it self, as that the monstrousness of
your Hierarchy has not scandalized the whole world to account all Religion but
a cheat. 2. You say by driving of people to an outward compliance in forms, we
have caused them to Nauseat at all Religion. Who would think that this were the
accusation of Non-conformists, who from the very beginning of Reformation, have
been continually vexed, by your impositions; and not rather conceive, the
objection to be made by them, against your violent pressing of Cross,
Surplice, Service Book, Book of Canons, and other ^rash, wherewith the Lords
people have been uncessantly urged, as the main, yea only things of Religion?
But I cannot stand upon every one of your calumnies, the Lord deliver you from
this perverse spirit: Only if by the driving objected, you do understand our
causing the people of the Land to stand steadfast, and adhere to the Lords
Covenant, whereby they were formerly obliged, it is already fully answered.

But, that which you say is of greatest weight, is, that we are guilty of the
waxing cold in Love, to which our Savior knits the abounding of Iniquity: And
this challenge you qualify, by our judging you in Matters which are doubtful
disputations, spreading tattles^ of you, as you call them, carrying sowrly
toward you, and casting odious aspersions upon you, as Apostates and the like,
with petulant railings, and this you add, is a greater persecution, then any
little suffering of ours in the World. Sir, though I cannot sooth you as you do
your felf, by the mouth of your N. C. (whose tongue you teach to speak lies) in
your smooth words of deceit, by telling you, that too much of what you speak is
true; Yet I heartily wish, there were more Charity on all sides; but where you
accuse us, of waxing cold in Love, and thence would infer our accession, to
the present abounding iniquity, I would first have you to read the text aright,
which runeth thus, And because iniquity shall abo^nd, the love of many shall
wax cold, which is a plain inversion of your causality. 2. Admitting your
ground to be good, I seriously wish, without vanity, that the waxing cold in
love, both toward God and your Neighbor, were not more your sin, then ours;
then had we not been scorched into a blackness, and consumed almost into
ashes, by these fiery trials, kindled, blown and kept into a flame, by the
Grandees of your way (pourtrey them as you please) whose heat speaks them to be
set on fire, against the Work, People, and Interests of God. 3. To call the
causes of our Differences matters which are doubtful Disputations, when both
by Scripture, Reason, and Solemn Engagements, and many sad experiences, they
are so fully determined, is indeed, to put false glosses upon things; and to
pretend to be a good Christian, and to acclaime the charity and kindness of
others, in an avoued persistence, in open Perjury, Opposition to the Cause of
God, and persecution of his People, is it not to wipe your mouth, and say you
have done no wickedness?

But you say it is from the spirit of the Devil to fasten the brand of
Apostasy upon the leaving of a party, and that to grow wiser is not to play
the changling, nor is a conscientious obedience to standing Laws time-serving.
Sir, as I love neither to irritate, nor prejudicate by hard words; so I approve
not either your or your N. C. tattles; but if to leave God, and not a Party,
be Apostasy? if to forsake the way, and Truth of God, be to play the
changling? and if to obey, and conform to mischief, framed by a Law, be
time-serving? I am sadly apprehensive, that, what you account to be, but the
Malice of the spirit of the Devil, shall one day be found, the Verdict of the
Spirit of God; Whether it be thus or not, in our controverted differences, let
the things themselves, and the issue of our discourse declare? What you tell us
of the primitive application, of the word Apostasy, is no restriction of its
proper acceptance: And for your other petty conceits, in this place, with your
mock-complaint, of the persecution of a just, but disdained censure, they are
not of that moment, to stop my procedour, to that part of your conference,
which concerns Episcopacie.

This head you say falls asunder in two, the one a general consideration of
that Government, the other, supposing it were amiss, how far it ought to be
separated from: And for the Government, in place of all these weighty and
unanswerable objections, viz. the want of our Lords Warrant. 2. Repugnancie to
his, and his Apostles Precepts and practice of restless labor, simplicity,
equality, humility and contempt of the world, etc. 3. Disconformity to the
first, and purer times of the Primitive Church. 4. The pride, avarice,
usurpation, and cruelty, to which, it naturally tends, and has been depraved:
And lastly, these evil and bitter fruits, of profanity, ignorance, and
superstition, that it has ever in its prevalencie produced, which have been
charged upon, and made out against it, by many of the Lords faithful
Witnesses; you make your N. C. faintly and poorly to aledge, I cannot think
that Churchmen should be called Lords, and be great Persons; that this is a
desingenuous prevarication, is obviously manifest. Yet such is the weakness of
your cause, that the meanest argument, you could put in your N. C. mouth, is
stronger then your answer, wherein you tell us, That this belongs not to the
thing it self; but is an addition of the Christian Magistrate. But I must
remember you first, that Churchmen and Ministers, are not capable of every
addition: Civil offices, and administrations, are very lawfully bestowed by the
Magistrate, upon fit Recipients: but as for Ministers, they are not only an
intolerable distraction, many degrees above that charitable employment which
the Apostles could not bear, but so inconsistent with the nature, manner, and
end of their Ministry, that, even our Lord, while in this capacity, does
bruskly decline, to be so much as an amicable trister: And therefore to justify
Bishops titles, from this ground, that they are extrinsick additions, or from
their civil place, and voice in Parliament, is no ways concludent. 2. Though
this were not; yet, I am confident, that who ever considers, the received use,
and import of this title of Lord amongst us, will find it an addition, as full
of fastuous vanity, for Ministers, as the title of Rabbi, (even admitting that
its excess did lie another way) therefore excepted against, and prohibited by
our Lord, was unlawful for the Apostles: but 3. This title is not an addition
flowing from the Christian Magistrate, as you pretend; but the very product, of
that pride, and usurpation, that at first exalted Prelacie, which, as as first,
it was assumed by the connivence of, if not, rather forced from the Civil
Magistrate; so now, by the Bishops, it is only derived from him, in consequence
of that Supremacy, which both falsely against our Lord Jesus Christ, and
traitorously to the Pope, in this respect their proper head, they have, for
their own conveniencie, transferred upon him.

But you add, that we consider not that, Sir, and Lord, Gentleman and Nobleman,
differ but in degree: since therefore, a Minister by Office, ^hes the temporal
honor of a Gentleman, why may not the temporal honor of a Lord, be as well
put upon a Bishop? Sir, if you were as innocent of the vanity, as you seem to
be ignorant of the Nature of these titles, Our controversy were at an end: a
Faithful Minister, truly minding his work, values not himself upon points of
Herauldri^; to acquit himself as becomes an Ambassador, for the Glory of
Christ, is all his ambition, and truly honorable, beyond the accession of all
temporal dignity, If it were not so, I could further inform you, that a
Gentleman and Nobleman, do not only gradually differ, but are prorsus disparata
wholly different. The King, we say, can make the one, but cannot make the
other. I grant the privileges of a Gentleman, are commonly supposed to belong
to Ministers, and decent civility may respect them, as of that rank, but
really, there appears to me such a disparity, betwixt these things, and a
Bishops receiving, let be the usurping, of the temporal, and more eminent
honor or Lord specially as above his Brethren, that if a Minister as such,
should but tenaciously lay claim to the title of a Gentleman, I would think it
not only very misbecoming his Profession, but a plain forfeiture of the
pretended privilege.

But, your N. C. urges to better purpose, that Bishops should not Lord it over
Gods heritage: And you for Answer, tell us, That by Lording, is meant a
tyrannical domination, and not a tittle. Next, That Gods Heritage, applied by
us to the Clergy, is not in the Text, bearing only not Lording over their Lots
or Divisions, to which you add That Whatever argument we use to put down
Bishops from being as Noblemen, will also prove Ministers not born such, not
to be Gentlemen. Sir, to put this foolish trifling about titles, first by hand,
Bishops neither are Noblemen, nor ought to be esteemed quasi Noblemen: because
1. The thing is altogether incompetent, and the title without the thing is a
vanity. 2. Either title or thing, as it exalts them above their Brethren, is
sinful, and the very reverse of our Lords Command: Whosoever will be chief
among you let him be your Servant not your Lord. He that is chief, let him be
as he that Serves not as a Nobleman: How then can ye acclaime either thing or
title? 3. The title of Lord in its Ecclesiastic usurpation, has been, and is
so grossly abused by Churchmen, above all that our Lord reprehends, in the
pride of the Pharisees, not only to the pretending to the uppermost rooms at
feasts, and the chief seats in the Synagogues; but the chief places in States,
and the first banches in Parliaments, not only to Greetings in the Merca^s, and
to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi, but to ride next to the Honors, and be
called Grace, Grace, that, seriously I marveil how you or any Christian,
regarding our Lords express words, can justify it? That these reasons do not
militate against the civil, and ordinary respect commonly paid to all
Ministers, and men of any fashion, without either a vain usurpation in the
receivers, or any other thing, then that courteous mutua^l preference,
commended by the Apostle in the givers, and which without falling into the
ravings of the Quakers, their austerity, you cannot from our Lords words
redargue, I think it needless to resume. Now you say that by Lording,
prohibit to Churchmen, a Tyrannical domination is only meant, why do you thus
offer to impose, contraire both to the import of the word, and tenor of the
Scripture? the word used by Peter is (...), and the very same used by our Lord
Math. 20. Whence Peter himself learned the Prohibition, that it signifies not
to Tyrannize, bu^ simply authoritative Dominari, to rule with Authority, all
Lexica attest; Neither does the proposition (...) joined to (...) import more
of force, then what does more expressively denote, and distinguish the dominion
of Empire and Authority, from that of propriety: As for the tenor of
Scripture, that it repugnes to your exposition is manifest 1. Because that
where Math. in this passage uses the compound (...), Luke does indifferently
use the simple (...), as of the same import to the present purpose, by which
your gloss, of a tyrannical domination is deprived of all shadow of ground. 2.
Because our Lord by both words, does only prohibit such a domination, and
authority amongst his Disciples, as was exercised amongst the Gentiles by their
Princes, and which they who were called their Benefactors did use over them,
but certain it is, that neither was the dominion of the Princes of the
Gentiles, allowedly or commonly tyrannick; nor is it our Lords purpose in this
place, to brand them with such a character. 3. The positive Command plainly set
down, and enforced by our Lords own example, is too evident, to leave any man
hesitant, as to the Prohibition: But it shall not be so among you, but
whosoever will be great among you^ truly great in virtue and reward, let him
be your Minister: Let him exercise the Ministry committed to him, by way of
humble and painful service, denied to all worldly advantages, and neither
affect, nor assume the Grandour, and Authority of Civil Governors. Even as the
Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to Ministere, and to give his
life, etc. and made himself of no reputation (contemning his Gentility, and not
valuing his Nobility) but took upon him the form of a Servant: Sir, do we
indeed believe that this is commanded, and proposed for a pattern to Gospel
Ministers? And yet it is not only most certainly so, but also undeniable, that
if there were in Ministers and Churchmen, that same Spirit of Obedience to
God, and love to Souls, which was in him, who accounted it his meat and drink
to do the will of him that sent him, and to finish his work, and if they had
the same eye, and regard, to the joy set before them, which he had, who is the
Author and ^inisher of our Faith, it could not be other ways. For my part, I
think a serious reflection on these things, is not only enough to confound for
ever, the ease, vanity, and pomp of aspiring Prelates, but to make the best of
Ministers ashamed, to appear so much above their Master, even in their indulged
honesties, and conveniences. But 4. Because the place that you touch is taken
from Peter, see how it also agrees with that of Math. Feed the flock of God
etc. Not as being Lords or Lording, over Gods heritage, but as being Ensamples:
where it is evident, that the adversative, does not only reject your Gloss, of
a tyrannick domination; But by commanding rather to lead and instruct by
example, then to rule by Authority, hold forth the same humble and simple
Ministry, to be enjoined here, which by our Lord was before recommended. The
next thing you answer, is, that Gods heritage applied by us to the Clergy, is
not in the Text, Pray you Sir, how came this in your head, that we apply the
title of Gods heritage to the Clergy, or own them under this name? Know you
not, that the usurping of this prerogative, both by your, and the Popish
Churchmen, has been always esteemed by us, an high arrogance? As for your
pretending to correct our Translation, Pray Sir, be sober, and remember the
respect which you bear to the Authors. 2. I grant the Greek Verbatim ^^ndered
seems to sound, neither as exercising Lordly authority over the Lots by which
as your interpretation of a tyrannical domination is disproved, so, even your
pretended exactness ( Your being wanting^ is exceeded. 3. Since the Lords
People are certainly here meant, whether you understand them to be termed (...)
lots, in order to their respective Pastors, who^e ^ortitions, and divisions
they are, or as being Gods heritage, according to the usual signification of
the singular (...) heritage^ and the clear Synonymous import of the word (...)
in the following part of the verse, but being Ensamples to the flock it matters
nothing, as to our present business, but plainly shows your impertinent
curiosity. However, I wish you to consider, that as we condemn the worldly, and
pompous usurpations of Prelates, above their own degree, and over their
Brethren, so, we most of all condemn their spiritual Tyranny, in Lording over
the Consciences of Gods People, whom they cease not now, as always, to vex
with their Pharisaick imposing, and exacting of implicit obedience to vain
Traditions and humane inventions, more then obedience to the Commandments of
God, as will afterward appear.

Your N. C. proceeds to say that his chief quarrel against Bishops, is, that
they are a function of man's devising, and no where instituted by God. To this
you think fit to answer, by way of retortion, telling us of our great, but
vain pretenses, to a jus divinum in several things: As first, in the matter of
Lay Elders, thus Sir you deall wittily, when you can do no better^ seeing you
cannot confirm your own opinion, you endeavor at lest to subvert your
adversary; but before I enter with you upon particulars, I must tell you
first, that Presbyterians in pleading for a jus divinum, do not pret^nd to a
posi^tive, and express prescription from Scripture, of all the smaller points
and circumstances, either of decency or order, requisite to their Government
and Discipline, in as much, as, the regulation of these, being abundantly
provided for, by the general rules revealed, and the things themselves, and
their use, such as ingenuous persons cannot probably mistake, the want of
express warrants, in all or any such particulars, cannot be justly cavilled at
as a defect: 2. That it had better become the sobriety, that you require of
your N. C. for you to have answered, what many worthy Men have written, for the
jus divinum of Presbytery, then to have passed all with the empty censure of
your own airy character of big talking, and minding it as little, as any could,
to the effect, you may amuse your poor N. C. with a fear of your conceited
quiblings; but leaving these things with as confident an estimation, as your
undervaluing is vain, and groundless, to the impartial perusal of judicious
Readers, I do only here premise, that, whoever abstractly and seriously
considers, the clear light, and obvious project of the Gospel, will of
necessity find. 1. That our Lord Jesus by virtue of that Kingdom, and All
Power given to him, in Heaven and in Earth, did, for the carrying on, and
prospering of his pleasure, the Salvation of sinners, appoint, in the Persons
of his Apostles, a perpetual Ministry in his Church, the sum of whose
charge, is both severally and jointly, to take heed, to oversee, and feed the
Church of God, and the chief part and duty of which office, is, to Preach and
Teach, and consequently to reprove, rebuke, exhort, remit and retain, bind and
loose etc. in which things, the heads of Doctrine, and Discipline, with their
immediate power, and warrant from Jesus Christ, and their connex^on, and
dependence betuixt themselves, do certainly consist, and are clearly held out.
2: As the Apostles were all the Ministers (waving the matter of the Seventie,
whose mission and employment was only local, and preparatorie, unto every
City, and place, whether he himself would come, and to say the Kingdom of God
is come nigh unto you, and de facto, ended at their return, Luk 10. 1. 9. and
17.) appointed by Christ, and in them, the order, office, and full pattern of
the Gospel Ministry established, (...) even unto the end of the world, so they
are by our Lord vested with such equal power, so expressly prohibited the
aspiring to, or usurping these degrees, lawful and allowed in secular
dignities, and so enixely commanded the lowliest humility and submission
conceivable, not only in their personal conversation, but in their Ministry,
that to introduce an imparity, either of Power, Dignity, or stated
Pre-eminence, amongst Gospel Ministers, is plainly to reject, and deny our
Lords institution, and ordinance. 3. That although the Apostles were singular
above their successors, in many respects, such as an infallible assistance in
the discharge of their Ministry, eminency of Gifts, an unconfined exercise,
an universal oversight, and the privilege, not only of our Lords peculiar and
chosen Witnesses, but of being the spiritual Fathers, and Authors of
conversion, to almost the whole Christian Church; yet were these prerogatives
only temporary, and necessarily requisite, and suited to, or depending upon the
particular exigence of the Gospels first propagation, and so far from changing,
or innovating that equality, parity and lowliness of Ministers, most manifest
from our Lords command and appointment, that on the contraire, these other
advantages, hindered not the Apostles, to respect and acknowledge the Pastors
of particular Churches, as partakers with them of the same Ministerial power,
their fellow laborers, Brethren (not in the bare name, as your Prelates scorn
their Curates, and the Pope in his pretended sevus servorum Dei, the whole
Roman Church) Compresbyters, and in the Pastoral charge, altogether their
equals. 4. As the power of Government, consisting in the Authoritative deciding
of Controversies, according to the word of God, the due application of
Ecclesiastic Discipline, and Censures, and the right regulation of all other
things, pertaining to the Ministerial function, is clearly imported in the
Command of Feeding, and Over-seeing, beside its natural inseparability from
the conduct of every rational, let be Christian, institution and Society, and
consequently only assistent, and secondarie to the other offices of the
Ministry; so, the Lords command of that most lowly submission, and
simplicity, incapable of the very notion of imparity, which he opposes even to
that lawful Authority, and dignity allowed in civils, does in such a peculiar
manner, regard the exercise of this Governing Power, that whether it be more
absurd, to introduce a stated degree of Superiority and Dignity among
Ministers, in the point of Government, or to separate and exalt Government,
from and above the office of Preaching, to which it is subservient, and to
appropriate it to certain Ministri-prelati, above others, can hardly be
determined, I need not here caution concerning ruling Elders, seeing the more
full description of Ecclesiastic Government, is here given, in order to
Ministers, in which these Elders being only partial sharers, it is not more
agreeable to their warrant, then suitable to this position, 5. As the grounds
of the equality and parity of Ministers by us asserted, are by these truths
plainly held out; so that superiority of Power, though still Ministerial,
competent to the meetings of the Brethren, as well over the several
constituent members, as over the Church according to their warrant hereafter
declared, is thereto very consistent, and thereby mostly established: whether
these things, all evident in the Doctrine, and practice of Christ and his
Apostles, do not fairly exhibit, the principles and platform of a
Presbyterian Ministry and its Ministerial parity, Let men judge.

Really Sir, when I consider Preaching, to be the main office, even our Lords
own commission, and great erand into the world, Discipline to be dependent upon
it, and wholly referable to its end, and a simple Ministerial Government, only
allowed for the regulation and advancement of both, and when I do remember,
that neither the glorious excellency of the Lord Jesus, hindered him to be
amongst his Disciples, as he who served; nor did the many advantages of the
Apostles, and others extraordinarily gifted, and accordingly employed and sent
out, as their assistents, requisite in the Churches infancy, make them assume
to themselves, or endeavor to settle in the Church, any superior Order, above
the degree of preaching Elders, and Overseers, whom they always respected as
their equals, in the work of the Gospel: And thirdly when I call to mind, that
wherever a Church came to be gathered, the Apostles did either by themselves,
as at Lystra, Iconium and Antioch, or by their fellow laborers (as Timothy at
Ephesus, and Titus in Crete; there left and appointed by Paul for the work, and
charged to leave the place when called) therein ordain Elders, without any
imparity, or higher order, and that Paul after, having testified that he had
keep back nothing profitable, nor shuned to declare all the Counsel of God; but
showed them all things, did commit to the Elders of Ephesus, the full charge
and oversight of the Church of God, without appointing any Angel. Prelat over
them: And lastly when I reflect how that in the beginnings of the Gospel at
Jerusalem, all things almost were acted by Common counsel: that where, and
when, the Christian name did first take place, there and at the same time, we
find a Presbytery of Prophets and teachers assembled, and acting jointly, and
by the Command of the Holy Ghost, sending out even the greatest of the
Apostles, as subject to them, that Paul imposes hands with the Presbytery,
and terms it their deed, and Peter exhorts Elders, as his fellows and their
Compresbyter; when I say I ponder these things^ they do make me assuredly
conclude, the Ministry and Government of the Church in the way of Presbytery,
to be as much Iuris Divini, as it is opposite to, and removed from your
Hierarchy. Having thus discovered the foundation, and traced the undeniable
lineaments of Presbytery in the Word of God, I may not insi^t upon the
inconsonant deformities of Prelacie, only this I must say, that though Prelacie
were not attended, with many and great corruptions, and in its exaltation (mark
it lest you think me injurious to good men) had not been always enemy to
Religion, and Godliness; Yet a superior Order of Churchmen, usurping from the
Pastors of the flock of God, the Ministerial Power of Jurisdiction, and the
only right of Ordination, and acclaiming to themselves the sole management of
Government, as their proper work, with dignity and authority over their
Brethren, has neither warrant, nor vestige in the Scripture of the New
Testament: but is so palpably the invention of man, that, it is not a greater
wonder, that the Devil should have improved it to all that pride, avarice,
wickedness and villainy, which it has produced, then it is a mystery, how the
world should have been thereby imposed upon, and have endured, all its rapine,
sacrilege and usurpation, under the pretext of Religion, to which it is so
repugnant.

I come now to try how you impugn the jus divinum, which we assert for Lay
elders, and other matters condescend^d up on by you, and therefore hitherto by
me not touched: You say Lay Elders are founded on no Scripture, as the most
judicious amongst us acknowledge; And you wonder, that when we urge from the
Apostles giving rules only for Bishops, and Deacons, that Diocesans must be
shu^fled out, how we do not also see, that ruling Elders, are not there. Who
these most judicious amongst us in Scotland, may be, who deny Lay or rather
Ruling Elders, to have any Scripture warrant, seeing your own N. C. is none of
the Number, I cannot apprehend; but for your wonder, I think it may be easily
satisfied, if you will but consider, that it is not from the simple omission of
Diocesans, in this Text, that we exclude them from the Church: but since it is
manifest from the Epistles to Timothy and Titus that the true Apostolic Bishop
was no other, either in name or office, then a Presbyter: Nay, that by the
rules to him set down, your Diocesans is plainly cast, and rejected, like as
both in Acts Chap. 20. and Titus the names of Bishop and Presbyter are
promiscuously used, is it not clearly concludent, that your Diocesan has no
Scripture warrant, whereas the ruling Elder, as he is not in these places
confounded, and made the same with the preaching Elder, but may justly enough
share both in the general names of Elder, and Over-seer, and also in their
rules without any incosistence; so his liquid warrant, as a distinct officer,
is elsewhere obviously extant.

In the next place you add, that the Brethren in the Council at Jerusalem prove
too much, viz. That our Elders are judges o^ Doctrine^ but if their
concurrence, both in the me^ting and in the decree, may be fairly understood of
an assisting and approving suff^age, without attributing to all unanimous
assenters, the same power and Authority of deciding, as is very casible, in any
other heterogeneous Assembly, whether our argument conclude from the Brethren,
as distinguished from the Apostles, and preaching Elders, and therefore to be
taken for ruling Elders, or from the Elders there mentioned, as including both
the preaching and ruling Elders, your ab^u^dity does not follow, and our
argument is nothing convelled: But you say, it is absurd to think, that, that
was a Church judicature: Pray Sir, not so fast, you would say, that, that
meeting was not a General Synod; for that it was a Church judicature its decree
does evince: As to the Arguments taken for ruling Elders from the exhortation
to rule with diligence, and the enumeration of Helps, and Governments, amongst
other Gifts bestowed on the Church, seeing they are not adduced as by
themselves, so convincingly concludent, but as accessory to these other places,
whereby the distinct office being proved, the promise and gift agreeable,
cannot but add a considerable light: Your terming them Sandy foundations is as
foolish, as your calling Helps, and Governments, extraordinary gi^ts, is
groundless.

But both your N. C. and I inquire what you say to that Scripture let the
Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, Especially they who
labor in the word and doctrine, That here both the Preaching and ruling Elder
are included, in the word Elder, as I hinted before, and that a distinction is
made, of him who both Preaches, and Rules, from him that only Rules, is
manifest, from the words; and you are so far thereby convinced, that you
acknowledge the office controverted to be spoken of, but you say the Text
supposes its being, but does not bear its institution, this is truly exact
and strict; it seems you remember not, that although all that was ever pleaded
in behalf of your Bishops, and the fair likelikood for them, which you would
draw from the Angels of the Churches, proceeds only upon a supposition, of the
thing in being; Yet none of our side, do redargue your arguing, from that place
only, for want of an express institution: Consider therefore Sir, that, if the
being of our Elders office, be in this Scripture supponed, and commended, its
institution is also thereby supponed, and commended, and this nicety of yours,
is no evasion; but adding that there are five or six glosses put on these
words, which you protest (without any reason) to be better then ours, you give
us your own, thus: [ Let such among you, as are fixed to rule particular
charges, be doubly honored; but specially these Evangelists, who meddle not in
rule, but labor in word and doctrine.] Sir, I am sorry that having plenty, you
have made choice of one, so many ways peccant, as importing, first, that at
the time of the writing of this Epistle, there were Elders fixed to particular
charges or Parishes within Ephesus, whereof the contraire is most commonly and
probably held, 2. That either there were at the same time, beside your fixed
Elders unfixed Evangelists, belonging properly to Ephesus; or that the Apostle
speaks here of these Catholic Evangelists, who belonged not to Timothie's
inspection, but which is worst of all, your Gloss plainly destroys the Text,
for whereas Paul does first deliver a General, that all well-ruling Elders be
doubly honored, and adds a special ampliation, d^ Natura regulae of the
Nature of a Rule, in favors of these, who also Preach, you expressly say, that
these Preachers meddled not with rule, and flatly deny them to be of the number
of these well-ruling Elders, which are to be honored: Next, where the Text
makes laboring in the word, an additament to well ruling, and therefore
deserving a special allowance, you prefer the sole merit of Preaching to the
double deserving, of both Preaching and well-ruling: but I pursue your raveries
too far, the words are plain, well-ruling Elders, Preachers or not Preachers,
are to be doubly honored; but such who do both Preach and rule well, have the
pre-eminence: Now whether or not you have shown, our Elders to be ill grounded
I leave it to your second thoughts.

But you proceed to surprise your N. C. with a how want you Deacons? and then
you tell him, That we had indeed somewhat called Deacons, but they were not
Scripture-deacons; for such were not Lay-persons but Ecclesiastic, separate by
imposition of hands, for the function, and so were to continow, whereas we
yearly altered our Elders, and Deacons. Sir, though in this point you represent
our Leaders as Deceivers, Yet really, I should be sorry, that you were as well
known to be a calumniator, as the Deacons used in our Churches, are clearly
found in our Bibles: Their institution Acts 6. is plain, specially verse 3.
Wherefore Brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of
the holy Ghost and Wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business viz. the
daily ministration, and serving of tables: From which Scripture, our Practice
of chosing honest, approved men, for the Ministration of Charity, there meant,
and the serving of tables, is so exactly copyed out, that I cannot but admire
your confidence: But you say, that Scripture Deacons were not Lay-persons, but
separate by imposition of hands: If by separation you mean the solemn
appointment and designation of Deacons, and hold the same sufficient to make
them Ecclesiastic, our Deacons as well as these in the Text, are indeed
Ecclesiastic; but if by separation you understand a total and perpetual
sequestration, from secular meddling, as you cannot be ignorant, that it was and
is the wish of many worthies amongst us, that the Church could have been served
with such Elders and Deacons; so, seeing inevitable nece^^^tie, through the want
of an al^mony, has forced both our Church, and other reformed Churches, which
observe the same practice with ours, to make use of such as they can get, it is
no commendable practice in you, who are such a pretender to modesty and
civility, to cast up this lamented de^ect, as our unpardonable blemish; since
it had become you rather, who would be accounted a kindly child of the Church
of Scotland, to have overtured a way how the Church Patrimony (whereby these
Officers of the Church might have lived) may be recovered from the Harpyes who
devour it now without remorse: neither has the after abuse of Deacons, unto a
preaching order, used in the Roman Church, any Scripture warrant, as is clear
from the Text, and the rules therein expressed: I grant we find in Scripture
Philip chosen a Deacon in the 6. chap, and Preaching chap 8. verse 5. Acts, and
that it is probable, that this and the like practices, were there after made
the occasion, and color, of the formentioned abuse, but if you suppose that
the first Deacons did Preach by virtue of their institution, you have no just
ground for it in the word: And Philips Preaching, is so plainly annexed to an
extraordinary dispensation, or tacit mission to him and to many others, upon
the dispersion after Stephens Ma^tyrdom, insinu^te in the 4. verse of the 8.
chap. that I doubt not, but a second reading will convince you.

Next you add, that Scripture Deacons, were separate by imposition of hands,
for the ^unction. I grant, that was the manner of their first solemn
d^signation; but if the Chuch, by reason of the Posterior abuse, of which, in
probability, the mistaking of this form has not been the lest cause, or
because of the reason formerly hinted viz. that because of the want of a
competent maintenance, they could not get such as would be totally and
perpetually separa^ed for that work, has thought fit, notwithstanding that
they do warrantably retain it in the ordination of Ministers, yet prudently to
disus^^^ in that of Deacons, will you therefore conclude that we disown the
thing it self? But you tell us, That Scripture Deacons were to continow,
whereas we alter ours every year: You said first, that we took away from them
their Church-office, without a fault; but remembering that our annual change, is
not a deposing from the office, only used by us in the case of demerit, but a
relieving from the exercise, you did well to phrase your charge better, in the
term of altering: In answer whereunto, I deny that the Scripture does repugne
to our custom, nor can you show any Text in the contraire: Nay I question not,
but he who considers the end, for which Deacons were first institute, will
easily grant, that when Philip became an Evangelist, he ceased from the
exercise of his Diaconat, and that though the then particular condition, and
communion of Goods, in use amongst the first Believers at Jerusalem, did not
require this relief to be expressly provided for; yet the after state of
things, both there and in other Churches, not permitting their constant
attendance, nor providing for them any stipend, might have induced it.

Having thus weakly objected against our Deacons you ask in the next place, Why
want you Diaconesses, whose Order, Qualifications, Age and Employment, are
particularly set down in Scripture? To which you cause your N. C. very poorly
answer, that he has heard many of our Ministers say, the want of them was a
fault: But seeing I am not of his opinion, I make this reply to your demand,
that we want Diaconesses 1. because the appointment of the office has no clear
Scripture Testimony; its true, that passage. 1 Timothy 5. 9. is commonly
understood of your Diaconesse, and by these better seen in Antiquity of these
feminine (...) quae faeminarum mores formabant, who did teach the women good
manners and differed as much from the Diaconesse, whose office it was, faeminas
pauperes, aut aegrotas pecunia aut opera sublevare, to help the poor, or sick
women with money or service. as our Elders do from our Deacons; yet if a man
should interpret that whole Text, to be meant of such, who were to be received
unto a more special manner of the Churches charity, seeing their bypast
deservings only, and not their future employment, appear there to be noted, and
the command subjoined Ver. 16. to believers to relieve their own widows, does
insinuat no less, I could not accuse him of any straining: and as for that
other Scripture, Romans 16. ver. 1. where we find Phebe termed (...) a Servant
of the Church, it may be so properly, and easily understood of Her occasional
services, without making her an officer, that it signifies nothing in the
contraire. But 2. admitting that the primitive Church among the Grecians, whose
women did live under a more severe rule, and were not so accessible, as among
the Jews, as Interpreters does note, had therefore both (...) and Diaconissas,
as well as Presbyteros and Diaconos, whereas the Jews did only use the latter, it
may possibly infer that women in case of an urgent necessity, are not
incapable of these offices; but does no ways conclude either distinct offices
institute in the Primitive Church^ and unknown among us, or that we who enjoy
and practice a more free converse, like unto that of the Jews, ought to imitate
the practice of the Grecian austerity, and weakness: and therefore since our
Deacons are sufficient to perform the duties appertaining to the office, and
are not by our customs excluded from a due and decent Administration to both
sexes, your objection of our want of Diaconisses, is but an empty inadvertent
cavil: I could further tell you, that a form or constitution, observing all
things that are of divine Precept, though using other things of no necessary
nature, only according to their exigence, may nevertheless be perfect and of
divine right, but the former answers do fully clear the matter.

The third defect you challenge is, why wanted you Evangelists? and because
your N. C. answers, that, that was ane extraordinary thing, you think you
picque him wittily, when you say, any thing in Scripture that makes f^r you,
call it ordinary; and what does not please, is extraordinary: And yet in the
very preceding page, in answer to the argument for ruling Elders, from Helps
and Governments, you tells us more bluntly, that by these are meant some
extraordinary Gi^ts; but not to detain you in this matter, that Evangelists are
only proper, and profitable in the penury o^ ^e^^ed ^astors, not only their
first use, but both the order and edification, that clearly appears, in a
distinct affixing of Ministers to their respective flocks, does abundantly
evidence: As to what you say of the peculiar Eminency, of some Pastors, and
the imp^ssibility of such a Mini^^erie for a whole Church, as were to be
d^sir^d, As it does not a little impinge upon the dispensations of the most
High, so, it is more vain, then to counterballance the inconveniences, which
would follow on your conclusion; but if you will ref^ect how in the beginnings
of our Reformation, both Superintendants and others were sent out by our
Church, upon the like employment, having Provinces, and not Parishes committed
to their oversight, you must of necessity acknowledge, our due esteem, and
seasonable usemaking of this excellent Gift in that exigent of necessity; and
if you account these to have been Evangelists (though you shall have many who
shall dissent from you in this, upon many accounts, ye^) ^ou will be
constrained to acknowledge, that we do not construe it to be so extraordinary,
as to restrict it wholly to the primitive times.

You object in the nex^ place, where do you read in Scripture, your classical
Subordination of Sessions to Presbyteries, etc? Before I make use of your N. C.
Answer, let me first imp^ove ^our own acknowledgement: You say^ this is indeed
rational, and orderly, and thence I infer, in Opposition to your assertion,
that therefore it is founded on a divine right: I am not so captio^s, as to
build this consequence, upon that Na^ural Divine right, which is the undoubted
impr^ss, and light of Reason, Na^, but taking Divine right^ for a divine right
positive, as they speak, my conclusion proceeds thus: The Church of Christ, by
express divine appointm^^t^ is constitute in one Society being made one Body,
gathered into one; and from the beginning, the more pur^, the more joint, and
unite in all counsels and prac^ices: therefore what ever is the natural, and
rational right and privilege of a Society, must also appertain to it, by virtue
of the same right, whereon its constitution subsists; the reason is, because,
in every concession, the things natural and proper to that which is conceded,
are certainly understood, to be imported: Now that union in Counsel, and Power
in the whole, over the parts, and the subordination of the parts unto the
whole, in matters pertaining and relating to the body, and concerning its end,
are the inseparable propri^ties, and privilege of a Society, is evident above
exception: which argument is the more confirmed, that in the acts of the
Apostles, we find the Church assembling, and by Common Counsel managing its
affairs, and determining differences, not by any special and express warrant
or command, but merely in the exercise of this intrinsic power, compet^nt to
the Church as gathered, and erected in one Society: This right then and power
of meetings being undeniable to the whole by the same reason and precedent they
are confirmed to the parts, the Subordination whereof to the whole, cannot be
drawn in doubt: Thus you see, how your own grant, affirms what you d^ny: but
your N. C. answers further That they at Antioch send up to them at Jerusalem;
And are not the Spirits of the Prophets subject to the Prophets. To these
Scriptures you reply, beginning with the last, That it is clear, that in that
place the Apostle is speaking of P^r^chial Churches, which subjection none
deny: But Sir, is not that which you call in question, the Subordination of
Sessions to Presbyteries: Now if the Apostle tell us, That the Spirit of the
Prophets, who in the days o^ the Apostles, had many of them charge pro
indiviso jointly, over the same Church, but now a days, have their distinct
charges over Parochial Churches, are subject to the Prophets, gathered in one
assembly, may not the Subordination questioned, be sufficiently thence
concluded, especially seeing I can hardly suppose you so Anti-episcopal, as to
be Independent, and still to doubt, after the many irrefragable demonstrations
given by the Presbyterians, whether this Church of Corinth was a Presbyterial,
and not a mere Congregational or Parochial Church. As for what else may be in
your return I confess I reach it not, seeing that at the time of the Apostles
writing, we find no divided Parishes, and to fancy that the subjection spoken
of, wa^ of the Prophets, in one Parochial Church, such as at that time there
was properly none, and not rather of the many Prophets, having the charge pro
indiviso jointly, over the whole company of the Believers, in that City, in
which many parishes were virtually included, is groundless and absurd. To the
first instance you say, It is ridiculous to urge it, seeing they of Antioch sent
not up to Jerusalem, either as to a Church superior, or as to an Oecumenick
Council, but to men there who were immediately inspired. That they sent not up
as to an Oecumenick Council, I cannot dissent from you, seeing I find in the
Text no suitable concurse for, or vestige of such an Assembly; but that they
sent not up as to a Church superior is by you ill asserted and worse proved,
seeing 1. The phrases in the letter sent from that meeting, that certain which
went out from us, and it seemed good etc. to lay upon you, and that the same
letter is termed a Decree, do clearly prove a superior Authority in the
writers. 2. Because the example which ye adduce from the jews their high Priest
for confirming your Gloss, does plainly redargue you, in as much as the Jews
consulted not the high Priest, his Urim and Thummim without regard to his
Authority; but consulted him as the high Priest, and the Person to whom God had
therefore committed them, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 10. 11. and 12. putting them in the
breast plate termed of judgment, and not of Responses: But you may say,
supposing the matter was thus carried, what makes it for your Assemblies? I
Answer, yes very much: for it shows 1. That, if the Apostles, who all of
them severally were immediately inspired, and so might have determined this
controversy, did notwithstanding join with other ordinary Elders or
Church^officers, and by common counsel give out their Decrees, that common
Councels and their authority in the Church, are juris Divini. 2. That as the
Church of Antioch, in which the Apostle Paul, Barnabas, and several other
Prophets were^ and the other Churches in Asia, received and submitted to the
decrees, so, it evidently intimats a subordination of these, making as it were
one Provincial Church, to that great Assembly of the Apostles and Elders
conveened at Jerusalem.

You subjoin in this place, That if that meeting at Jerusalem was a Council,
then all Councels may speak in their style, it seems good to the Holy Ghost,
etc. It Is answered 1. The connection o^ your proposition, contains an obvious
non sequitur, in as much, as it is not from their being a Council, but from the
certainty of these Scripture evidences whereupon their determination proceeds,
that their prefacing of the mind and sentenc^ of the holy Ghost does flow. 2.
That, that meeting was a Council of the Apostles, and Elders at Jerusalem, a
conveened in one to Consulte, Reason and exercise Authority, which severally
was not so satisfying ^or the very Apostles to do, notwithstanding of their
immedi^^e assistance, is plain from the Text, and especially Paul's deference to
them. 3. If you imagine that Ecclesiastic Councels cannot be of Divine right
unless they have the Spirits absolute and infallible assistance, you err as
grossly, as he who for want of this infallibility, should deny to the Church a
standing Min^strie, by Divine institution. 4. Though the infallible guidance of
the Holy Ghost given to the Apostles, and being to them in stead of the rule,
was indeed singular and extraordinary; Yet as the Lord to all his Ordinances,
has annexed the promise of an agreeable presence, which does not fail the
sincere and faithful improvers, so, Church Assemblies in matters of Faith to
them committed, and following the rule thereto prescribed are also thereby
countenanced, and in sound believing and upright walking, may both attain to,
and profess their assurance of the Holy Ghosts assistance. 5^ Seeing that all
Councel-acts and Canons, anent matters of Faith, ought to be guided by the
Spirit, and conform to the word of God, and enacted and emitted in this
persuasion, these Meetings that truly keeping the rule, and sincerely laying
hold on the promise, do proceed in their determinations, may therein
warrantably use the Apostles words; and such as do otherwise, are only
culpable in the presumptuous usurpation, because they have not rightly
followed, and in effect attained unto the rule of the Word, and the conduct of
the Spirit, which ought indeed to be their warrant. 6. Having on these clear
grounds declared the Authority of Ecclesiastic Meetings in Matters of Faith, I
freely grant that in other things, which may be incident to their cognition,
and are not of Faith nor defined in Scripture, they have neither the like
warrant, nor may they use the like expressions; and therefore as in this case,
they cannot found upon the Lords Commandments, so they are only to be respected
as such, who are entrusted to give their judgment, and have obtained mercy of
the Lord to be faithful. 7. The contradiction which you allege it is for
fallible men to say, it seems good to the Holy Ghost, is abundantly salved,
both by the infallible rule of the word, to which they are astricted, and by
the never-failing promise of him who is the Truth, and will be with his own to
the end of the world: And your lapse in this objection, is but the same with
your former against Ministers, their calling their Preaching the Word of God,
which I have already fully confuted: And thus I hope all impartial Men may see
that the jus divinum, being in this matter our rule, the Independants have not
the better of us, as you groundlesly give out.

Next you proceed to challenge our Discipline, and what warrant we have for it?
but, seeing as to the substance you are satisfied by your N. C. Answer, from
the Excommunicating the Incestuous Person, and the noteing these that walk
disorderly, together with his and caetera (which you may find very clearly
amplifyed by many able Men) and do only fall a nibling at the circumstances of
public Repentance, Why so many days? (which might be questioned of any
number) And why in a place of repentance? And Why sometimes the use of
Sackcloth? all well enough answered by your N. C. his telling you of the
power of order in external Circumstances, given to the Church for Edification,
I come to weigh, the stolen advantage, that you flatter your self to have
gained, over your poor Adversary, which you carry on^ with the like questions:
As 1. Why may the Church impose such days of penitence, and not as well order
to all, for the sins of the year, the penitence, of Lent. 2. Why is a part
separate for Penitents, and not for communicating? and thirdly Why may not a
Churchman officiat in a Surplice as-well as a penitent put on Sackcloth? and
that the simple may fancy a pungencie in these empty conceits, you make your
N. C. confess a surprisall, and refuge himself in a childish implicit belief
of his Ministers ability above his own: whereupon you so vainly triumph, that
I am ashamed to represent such a mean piece of pageantrie, but to the matter,
days are assigned to Penitents, because time being a necessary requisite, and
its lengthening or shortening, very conducible for the end of public
Penitence, the edification of the Church the deterring of others, and the
through convincing and gaining of the person, according to either the quality
of the offense, or condition of the Offender, its prudent regulation, as of a
matter therefore left undefined, can no more be denied to the Church, then the
exacting of Penitence it self; but as for your expiatory quarantam of Lent, as
it bears no parity to the reason by me adduced, so, it imports such a delay of
repentance, hardening in sin, increase of Superstition, and relaxing again to
Licentiousness, that it is hard to say, whether its appointment be more
groundless, or its effects pernicious? If you, object its first rise, and
occasion, from the wel-meaning observance of pious Men, I will not tell you,
that the samine flowed from their mistake, of our Lords total and Miraculous
abstinence by the space of 40 days, neither by himself repeated, nor by his
Apostles imitated: Nor what a superstructure of vanity, may be built on such
foundations: but when you consider its great depravation, and bad fruits, I
hope you will easily incline to say What is the chaff to the wheat? The
invention of Man, to the Ordinance of God? 2. A place is separate for Penitents
that they may be Noted, Rebuked and Ashamed, that others may fear; but to
separate a place for Communicating, more then is done by us, in the time of the
Administration, what shadow of reason can be adduced for it? Specially after
the Idolatrous superstition, whereunto it has been abused, and from which unto
this day, men's minds are not thoroughly purged: Witness these Superstitious
Bowings, Cringins, and Kneelings, which your English Prelatick-Church does
still retain. As to the third point, I will not say, that where the Surplice in
taken of Innocence is most used, the Sackcloth of Penitence would be more
agreeable: Nor may I stand to show you the Usurpation, and evils of Men's
imposing Significant Ceremonies, others have done this already unanswerably,
but the Disparity which I find in your inference, is that Sackcloth in
Penitence for Grosser sins, was by us appointed (though not universally and
constantly practiced) not as properly Significant, either of the Penitents
guilt, or remorse, seeing it has to neither any suitable report; but as that,
which being at first the squallid neglect flowing from, and thence becoming the
customable effect of deep and bitter mourning, might be both a humbli^ng badge
to the delinquent, and a mean of fear to others; whereas your Surplice, is
arbitrarily institute, and imposed to signify Innocence, without either real
foundation, or sufficient warrant, wherein, whether you do more usurp against
God's Prerogative, to appoint Sacred and mysterious Signs, and that
simplicity, in which he has set forth his Gospel, or be more grossly mistaken
in the event, and fruit of your application, is a great question? I grant, that
Necessity or Decence, have introduced many things circumstan^ial, that are
rational, and consequently upon some real antec^dent ground, expressive of
their use and end: as grave apparel in Pastors, a becoming covering of Pulpits,
Tables in sacred use, regulation of time, postures, gestures, and the like,
without which, wo^ship cannot be performed; but to ascribe a liberty to the
Church, of appointing Ceremonies, having for reason of their signification, the
will of the Instituter, and their use only in the representation, is so
manifest an impingement upon Divine Authority, and the Sacraments thereby
o^dained, and has already produced such a mass of Superstitious superfluity,
in the Romish-Church, that I much admire to find a serious Person, pleading
for such fopperies; specially seeing, that this once granted, and common
Resemblances sustained for good warrants, not only all Christians might be put
to year^ at least to assemble always in their whites, but all the All^gories
in Scripture, as the drinking in of the sincere milk of the word, stand
therefore having your loins girt, etc. And hundreds more, may be turned unto
such vain shows, yea all Imagerie more probably allowed: where you say that
both Surplice and sackcloth were equally practiced under the Law, I must by
the wa^ tell you, that I find not Sackcloth therein commanded as a solemn
significant Ceremony, I say commanded as a solemn Ceremony, for that you
find it, not only mention^d, as the ordinary concomitant of more grievous
mournings, nay by the Prophets even literally commanded, as also baldnes,
sitting in the dust, ^owling and wallowing in ashes, the better to express that
serious mourning, whereunto the Lo^d did call, is plainly obvious, and can only
infer, that therefore, and after this manner, it is the more capable to be
still contained. And for the Surplice, or rather the white linen and the
Ephods, beside their expr^ss Warrant, the main thing of this Controversy, they
had such an agreeable conveniencie, and de^encie to the service of Sacrificing,
then in use, and might probably in the Priests, to whom they appertained, have
had such a prefiguing respect to the immaculate innocence of Jesus Christ, our
great Priest and Sacri^^ce, and yet did so little appear in the more solemn
Garments of the high Priest, that the example adduced does rather redargue,
then confirm your continuance of this, now idle Rite: I might further tell
you, that the use of Sack cloth among us was not offended at; and if it had,
would probably have been forborne; And also add to these clear disparities,
your rigid imposing and exacting of these your Doctrines, more then the
Commandments of God, both in prejudice of Christian Liberty, and to the
slighting of true godliness; but whether the disparities above mentioned be
subtle shifts as you are pleased to judge, before you hear, or solid
differences, these who are less prejudicate will easily discern.

In the next place, you return, to show us our difformity, with the
Scripture-pattern, in demanding Why we do not observe the decree of the first
Council at Jerusalem? to which I answer; that we observe it, except in so far
as it was designed to be temporary, and framed to bury the Synagogue with
honor viz. in the matters of Blood and things strangled: And as for meats
offered to Idols, the Apostle Paul did thereafter declare that point, so that
in these particulars, the Decree does not reach us: This answer as to your
reply differs nothing from your Non-conformists. And therefore I proceed, and
really Sir, I find in your return such pitiful inadvertencies, as to the Text
of Scripture, that I cannot but premise my wish, that in the study of it you
may become more serious. 1. You say that to allege that the exceptions in the
decree were made to please the jews, is a divised fancy against express
Scripture, and yet the Text bears, James first propounding the thing, and
plainly adding, this reason Act. 15. 21. For Moses in old time has in every
City them that Preach him, etc. Whereupon it follows, then pleased it the
Apostles, pray Sir, consider the Text, and what this then can else import? 2.
You say St Paul wrote his Epistle before he went to Jerusalem and yet James
tells him these things were still observed there; whence you infer that
commands in externals may be both local and temporary: What indistinctnesse,
and bad logic have we here? If you mean that Paul wrote his Epistle, that I
mean anent meats offered to Idols, before he went up to Jerusalem, from the
Church of Antioch, to that Council of the Apostles, and Elders, the Scripture
is contraire, showing that his travels unto Greece, and all his dealing with
the Corinthians, yea and almost all his Epistles, were thereafter; but if you
mean that he wrote before his going up thereafter mentioned Act. 21. it may be
so indeed, as to his Epistles to the Corinthians, and some other, but then the
Apostle James, only tells him, that the believing Jews were still zealous of
the Law, and that they were offended, that he taught the Jews among the
Gentiles to forsake Moses, which is so far from concerning the Decree under
consideration, or the proving your point, that a thing may be obligatory in one
place, and not in another, that as James advises Paul to purge himself of that
calumny, anent the Jews, so v. 25 he expressly resumeth, and secludeth the case
of the Gentiles, before determined: As to your other inference, that Commands
in externals, are not intended ^or lasting obligations, I grant this Decree, or
any other having a temporary reason, is thereby determinable; but if your
meaning agree to your too visible design, to resolve the E^durance of these
things, which are absolutely settled, into the Arbitriment of the Church, or
rather of the Civil Powers (for it is evident, that, though in all your
discourse, you pretend the Church, yet you take your measures from the Civil
Authority) it is not only groundless, from the matter of the Apostles their
Decree, but of dangerous consequence, to the shaking loose of all Religion: for
proof whereof, see how upon the back of this discourse, you boldly attempt to
make even the very Sacraments Arbitrarie, by asking why we^^se not washing of
feet, since there is no Sacrament set down more punctually in Scripture? And
when your N. C. retorts, that you are under the same obligation (which
retortion may be pertinently made to most of your objections) you tell him,
that you have a clear answer, that in these externals, God intended no
perpetual obligation; and therefore in them you follow the practice of the
Catholic Church: O unhappy Bohemians, and you other Christians, who suffered
so much, and so grievously, for the retainning of the Cup, in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; If this new Doctor, who with his New Light, can penetrate
unto the secrets of God, and measure the duration of his intentions, had lived
in your days, he could have told you, that the Cup is but an external thing,
under no perpetual obligation, and by his Doctrine of Conve^^encie, led you to
a safe and peaceful Accommodation to the practice of the Catholic Church: but
Sir, they are at rest: As for this your Laxe acceptance of a professed
indifferency in externals, what part of the Christian Religion or Worship, may
it not corrupt, or subvert? and seeing it does tolerate and allow, the not
practicing of the washing of feet, to you, as well founded In Scripture, as
either of the Sacraments, would it not in a just parity of reason, dispense
with, and forego these also? This is indeed doctrine so damnable, that I hope
it shall never need an Antidote, and therefore I return to examine your third
or eight Sacrament (I know not which, for all are but external) of washing of
feet, And you say, That it has in Scripture of Element, Water, the Action,
washing the feet, the Institution, as I have done so do ye, And ye ought to
wash one another feet; and the spiritual use of it, Humility: Whence you
conclude. Why do ye not there ore use this rite? To which last point, it is,
that waving any further discourse an^nt the Nature, and requisites of a
Sacrament, whereof, notwithstanding your parrallel description of this washing,
yet I perceive you are loath to apply the name, I shall direct my answer viz.
that this washing is not to be used, because, though our Lord did practice this
lowly act of Condescendence, as eminently expressive of that humility,
whereunto he would have his Disciples instructed; yet, neither is it in it
self, of the Nature of a Sacramental sign, whereof all the significancie is
from the institution, and virtue in the exhibition of the thing signified,
which you cuningly omit to mention; Nor does Christ perform it by way of
Institution, for Repetition; but by way of example, for Imitation, as is
manifest from the Text, John, 13. 4. etc. where we find, that our Lord does
first wash his Disciples feet, before he told them what he was a doing, and
then having done the act not simply significant by his appointment; but of it
self as the effect expressing the greatest humility as its cause, he teaches
them not a ^o^emne reiteration, but the use in these words, If I your Lord and
Master have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash on another feet: If I have
been among you as he that serves, so ought ye to serve one another; for I have
given you an example that ye should do as I have done to you. I have not showed
you humility in a figure, to be repeated for your remembrance, but by a solid
practice taught you, the like performance: so that to turn this pattern unto a
rite, is in effect as far from our Lords purpose, as the instruction of plai^
examples, is preferable to that of Mystic representations: which exposition is
so true, and sound, that as this fancy of yours, was never owned by the
Church of Christ, so, it is most certain, that wh^re it has been followed, (I
mean by the Pope) and this action has been used, as a rite, it has only been
made a color to the most prodigious, and superlative pride, that ever the sun
beheld: and thus I hope all men may see that the not using of this washing,
never again used, for any thing we read, by way of Sacrament, or Ceremony,
either by our Lord, or his Apostles, and Churches; is neither a difformity in
us, from the Scripture, nor an argument for your irreligious laxenesse in
things you call externals.

As for your Demand, why in your Worship do you not Kiss one another with a
holy Kiss? seeing it is no where commanded in worship, as you seem boldly and
ignorantly to suppose, and the Christian manner of the thing, in customary
civility, is only recommended by the Apostle, as an allay of chastity, and
kindness in Civil rencounters, the question is, but a petulant extravagancie
of your vain imagination.

Next you Enquire why do you not anoint the sick with oil? I answer though you
address this demand to a N. C. yet it is evident, that your conclusion of
difformity to the Scripture pattern thence inferred, is equally levelled,
against the whole Protestant Church, wherein this Ceremony is univer^a^ly
di^used, and that not from your vain warrant of the Churches Authority in and
over things expressly commanded, as you judge this rite to be; No, this is a
presumption so high, and laxe, that even the grossest Papists, are unwilling to
avouch it; but the ^ound answer of all the Churches is, that as the custom of
Anointing might have been occasioned, from an observance then in use in these
parts, where Anointings were much more ordinary then in our parts of the world;
so, it is mentioned in the Scripture by the Apostle James, not by way of
Command, but as the accustomed Symbol, adhibite in the exercise of the Gift of
healing, which being then Ordinary in the Church, is commanded to be applied by
the prayer of Faith, whereunto the effect is solely re^erred, and only with the
formality of Anointing, as being then customary in the like cases, seeing then
that the Text runs clearly thus, is any sick? let him call the Elders, and let
them pray over him anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord, and the
prayer of says shall save the sick; And that the application of the
extraordinary Gift of healing by prayer, with the then us^all circumstance of
Anointing^ is here only enjoined, how can you make this Text binding as to the
manner and circumstance? when you cannot but acknowledge, that the substance
viz. the power of healing is ceased. But having made your N. C. say That the
Apostle promises recovery upon the anointing, you turn to fight with your own
shadow, and tell him There is no such matter; that the recovery is promised to
prayer, and also forgiveness; and seeing we pray by all for their raising up,
and that they may be forgiven, why do we not as well anoint? But, what Logic can
make out this consequence in as much as Anointing being there only spoken of as
the concomitant rite used in the application of the Gift of healing, it is
manifest that without the existence and exercise of the Gift it self, it is not
now to be repeated; and therefore though prayer be principally commanded as the
special mean, by which even the Gift of Miracles was actuate and made
effectual, and to this day does remain as the great one by which all the
promises either for raising up or remission are drawn out unto effect; yet
thence to infer that Anointing, a peculiar solemnity in the Gift of healing,
should still continow, notwitstanding the Gift it self be ceased, is, very
absurd: Now that Anointing was an Ordinary observance in the exercise of the
Gift of healing you may read it clearly in the Disciples practice Mark 6. 13.
And they Anointed with oil man that ^^re sick and healed them. This being then
the just and true account, not only of our practice, but also of that of the
whole reformed Churches, how vain and ridiculous are you to tell us, that our
pretense of Scripture is but to impose on women and simple people, and all our
persuasion, grave nods and bigwords: but leaving you to puff petulantly where
you can prove nothing,

I proceed to your next demand, who taught us the change of the Sabbath? and
you say we will read the Bible long ^re we find it there; which you think
sufficiently proved, when you tell us That the Churches meeting recorded to
have been on the first day of the week, saves not that they antiquated the
Saturnday, (as you are pleased very cours^y to speak) and that of the Lords
day, says yet less: Sir, for answer, let me only tell you, that by this your
conceited slighting of Arguments, which you cannot answer, with your vain
arguings, against these things which you cannot disprove, you have discovered
to me the deep wisdom of Solomon's contradictory-like advice, answer a fool^
and answer him not, Prove. 26. 4 and 5. in so sa^^s^^ying a reconciliation,
that remitting you for answer, lest you be wise in your own conceit, to the
labou^s of these who have cleared this point above cavillation, I ^orbear to
make any further answer lest I should be like unto you; Only I think it worth
the observing how like the progress of your dangerous Libertinisme is to that
verdict of the Apostles, 2. Tim. 3. 13. Your first sally was only against
ruling Elders and Deacons, the next attacques the very Discipline of Church,
your third endeavors to introduce the Superstition of Lent, the Table
Altar-wise, and the Surplice, and to corrupt the worship, your fourth resolves
the necessity of Baptism and the Lords supper, into the Churches arbitriment,
your fifth pleads for Extreme Unction, or else a liberty and power to the
Church above the Scripture, and your sext to complete the carier of your
delusions. Notwithstanding that the cl^arest light both of Reason and Religion,
do exact a definite constant portion of time, for a rest, and this rest to be
holy unto the Lord, that the Law of God in recommending the celebration of the
old Sabbath, does found it upon a perpetual determination of the seventh part
of time, grounded on Divine Authority, and example, and lastly, that the
Scripture in the antiquating of the service and observation of the Jewish
Sabbath, does evidently translate the keeping of the perpetual holy rest unto
the Lords day, the first of the week, Notwithstanding, I say, of these firm
grounds your sext attempt darres to unfix this grand Ordinance, the reverence
or contempt whereof, has in all ages of the Church, by experience been found
of great moment, and unquestionable influence, either as to the promoving or
decay of true Piety and Godliness: how justly may it be said of you and your
Compli^es, who endeavor to make void the Divine institution of this day, which
your predecessors so grossly and wickedly profaned, ye be witnesses there ore
unto your selves, that you are their Children, fill ye up the measure of your
Fathers: But O ^ear lest you do not escape the damnation of Hell: I will not
take Notice of your own or your Non-conformist's mien reflection on these
things, That they may prove our Church was not perf^ct, but will not justify
you, your answer to that, which follows viz. do you mean to lay aside the
Scripture? (...) rather to be considered, wherein leaving the retortion of ^ou^
objected insolence, and big pretending, to the impartial examiner of what you
have alleged and I replied ^ come ^o your sum of the whole matter, which you
say, is, That the Scriptures were designed b^ God, for the purifying of the
hearts and conversations of Men; Most true: And therefore it was not necessaire
they should contain direct rules for the Church-policie, which being a half
Civil matter, needs not Divine warrants, a strange inference, whereof almost
every word is a ridle: for first you grant that the Scripture does contain
Rules though not Direct rules for the Church-policie, and yet you add almost
immediately, that it needs no divine warrant: Then what mean you by Direct
rules, if you mean Particular as the subjoined Antithesis of Common does give
us to understand, let these Scripture rules Common or not be observed, and
particular determinations thereto duly squared, and it is all we contend for:
Search therefore the Scriptures and whatever latitude may be left therein, as
to the regulation of necessary and common circumstances, according to decency
and order, for Edification; Yet I am confident, that as to the substance and
main of the Officers, Discipline, and Government of the Church (the matters in
controversy betuixt us) both you shall be found thereby clearly condemned, and
we justified: but if by denying the Scripture, to contain direct rules, for the
Church-policie, you understand, that it only holds out indirect, unstraight
and ambiguous rules, applicable to any form, as may best suit and serve the
interests, and lusts of vain Men, this indeed is agreeable to your scope; but
as far from Scripture, as it is dissonant to the truth of God, and Great ends
of the Gospel: 2. What do you understand by the Church policy? its Officers,
Discipline and Government are the things which we contend for, If you think
these half Civil, I would gladly learn what a Church as such can have more
Ecclesiastic; certainly if a distinct Head, Jesus Christ; a distinct
Authority, flowing from that all Power given to him; a distinck manner, nothing
like but wholly opposite to the way of Civil rule; distinct effects and ends,
as Holiness and eternal perfection, are from external justice, and temporal
peace; and lastly a distinct subsistence of the Church, and its Policy, not
only when disowned, but mortally persecute by the Civil Powers, may prove the
Policy Ecclesiastic to differ from the Civil, there can be nothing more
clearly disterminat; but if by Policy you only mean the external protection,
and assistance, which the Civil Magistrate may, and ought to give to the Church,
it is not only half, but wholly Civil, as to its rise and cause; and therefore
the acknowledgement thereof we render, under God, heartily and entirely, to the
Powers, which he sets up: I might further question what you call half Civil?
and how you come to deny that Divine warrant which at first you half grant? but
I shall content my self, to declare the falsehood of your inference, understood
of the Discipline and Government of Gods house, the subject of our debate, by
showing you that its plain contradictory is a Scripture truth: viz. The
Scriptures were designed by God for the Purifying of the hearts, and
conversations of men, and therefore it was necessary they should and they do
contain direct rules for the Churches Policy, wholly Ecclesiastic, and
appointed by Jesus Christ: The reason of the consequence is clear, not only
because the Church Policy, viz. its Officers, Discipline and Government, are
expressly and directly ordained by our Lord, for our Sanctification and
Salvation as I have formerly shown, and therefore their necessity such as
cannot without the highest presumption be called in question: but also, because
their usefulness, in order to these ends, is by diverse Scriptures undeniably
held forth: And he (who as the Son was faithful over his own house) gave some
Apostles and some Prophets. etc. yea and all the Gifts, Power, Authority, and
Directions to be found in Scripture, concerning them, for the work of the
Ministry, the Edifying of the body of Christ, and perfecting of the Saints Is
a truth so evident, that I marvail, how you could adventure on this
Architectonick reasoning, and offer to lay down the end and project of the
Gospel, and then frame and Model its institutions, and midses according to
your own imagination, and not rather humbly endeavor, in the recognisance of
his wonderful love, and fidelity to, and care of his Church, his own body,
with all sobriety, to pursue the knowledge, and practice of what things-soever
he has ordained for its edification? I might further remember you, that the
rebuke, and all the Censures of discipline are for Edification, the Saving of
the soul, making sound in the faith, and Causing others to fear: and that we
find the exercise of the Churches Authority, and Government, in that Meeting
and Decree made at Jerusalem, attended with The consolation and establishment
of the Churches, But if your own concessions be but a little pressed, they will
easily exhibit the inconsistencie of your vanity: you say then, That the
common rules are in Scripture 1. That there should be Church Officers, and are
not their Power, Degrees and Ministerial Authority, as certainly therein
defined. 2 That these should be separate for that function, Ought not then the
best among them, give themselves continually and wholly to Prayer, and to the
Ministry of the word, without usurping a stated superior Order of Governing,
as their special work, let be immixing themselves by privilege in secular
Courts and affairs? 3. That they should be obeyed: is this their power for
discipline and Government set down in Scripture, and not also its rules and
limits? Were the Apostles more then Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God? was not the sure word of Prophecy their great warrant? When
the Apostle Paul is about to set order in the Church of Coriath, hear his
Preface by ye followers of me even as I also am of Christ: And as in the
ordinance of the Lords Supper, he only delivers what he had received of the
Lord, so, even as to that smallest of matters, the Length and Fashion of the
hair, does he use any other Authority, then what he seconds with rational
persuasion? How far was he then from that dominion over our Faith, which you
ascribe to the Church, not only of appointing significant instructing
Ceremonies, but of abrogating things as expressly ordained, in your opinion, as
the true Sacraments. 4, You say, That things should be done to Order,
Edification and Peace, keep within these bounds, and invert not this Method,
and we are agreed; but if you subsist not in the regulation of the manner, but
will impose New things, which the Lord requires not, nay, which he abhors
even your own inventions, framed to your own lusts and interests, or produced
by your delusions, and then make peace your Argument, because ye will not allow
it to such, as in Conscience cannot conform; the Lord, who has founded Zion
and Reigns in it, and who has builded his House and rules over it, will one
day judge: Thus you see how these your everlasting obligations, do fully
conclude, all the truths that we assert: Where you add that the other Rules
are now altered with the alterable state of things whereunto they were
accommodate, if you understand it soundly, of these things only which are
indeed ceased, it is a very certain and allowable truth; but you remember not
that in the very Page preceding, you impute this alteration so grosly^ to the
bare Practice of the Catholic Church, (a very doubtful term) and thereby not
only unsetle Scripture foundations, as to the Sacraments, but endeavor to
introduce such an arbitrary authority in the Church, that in place of
establishing true Christian Liberty, which you seem here to assert, it is
evident, that you go about plainly to set up; an absolute Spiritual tyranny,
over the Church of God, and so to load it with the Ceremonies, and innovations,
a bondage more severe then the old dispensation, from which we are liberate;
but blessed be our Lord Jesus Christ, who has delivered us, not only from that
old Law of Ordinances, but has made us free, that we should be no more the
Servants of Men, nor liable to be judged in meat or drink, or in respect of an
holy Day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath; and having blotted out the
hand writting of God's Ordinances, that was against us, has put no new blank
in Men's hands for their own devices, and superstitions: To conclude then, in
your own words, these things are so rational and also so clearly deduced from
your own concessions, that I see nothing either to be excepted against our
Conformity to the Scripture pattern and the true Christian liberty, both in
opinion, and practice, which we maintain; or to be alleged for your pretended
liberty, consisting in a Licentious absurd imposing on such, whom you
acknowledge to be free.

But in order to this last point, viz. your attempt to remove a Scripture rule,
easy in it self, and imparting true Liberty to its observers, and to set up
an unwarrantable Yoke of Church Authority in its place, I conceive it is, that
here you go about, to represent your N. C. as a vain and clamorous boaster, of
the Crown, Throne and Kingdom of our Lord, on purpose, to prejudicate against
our just complaint of your invasion and Robbery; but waving your Calumnious
Methods, I shall only endeavor to speak ^urth the words of truth and
soberness. I shall not here discourse of the Kingdom of Christ in all its
parts, whereunto we find in Scripture both the outward Protection of the
Church, vengeance upon Adversaries, and all judgment, even the great and last
ascrived; but, in order to our present purpose, I affirm plainly, that our
Lord Jesus as the Redeemer, is in a peculiar manner exalted to be Head and King
in and over his Church, by virtue of which Kingdom, he sends forth, and
Authorizeth his Ministers, has defined their Order and Power, determined
Censures, and given and declared Laws to be observed in his house, and that in
such a manner, and in that perfection, that in all things properly thereto
relating, he has only left to the Officers by himself appointed, a Ministerial
power of administration; so, that there is neither place left, nor power given,
to diminish from, or add to the Officers, Laws, Censures, and Orders, which he
has therein established that these things are so, cannot be better cleared,
then by remitting you to our larger Catechism, where, as you will find
satisfying Scripture proof for their confirmation, so really I cannot but, by
the way, recommend to you its more serious study, for the curing of that
looseness in Principles, which almost in every thing you discover: My part at
present shall be to consider your strange discourse on this subject; You say
then, Christ's throne, Crown and Kingdom are inward and spiritual not of the
World, nor as the Kindoms of the World. Sir, though I acknowledge the Scripture
phrase, in this matter to be Metaphorical; Yet I wish you had better observed
it, and forborne the hard and unused expression of an Inward Crown: But to the
question, Christ's Kingdom is indeed in its power, and effects (the restriction
a little above premised being remembered) internal and Spiritual, but does it
therefore follow, that its administration is not external and visible, when
the Lord declared all power to be given unto him, and by virtue thereof sent
forth his Apostles and Ministers, and gathered Churches, having peculiar
Rulers, Laws, and Ordinances; was not this both visible, and audible? Are not
all the acts of Discipline and Government, properly thereto referable, of the
same Nature? Our Lords Kingdom is truly not of the World, nor as the Kingdoms
thereof, is it therefore not in the World? What does this arguing conclude? You
proceed, a great part of his Kingdom is the liberty whereto he has called us,
and I grant, that as liberty, and deliverance from Sin and Satan, are among its
choice benefits, and therefore the exultation of Zachariah his thanksgiving,
so our liberation from the yoke of Jewish Ceremonies, and all such bondage, is
that which we readily acknowledge, in opposition to you^ unwarrantable
exactions: but what would you thence infer? because Christ hes liberate us
from the former slavery, and Pedagogie, has he therefore left us to the worse
Tyranny of men's pretended, and corrupted power, and deluded imagination? God
forbid; but as the has set us free for ever, so he has only laid on us, his
own easy ^^oke, and light burden, of Pure and Evangelick ordinances, by which
our Liberty is so far from being intringed, that it is thereby both preserved
and enlarged.

In the next place you say Since no Allegory holds, it is ridiculous to argue,
because offices in a Kingdom are named by the King, therefore it must be so in
the Church. It Is answered 1. do you then think that our Lords Kingdom is only
Allegorick? Or because the symboles and badges, usual in Earthly Kingdoms,
are, in a figure, thereto transferred, is it therefore wholly a figure? but God
has set his King upon his holy Hill of Zion, and Know you assuredly that God
has exalted him to be both Lord and Christ, b^wis^ therefore and be instructed
Kiss the Son lest he be angr^, and learn to acknowledge his Kingdom, in all the
parts and privileges thereof, by him declared: Next it is most evident, that
not only Christ's Kingdom, in and over his Church, is real and certain, and
that Officers truly such, vested with his Authority, and therefore depending
on Christ as King, are held forth by the Scripture, and to be really found
therein; but seeing he himself has in the Gospel so expressly founded their
mission, upon that All power, given unto him, and Paul so plainly referres the
giving of Apostles etc, unto his Ascension and exaltation, are you not ashamed
to allege these things, to be only by us concluded from the vain appearance of
an Allegory And thus to make your self ridiculous, in that scorn you intended
for others? But poor wretch, you add, That we may as well say, that there must
be coin stamped by Christ, as Officers appointed by him in his Church: (for
this is the running of your words) Lord deliver you from this profane Spirit:
think thou, that the Kingdom of Christ, has need of money, as it has
indeed need of Officers? Or, because money is current and symony a frequent
practice in your Church, hes it therefore any place in Christ's true Church?
Sir, your profane scoffing at the Kingdom of Christ is one passage, amongst
many, that give me Confidence to say, arise O God plead thine own cause,
remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily. But I profess I am
confounded in my self, when I think of my own provocations, and on the
iniquity of his Sons and Daughters; for if the abuse of the Glorious Gospel,
shineing amongst us in so much purity, had not been great, he would not have
given up the dearly beloved of his Soul into the hand of such persecuting
adversaries, and such scoffers at him, who justify these malicious mockers in
Cajaphas Hall, with an overplus of wickedness. O if he would return, he
would quickly empty Pulpits, and Chairs in Universities of such, who bend
their tongues for lies, and make the world see, because they have rejected
knowledge, he has also rejected them that they shall be no Priests to him.

The next thing you subjoin is, what King will think his prerogative lessened,
by constituting a Corporation, to whom he shall leave a liberty to cast
themselves into what mould they please, providing they obey the General Laws,
and hold that liberty of him. Thus you will always aspire to enter into the
Counsel of God: if your vote had been here asked, it is very like you would
have bestowed large privileges upon that Church, where you might have been a
sharer; But we bless him to whom the Church is committed, and on whom the
Government is laid, who has provided better, and given unto his Church
complete Officers, perfect Ordinances, true Laws, and good Statutes; and
ordered his house in all things: and therefore as we are not to enquire, what
the Lord might have done but humbly and thankfully to acknowledge what he has
done, so, in these things for men to disown his Authority, and deny his bounty,
and usurp to themselves a power of altering, what he has established, and
fashioning the worship and Government of Gods house, according to the device of
their own heart, is no doubt no lawful liberty, but a licentious invasion of
Christ's prerogative, and a jealousie-provoking sin of Laese Majesty Divine.
That thus it stands, betuixt you and us, the preceding passages do plainly
witness, and the faithfulness of Jesus Christ, as a Son over his own house, so
expressly commended, and preferred before the faithfulness of Moses, is an
argument, which you will never dissolve: You say his faithfulness consisted in
his discharging the Commission given him by his Father: Most certain; but you
ask who told us that it (I suppose you mean the appointing the Officers
Ordinances and Government of the house of God) was in the Fathers Commission?
Herein is a mavelous thing. You know that Jesus Christ whrist was sent by the
Father, to redeem, gather, feed, guide and Govern his Church; and you see, that
as the things in question are thereto necessary, so in discharge hereof, he
sends out Apostles, and Ministers, Ordains Officers, vests them with power and
Authority, instructs them to a Ministerial, and lowly administration and
deportment, defines Censures, appoints his Ordinances, and Laws, liberats the
Worship of God from the shadows, and types of the Jewish Pedagogie, and cleares
its true and spiritual exercise and liberty, and finally acquits himself
faithfully in all his house: do you then question, if he did these things, or
doubt you that he did them by Commission? it is a hard Dilemma which you will
never evade: but you add that if we argue from Moses it will infer that all
particulars must be determined: whereupon you urge, that as Moses determines
the days of Separation for a legal uncleanness, why does not the Gospel the
like for spiritual uncleanness? It Is answered, if you had taken up the
Argument aright and considered the faithfulness of Christ and Moses, not in
order to the same; but with relation to their respective Commissions, You had
not fallen into this mistake; but the Scripture parallel, is clear, Moses as a
servant did faithfully and completely order Gods house, therefore Our Lord much
more as a Son, has thus ordered the Church, his own house: Whence as it does
no ways follow, that whatsoever things were institute by Moses, ought to have
been in like manner imitate by our Lord; so this is most concludent, that as
Moses, as a Servant, did diligently and exactly execute his Commission, in
order to the Tabernacle, its service, Ministers, and all its appurtinents, so
Christ, both by reason of a command received and of his interest and power,
has exceeded the faithfulness of Moses, in the Ordering and appointment of
things appertaining to his Church: But for the better confirming our Reasoning,
and the removing of your Mistake, I do only recommend to you this obvious
truth, viz. that the Commendation of our Lord held out by the Apostle in this
comparison, institute betuixt him and Moses, regards the Manner, but not the
subject, of their administrations: Not what was the Nature of extent of Moses
his trust, but what was his diligence, and faithfulness in the discharge; is the
light and argument of the parallel: suppose two entrusted in employments,
wholly diverse, and inadequate, and the exact fidelity of the one trusty, to
be notourly known, may not the faithfulness of the other, be thence very
properly commended? And will not this commendation very evidently infer, that
as the first was punctually observant of all things committed, so, the second
did equal his exactness, without giving the least ground to conclude, that
therefore either the second must have done the same or like things, with the
first, or yet that the first administration was as extensive, as that entrusted
to the second: this being duly perpended, and it being certain, that not the
establishing of an universal, and perpetual order to all and every of the
concerns of the jewish Church, as appears from the alteration and addition
made thereafter, by David, and Solomon; but only the setting up of the
Tabernacle, its Sacrifices, and service, according to the command, accommodate
to the then state of that People, was to Moses (and that only by peremptory
prescript, as to a servant) enjoined; whereas unto our Lord, as a Son over his
own house was freely committed the unchangeable establishment of his Church, in
all its requisits unto his coming again: then if our Lords faithfulness be
indeed equal to that of Moses, his appointing of Officers, Ordinances, and
Laws, necessare and convenient to his Church, with all requisite exactness,
though neither after the pattern, nor in that particular and peremptory
strictness, of Moses his prescriptions, can neither be denied nor declined: If
you yet cavil, that this says too much viz. that all particulars must be now
as of old determined, It Is answered, the determining of Particulars under the
Law, was from the express ^enour of Moses his Commission, and therein did
consist much of the Pedagogie, and rigor of that shadowing dispensation, from
which God having now relieved us, and given us the clear light of the Gospel,
and these things necessare and convenient to its holy ends, in simplicity,
parity and liberty, it is evident, that as our Lords faithfulness under this
Gospel administration, did oblige him to provide the Church, in all things
necessary and convenient, and liberate us from all further burden of Antiquate
rites and Ceremonies, beyond the necessary exigences of decency and order, so,
he has fully acquit himself, in this his own house, as Moses in his house, and
by this his faithfulness, for ever excluded all your superinduced humane
inventions, whether in Church Officers, Government or Worship: in a word, so
ill grounded is the absurdity, wherewith you would urge us; and the
faithfulness of Christ, compared to that of Moses, is so far from saying too
much, viz. that all particulars must be in the Gospel determined, that it
inferres the direct contraire, viz, that seeing God having committed to Moses a
Law, descending to a most strict prescription of Particulars, and Ceremonial
observances, he was therein faithful; therefore our Lord more faithful having
a dispensation entrusted to him only of Gospel Ordinances, with a becoming
liberty, has in his fidell discharge, both fully defined the former, and
established the latter, free from all humane, either General or Particular
inventions, and impositions: But you go on and tell us, That Moses instituted
no Church Government in the way we use it, and that Synagogues their Rulers and
chief Rulers were not appointed by Moses, and yet no unlawful thing, since
countenanced by Christ and his Apostles: Whence you conclude, That either what
they did, was founded on Divine tradition, (which no Christian will grant) or
that a form of Government was devised by men; and if the Jews had that
Liberty, certainly the Christian Church is more free, as to these externals.
Sir, not to detain you in a curious enquiry into the special composition,
gradual advance and necessary alterations of the jewish Policy, It Is
answered, 1. I have just now told you, that Granting Moses did not institute
any Church Government as used by us, because neither given him in commission,
not at that time needful, and agreeable to the condition of a wandering
people, and the dispensation they were then under; Yet the Scripture Argument
from our Lords faithfulness, preferred to that of Moses, being conclusive of
the same, yea of a greater care of all things necessary, and requisite for his
Church, to the end of the World, then that which Moses did adhibite, even in
the setting up of the Tabernacle, and its commanded service; must of necessity
infer, both that our Lord did de facto provide for the Ministry, and
Government requisite in his own house, and that the Ministry and Government,
which we find descrived in the Scriptures of the New Testament, are of his
appointment, and such as may not be altered. 2. Not to mention the evident
necessity of Synagogues, up and down the Land, for the end of teaching the
people, a most certain duty, which could hardly otherwise be performed, the
dispersion of Levi among the Tribes, Moses blessing, designing him to teach
Jacob judgments, and Israel Gods Law, David's appointing 4400. of the
Hebronites, 1 Chronicles. 26. 30. 31. 32. through all Israel, in all business of the
Lord, and for every matter pertaining to God, as well as affairs of the King,
and Asaphs regret, for the burning up of all the Synagogues of God in the Land
(not to mention the coincidence often hinted at in the Old Testament, of Judges
and Teachers of the Law, in every City, and their appointment out of the Tribe
of Levi) are grounds, more then probable of the Divine institution of
Synagogues, and their Rulers; and that they were no humane invention, 3. The
evident Testimonies that we have in the Word of God, not only of the Lords
special appointing of the Tabernacle, its whole service and Ordinances, framed
and suited to the then State and Posture of that people; but also, how that he
Reformation, and establishment made in David's days, together with the building
of the Temple, its Officers and Porters, were particularly directed by the
Spirit of God, in Samuel, David, and the Seers of these times, instrumental in
that work, 1 Chrom. 9. 22. and 28. 11. may sufficiently evince to any rational
discerner, that the Synagogues, more material, then many of these
circumstantial things expressly commanded, were also ordained by the Lord, and
likewise instruct all to a most tender, and precise adherence to the express
Will of God, in all Matters relating to his house and Worship: And here, upon
the mentioning of David, I cannot omit to remember, how that in all the
Scripture, we find not a parallel and type, more frequent then that of our
Lords Kingdom, in and over his Church, to that of David over Israel: seeing
then, that these ^igures have their certain grounds of resemblance, and there
is not a more conspicuous typifying Character, in the person of David; then,
that of his Royal ordering, and establishing the house, and Church of God,
whereunto he was raised up, and particularly inspired, and commanded, though
the faithfulness of Christ, preferred to that of Moses, should not, Yet his
succession in the Throne of David to reign over the house of Jacob for ever,
does undeniably conclude both the Government and complete setlement of the
Church, by us contended for: 4. If you would reflect upon the Lords singular
Providence over his People Israel, first, in that Theocratie, whereby in a
peculiar manner he Governed them, unto the days of Saul, 2. in their Urim and
Thummim, and the holy Oracles of God, which they constantly enjoyed, 3. In the
continual assistance, which they had almost in all times, of Prophets
immediately inspired, you cannot lightly suppose, that either Synagogues, or any
other Lawful institution, concerning their Law and worship, were a mere humane
invention; but though the evidences of their appointment, remaining with us
upon record, were more obscure, these passages alone, do render it more then
probable, that their Authority and rise was Divine. 5 The comparing of the
Church of Christ, to that of the Old Testament is so unfavourable to your
cause, and there are such manifest disparities in that parallel, that it rather
makes against you then for you; for as the Ordinances of that dispensation,
were such, as were to be done away and abolished; and therefore were appointed
by God ( who in times past spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets at Sundry
times and in diverse manners) in a variant and mutable form, So, the Lord
having in these last days, and now in the end of the World, spoken unto us by
his son, to whom he says, thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, the
Anointing of the most Holy, attended by the sealing up the Vision, and
Prophecy, and the setting up of his everlasting Dominion, do infallibly
conclude, the introducing of a more excellent Ministry, and the full and
immutable establishment of all Ordinances, requisite to the ingathering, and
perfecting of the Saints: Sir, if these things were considered by you, and that
our Lord has now at last, by himself, given and ordered, for us, a complete
and perfect ap^ointment, of all means necessary in his Church, you should find
more Soul-satisfaction in walking at true liberty in the observing of his
precepts; then in the Lascivient fancies of your own vain Imagination, which
not content to rest in the blessed change that our Lord has made, of the first
Covenant, not faultles, unto this New one and better ordered, under the
specious aspiring to a liberty, equal to that of the Jewish Church, does
plainly charge, the Christian Church, with the imperfections of that, which is
decayed, and vanished. Having thus examined and answered the strain and scope
of your discourse, I shall briefly go over what remains: You say Our Savior
and his Apostles countenanced the Synagogues and their Rulers, and why not?
seeing not only their first institution appears to have been such, as I have
declared; but also other occasions, noted in the Gospel wherein you have no
advantage, did clearly thereto invite: Next you say That this their practice
was either founded on divine Tradition (which no Christian will grant) or that
a form of Government not unlawful was devised by Men: I answer 1. I have
exhibited already warrants for their practice, beside tradition. 2. Might not
the positive manner of the institution of Synagogues, have been then more
clear, while the thing was in observance, then now it is, after its abolition,
and the revolution of so many Ages? 3. If I were concerned in your parenthesis,
against Divine Tradition, I would ask you, why do you thus without distinction,
make the admitting of it in the Jewish Church so great an absurdity? That there
were Divine Traditions before the Word was committed to writing, and that under
the dark, imperfect, and progressive dispensation of the Old Testament,
assisted nevertheless by a more immediate presence, unwritten traditions might
both have been more usual, and were less fallible, may be probabely enough
held, by these who yet, now, after the full and perfect revelation of the
Gospel by our Lord Jesus Christ, do upon solid grounds, very justly reject
unwritten Traditions, in the Christian Church; By which reasons, you may
perceive, that the one member of your Dilemma, laboring so sadly of untruth,
both in its supposition and the absurdity thence inferred, it can no ways be
cogent to enforce the other, of the liberty of Man's devising in the point of
Church Government, even in the Jewish Church, let be in the Christian, so many
ways more excellent: But in the close you insinuate That the greater liberty
you plead for to the Christian Church is in externals: That this General
ambiguous objection is only intended for a convenient retreat, is apparent from
all the preceding discourse, seeing, if by Externals, you understand things in
their own nature extrinsick to the constitution of the Church, and which in the
New Testament have no further use allowed, then is conducible to decency, and
order, we willingly grant, that the Christian Church (being in effect
absolutely liberate from the old burden of Ceremonies, and not (as you vainly
conceit) endowed with a greater, and more arbitrarie power of imposing) is
indeed herein more free then the Jewish was: But if by externals you mean, as
alas the instances premised do too plainly speak, all the visible Ordinances of
the Church, specially that of Government at least, what ever is in it visible,
the liberty that you would introduce, is not more contraire to the Scripture,
both of the Old and New Testament, as I have shown, then most licentious and
irreligious.

Your last cavil against the exercise of our Lords Kingdom, in ordering the
visible administration of his Church, is, That if this were inferred by his
headship over the Church, his being also the head of the World, should argue
the same determination in the order of the World, as well as in that of the
Church. And having made your N. C. seemingly and poorly check you by saying,
that Christ's Church is dearer to him then all the World: Then you restrict the
absurd^^y, which you press, unto the civil Matters of the Church, and proceed
in such a rambling discourse, that I am at a stand, how to meddle with it: But
waving the censure of your impertinencies, I answer 1. That the Mediatory
Kingdom of Our Lord over his Church, and his Natural (so to speak) Soveraignity
over the World, are so grossly here by you confounded, that I can only entreat
you to be more serious in reading, and searching what the Scripture does very
distinctly hold forth: 1. Of their different rise, the one given, the other not
given. 2. Of their different objects and ends, the one having and proposing the
World and men in order to a regular and peaceable being in it, the other the
Church and men therein called unto spiritual duties and eternal life: And
lastly of their different administrations, the one grounded on the dictats of
reason, and using external Magisterial authority and power, and sensible
rewards and pains, the other proceeding on divine revelation, and carried on by
no such externals, save a simple Ministry, and the power internal and
spiritual; and then I doubt not but you will of your self rectify such
aberrations, 2. The parallel of Gods Government over the World, with the
Kingdom of Christ over his Church, is, so far from concluding, that Arbitrary
or Architectonick power, which you endeavor to set up in Ecclesiastics,
equal to that in Civils, that the contraire may from thence be sufficiently
evinced, thus, therefore God has not determined the order of Civil matters,
either in the World or in his Church; because an Architectonick and free
disposing Government, limited with general rules, necessare to its ends, was
most suitable to that almost absolute right and power, which he has given unto
man, in and over the things about which it is conversant: but so it is that the
things of the Church, about which our Lord Jesus his Kingdom is exercised,
being wholly Spiritual, are neither committed to our power, nor left unto our
arbitriment; And plainly such, whereof, the Lord in all times, has reserved to
himself, the sole determination: and therefore it was clearly necessare, that
all the Ordinances, Ministry, and Government thereto pertaining, should be
also by him alone, ordered, and appointed; which disparity, does not only
reject but unanswerably retort your Argument from this pretense. 3. Your great
error, and greater presumption in this question is, that apprehending our
Argument for the Determined Ordinances and Government of Gods house, to be
taken from the simple position of his Kingdom, and the consequences, that by
allusion to the Kingdoms of the Earth may be thence deduced, you remember not
that the Scripture not only holds out his Kingdom, and the nature thereof, very
distinctly; but also does particularly exhibit, all the Ordinances necessare
unto its ends, and appointed to be therein observed; So that our reasoning
being wholly Scriptural, both in its ground and superstructure, your
redargution from imaginary reason, opposed to the clear and positive Counsel of
God, is plainly irrational: if in the days of old, Israel had changed the Law,
and Ordinances given, and therein disowned Gods particular Kingdom and
Government over them, and notwithstanding thereof pretended to the liberty of
the Nations about, seeing this their liberty was no ways determined by, but
very consistent with, the Lord's high Soveraignity, under which all do bow, had
this poor reasoning, justified their rebellion? certainly not: how much less
then, can it conclude the exemption of the Church from Christ's Kingdom, in
these Ordinances therein by him established, of which the Lords peculiar
Kingdom over Israel was but a slight adumbration.

But you say, Seeing justice is a part of Gods Law, as well as devotion, why
does not the Lord determine how his Church should be governed, in Civils. It Is
answered, Justice is indeed a part of Gods Law, and he has therein determined,
as particularly as the right, which God has given to man in Civils, does
permit; or the ends thereof do require; but as this your Arithmetical
equalizing of Man's liberty, in matters of devotion, to that power he has in
things Civil, does sadly discover the woeful vanity of an unserious Spirit; So
the Geometrical analogy of Gods determining, anent our Devotion, wholly
dependent upon his prescript, unto his general appointment in matters of
outward justice, accommodate to that power and liberty he has therein left us,
in place of inferring an equal power to Man in both, does, on the contraire,
evidently demonstrate, that the Lords determination, in matters of Religion, is
as much more particular, then his Commandments are in the things of justice, as
our Liberty in the former, is more restricted, then our Liberty in the latter:
if you had but considered, the the (...) has given the Earth unto the Children
of Men, and that, the things thereof being put under his feet, an agreeable
power of Government thereanent is certainly given unto his hand; whereas our
Lords Church and People are his peculiar people, his chosen Nation, redeemed
and bought with his precious blood, and not their own; let be to have the
things, concerning their Souls redemption, in their power, how happily had you
been delivered from this strange confounding of things, Sacred and profane;
And how clearly might you have perceived, that Gods Dominion over the World,
consisting in General Laws, suited to its object, and swayed by his Sovereign
Providence, in order to his holy ends, does bear but little likeness, to our
Lord Jesus his Rule, and Government in his Church, as a Son over his own house,
and also its Ordinances. But to enforce your point you add, that you hope we
will grant that the Civil Peace is more necessary to the very being of the
Church, then is Order in Discipline: Whence you insinuate that the former as
well as the latter, requires Chri^^s particular determination: Not to
Scandalize you by frustrating your hope; Sir, you know so well, that a thing
though more necessary; Yet if such only by a mediate and consequential
necessity, may therefore fall under a quite diverse disposition, from that,
which though less necessary, by this mediate and extrinsick necessity, to the
being of the Church, then the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, do the former
therefore, as well and in the same manner with the latter, belong to Christ's
Kingdom? As to what you add, That it was for this reason that the things of
Civil peace were determined in the Old Law: This did so certainly flow from
Gods peculiar interest in that People, as a Kingdom, as well as a Church, that
I make no answer; That which you subjoin, for evincing, that either the Lords
Kingdom over the Earth does extend to the appointing of Civil Officers, or else
his Kingdom over his Church imports no such thing; is so manifestly, repugnant
to the very nature of the things, and the Lords declared pleasure (the best
decision) Nay this whole discourse does so foolishly, and laxely cast, and
weigh things Religious and Profane in the same balance of vain conjecture,
that I almost repent my noticeing of it so much; but see the flattery of
delusion, having made your N. C. childishly to decline all Reason, as Carnal,
and, in the fright forsooth of your strong reasons, retreat to his Ministers
and the Bible, you ridiculously triumph over him, and think, your self so much
Master of the field of Reason, that insinuating your own praise, in the
description of Sound reason, you puff at other men's, as pitiful niblings: thus
being first in your own cause^ you would seem just, how I have Searched you let
others judge: for Scripture, you tell us. That to qu^te it, is not to build
sure upon it, the Devil did that, and so do all Sects: do you therefore mean,
that it should be laid aside, as an insufficient Judge, or that we use it no
better then the Devil did? I desire you may explain your self, if not for our
concernment, at least for the Scriptures vindication: In the mean time, I am
heartily willing that both what you and what I have said be rightly pondered,
and whether the Church in matters of Government be lest to rove in your
pretended liberty, or more excellently established by the infinite wisdom,
unspeakable love, and most tender care of its only Lord and Head, let Scripture
and Reason impartially decide: But to conclude all, you tell us with a preface,
That the Angels of the Churches afford us fairer likely hoods for Bishops, then
ever we shall find in the Bible for Presbytery It Is answered, seeing you your
self do acknowledge, that nothing in it (whether you mean in this place, or in
the whole Scripture, the words are ambiguous) amounts to a demonstration; I
remit the matter to the Scriptures by me adduced, whereby I am confident all
your Likelihoods are more then counterballanced: He who is further desi^ous to
have them removed, may consult M. Durham upon the Text; for my own part, since
ever I had the understanding to consider, that the R^velation was made in a
Mystic phrase, that the Seven stars who are the Angels, do certainly
signify the many teachers that were in every one of these Churches, that in
the Candle-sticks, as in the Stars, we find the same oneness, and number,
and lastly that though to the Angel be the inscription for address; yet we
find the body of all the Epistles written directly to the whole Churches,
these things I say occurring I protest I could never discern more reason in
this argument, for subjecting these Churches unto seven superior single
Prelates; then for making the same Prelates really Angels, or turning every
Church into a Candle stick; Or if I may adduce another instance, not absimilare
to your Fair Likelihoods, for interpreting the two Witnesses, to be the two
Archbishops of St. Andrews and Glasgow.

When you have spent your endeavors upon the Authority of Episcopacie, you
think to second it in the next place with its Antiquity derived you say, from
the times next to the Apostles, whereupon you conclude in these words That how
this excrescing power, should have crept into the whole Church, and no mention
when it came in, no Prince or Universal Council to introduce, it, in the times
of persecution when the Church usually is purest, and most free of pride, no
Secular consideration to flatter, but the first brunt of the persecution
always against it, and how none opposed it, if this was not introduced by
Apostles, or Apostolical men, passes my Divination: And really Sir, as to its
particular Methods, and increase, so does it mine: And so much more then it
does yours, that I am persuaded from clear Scripture, that it was not only not
introduced, but plainly reprobate by our Lord and his Apostles; Yet am I so
little thereby stumbled, that the more dark and obscure I find its rise and
progress, I am the more confirmed, that it is the very Mystery of iniquity,
and do so much the more admire the incorruptible and eternal Truth of the
Gospel, which as in the beginning it foretold the coming, and took very early
Notice of the first motions of this prodigy of wickedness; So has it,
through the many ages of its exaltation, preserved it self against, and now in
the latter days overcomes its Malice; But to review your discourse more
particularly, I have already showed, that the Ministry and Government
institute by our Lord, and confirmed and practiced by the Apostles, was plainly
Presbyterian; if so, what place for further inquiry? Is your alleged
traditional subsequent humane institution of Prelacie of greater moment? 2.
That even in the Primitive times, and for 140. years after our Savior, no
vestige of Prelacie appears upon record, is the consentient opinion of the best
Searchers, both on your, and our part. 3. This plea of Antiquity has already
been so fully handled, and improved both by yours, and ours, specially Hamond
on your part, and Blondel, Salmasius, and other Learned servants of Christ on
ours, that there needs nothing be added: and where the advantage is, the
Ingenuous may easily discern: He that desires a solid and short account of the
matter, may read the appendix to the jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici: But you
proceed to give in some poor scrapes of pretended Antiquity, which not only the
most sure, and clear, and far more ancient Scriptures of Truth, but even the
convincing answers which they have often received might well have made you to
forbear: And first you say That Ignatius his Epistles are plain language: And
so they are indeed, but too plain for you to have cited, as the following
passages, compared with the Scriptures subjoined may evince: In the Epistle to
the Tralliani, we have [ what is a Bishop, but he, that is possessed of all
Principality, and Authority beyond all, as much as is possible for men?
Reverence the Bishop as ye do'Christ, as the holy Apostles have Commanded, etc.
As the Lord Christ does nothing without his Father, so, must ye do nothing
without your Bishop, Let nothing seem right or equal to you, that is contra to
his judgment.] In the Epistle to the Philad. [ Let the Princes obey the
Emperors, the Soldiers the Princes, the Deacons and the rest of the Clergy,
with all the People, and the Soldiers, and the Princes, and the Emperor, let
them obey the Bishop] (no doubt the Bishop of Rome) In the Epistle to the
Smyrnenses; [The Scripture says honor God and the King, but I say, honor God
as the Author and Lord of all things, and the Bishop as the Prince of Priests,
resembling the image of God, of God for his principality, of Christ for his
Priesthood, etc. There is none greater then the Bishop in the Church, who is
consecrated for the Salvation of the whole World, etc. Let all men follow the
Bishop as Christ the Father, etc. It is not Lawful without the Bishop to
baptize, or offer, etc. He that does any thing without consulting the Bishop
Worshippeth the Devil: Now on the other hand let us hear what the Scripture
says to this purpose, Who then is Paul who Apollo but Ministers by whom ye
believe? Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ; for we preach not
our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your Servants for Jesus
sake: Not that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy:
for by faith ye stand. But so shall it not be among you, whosoever will be
great among you shall be your Minister, and whosoever of you will be the
chiefest, shall be Servant of all: to these add the practices, and other
professions of the Apostles concerning themselves, and their Fellow Laborers,
and really Sir, when you shall make these things found in Ignatius, consistent
even with the strain of pure Religion, and the truth of the Gospel, let be to
the Orthodoxie, and Piety of Ignatius, and the simplicity of his times; then
shall I cede to the Authority of these Letters: Only in the mean time let me
tell you, that for all the pains that Hamond has taken, to assert their Faith,
the words above cited, do savor so strongly of most gross and corrupt
interpolation; that not only I reject their Testimony, as to the matter of
Prelacie; but do esteem even the passages that may be therein found for
Presbytery, as to the Trallians, be subject to the Presbytery, as to the
Apostles of Jesus Christ, The Presbyters are the Council of God, and joint,
Assembly of the Apostl^s, and such like of little or no value. 2. You mention
Cyprians time, but hold, I preceive your second Edition mends your first, and
this your practice like to that of your more innocent friend Mr. Coluin, in his
verses, of giving us second Editions, bearing additions, without advertissment,
had indeed abused me, If by accident I had not fallen in the review of my
papers, to make use of your second Copy, and in this you tell us, in the next
place of the Apostolical Canons, a work of very venerable Antiquity, at least
the first fifty of them, though perhaps none of the Apostles: But first why
say you Perhaps, in a matter beyond all peradventure. 2. Not to trouble you
with Criticisms, he who would be resolved anent the Authority of these Canons,
let him only read them: And as I am confident, he will be far from thinking
either the first 50, or the rest of them Apostolical, So I am certain the
mention made in the 3. Can. of Sacrificium, Altar, Oleum in Candelabrum, and
Incensum oblationis tempore, a Sacrifice, Altar, oil in the lamp, and incense
in the time of offering, the 17. Can, qui viduam duxit, Episcopus aut Presbyter
aut Diaconus esse non potest, he who has married a widow, cannot be a Bishop,
or a Presbyter, or a Deacon, the 25. Can. Ex his qui caelibes in Clerum
pervenerunt, jubemus ut Lectores tantum, and cantores, si velint, nuptias
contrahant, Of Bachelors who has entered into orders, Readers only and Singers
if they will, may marry, the great and constant distinction therein, made,
inter Clericum, and Laicum, and the many other vanities therein to be found,
specially in the last part of them, will easily render their venerable
Antiquity of no moment, in our present Controversy: so that neither your 40
but in effect the 38. Canon, though it were more positive, and express for
your Prelatick pre-eminence, nor your Synodicall injunction, to the same
purpose, both posterior to the first Primitive purity, are of any regard: but
3. so wretched is the cause that you defend, that even in your clearest
evidences, your partiality and hypocrisy is manifest: You allege the
Apostolical Canons in defense of your Prelatick Order, and yet you consider
not, that the same Canons, do not only condemn your Prelates; But subvert their
present constitution. I shall not insist upon the 24. Canon Episcopus aut
Presbyter in fornicatione, aut perjurio deprehensus deponitor: Let a Bishop or
a Presbyter guilty ofsornication or perjury, be deposed: the 20. Episcopum aut
Presbyterum qui fideles delinquentes (quid ergo si Innocents) percutit, and
terrorem ipsis hoc modo incutit, deponi praecipimus. We command that the Bishop
or Presbyter who smites delinquents, and so becomes a terror unto them, be
deposed, what then, if they smite the innocent: the 28^ 41. 53. 57 and 75.
which I am most assured, if observed would remove all the present Bishops and
Curats in Scotland: but the Canons I offer are the 4. Omnium aliorum Pomorum
Primitiae Episcopo and Presbyteris domum mittuntor, Manifestum autem est quod
Episcopus et Presbyteri inter Diaconos and reliquos Clericos eas dividunt, Let
the first ^ruits of all others aples be sent home to the Bishop and Presbyters,
for it is Manifest that the Bishop and Presbyters, divide them among the
Deacons, and the rest of the Clergy, 33. Cujusque gentis Episcopos oportet
scire quinam inter ipsos primus sit, neque sine illius voluntate quicquam agere
insolitum, illa autem quemque prosetract^re, quae ad Parochiam ejus and loca
ipsi subdita attinent; sed neque ille citra omnium voluntatem aliquid facito.
36. Bis in Anno Episcoporum celebrator Synodus, and pietatis inter se dogmata
in disquistionem vocanto. and 80. Dicimus quod non oporteat Episcopum aut
Presbyterum publicis se admini^^rationibus immiscere, sed v^care and commodum
se exhibere usibus Ecclesiasticis, animum igitur inducito hoc non facere, aut
deponitor: together with the obvious strain of the whole plainly insinuating,
the Bishop to be the person, to whom the flock is principally and immediately
committed, and who as the Primus Presbyter, the first Presbyter, ought chiefly
to mind the charge, In which Canons although I grant that their appears a
precedencie of Order, given to the Bishop, over the Presbyters, (who in these
times were many Ministers, living in one City and Society; having the charge in
common among themselves, and with and under their (...) over the Church, and
Flock in their bounds) and also to the first Bishop of a Province, over his
Coepiscopi; Yet I am sure your Prelatick power, and Superiority, acclaiming the
sole power of Ordination, and Jurisdiction is no where thereby approved; but
rather condemned: Your third Testimony you bring from Cyprian, in whose time
you say That the power of Bishops was well regulate and Settled, and here
knowing that he professes That he would do nothing without the Clergy, that
he could do nothing without them, nor take upon him alone: Whereby the ancient
Prostasia; and not your Prelacie, is plainly and only held forth: You insinuate
as much, as if he had afterward retracted this opinion, and this you prove very
pitifully, 1. From his answer to one Rogatian a Bishop, that he by his
Episcopal vigor, and Authority had power presently to punish a Deacon, for an
affront received, which yet does not at all seclude the Presbyters, according
to the Rule of the Canon Law Episcopus non potest judicare Presbyterum vel
Diaconum sine Synodo, and Senioribus, The Bishop cannot judge a Presbyter or a
Deacon without the Synod, and Elders^ 2. From this Censure of Heretics and
Schismatics, for proud contempt of their then Bishops, which we do as little
allow as you do. 3. From a letter written by the Presbyters and Deacons of
Rome, after the Death of Fabian, wherein they complain of the want of one to
Moderate, and with Authority and advice to take account of Matters, whence you
say, that surely they thought little of Persbyters being equal in power to
Bishops, who write so, where the Episcopal power seemed to be devolved upon
them: but pray Sir, If a society consisting of Members all equal in power, but
having a Head or President for order, and good Rule, do regret his loss, during
the vacancie, in these very terms, wherein lies the inconsistence? How
foolish then is that stricture of your vanity, which you here subjoin? viz.
but. I believe, few of you know these writings; whereas to be plain with you,
in my thought, neither you nor I have given any great Specimen of this
knowledge, or said so much, as the half of what is obviously to be found, in
almost any printed debate anent this matter.

Sir, I must tell you further, if I my self were alone concerned in this
reflection^ I would scarce look upon it as a reproach worth the wipeing off, to
be as great a stranger to these things as ye take me to be, nor would I think
many cubits were added to my stature to be as knowing in them as your self; yet
it is known that I tell the world no news, when I say, that there have been
(and to this day are) not a few great men of our way who have given such proof
of their knowledge in these ancillarie and minutious things, whereof you
represente us as ignorant; as have made your greatest Rabbis find, that
wherein they gloried they were not short of them; and if ye know not this, yet
seem to have lost your silly self in the Labyrinth of Antiquity, and by this
means are fallen under the shameful reproach of being peregrinus Domi: and if
ye know it, and yet so superciliously assert the contraire, what Apology can
ye make for speaking so great an untruth, that will either satisfy the world
or your own Conscience. But Sir, ingenously I profess, I pity you for your
Vanity and folly; for it seems ye think this the only expedient to make the
world believe the pregnancie of your pate, and Pronounce you worthy of the
Chair: but Sir, it will only make the more serious weep to remember who did
once fill it, and should have filled it still, when they consider how it is
become the seat of a scorner; and the less serious will laugh at your
prodigious folly. I have only one overture to propose unto you, that your
vanity may be with some handsomeness hereafter coutched, and the world may let
pass what you say without quarrelling at it, as a known falsehood: And it is
this, in your after comparings and measurings of your abilities, that you may
be taken notice of for a Nonsuch, be so wise as to compare your self with your
Fellow-Curats, if ye hope to bear the bell, but when ye insinuate a comparison,
with so many burning and shining lights, and then, in your Juvenile pride and
self-conceit, arrogate a preference to these, ye do only force men to take
notice of, and enquire into, your shame and short-coming: And, if I mistake
not, fall upon the most certain method of making your self ^^ink above ground.
Sir, if, in these two or three lines, I have digressed contrary to my
inclination, the occasion will justify it, and charity persuades to it. But,
3. You tell us, that in the Council of Nice, Speaking of the power of
Metropolitans; the Canon says, let the ancient customs be in force: It Is
answered 1. We find that Council did conveen in the year. 325. Now admit, that
certain Customs concerning Metropolitans, as well as Bishops, were b^ought
into the Church about 165. years, before the Council; which is the highest
period from whence they can be calculat, These customs in this respect, might
will therein be termed Ancient, without the least contrariety to my assertion.
2. It Is evident enough from many suffrages, that as the primitive Episcopacie,
which succeeded to Presbytery, the Government first institute by our Lord and
his Apostles, and exercised in the Christian Church, did only import the humane
invention of a Prostasia, for Order; So the custom of Metropolitans, in these
times, did differ nothing from it, as may appear from the 33. Canon of these
called Apostolical already cited, wherein he is only termed Primus Gentis
Episcopus, and tied to the advice of his Coepiscopi: In the next place, you
tell us, that nothing can be alleged against your Episcopal power, but Some
few or disjointed places of some Authors, which at most Prove, that they judged
not the origin of Bishops to be divine, and none save Aerius, repute an
Heretic, did ever speak against the difference, betuixt Bishops and
Presbyters: Sir, if you did not here acknowledge, almost all that I desire, I
could easily show you, that not only the Scriptures of the New Testament, and
the agreeable practice of the Apostles, and their Immediate successors are
against your Prelatick excrescent power; but that even for several ages
thereafter, while both Bishops and Metropolitans did exercise their Prostasian,
your Diocesan Prelat, having the sole power of Ordination and jurisdiction, was
unknown, yea expressly reprobate: but because the appendix whereunto I have
already referred, and Smectymnus, do plainly make out this point, I shall not
detain you: As for A^rius, it is true, he held that a Bishop and a Presbyter do
not differ, and that Augustine calls this proprium ejus dogma, his proper
Opinion, and Epiphanius, dogma furiosum et stolidum, a furious and foolish
opinion, and that both of them do rank him among Heretics; but seeing they
also accuse him of Arr^anisme, and withal do also tax him for error in some
points which are cl^ar truth, viz. that it is not lawful to pray and offer for
the dead, their censure is as little to be noticed, as his Testimony; specially
seeing many Learned men do plainly assert, that not only Hierom, but even
Augustine himself, Chrisostom and many others of the Fathers, were of the same
opinion with Aerius as to the matter of this difference: but for Ierom you go
about to alleviat his Testimonye, viz. Idem ergo est Presbyter qui Episcopus.
Therefore a Presbyter is one and the same with a Bishop, and noverint Episcopi
se magis consuetudine quan dispositionis dominicae veritate Presbyter is esse
majores, etc. And let the Bishops know that they are above Preebyters more
through custom then any divine warrant. Because he himself was but a
Presbyter. Pray Sir, who were they whom your men cite so fast for Bishops, were
not they themselves Bishops, and yet the truth is, there were Bishops also at
that time of his Opinion. 2. You say that his fervent if not sirie Spirit
drives him along in every things to an excess. Good Sir, where is now your
veneration for Antiquity and the holy fathers? For us, seeing we do not found on
man's Authority, this your brusk character, discovering more of your partiality
then of Ieroms infirmity, does not offend: Only this I must say, that whatever
be his fervor in his other writtings; yet I am sure that both in his
Commentary upon Titus and in his Epistle ad Evagrium, he confirms his
assertion above set down, with Scripture Arguments, most calmly, solidly and
unanswerably. 3. You allege, that Notwithstanding that he make the Bishop and
Presbyter to differ in degree only, and not in office, and that by
Ecclesiastic and not Divine Authority, yet he confesses that Presbyters did
not ordain, and that the origin of the exercising power was in the days of the
Apostles to prevent schisms, etc. It Is answered he says indeed, quid enim
facit, excepta ordinatione, Episcopus quod Presbyter non facit; But as he is
there pointing only at the custom, then in use, so, this does nothing derogate
from that equality, yea identitie of power, which he attributes to both from
Scripture: what you mean by the origin of the exercising power, etc. Is not so
clear. It Is true he affirms that at Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist to
Heraclas, and Dionysius Bishops, the Presbyters did always name one, chosen of
themselves, and placed in higher degree, Bishop; but what says this more then
that in all that time for orders sake, they had successive Presidents at first,
it is like moveable, and thereafter fixed during life: And we have already both
acknowledged, and regreted the grievous abuse, occasioned by that latter
practice: You add that he compares, the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons in
the Church, ^to the high Priest, Priests and Levites in the Temple: and since
there was at that time, from Ecclesiastic custom then allowed (which
according to his use, and as he uses to speak promiscuously, writing of Lent,
he here indifferently terms an Apostolic Tradition) a ground of resemblance,
why might he not use the similitude, without stretching it either to evert,
what he had said, or countenance your Prelacie? Lastly you allege that he
says, that it was decreed through the whole World that a Presbyter should be
over the rest, to root out the seed of difference: It Is answered that this in
toto orb decretum est, may, and is, to be understood, not of an express
Decree, which does no where appear; but of a General consentient custom,
taking place every where: both the truth of the thing, and Hieroms after
Paulatim ad unum omnis Solicitudo est delata, by little and little all the care
is devolved upon one, do abundantly clear, How ever this may be warrantably
said, that as this custom did with time universally obtain, and in Ieroms
days, not having much exceeded the limits of a simple Prostasia, was by him
also approved, as the remedy of dissension, so, he holding it to be not of
Divine disposition, no doubt if he had these other holy men, were this day to
see the hundred part of these sad, and fearful effects, that it has produced,
nothing could be able to break their astonishment, at the surprising sight of
such prodigious consequences of this Mystery of iniquity, but sorrow and
Lamentation, together with deep regrete, that they did not better forsee, and
more timously resist, the first tendencies and beginnings of this evil: Now
whether or not Antiquity be on your side, and if our grounds from Scripture
against your Episcopal Authority, be not much confirmed, both by Ierom and the
other passages here handled, I willingly submit it to all the lovers of truth:
but lest you think that by the representation I have made in the beginning of
my answer to your alledgeance from Antiquity, of the early and strange rise
and grouth of Episcopacie, I do thereby derogate from that light and purity,
which with you I acknowledge in these Primitive times, I must note, first, That
pride as it was the first sin and corrupter of Man's integrity, from which the
felicities of Paradise could not exempt him; So is it of all sins the most
inward, rooted, and subtle, attending a man in all conditions, finding Matter
in all occasions, and immixing it self even in our fairest and purest actions.
2. That the Disciples of our Lord, notwithstanding of his own presence, holy
instruction, and humble example were not free of the motions of this evil, the
History of the Gospel does plainly testify. 3. I note that the times of the
Apostles, the most pure and powerful that ever the Church enjoyed, were many
ways infested with this plague, I mention not the contentions betuixt Paul and
Barnabas, which no doubt sprung from this latent corruption; but he who
considers the great number^ and many wicked practices of false Apostles,
Heretics and Schismatics, in these days boasting against, and despising even
Paul himself, with the affected Pre-eminence of Diotrephes, and the then begun
working of the mystery of iniquity, toward the exalting of the Son of
perdition, in place of denying, must of necessity marveil, how this Devil of
pride could in so gracious and short a time, destitute of all Earthly
encouragements, so greatly prevail, and plainly perceive, that this active
Spirit, would not be wanting, to embrace and improve all occasions and
opportunities offered; 4, That as order did no doubt at first in all meetings
require a President, whom I also easily grant to have been, as any occasion did
require, rather recommended by desert, no evil consequence being then
apprehended, then presented by a constant and complete Rotation; So it is very
probable, and confirmed by Hieroms suffrage, that contentions did first both
fix the presidencie or prostasia, and exalt it to any notable eminency; but
whether by way of remedy, or by way of victory, to the increase of the Malady,
is indeed the most observable points, and, as I apprehend, that whereupon we
will divide: and therefore I note 5. That although the Authority of able and
holy men at first, advanced to a fixed Presidencie, might then appear, as in
these days of great simplicity and humility, in it self very innocent, and in
the event also effectual to concord; Yet without all question at best it was
but an humane invention, copied from the pattern of the manner of the then Civil
Government of the Empire, to which our Lord expressly commanded his Disciples
not to conform. 6. That seeing affected pre-eminence and the contentions thence
arising, did clearly occasion the introducing of this Prostasia, though in
many, yea most places, the prevailing number of good men, might thereto advance
worthy and deserving persons, studying more the prospering of the Gospel, and
unity of the Church then adverting to the bad consequences, that thence might
ensue; Yet it is not only most certain, that this promotion was that, whereunto
these strivings did every where directly aspire; but also most probable, that
even in the first beginnings, many ambitious pretenders, wanting a just
opposition, did carry their design, and were preferred. 7. That by plain
dealing I may satisfy all pretenses, I observe, that albeit power and
Authority, unite in the Prostasia of one amongst many, may be thereby rendered
more strong, and effectual; Yet seeing the benefits of this union, and
advancement, does only flow from the accidental worth, and ability of the
person that happens to be promoted, and that the order or institution it self,
destitute of divine warrant, and promise, and clearly occasioned by evil
contention and introduced into the house of God by humane invention, could not
at first have any thing in it recommendable, and has since produced most
corrupt ^ruits; Neither the existence of Many excellent and great men in this
degree, nor the laudable, yea extraordinary advantages, that the Church has
received from them in the concret, can now justify, and maintain the Order it
self in the abstract: If this arguing were good, able and well qualifyed men
vested with such a power, or placed in such a condition, have proven and may
prove notable instruments of Good: therefore it is reasonable and expedient,
that such a constant order should be erected, we might not only have Bishops,
but most of the Monastic Orders of the Roman Church: We find Peter with the
singular benefit of the Church, exercing a power of Life and Death, and that
given him from above, and not assumed; could therefore an order of Churchmen,
pretending to the like Authority, be rationally thence maintained in the
Church? No ways: Accidental advantages do not commend unwarranted
institutions, much less can they justle out our Lords express constitution: But
it is he, the perfect orderer of his own house, who has positively defined,
and blessed its Officers, and their power, and not left the matter Arbitrarie,
to the probable contrivances of apparent benefit, far less to the
dissembling pretenses, of men's Lusts, and corrupt Interest. 8. It is to be
noted, that although the great measure of Grace, given to the Primitive Church,
and the hard and frequent persecutions, wherewith it was exercised, did for a
time hinder that strange depravation and incredible ^ruption of wickedness,
whereunto the setting up of the Ancient Prostasia, the rudiment of your
Prelacie, did from its first beginnings, secretly and covertly bend; Yet this
is most evident, that so soon as the Church of God obtained the countenance,
and was favored by the more fond in many things (such as excessive Do^ations
and Grants of privileges) then prudently pious benevolence of Secular Princes,
this Prelatick order, which in its depression had been indeed honored, with
many shining lights and Glorious Martyrs, attaining then to its ascendent, did
not only debauch the Lords Ministers, for the most part unto idleness, avarice
and luxury; but continually climb up according to its proper Genius of
Ambition, until the Devils design in its rise, and progress, was fully
discovered, and consummate, in the revelation of the Son of perdition: 9. This
being the rise, progress and product of Prelacie in the first Churches, as may
be clearly gathered from the writtings of these times, how it was introduced in
other Churches, thereafter gathered and brought in, may be found in their
Histories: Only this is certain, that as in almost no Church it can be showed,
to have been coevous with Christianity, and in all the western Churches where
it obtained place, was ever a sprig of Romes Hierarchy, propagate by her
ambition and deceit, and the like practices; So the Church of Scotland in
special, was in the beginning, and for some centuries thereafter, instructed
and guided by Monks, without Bishops until palladius from Rome, did set up
Prelacie among us, as many Authors witness; Nay, we may find it on Record,
that even in the 816. year a Synod in England did prohibit the Scots any
function in their Church, because they gave no honor to Metropolitans and
other Bishops.

By these observations, having in some sort delineate the mysterious and
crooked windings, of this excrescing Power, in its first motions, and setting
forth: and very clearly and naturally traced its progressions, and thence
deduced that most prodigious production of the Antichristian Papacy, as any
considerate man may thereby easily perceive, not only how it might, but how de
facto it has crept into the whole Church, without an Apostolical
introduction, notwithstanding of all your contrary insinuations, so I am
confident, that what ever other advantages, these primitive times had above our
latter days; yet our discovery, made after so full a revelation, compared to
the obscure appearances of this wickedness, in the first ages of the Church,
cannot be thereby rationally disproved: and your scurrile disparaging of the
latter times of reformation, as the fagg end o^ sexteen hundred years, does
with little less success, plead for the Pope and Antichrist, then for your
An^ichristian Prelacie.

As for the rest of your discourse, wherein you tell your N. C. that though the
ancient Bishops were better men, then either Bishops or Presbyters alive; Yet,
in Presbyteries, Specially in the matter of Ordination, they were sine quibus
non, and what ever be the present abuse of the Episcopal power; Yet it is a
rational and most necessary thing, that the more approven and gifted, be
peculiarly incharged with the inspection of the Clergy, an order of men
ne^ding much to be regulate; and seeing all humane things, and Presbytery also,
are liable to be abused, the common maxim remains to be applied, remove the
abuse of Bishops, but retain their use. In answer hereto, I need not enlarge,
he who knows Church History best, will easily grant, that as for the first
Centurie and an half, we have no vestige upon record, of your Prelatick power;
So when (...) had place, their concurrence in Presbyteries, was only for order,
as being the Mod^rators, a consideration of the same exigence and effect,
whether they be fixed, or unfixed, and not from any peculiar power, proper to
them as a superior order; A thing so certainly disowned by the primitive
Church, that, even after the Bishops thought themselves well stated in their
Prelacie, and were beginning to contend among themselves, for the Papacy,
Hierom does plainly deny them any such prerogative above Presbyters, and was
not therefore contradicted by any: How much more then does this condemn that
sole power, both of Ordination and Jurisdiction, whereunto your Bishops do
pretend. As for your alleged reason, and necessity of promoting the better
gifted over the unruly Cl^rgie, whatever application it may have to that
naughty Company of your insufficient and profane Curats, or Conformity to the
Court; yea, the worlds prejudice against our Lord Jesus, his Ministers, and all
his followers; Yet these two things are most evident. 1. That as that lowely
and ministerial Government, appointed by Christ in his own house, admitting no
superiority or inequality of power among Ministers, is not subjected to, and
alterable at the arbitriment of humane reason; so, the advantage of Gifts,
whereupon you would found it, does so little favor your conclusion, that the
direct contrary is recommended by our Lord, as its best evidence and fruit, he
that will be chief among you let him be your Servant; and that not only as to
the grace of humility, but in plain opposition to that superior Authority
exercised in Secular Rule, whereof the imitation in this place, is expresty
prohibit to Gospel Ministers: but the ground of your mistake is, that
Notwithstanding our Lord has said of himself and his Ministers, that one is
your Master; and all you are Brethren and fellow servants, among whom an
inequality of gifts, may well consist with an equality of condition; Yet
restess and most subtle Ambition, for grati^ying its evil lust, will, even in
a plain opposition commanded, allege the affectation, and not the thing it
self to be discharged; and in the low lie state of Service, devise superior
and inferior degrees. The second thing is, that though I be ^arre from denying
humane infirmities incident to Ministers, as well as others, and do heartily
wish, that the of ^nces by them occasioned, may be always, as the most hurtful
to the Gospel, most seriously precautioned and regreted; Yet I am sure, that,
without regard to our Lords most gracious gifting, and most wise ordering of
his Ministry for the feeding and ruling of his people, to affirm that
nevertheless there is no order of men needs so much to be regulated, is a
presumptuous and vain imputation, against Jesus Christ, the Head and King of
the Church, and his Oeconomie: Has our Lord taken so great pains to Separate,
Instruct, Sanctify, and send forth Ministers, and promised them so special a
presence and assistance, for the oversight and conduct of Believers, and darre
any Christian say, that even the order it self (for alas I grant the men are
but earthen vessels) needs more then any other, the contrivance of man's
invention for its regulation? But let none that honors Jesus Christ, or
remembers the former Beauty, Order and Success of his Ministry and Courts
amongst us, be offended; this reflection proceeds from the same Spirit, that
accused our great Master, as a Rebel and Usurper, and his Apostles as the
Troublers and Subverters of the World. As to your conclusion, when you have
disproved the Divine warrant of Presbytrie, and showed both its occasion, rise,
tendencie, and proper fruits to be only evil, as I have done in the matter of
Prelacie, then you may equiparat them in the point of abuse: but seeing the
abuse of Presbytrie is only accidental, from humane infirmity, and that of
Prelacie, its most native Genius and Product; Na^, seeing Presbytrie is indeed
the right use of the Churches Government, and Prelacie its manifest
depravation, the maxim which you adduce, in its just application, does most
clearly say, remove the abuse of Prelacie, and let the use of Presbytery be
re^ained.

The fourth DIALOGUE Answered.
SIR, since you have said nothing that I have not to my self (and I hope to all
rational and impartial men) satisfyingly answered, and seeing I can say it in
Gods sight, that in all the matters hitherto treated, I find in my heart a
serious desire to please him in all things; and also to comply with his Church,
and obey the Laws of the Kingdom, in what I judge agreeable to his will, with
as much distrust of my self, and charity toward others, as humane frailty
does permit: In this persuasion truly, and by your own verdict, conscientious,
without either noticing the pitiful shift of a blind conscience, which you make
your N C. pretend, or charging you with that arrogance, whereupon you make him
weakly to exclaim, I shall proceed to consider the grounds which in this place
you lay down, You say then, Private persons have nothing to do with Government;
submission and not judging is their part. I cannot stand to discuss all the
ambiguities that may be latent in this General; but it is strange. 1. That the
Government of Gods house (^or that is the point betwixt us) should be
instituted by him, for the Edification and Salvation of private persons, and
his own Glory, as you cannot deny; and yet they to have nothing to do with it.
2. You say, Submission i^ their duty. And would you have it blind, and not
rational, and conscientious? 3. Our Lord has defined the Government of his
Church, and did establish the same among us, engaging us thereinto by a
perpetual Covenant, is it then nothing of our concernment? But may we break
these sacred ties, and abandone our selves to an implicit compliance, with
every humane invention? I grant that private persons are neither, under a
righteous constitution, to usurp the part of the Governors; nor yet under a
sinful, unlawfully to solicit, and endeavor an alteration: but as in the
former case, both Reason and Religion, specially where an Oath has
interveened, does oblige to maintenance, so in the latter, I am assured that
all active owning and approving (the thing whereunto we are pressed) beyond a
providentiall acquiescence, is utterly sinful: If you require my reasons, there
is none like your own, viz. first, because, I am persuaded that, what ever may
be the comparative innocence of an erring, but well-meaning opinion; Yet of
every Soul, who has seen the Glorious light and work of God in the Lands, and
engaged himself thereto by solemn Covenant, and now of late, has broken these
bonds, and concurred to change Christ's pure Ordinances, and set up, establish
or countenance Prelacie, and its wicked Hierarchy, God will surely either in
this life, as we have already seen, in the convictions of many, or in the last
and great Judgment, openly require it. 2. Because not only perjury, manifestly
ingredient in the active submission and compliance which you exact, has a
plain and direct tendencie to the blotting of the Soul; but as the Gospel and
all its Ordinances, are designed to purify the heart; So, this of Government,
so clearly therein appointed, and of so necessaire and effectual influence, for
the conserving of truth, edifying of the body of Christ, and perfecting of the
Saints, does undeniably contribute to the same end: And by these two easy
rules it is whereby I heartily wish, that both you and I, and all men may
examine our Conscienc^s.

In the next place you tell your N. C. That we have no rational ground to
think you wrong, in Matters of Religion: do you then think that obedience to
the Lords Command, against swearing falsely, and adhering to, and owning the
Kingdom, and Ordinances of Jesus Christ, are no Matters of Religion? or have
you already answered the full and just account, that I have given of our
differences? But, supposing there may be error on your side, you add, that
unless the error be of greater importance, then the Communion of Saints is, it
ought not to unty the bond of the unity of the Catholic Church. This is the
rule which you gave us before, in your first Dialogue, and therefore I shall
say little to it, only if your meaning be, that except the conjunction with the
erring party, be of greater prejudice, then separation upon that account, we
ought not to unty the unity of the Church, I willingly assent: but if there be
any other latent sense in your strange weighing the import of error, with an
article of Faith, things quite opposite, without all communication of degrees;
when you explain your self, I shall consider it. To this you subjoin many
things of Paul's conforming both to Jews and Gentiles, in matters of greater
scruple, then what we contend about, and thence conclude, That if Paul did so
freely and out of Charity, then are we much more bound, from whom the duty of
obedience to Law does also exact it: Now, because in this place, it is, that
you not only abuse Paul's practice, but go about to intricate and destroy, by a
new knack of pitiful Court Sophistry, the privilege of Christian liberty, I
shall therefore endeavor briefly to give you a distinct and adequat return.
And I say that Paul's conformity does no ways enforce the compliance required
of us; because that all we find in the Apostle, is a free and prudent
accommodation of himself, in things wholly external and indifferent, for the
gaining of such, with whom he conversed; whereas the compliance demanded of us,
is plainly to own and approve unwarranted, wicked and accursed Prelacie, and
its abominations: which, both by the Command, and Oath of God, we are bound to
extirpate: If Paul, notwithstanding of the accomplishment of the^ Mosaic
dispensation, at first institute by the Lord, and not then expressly antiquat,
did nevertheless continue some of its observances, that by showing a respect
to, and not despising of these shadows, though already evanished, he might the
better convince the Jews, of the fulfilling of what they prefigured; can any
man thence infer, that therefore we ought not only to relinquish the true
Ordinances of Christ, but acknowledge the inventions of men, such as Prelacie,
and its vain Ceremonies, although the samine be found contraire both to the
word of God, and power of Godliness, and therefore are by us solemnly abjured.
As for Paul's freedom of converse toward the Gentiles, admitting that there
appears a seeming excess in it, obnoxious to misconstruction: yet, was it not
in meat and drink only? And is not its principal design of asserting, in these
things, such an absolute liberty, as might warrant the deed in it self,
notwithstanding the possibility of some men's mistakes, wholly opposite to your
purpose? so that, without question, the outmost advantage you can draw from
this matter, is, that we have the liberty to do materially many of these
external things, by you enjoined, without homologating your intention in the
imposing, which, whether you would accept of, or account consistent with
sincere dealing, I leave to your self to judge? But it is like your meaning is,
that all the things whereunto we are pressed, passing from our Covenant,
relinquishing of our sent and sealed Ministers, owning and active submitting to
abjured Prelates, and the like, are in themselves things wholly external,
insignificant, and nothing; wherein we may as lawfully complement Authority, by
our obedience, as Paul, by a free exercise of his liberty, in washing,
shavings, circumcising, eating, and drinking did complacently insinuat upon
Jews, and Gentiles: And if in these there be any parity, let the meanest
capacity discern 2. Although the things required of us, were indeed in
themselves wholly indifferent; Yet we cannot be urged with Paul's conformings,
because the reason and design of Paul's practice, being diametrally repugnant to
yours, instead of confirming, plainly subverts the compliance by you demanded:
Paul's practice, did flow from liberty, and the reason and warrant of that,
was, because that Christ has made us free, and called us unto liberty,
blotting out the hand-writting of Ordinances that was against us: dare you
then, or any mortal else, offer to write and fix another, and again entangle
us with a yoke of bondage, and subjecte us to, or judge us concerning
Ordinances, after the Commandments and Doctrines of men? What reasoning can be
more absurd then that of yours? Paul did these things freely, therefore, you
are bound to obedience: Do contraries, that remove, establish one another? I
grant that, if in charity to our equals, even Aliens, we are bound to a
compleasant and gaining acting or forbearance, in things indifferent, and in
our power; much more does the same charity bind us, to the like compliance
toward our Superiors; but by what consequence can you extend this obligation of
charity, to a plain surrender of our Liberty; and turn the praise of a free
benevolent exercise, unto a bondage of obedience, wherefrom our Lord has so
clearly liberat us, as to all these externals, which you so much plead for? But
as to this point, you tell your N. C. That he bewrays great simplicity;
because forsooth Paul did not re^use compliance by reason that the things were
commanded by Authority: But because certain false Brethren came to spy out his
liberty, to whom he gave place by subjection, no not for an hour. Really, Sir,
your N. C. must indeed be very simple, that he could endure such imposing. You
say, Paul did not re^use compliance, by reason that the Ceremonies were
commanded, and yet his own words by you cited, say plainly, that though at
other times, in the free and edi^ying exercise of his liberty, he has in
charity ceded to the weaker; Yet, to give place by subjection (mark it) the
correlat and homologation of command, he would not, no not for an hour, Is not
then to repeat only your discourse, to redargue it? I might tell you further,
that by the context, it is evident, that the Apostle speaks in this place, of
these that would have brought Gentiles under the Law of Moses, and the
observance of the Jewish ceremonies, who certainly did pretend Divine Authority
for their Doctrine: And therefore, and for this only reason, were in the
vindication of Christian liberty opposed by Paul, and Barnabas: but let us hear
what Stilling-fl^et has put in your Mouth as to this Matter: You say then
that, If an^ require of us compliance, as if it were necessary of it self, we
have reason to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free.
But it is unsufferable peevishness, if the Magistrate enjoin a thing, declaring
it free in it self, and only necessary because commanded, upon that score to
refuse obedience. To this it is answered 1. That it is unsufferable boldness
for you, to allege a peevishness in a practice, so exactly parallel to that of
the Apostles, who, as they understood the liberty wherewith Christ had made
them free, to consist in that real relief and freedom granted to them from
the yoke and burden of the Jewish ceremonies; so, they do exhort believers to
stand fast to it, which certainly imports a nonsubmission, and resisting to the
imposition, either of these antiquat Jewish observations, or any other of Man's
invention, seeing that these are indeed contrary, and not only an
astrictedness, in opinion, unto the liberty purchased: It Is true, the false
Apostles pressed their observance from divine Authority; but seeing the
Christians then did except, upon the liberty which Christ has obtained, and
thereby proclaimed to us an exemption even from the old Divine Law of
Ordinances, is not the same much more forcible against Men's usurpation of an
unwarranted tyrrany; or think you, that our Lord has only freed us from Moses
impositions, that we might fall into the hands of more severe Taskmasters, who
not only take upon them to appoint, without Gods warrant into the house and
matters of God, and introduce will worship, which he abhorres; but after they
have urged our obedience, as only Civil, and out of respect to Authority, and
not from Conscience, do then tell us, that by a general and supervenient Law
of God, their statutes become to reach even the Conscience also? But 2. you
say, if the Magistrate declare the thing to he free in it self, and only
necessary because commanded, Christian liberty is not thereby lessened. It Is
answered, is not Christian liberty always opposed to the Jewish bondage? Now,
Sir, I demand wherein did this bondage consist, was it in the Authority only,
whereby these ordinances were enjoined, and which did indeed immediately reach
the Conscience, and not rather in the obligation to that burdensome practice,
which thence did ensue? And certainly, you, and all men, must grant the latter;
seeing the speciality of Divine Authority, is so far from rendering an
imposition, otherwise light, to be burdensome; that without question, as its
precepts are the perfect law of liberty; So the clearness of its warrant, is
the greatest relief of Conscience: Nay, this is a truth to certain, and
apposite to our present purpose, that I am sure you are convinced, that if the
Prelates could produce Divine commands for their injunctions, these would
quickly satisfy all our scruples, and make Non-conformists, the most
conformable of the Nation. Give over then your empty quibling, in telling us,
that you exact not our compliance, as necessaire in it self by divine
prescript, for though I could show, how that notwithstanding you pretend not to
any immediate divine warrant, for your imposings; you not the less allege that
Divine Authority, whence Magistracy does descend, for astricting our obedience;
Yet this is so far from being our exception, that plainly on the contraire,
your ceremonies commanded in the Matters of God, against that liberty purchased
unto us, are not in themselves, or in any other respect, so much a burden, as
for lack of that very same authority, whereof you do most inadvertently
pretend, that the want should be our solution. But 3. what can be more
manifest, then that, as the hardship of the Jewish Pedagogie, did consist in
the multitude of their Ceremonies, and Observances, whereunto they were tied in
practice, and neither in the obligation of Divine Authority, whereby they
became bound, nor yet in their opinion of things, which, notwithstanding of
their being injoined by the Lord, they knew to be in themselves free, and were
not in the least, by this liberty of opinion, delivered from the rigor of that
Pedagogie, so the releasement, which our Lord has purchased, consists in
freeing us from that yoke, and burden, which the Jews were not able to bear,
and in liberating us from the Law of Ordinances, and the rudiments of the
world? Pray Sir, is this only to change the opinion of things, and leave us as
much ob^oxious, to be subjected in obedience as ever the Jews were? who can
admit it? If you be still unclear, answer this demand with your self in
sobriety: If the false Brethren had said to the Christians of old, we
acknowledge with you, that the Jewish dispensation is accomplished; but since
the Lord has not expressly discharged the continuance of its observations, and
they are but things external, and of themselves free, let us in the
recognizance of his Authority, or for peace sake, still be subject in a
conformable obedience: would not the Apostle have returned the same answer? It
is the Lord who has made us free, let us not again be brought unto bondage:
the sun of righteousness is arisen, and has obscured all the former shadowing
lights, we have no need either of these, or the more pitiful tapers of men's
blind invention: And here I must tell you by the way, that as I have drawn out
my answer on purpose, to meet with your significant rites introduced in Gods
service; So, as to the first part of it, anent the liberty purchased to us by
Christ, I further add, that it is a groundless conceit, to think that the only
reason of abolishing the Jewish ceremonies, was, because they did prefigure our
Lords coming, seeing it is most certain, that although the whole complexly, was
indeed a Pedagogie to lead unto him, and make that People to wait and long for
his redemption; Yet a great many of them did not properly prefigure, such as
the observation of days, distinction of meats, and the like, to which no such
relative signification can be attribute, without a groundless and violent
straining: and therefore, as I grant, that many of these rites, as being only
shadows of the good things to come, did evanish upon their appearance, and
consequently could not have been kept up, without a tacit hint, that the
things thereby typifyed were still expected; Yet I am very assured, that as to
a great part of these Mosaic Ordinances, our Lord did remove them, as a yoke
and burden, by the gracious concession of that Liberty, wherewith he made us
free, and that to bring back that servitude, or to introduce the like, is
plainly to bring us back again to the rudiments of the world, from which we are
dead with Christ, to disown the liberty which he has purchased, and
consequently, and as plainly as in the former case, to deny that our deliverer
is come. 4. Having showed that the liberty of thinking the things to be free in
themselves, the practice nevertheless being strictly injoined, is not Christian
liberty, and that it is irrational to affirm, that an observance commanded by
the Law of God, becomes o^ this account more burdensome, then if man's
authority only did make it binding: And seeing on the other hand I easily grant,
that in things in themselves free, and in our power, no reason of Religion or
Righteousness gainstanding, it were peevishness to decline the request of an
Equal, let be the command of a Superior: I shall here shortly declare wherein
it is that Christian liberty stands, and consequently what the injury is of
your invasion: As then Christian liberty, is neither a licentiousness to sin
against God, nor to rebel against the Powers that are over us; So I plainly
understand it, to be that free^dome of serving God in Spirit and in truth,
whereunto our Lord Jesus, by releeving us of all outward observances, either as
media in our worship, or for themselves requisite to the acceptance of our
service, other then he himself has expressly appointed, has redeemed, and
restored his Church. That the circumstances of time, place etc. and their due
regulation for Decency, and Order, are not here rejected, the quality, for
themselves, that is, for some respect, by special command, peculiarly to them
appropriat, sufficently holds out; it being very certain, that, under this
consideration, the matters of Decency, whereof both the conveniencie and use
flows only from the common exigence of all humane actions, do not fall: And
that this is the true notion of Christian liberty, the Scriptures whence I take
it, and wherein it is so clearly distinguished, from the Jewish bondage, there
also described, John 4. 21. Gal. 3. 4 and 5. Col. 2. are so plain, that nothing
can be added. Only I observe, that because by this liberty, we are delivered
from these performances, whereunto the exercise of Religion, requiring, in
every act of worship or service toward God, the Faith and Conscience of a
Divine prescript, without which it is impossible to please him, was formerly by
Moses Law astricted: Therefore it is indeed and is rightly termed, liberty of
Conscience, which while you and others do conceive, to be nothing else then a
freedom to think things to be free in themselves that are not commanded by the
Lord, you do not only grossly mistake it, as distinguished from the Jewish
servitude; but open a door to humane lust, and invention, to incumber and
deprave the whole body of Religion, and the worship of God, with whatsomever
fopperies they please to devise: seeing that, in your opinion, it is impossible,
that Christian liberty of Conscience, can be thereby prejudged. Now, to prove
that your exactions are high impingements upon this freedom, I need not
mention these compliances, which you crave, and are in effect directly opposite
to the will of God; but even your other ceremonies, all added as in and by
themselves significant, to the worship and service of God, without the warrant
either of his word, or of the common exigence of all performances, and so
thereby made Religious in their use, and object; and therefore certainly
belonging to Conscience, needs no other argument to evi^ce it, then the
subsumption of a condescendence. Having thus in some measure cleared what I
proposed, lest you or any other should account these things, to be matters of
mere doubtful disputations, I must add, that as it has always been
observed, that the greatest urgers of conformity in the externalls of humane
invention, have been very little, if at all, serious, in the life and
substantials of Religion; so the great prejudice thence ensuing, to the power
and practice of Godliness, partly by reason of the imposers evil lusts and
ends, partly by reason of that spirit of delusion, to which they are given up,
and partly by reason of the vanity of the things imposed, and the Lords
abhorrence of them, does both discover that Mystery of Hypocrisy, and
Wickedness, which secretly works under these vain forms, and should ever
render them most odious, to all the lovers of truth and holiness. I might here
further add, that as your impositions are invasive of Christian liberty,
injurious to Conscience, and corruptive of the pure and acceptable worship of
God, and consequently such, as no power on Earth can lawfully command them, or
we therein obey; so, were it but for the offense that may thence redound, to
the stumbling of the weak, and hardening of the imposers, to proceed from small
beginnings to the grossest mixtures, all conscientious Men may very justly be
therefrom deterred; but to this I shall speak at greater length. 5. Having
showed that Paul's Christian civility, does make nothing for your imposed
conformity, and that to turn the free exercise of a charitable compliance,
unto a yoke of bondage, is a perversion intolerable, I shall sum up the whole
matter with this brief reflection, viz. that admitting the things required of
us, were only such externals and nothings as you would groundlessly persuade,
and that our forbearance had, in it, more of weakness then sound reason; yet
the free Spirit of Christianity, which you allege, and Paul describes Romans
14. is, so far from urging us to your desired compliance; that I am very
confident to affirm, that if the severest Nonconformist, had had the rule to
dictate (pardon the supposition, blessed be the Dictator) he could not more
manifestly and directly have condemned your rigid exactions in their matters,
then the Apostle does in this place: I need not insist upon particulars, the
whole chapter is most express, Let not him that eats (and you think all the
points of the controverted conformity of no greater moment) despise him that
eats not. How do you then vex them with hard Laws, and grievous pains, more
then you do heinous Malefactors: Who art thou that judge another man's
servant? Is a demand which one day will concern Kings and Rulers, more then
any of their Subjects: Why do they then judge? Why do they set at naught their
brethren? for all shall stand (and that on even ground) before the judgment
seat of Christ: Let us not therefore judge one another, but let us judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way: You assure us, and seem persuaded, that the things pressed are of
themselves nothing; but to him that esteems them unlawful, to him they are
unlawful, and he that doubts is damned if he do, because he does not of
faith; How then can you require this conformity? and of how different a temper,
was the free and charitable Spirit of the Apostle, who not only indulgeth the
weak Nonconformist; but becomes such himself to evite his offense? If thy
brother be grieved with thy meat (or with any of the matters now in debate, for
you make no difference) now walk thou (spoken in my opinion to the Prince as
well as Peasant) not according to charity, destroy not him with thy meat (or
your acknowledged humane inventions) for whom Christ dyed: Say not that the
things in controversy being concluded by Law, are no more free, or in the
condition of the things here mentioned; for, if not only judging and despising
the Forbearer be here forbidden; but even the con^raire practice, when to him
offensive, how much more must the designed framing, and strick executing of
Laws, for no other visible end, then the violenting of scruplers, and racking
of their Consciences, (acknowledged by your self for the widest step to Atheism
that can be made) be in this Scripture condemned? If you urge, that to carry
this indulgence so high, is to frustrate all humane Laws, seeing the person
unwilling to obey, may always pretend, from Conscience, the privilege of
forbearance; And as de facto you reason, Any offender may decline Discipline,
and say that the thing being indifferent, by command it becomes necessary, and
so a burden of Conscience. It Is answered, that as the burden of Conscience,
does not stand in a necessity, by Divine precept, of the things imposed,
otherwise the Lords commandments, that are certainly most easy, should thence
become most grievous; but, in effect, in a forced obligation to practice, in
things wherein Conscience, requiring the Lords warrant in order to his
acceptance, cannot at all find it so; the liberty and privilege here spoken
to, is only in order to Conscience, viz. That Christians ought not to press, or
judge one another in the performance, or forbearance of things in themselves
indifferent, as acceptable and well-pleasing to God, without his warrant: and
therefore the force and effect of humane Laws, ordering and commanding things
in order to the Politic ends of Government, and, in so far, by the Lord
commanded to be obeyed, are not by this Doctrine in the least demurred: Now
that your Ceremonies and other impositions, being all relative to the service
and worship of God, wherein as every thing is to be observed, with the faith of
the Lords acceptance, so nothing can be acceptable without his warrant, are
not of the nature of things, as objected to civil commands; but plainly such,
wherein Paul pleads for liberty, is manifest: Nay, you your self know so well,
that the very things scrupled at by us, as enjoined toward a religious
observance, would be readily complied with upon any other reasonable occasion;
and that thousands, who detest the Surplice, would cheerfully engadge in a
Camisado, for their Prince's service, that I add nothing: If you say, that the
things in debate, though commanded for religious uses, are never the less
enjoined not as acceptable to God and under this formality; but are only
necessary because commanded; You bewray, not only a sinful gaudie
licentiousness, of doing things for, and in the house of the God of Heaven, not
commanded by the God of Heaven; wherein even Heathens, let be Christians, have
been tender; but expose the purity and simplicity of Religion, to all the
corruptions of man's vain imagination: As to what you add anent the pretext,
which this liberty may give to offenders, to decline Discipline, it is yet less
to the purpose, in as much as submission to Discipline, does in effect flow
from the Lords Authority, whereby it becomes necessary, and Men's part therein
is only a naked ministerial application. Lastly if you object, that public
Peace and Order require your conforming obedience: Your opinion and method in
this point, is much different from the Apostles, he makes it his great
argument, not only for not judging and censuring Non-conformists; but also, in
the case of offense, for complying with them in their forbearance, That we
ought to follow the things which make for peace, and wherewith one may edisie
another: But you and your party, for all the noise you make for public Peace;
before you tolerat a Nonconforming in the greatest indifferencies, and
howsoever tender and innocuous; will sooner both deprive your Brethren of
Peace, and for your vain trifles destroy the work of God: whereas though you
had faith in these things, yet you ought to have it to your selves before God:
But, Sir, it is already too manifest, that as in practice you know not the way
of Peace, so, in this discourse, by pressing a strict obedience from the free
Spirit of Christian liberty, which you seem to commend, you palpably condemn
your self in that which you appear to allow.

Having thus far, in the pursuit of your reasonings, digressed, in the
explanation of true Christian Liberty; because of its after use, in the perusal
of your remaining purposes, I shall not stick in the considering of what you
make your N. C. add, That we forbear the things pressed, for avoiding the
scandal of others: I have already told you, that the reasons of our forbearance
have no less then the indispensable motive of the will and Oath of God: Yea,
suppose the things required were mere externals, and indifferent, as they are
not; yet I have so clearly proven that your abridging of our Christian liberty
therein, by virtue of your commands, is in it self repugnant to the Apostles
Doctrine, and in its effects pernicious, that your requiring to make the
restraint of Authority, abused to these impositions, the warrant of Practice to
the forcing of Conscience, and the offending of a Christian Brother, is a
Sophisme, no better, then if the hardy practiser, or proud imposer, who is
expressly commanded in Christian tenderness to regard his Brothers offense,
should by a vain pretending of his own offense, taken from the others indulged
forbearance, or recusancie, thereby turn the Argument, and elude the
exhortation, to the very scorn of Scripture: That which I rather observe, is,
that seeing that to give Scandal is not ill defined by you, to be a stretching
of our liberty to practice, to the drawing of others to the like (or grieving
or making them weak) who have not the same clearness, why do you not begin your
application at Prelates, Who having first streatched their practice, to the
ens^aring, do also frame unjust decrees to the forcing of such who have no
clearness to conform? And on the other hand, ought you not to indulge such, who
only desire to re^uge their Conscience, in the Sanctuary of an allowed
forbearance? But these are the men, whom having first sinfully spoiled of
liberty, you scornfully abuse, by telling they may now act, without regard to
Scandal, since you do permit them no liberty to the contraire: But I hasten to
your more closs examination of the matter of Conformity.

And first you ask, why do not our Ministers join with your Courts for
Church Discipline? It Is answered, it were tedious to examine the follies of
you, and your N. C. in this point; we join not in your Courts, because they are
not the Courts of Jesus Christ; but of the King, and Prelates: If this you deny
read the Act Par 1. 1661 Sess^ 1. Concerning Religion and Church Government,
the proclamation of Council thereafter, discharging all Presbytries until
Authorized by the Bishops, and the Act Par. eod. Sess. 2. For the restitution
of Bishops, where, as you will find that Presbytries were made Precarious; as
to their continuance (not as to their right, which is indeed Divine) by the
first Act, and then simpliciter discharged, and broken up by the Proclamation;
so that which returns, in their place, by the last Act and what ensued, is not
the former Presbyteries, but only the Exercises of the Brethren, having both
their regulation and authority from the Bishops, who have all their
Church Power and Jurisdiction in a dependence upon, and subordination unto the
sovereign power of the King as Supreme. So that the Kings Authority and
Prerogative Royal, is plainly the proper fountain, and last resort of all the
power and jurisdiction to be found, either in your Church, or its Meetings: Nay
further, this (...) so certain, that as his Majesty does not so much as pretend
a Commission from Jesus Christ, as the anointed King of his Church, for this
effect (which yet the Pope, in his most wicked usurpation, did always Judge
necessary) so, if it be Treason, as it is dict. sess. of the same Parliament,
act. 3. to derogat from the prerogative of the Imperial Crown of this Realm,
and if absolute supremacy in Ecclesiastics, incapable either of superior or
conjunct, do thereto by the late Act of Supremacy appertain, certainly to make
our Lord so much as a sharer with the King, in this matter, would fall under
the compass of this crime: However, not to rake into this abyss of
wickedness, that Act of Supremacy, giving to the King, over all Persons,
Meetings, and in all Causes of the Church, all the power, that Christ as head
of the Church, in these things has or can acclame, (a piece of such desperate
solly, that I am assured, that as he that sits in the Heaven does laugh, so
shall he one day have all its contrivers, and abettors in dirision) in this I
am very positive, that according to the present legal establishment made in
these matters, to derive the power of your Courts from, or connect the same
with, the power and headship of our Lord Jesus, is utterly impossible. That we
then, who as Ministers of the Gospel, do take upon us, and exercise no power,
save that which is our Lords, cannot join and partake with your Meetings, your
self may judge.

But you say, That all that is Divine in Discipline, is, that scandalous
persons be noted, and separated from worship; but how this shall be
administered, can be no matter of Religion, or of the concernment of Souls,
providing it be done: It Is answered, to argue thus, all that is Divine in
Preaching, is that the truth of the Gospel be declared: but how this shall be
performed can be no matter of Religion, or of the concernment of Souls,
providing it be done, would it not be false and weak reasoning. 2. As your
Providing it be done viz. rightly, is a salvo, whereby a man may as pertinently
argue against all means whatsomever, which certainly are nothing useful,
providing the end for which they are appointed be rightly done, so this quality
has such an exigence even of these midses, which you suppose to be of no
import, that it plainly subverts your Argument: But 3. Your position, that all
that is Divine in Discipline, is, that scandalous persons be noted, etc. Is
false, in as much as this is no more clearly to be found in Scripture, then the
Persons and Officers therewith incharged, are evidently thereby ordained, yea
this matter is so certain, that there is scarce one place to be seen in
Scripture, for the warrant of Discipline, which does not with the same
evidence, hold out the persons entrusted with its administration: And I will
give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven: Whose sins soever ye remit
they are remitted unto them: Feed, Over-see, Rule the slock, are Commissions so
full, ordaining the persons, as well as designing their work, that I can hardly
impute the laxeness of your reasoning, to your oversight.

In the next place (for as for your quibling with your N. C. anent the foolish
answer which you put in his mouth it is altogether frivolous as shall be
showed in your 7. Dial.) you urge, That, seeing that Presbytries do by Divine
right acclaime a power o^ jurisdiction, they ought to meet in these Courts, let
the Law call it what it will, even as i^ the King should abrogate all Laws for
the worship of God, and declare, that all that assemble to worship God, shall
be understood to worship Mahomet, and thereupon command all to meet; though we
meet not on that ground, yet you hope we would s^ill meet to worship God, how
ever it be interpret: It Is answered, If the jurisdiction competent to
Presbyteries by Divine right were in these Courts, your Argument might have
some weight; but seeing they are not the former Presbyteries, but new Courts set
up, as I have already declared, no more deriving power from Jesus Christ, then
your late High Commission, how can you think in reason, that either the right
and power of Presbyters, or his Majesty's call, should oblige Ministers to com
to the one more then the other: For my part, as I esteem it a less sin upon the
Kings call to come to a Court of his own erecting, then to abuse Christ's
warrant to the establishing of a Court, as his, which by its institution
manifestly disowns him; So, I should sooner resolve, upon the Kings command to
meet in the High Commission, then, by coming from the motive of our Lords
warrant, acknowledge your Exercises of the Brethren for his Courts, which are
so palpably settled upon the basis of another Authority: As for your Similitude,
not to insist upon such claudicant Arguments, it is like to the legs of the
lame which are not equal, but make it straight, thus, the King dissolves all
Christian Churches, and erects Mohammedan Mosches, charging all to repair there
to worship, and declaring that he will account their so doing, a testimony of
their compliance with the change by him made: Now if one should stand up, and
for the persuading of just recusants, say, that they may safely go there, and
worship God, without either owning of Mahomet, or regarding the construction
may be made of it: Pray, Sir, how would you understand it? And what ever you,
or any reasonable man think should be the practice or Christians in this case,
I am content the N. C. be thereby judged: I confess the terms of the
Similitude are hard; But remember they are of your own choosing, and my work is
only to make them just; to conclude therefore, it is not Men's interpretation or
mis-interpretation (although in many cases these homologations, whereby either
Enemies may be hardened, or friends stumbled, require also a very weighty
consideration) that we regard in this matter: but the real state of things,
whereby as Christ's power is ejected forth of your Courts; So the Divine
jurisdiction of Presbyters cannot possibly therein have place: To this you
subjoin that suppose Episcopacie were Tyranny, and Bishops were Tyrannes in
the Church; Why ought you not to submit to them, as well as you did to the late
Tyrannes in the State? It is answered, if I did think there were any Emphasis,
more then the strain of your discourse, in this your urging Our submission to
the late Usurpers, I could tell you that though the cases were parallel, as
they are not, all the submission made by us to Oliver would not make out your
inference: And that it is Your, and not Our submission which only can serve
your turn; I need not mention that Mr. Sharp Now of St. Andrews, was the first,
if not the only Minister in Scotland, that took the Tender, and thereby,
deserting his Fellow Prisoners, procured his own liberty: Nor how the late
introductors of Episcopacie, were most or many of them such as by subscriving
the Tender, abjuring the King, and the like compliances, had wholly deboshed
their Consciences unto the perfidious re-establishing of your abjured Prelacie:
whereas the tenacious honesty of the faithful of the Land, was both then, and
is now, accounted their bigotrie and folly. But to the purpose. 1. If Bishops
had only been intruded upon Presbytries as they were in former times, it is not
questioned, but Faithful Presbyters, not Outed of their possession founded on
Divine right, might have continued the same with a due Testimony, and
opposition against unlawful usurpations, conform to the old practice of Gods
Servants among us in the like case; but seeing in the late revolution, not only
Presbytries were broken, and discontinowed, but the very foundations razed, a
new foundation of the Kings Supremacy laid, and a new superstructure thereon
built, Our compliance now, as you require it, would not be an act of
Submission, but a plain partaking in this wickedness. 2. The case of men's
usurpation in the State is so vastly different from that of your usurpations in
the Church, that it greatly alters the latitude of these submissions, which you
go about to equiparat, for though, in Civils, the aspiring and usurpation of
wicked men, be a heinous transgression, before God; Yet, such is the nature,
and condition of the Kingdoms of the Earth, in themselves mutable, and at the
disposal of the most high, who rules therein, and gives them to whomsoever he
will, and sets up over them sometime the basest of men, that the attaining
thereto becomes such a providentiall title, as may sufficiently warrant, not
only necessary submission, and obedience in things lawful, but even these
other acts of seeming compliance, that do directly acknowledge the Usurper to
be in titulo; providing that they proceed no further, either to anticipate
Divine Providence, in the establishment, or homologate the wickedness of the
usurpation. If of this you have any doubt, I remit you to Scripture-practice,
the customs of all Nations, the opinion of most Casuists, and Reason it self,
whereby the taking and exercising of inferior offices, under undeniable
Usurpers, is most certainly confirmed: And this is plainly the case, both of
State-usurpations, and of the largeness of that submission, which it admittes.
Now as for Church-usurpations, the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, not being mutable
and perishing, like unto the Kingdoms of this world; but his dominion of it
self extra Commercium, as Lawyers speak, of things not acquirable, and by
Divine decree, an everlasting dominion which shall not pass away, and his
Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed: As it is therefore incapable of all
acquisition, and his Crown such whereunto (however the great ones of the Earth
may bandie together and boast themselves against it) neither violence nor
possession, can entitle; So, in case of a pretended usurpation, though
Providence may order a passive submission; yet most certain it is, that in this
case, where there neither is nor can be any title, all deeds, so much as of
simple recognizance, are utterly unlawful: And therefore albeit that under the
late Usurpation it was Lawful to partake, in the capacity of inferior
Magistracy, of that power, whereunto the Usurper had in providence attained;
yet, in the case of our present Church-usurpation, to acknowledge it in the
least, by partaking of a jurisdiction founded in the pretended Supremacy, and
not derived from Christ, to which neither the events of of Providence, nor
immemoriable possession, can give the least shadow of title, is altogether
unlawful.

Thus I have unfolded to you the disparity that invalidates your Argument, and
have also granted the passive submission, which Providence and Christian
patience do always recommend: If the grounds here insinuate do not so easily
engage you assent, when you shall add thereto these certain truths, 1. That in
Civils, though the manner of purchasing may be in many cases injurious and
unlawful; yet it may be sufficient to acquire the dominion. 2. That wherever
the length of time, or prescription may superinduce a Right, there, even from
the beginning, naked possesion is quasi titulus, and qui pro suo possidet
potest usucapere. 3. That although Lawyers speak of certain vitia, that in
private rights hinder definite prescription; Yet all Politicians grant, that
immemorial possession, or even that of three ages, is sufficient to confirm
over any people the most violent usurpation. And lastly, that on the other
hand, our Lords Throne and Scepter are everlasting, and such as can never be
moved, I doubt not but all your difficulties will evanish.

You proceed to say, that our Ministers are content to Preach and quite
Discipline, a part of their Rights, why may they not as well exercise
Discipline, though not with a full liberty? It Is answered, 1. As I have already
told you, that to sit in your Courts, is not at all to exercise Christ's
Discipline, but a pretended power dependent upon another head; so, you do not
truly accuse our Ministers of quiting Discipline: it is well known, that, in
so far as is permitted, they do not separate Doctrine and Discipline, which
our Lord hes conjoined: And if full liberty be not permitted, and they
necessitat to acquiesce to what the Powers will allow, it is very disingenuous
in you, to misconstrue this force, which they suffer, unto a voluntaire
quiting. 2. Though by the manner of your proposing the objection, you would
have us to believe, that the cases are parallel, and that in the case urged, as
well as in that instanced, there is only a restraint laid upon a more full
liberty; yet the disparity is most manifest in this, that in the matter of
Preaching, without the exercise of Discipline, we are by force debarred from
doing full duty, in which case, the doing of a part permitted, cannot be
censured; whereas in the compliance you require, the very act is sinful, and is
therefore, and not because we are denied a more full liberty, very justly by us
refused: but having vainly concluded, upon the poor arguments which we have,
heard, our Ministers to be Peevish, and made your pitiful N. C. confess himself
non-plust by his general pretense of Conscience; You ask him, what he can
pretend for the peoples withdrawing from your Churches, since there is only a
small alteration made in point of Government. It Is answered, if all the matter
be a small alteration in point of Government, it had far better become that
charitable, healing and free spirit, whereunto you so often pretend, to have
reflected thus; since the change lately made, by its previo^s perjury, and
subsequent deluge of profanity; the desolating of Churches, and dispersing of
Shepherds and flocks; the disquieting, and vexing of thousands, unquestionably
Godly and Loyal; the fiering and filling all the corners of the Land with
contention and discontent; the burdening of a Country, formerly exhausted and
now expecting relief, with heavy impositions, and strange exactions; And
lastly, the necessary and worst result of all these evils, the provocking the
Lord to Anger, and rendering his Majesty's Government less comfortable, and
desirable, has occasioned so great a perturbation, and yet, is in it self,
and imports so small a matter, why do not our King and Nobles consider for what
the Land perishes? Wherefore do not all men bend their knees and pour out
their prayers to God and the King, that so seen destructive, and easily
remedied a cause, may be removed? but seeing for all your sparingness in passing
judgment; yet you cease not scornfully to censure a poor people, needlessly and
unchristianly, by you ensnared, and thereafter more cruelly persecute, and
oppressed, not repeating what has been said by others in their vindication, I
shall briefly run over what you here subjoin.

You say then That Separation being a tearing of the Body of Christ, to forsake
the unity of the Church, when there is scarce a color of pretense for it, must
be a great sin, It Is answered, I will not stand to descant upon the nature and
several degrees of Separation, and how that nonconforming to, and compliance
with a prevalent backsliding party, in effect the worst of Separatists, which
is our present case, is very different, from the case of Separation, from a
Church formerly acknowledged, and joined with; nor love I to inquire how far
a man's entry into the Ministry, by open perjury and violence, and his profane
and flagitious deportment therein, notourly known, may in the perturbed state
of the Church, supply the want of a declarative sentence, making void his
mission; Nor lastly, will I make use of your own plain laws, viz. the Act anent
the restitution of Bishops, and the late Act of Supremacy, whereby all
Church Power (mark it) is made dependent upon, and subordinat unto the Kings
Supremacy, to prove your Ministers, to be but Court Curats: But in this I am
plain and confident, that if the Prophets, who, by their lies and lightness,
cause the people to err, and speak peace to such as despise the Lord, and
strengthen their hands, who walk in the imagination of their own heart, be not
to be hearkened unto; if we ought to bewarre and flee from false Prophets,
whose fruits (of ungodliness as well as heresy, as is clear from the context)
do discover them, to be but ravening wolves, destroying Souls, under the sheeps
clothing of an exterior call, and hypocritical composure; if such who cause
divisions and offenses, contraire to the received truth, and who serve not our
Lord Jesus, but their own belly, are to be avoided; and lastly, if these
Destroyers, and Offenders be the only persons guilty of all the Separation, and
other inconveniences, which ensue, then are your Curates (as dignoscible by
all, or one or other of these characters, as the night is by darkness) justly,
yea necessarily, to be disowned, fled from and avoided, and only chargeable
with that schism whereof you endeavor to make us guilty.

But you add, That, in a schismatical time-serving humor, we come sometimes to
Church, to ^vite the punishment of Law; but seldom, that we may retain our
interest with our party; that we hear some of you but not others; that some go
to Churches in the Country, but not in the City; and finally some join with
you in the ordinary Worship of Prayer and praise, yet will not join in the
Eucharist, which is but solemn praise. Sir, if you had been candid in this
reflection, in place of imputing this variety to humor, and faction, it would
indeed have moved you to pity the strait of so many good people, redacted to
such a multi^arious perplexity; which yet, in its outward appearance, is but
light, in comparison of these inward inquietudes, wherewith the contraire
workings of the fear of God, love of truth, abhorrencie of wickedness,
tenderness toward Authority, respect to union and peace, and fear of
punishment, do continually solicit them: If I might presume so far upon
your credit, I could tell you that, in my certain knowledge, some have been,
against their Consciences, forced by violence and spoill to hear your Curates,
who therefore have mourned many Months thereafter, and certain of them even
unto death; That others whom the generality of your Curates did either offend,
or, according to the Lords prediction Ier. 23. v. 33. after long trial not
profit at all, have searched by a choice to remedy the evil; (for, that there
are better and worse not only as to private, but also as to Public
transgressions, you groundlessly deny) and lastly, that some have prevailed
with themselves to hear and join with you in prayer and praise, who have yet
still scrupled in their Consciences to communicate with you, in that Sacrament;
which, beside the adjunct of solemn praise, is designedly institute to signify
and confirm our communion in, as well as our union with Christ, from whom, we
have reason to apprehend, that many of you, according to Scripture-rules, and
the grounds which your conversations hold out, are at great distance: If then
these things be so, let it satisfy you in this point, that, as the Generality
of the whole land would account it a great relief to be delivered of all your
Tribe, and many of the godly are convinced, that your Ministry being neither
of nor for our Lord Jesus, is not to be owned; so all these umbrages of
compliance, which you observe, are only the effects of curiosity, fear, or some
other humane frailty, wherewith by you we can, neither in Charity nor
ingenuity, be urged: But you are so desireous to win us to this conformity of
owning your Curates, that you are willing to suppose them to be but Intruders
occupying the places of our faithful shepherds violently torn away; and yet
you argue, that although the high priesthood was in our Lords days violently
invaded by the Romans, and by them exposed to sale, and those Symoniacks, did
also usurp the right of others; yet we find Cajaphas, as high Priest,
Prophes^ing, and our Savior answering to his authoritative adjuration; and
though the Pharisees were wretched teachers, and very guilty persons; yet our
Savior says, hear them; for they sit in Moses chair: which you sa^ is
unanswerable and was the doctrine of our own Teachers? It Is answered, not to
insist upon the particular, and full answer already made by others, for
dissolving the apparent force of this objection, it is to be considered. 1.
That as this argument does proceed upon parallel instances, and similitudes for
the most part lame, and unequal; so the Jews their particular customs and
observances, in the examples adduced, are to us so hid and unknown, and the
Jewish constitution in General, of a Church and Nation joined in one special
people, unto God, by virtue of a Divine Law, for matters both Civil and
Religious, committed, even in its Civil part, to the custody and interpretation
of their Religious Officers, is so manifestly different from that of the
Christian Church, gathered in one, out of all and every Nation, only for things
Religious, without any alteration in their Civil State, under Jesus Christ
their Head and King, and the Ministers by him sent forth, that little light as
to our present purpose, can be thence concluded. 2. That not only in the point
of the Churches Ministry but also in its worship and other ordinances, to
reason from the dispensations of Sovereign Providence, in the decline of
Churches, the lawful compliance of good men with these Churches, in owning
them in things found, and bearing with corruptions, which they could not
remedy; and lastly from the Lords assistance and presence, that never the less
has therein appeared, For the declaring of what is duty, or not duty, in the
exigence of the first innovations, tending and leading unto the setlement of
these abuses, is very deceitful and dangerous. If in this ye be doubtful, my
charity, I hope, shall give you satisfaction: what, before the Reformation,
were the gross corruptions of the Romish Church, both in its Ministers Worship
and Sacraments, is to you well enough known: And yet, that many pious and
devout Souls, and some of them convinced and mourning for its abominations, did
nevertheless therein sincerely seek and serve the Lord, and found the strength
and joy of his presence, shall never be by me denied: If then it should happen,
that in your high pretensions for Union and Peace, a Popish Ministry, or
other abuses should be set up, and enjoined among us, would you think it just
to require our conformity, and to offer to square duty, in such a case, to any
of these particular precedents to be found in the times of the former darkness?
I am confident you would not: If our Lord, when on Earth, did for a while
connive at certain corruptions, in a dispensation drawing to its period, and if
at the times of ignorance God sometime wink, and according to the obscurer
light, and witnessing thereof, do allow the endeavors of such, who happily may
feel after him, and find him; for any man thence to conclude, that the change
unto the Gospel administration, made no alteration in duty; or that in a
greater measure of revelation, whereby we are commanded either to repent of
former, or to resist returning corruptions, we ought to be stinted to the old
rule, and make no further advance, are wide mistakes: It ought to be the study
of Gods Servants, to discern times, and to know, in this their day, the things
which belong unto their duty, as well as unto their peace: to ty up practice,
that ought to be advertent unto, and has a dependence upon every circumstance,
unto generals abstracted and concluded from the particular instances of other
times, is altogether fallacious. 3. Let me remember you of what I have already
hinted at, viz. That seeing Separation is a departing from an Union once
acknowledged, even in these things which are not in themselves condemned, which
certainly is of great importance, and of a very weighty and various
consideration; whereas nonconforming to, or noncompliance with the
introduction of things that are clearly sinful and unlawful, has a manifest
warrant, and is of no such extent: from instances of not Separating, to
conclude against Noncompliance; and from denying the Majus of Non-separation,
to deny the Minus of a tender forbearance, is bad Logic: nay, so ill does this
parity hold, that on the contraire, the very aversion that every true Christian
ought to have for Separation, does mostly recommend this Noncompliance, which
being a sovereign and prescribed antidote against these evils, which, if once
received, may go on to greater corruptions, and necessitat a sadder division,
is therefore to be timeously adhibite. For clearing of this, let me but ask you
this one Question: The allowed Separation of the reformed Churches from that of
Rome, does it not plainly infer, that it had been better, and was the duty
of these informer ages, to have seasonably resisted, and not complied with the
first beginnings of these errors, and evils, which afterward did procure the
rent? And however you may judge, that the causes of that Separation were no
more then sufficient, and could have laked nothing; yet I am assured, that you
and every rational man will say, that a timeous Nonconforming, warrantable
upon lesser motives, might have proven the better course. I shall not enforce
this consideration by suggesting the evil tendencie of your way; nor do I tell
you that it is a reviving of the same causes, that in process of time did
produce all Romes abominations, and that these floods of Error, and
Superstition, had their visible rise from smaller aberrations; so that, if God
should suffer the course of your defection to prosper, and wear out the
present opposition, the Ages to come might more justly take up against us the
complaint of our not timeous resisting; then we can regret the too easy
compliance of these, who should have withstood the beginnings of Romes
backsliding. On these things, I say, I do not insist; but, that you may the
more plainly understand the difference that I conceive to be betwixt
Noncompliance, and Separation, I freely acknowledge, that if God had permitted
this whole Church, to slide into the present evils of your Prelacie and corrupt
Ministers; and thereafter had blessed us with a discovery; yet I would not, in
that condition, allow the same necessity, and expediencie of a Separation, that
now I find, to plead for a Noncompliance; in as much as our present
Noncompliance, is not only a more certain, seasonable, and safe duty; but is
also attended with a faithful and edifying adherence to our true and sent
Teachers, who though removed to corners, do still remain the Lords Ministers,
and our Pastors: which things do much difference it, from the case of a proper
separation, as above descrived, and do not a little justify these more tender
practices which you would disprove.

Now, though these few things premised do obviously satisfy the difficulty
objected; yet, to render the application more full and easy, you may further
consider, that your instance from these corrupt High Priests, set up by the
Rom^ns, does not help you. 1. Because that the high Priest was ordained by the
Lord, as in order to Sacrifice, so also for Rule and Judgment, and that not
only in matters purely Religious; but also in all things determinable by Moses
Law: at least as to the Ministerial declaring of the Ius, which, albeit in a
great part merely civil, are yet, in this respect, termed the matters of God,
and jubjected to the high Priest his judgment, in the respect mentioned. 2.
There is no statute in Moses Law, affixing, as you allege, the high
Priesthood to the Eldest Son of Aaron's line, who possibly might have happened
to be an Infant, or legally incapable; but only to his race in general, so
that there was a necessity that the determination of the choice should be in
the hand of the Sanhedrin, thus Eli, Abiathar and Ahimelech were all of
Ithamar, and not of Eliazer his branch. As for the promise made by the Lord to
Phineas, it is neither made to the eldest Son of his posterity, nor did it give
any proper right; but only an assurance, whereof the accomplishment is
sufficiently performed in the return of the Priesthood to Zadock, and his
line, notwithstanding the preceding interruption. 3. Not to enter into a
particular debate anent the form and power of the Jewish Church, as distinct
from the State, and wherein the differences did consist; this is the received
opinion of the Orthodox, that though at the first institution, their supreme
Church-sanhedrin was, as to causes and several other particulars, distinguished
from their supreme Civil-sanhedrin; yet through process of time, and many
revolutions of affairs, a confusion of the two grew more and more, and at
length the Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin, whereof the High Priest was President did
degenerate into a mixed Court, and having the advantage of enjoying their
Religion under their civil mutations, and keeping their High Priests and his
Courts, when they lost their King and civil Courts, for their greatest matters,
did exerce by their Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin all the civil power they could be
permitted to exerce. 4. Particularly it is evident that, from the days of the
Maccabees, the High Priesthood was much changed from its primary institution;
and as more extended to and busied in civil Rule, then conversant in holy
things; so much exposed to frequent invasions at home, and at length, with the
whole Nation, swallowed up by a foreign dominion: Which things being d^e^y
perpended, it clearly appears, that neither the practice of the Romans, founded
in the right (though an abuse of the exercise) of their conquest, nor the
symony of the purchasers, a clandestine crime, did make void their Priesthood:
How much less then do Cajaphas his prophesying, a Providential Dispensation, or
our Lords free answering and confession to his adjuration, whether
authoritative made by him as a Judge of the Nation, or otherwise, scarce
sufficient to prove a Non-separation, militat against our Noncompliance, with
your re-introducing of abjured Prelacie, and its corrupt Ministry. As for your
instancing of the Pharisees, our Lords words in this matter Math. 23. 2, 3.
are, the Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat; all therefore whatsoever
they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works,
etc. And that hereby you have no advantage appears,

1. Because it does not manifestly appear, that the Scribes and Pharisees here
spoken of were Intruders; but, on the contraire, it is most probable that they
were Doctors of the Law, lawfully appointed according to the use of that people.

2. The Scribes and Pharisees, sitting in Moses chair, did teach the Law, not
as appertaining merely to the Soul^ and Religion toward God; but as the
Municipal Law of that Nation containing also the rules of external
righteousness and policy; and therefore are to be regarded not so much as
Ecclesiastic Teachers, but rather as Doctors of the Law: whereby it is
evident, that your argument from our Lords command, is as far, in this
respect, from concluding our compliance with your intruding Preachers, as these
National Doctors, with whom our Lord was not to meddle further, then to vindicat
the Law of God from their corrupt glosses and practices, are different from out
Spiritual Pastors, who being sent by Jesus Christ, cannot by Man be discharged.

3. If it be urged that the Scribes and Pharisees were also the Teachers and
Directors of all matters of Religion; and even in civils did only respondere de
jure from the law of God, although this do no way remove the disparity,
immediately assigned; yet this is further to be observed, that as our Lord in
this regard did expressly warn his disciples to beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, and in many things correct their vain and perverss doctrines; so his
tolerance of them in Moses chair was only temporary, as of many other things,
until the then approaching end of that dispensation, which he would not
anticipate: during which time, if our Lord do command a well-cautioned
observance, for the best improvement of that which was shortly to be abolished,
can you rationally thence infer, that we ought, at the pleasure of men, both
deserte his sent Ministers, whom he has not recalled, and comply with and own
Intruders, so lightly violating, and abusing his Ordinance?

But 4. Admit that the Scribes and Pharisees their entry to that office, were
not in every point justifiable, and that they truly were very wretched
Teachers; yet, their occupying of that charge, seeing our Lord did not send
forth and establish his perpetual Gospel Ministry, until after his
resurrection, was not circumstantiat with, and peccant in the violent exclusion
of others, lawfully settled in that chair, which they possessed. Sir, this is so
casting a difference, that I nothing doubt, but if you will only pose your
self, what you think our Lord would have determined, in case that, there being
among the Jews, an established order of lawful Teachers, the Pharisees had
risen up, and by open perjury and violence ejected them, and that the business
being still recent, and many of the Teachers remaining on life, and by all
acknowledged for such, whom man could not exauctorate, the people had firmly
adhered to them. Let your Conscience, I say, in these suppositions, sincerely
resolve the question, and, I am most assured, the verdict of your own breast
will be, that whatever was our Lords connivance for a time, at a Non-separation
from a course, whereunto he was shortly to put a period: yet, in the case here
stated, he would not have commanded the people to deserte their lawful Guides,
and follow Intruders, and thereby countenance such a wickedness.

5. Although I love not to play the Critic, and do grant, that the observance
here enjoined, does indeed infer Hearing not to be prohibit; yet your
exhibiting of the command in these words, not found in Scripture, hear them,
for they sit in Moses chair, does found so like to that heavenly voice, this is
my beloved Son, etc. and that Emphatick hear ye him there commanded; whereby,
the old letter and typical shadows of Moses Law being antiquat, life and
immortality were brought to light; that I cannot but account (that, however our
Lord permitting the hearing of the Pharisees so long as that dispensation did
stand not abolished does here directly aim only at its right improvement,) the
two, hear ye him, and hear ye them, in the same signification, to be
inconsistent; and this representation, a Stretch savouring more of favor to
your cause, then tenderness of Truth and Scripture Phrase. But I am tedious in
a matter, so obvious, the sum, where in I would have you and all to fix, is
this, that whatever may have been or may be the various dispensations of
Providence, in the overcloudings of Churches, and decline and corruption of
Ordinances, wherein no doubt the holding the foundation Jesus Christ, by sound
Faith, and sincerity in Gods sight, have gone a great length; yet as the
instancing of such times, cannot, with any show of reason, or measure of
honesty, be alleged for a tacit, and toward compliance, with the
re-introducing of the evils of these dark times, in Doctrine or Worship,
contraire to the revelation of a more full and pure light; so no more can it be
made use of, after the manifest and sealed blessing of a sent and faithful
Ministry, to persuade a voluntaire abandoning, at the lust and arbitriment of
Man, of our true Pastors, and a willing and tame embracing, and owning of
manifest and profane Intruders. According to which Rules, if you will be
pleased to re-examine your instances, I doubt not but you will find them,
neither to be unanswerable, nor that the Doctrine of our Teachers, against
causeless Separatists, does homologate your inference. As to what you add, That
it is a great cruelty, if a Minister be put from his place, whether justly or
unjustly, that the people should be starved. Sir, I am verily of your opinion;
and therefore, as I wish our outed Ministers, had testified more love, in
despising hazards for the relief of Souls; so I cannot but remember you, how
dreadful a charge this driving away of Pastors, and starving of Souls will one
day amount to, against such who have been its direct Authors: However, seeing
the love and faithfulness of Christ, the Great Shepherd, has secured the
event, they that believe need not make haste, for verily they shall be fed.

Your N. C. next Argument, is, That your Curates are naughty men, and weak
preachers. Sir, such is the notoriety of this charge, and so afflicting ought
it to be to every one, concerned in the credit of the Gospel, and honor of its
Ministry; that, I am assured, all sober men will rather impute it to
tenderness, then want of matter, that I incline not either to enlarge the
objection, or insist in the examination of your answer. You think it an odd
piece of Religion, for us to reproach our Pastors by the name of Curats, a
designation not to be ashamed of: but though the name Curate, ows its
invention, only to the vanity of men, by whom the lowly Scripture-stile of
Minister was disdained, and be of no proper origination, and in effect the
product of the corruption, both of the Churches humility, and purity of the
Latin Tongue; yet, seeing you account it honorable, and I and many others do
rather use it for distinction, I heartily wish that you and others, who do
appear so sensible of an apprehended reproach, may be as serious in reflecting
upon that important aggravation, it shall furnish in the last Judgment,
against these who, in stead of caring for Souls, do visibly destroy them. As
for what you insinuat, that the Curats are our Pastors, and over us in the
Lord, pardon me to say, that I cannot find the relation, either in their
office or exercise, and that, if Scripture-marks do entitle to Scripture-names,
these Intruders, entering not by the door, are liker to Thieves, these false
Teachers are but revening Wolves, and these Prophets, who teach lies, are but
the taill: Nay, every one, who rightly considers, how that in place of minding
the Lords Work, whereunto they pretend, and honoring him before the people,
they have made his offering and Sanctuary to be abhorred, and his name to be
profaned, in liew of that honor which you acclaime, may justly conclude, that
they that despise the Lord, shall be lightly esteemed. Say not where is
Christian Charity? to call the manifest lewdness and lies of these pitiful
Miscreants, whose gross abominations are, almost every where, the grief of the
godly, and the very scorn of all, nay such, whereof your self page 30. does
abhor the patrociny, and for which, you pretend to be a bitter mourner in
secret, Slight grounds, and to bid men be slow to take thence an impression, is
plain mockery; Charity that believes all things, rests and rejoiceth only in
the Truth, and rejoiceth not in iniquity: neither can you allege, our grounds
being good, your Church, in our not complaining, to be neglected; it were
strange charity to believe, as the proverb runs, that Satan will reprove sin.
As for your alleging, that to separate upon the personal ^ailing, much more
weakness of a Preacher, will open a wide door to Separation. Whatever danger
may be in your smooth generality; yet, I am confident, not to own (for, as to
separation, I have already cleared how the practice of these you do condemn
does differ from it) for Ministers, such vicious intruders, and flagitious
livers, as your Curates are, is a Sovereign expedient for preserving both of
Truth and Christian Unity: and that as to ty the good of Worship to the sincere
intention of him that manageth it, is an error; so, to think that Gifts and a
suitable converse in a Minister, are of no influence or regard as to the work
of his Ministry; and that because, not to hear Sermons only, but the solemn
worship of God is the chief end of our meeting (wherein you are mistaken, if
you think that you and we do not agree) which we can do, be the Minister what
he will, is irreligion unmixed, which your jejune commending of the reading of
good Scriptures, and singing of good Psalms, does not palliate. Be the
minister what he will: What? be he Socinian, Arminian, notoriously flagitious,
an Adulterer, or Incestuous Person, a despiser of Discipline, a strengthener of
the hands of the Wicked, and sander of the hearts of the Godly, a Symoniack, is
nothing but what he may will, and many of yours do, de facto, will: nay, be he
Popish, Mahumetan, Pagan or Atheist, all are but what he may will: O execrable
latitude! But you conclude this point, that our crouding to hear such weak men,
now in Conventicles, who formerly were of no esteem among us, says we are not
so zealous for good Preachings, as we would make the world believe. Pray, Sir,
if a man in plenty, make choice, and in penury make a shift, will you thence
infer, he is not desirous of the best, this is too weak: but, to be ingenuous
with you, I question not, but some Curats make constantly more able, and
frequently better Sermons, for the matter, then weaker Non-conformists; and
vet, the just grounds of our exceptions, do still conclude, that they are
neither so good men, nor acceptable Preachers, as these whom we prefer. As
for what you add, That the way to make a man popular among us, is to rail
against Church and State, It is a malicious calumny, wherewith you endeavor to
slander us unto our Rulers, and which they, who ought to be as the Angels of
God, may easily discern and repel.

Your N. C, in the next place objects to you, the obligation of the Covenant:
wherein the whole Nation and the posterity are engaged, to maintain our former
Presbyterian Ministry, extirpat your Prelacie and all depending on that
Hierarchy, and whatsoever shall be found con^raire to ^ound Doctrine, and the
power of Godliness. I shall not improve this argument, being of such an obvious
evidence, in any further explication; but briefly review what you answer, on
the contraire: And 1. Your evil Conscience foometh forth your indignation
against the Covenant, in your reproachful calling it, our Goliath, always
brought out by us, to defy the Armies of the living God, whose strength, like
Sampsons, lay in its hair, the Armies that fought for it, and not in any innate
vigor. But as, notwithstanding all the arrows of malice, blasphemy, and rage,
that you and your party, have shot at it, it still abides in strength, and the
Armies of its followers have been made strong, by the hands of the mighty God
of Jacob, and, even in their most desperate extremity, did by the blood of the
Lamb, and the word of their Testimony, obtain the most signal victory; So, the
Virgin, the Daughter of Zion, has despised thee and laughed thee to scorn;
Whom have thou reproached? And against whom have thon exalted thy voice? even
against the holy one, the God of truth (^or what are men or their doings, that
you murmr against them) the swift Witness against such, as swear ^a^sly: He
it is that it regards the rage, and tumult of your party, and will turn you
back: and as the inconsistencie, of your assimilations to Sampson, a Worthy of
the Lord and to Goliath, a Champion of the Philistines, do plainly discover the
unreasonableness of your spite; so the Lord who has already proved the innate
vigor of his Covenant, in the blood and suffering of his Martyrs, can also,
in his good time, make its hair to grow, and strength to return, to the utter
ruin of your Prelacie, and all its adherents. But 2. You proceed to tell us,
that it is a ridiculous fancy, to say, Children can be bound by their Fathers
Oath, which is to make us the Servants of men, and give them Authority over our
Consciences, Gods peculiar power: Sir; I perceive that whether you rage or
laugh there is no rest: just now we heard you railing, and certainly here you
are rallying: but first, I am glad to find your assert so plainly, the liberty
of our Consciences from man's imposing, and shall only remember you, that if a
Father, in respect of this liberty, may not, at his arbitriment, bind his Son
by an Oath, requiring a conscientious performance, undoubtedly far less can
Rulers, whether Civil or Ecclesiastic, perscribe at their arbitriment in
matters of Religion, which, without question, do exact a conscientious
observance. 2. Though, the Lords Authority over Conscience do indeed exempt it
from man's usurpation; yet, in so far as it has pleased the Lord, to vest any
person with this power over another, all usurpation cease, and the Lords
reserved dominion does rather establish it: for example; therefore it is, that
the righteous and necessary commands of lawful Rulers, do even in conscience
bind their Subjects; because in so far as they observe the limits of their
power, by him appointed, their authority is understood to be of God, and by him
approved and allowed. 3. It is manifest that the Lord has, in many things,
given to Fathers, by virtue of his precept, a Power of Command, reaching even
unto Conscience, without an interveening Oath: Honor the Father and thy
Mother, is that which God has enjoined; and does certainly require a suitable
obedience; If then this Authority be not impugned by your alleged reason, that
we are not the servants of men, can the interposing of an Oath, or the Fathers
adjuration, in things otherwise under the compass of his power, render your
objection more effectual? But 4. That I may return you a round and full
Answer: I say, that in many cases, whereof our present case of the Covenant is
of all the most probable, Children, by virtue of the paternal authority given
and allowed by the Lord, can be, and de facto are bound, by their Fathers Oath:
And first, wherever the Fathers command does engage to a perpetual obedience,
there can be no question, but, in that case, an accessory adjuration does
greatly intend the obligation: I need not confirm this by the parallel
instance of Readiness adjuring the People, while in the pursuit of his enemies;
the reason of this position is above exception, viz. That if a simple command,
flowing from the paternall power which God has established, be therefore
binding, the solemn invocking of the same God to be an avenger of the contempt
of that authority, by himself approven, cannot but add to the obligation: but
if you desire to know in what things, and how far the command of a Father,
even of it self, without the consent and acceptance of the Children, (which I
grant, when intervenient, does alter the case) does oblige? Take the instance
of the Rechabites, who for obedience to their Father Ionadab^s command, who
lived some Ages before, 2. Kings 10. 15. not to drink wine (a thing free in it
self, and not under any Divine precept) they nor their sons for ever, have
therefore the Lords express commendation, sealed with a perpetual blessing: If
then a Father's command in things free, and arbitrary, may be confirmed by the
accession of an oath, and, in the case adduced, does perpetually bind, how much
more, must the sworn engagement of the Father for himself and his posterity in
things commanded by the Lord, be everlastingly obliging. 2. In what case
soever, a Father's Bond or Contract is binding to himself and his posterity, if
he confirm the ^amine by an Oath, the force and virtue thereof does also reach
all the offspring, cocerned in the obligement. For explication of this truth,
it is not needful that I determine particularly, what Contracts are perpetual,
and what only personal: If these be perpetual, whereof the subject matter
being either under the necessity of an express perpetual command, or having an
evident and lasting conveniencie, agreeable to the principles of Truth and
Righteousness, the party contracter does expressly thereby engage for himself
and his posterity: as it is short of the true and full extent of perpetual
contracts, which cannot in reason be restricted within the limits of paternal
commands, so it is more then necessary for my purpose, and more then proven by
the instances subjoined.

Now that there are such obligations, as perpetual of their own nature so,
carrying along with them the virtue of that accessory Oath, whereby at first
they were established, is clear, not only from that Covenant and Oath Deuteronomy. 29.
10 and 14. whereunto Moses did engage the people of Israel, and which he
declares to be made with them that stood there that day, and also with him
that was not there; to with the Generations to come, as appears by the sequel
of that Chapter, specially, v. 29. an example whereof the exceeding evidence
can only expose it to exception; but also from these more controverted
instances 1. of that Promissory oath taken by Joseph of the Children of Israel,
for carrying up his bones from Egypt, Genesis 50. 25. which the after-generation
in the Conscience of its Religion did punctually observe, Exo. 13. ver. 19. 2.
From the Oath sworn by the People of Israel to the Gibeonites, Josh. 9. 15.
for the breach whereof, we find, the Lord several ages thereafter, severely
animadverting against all Israel, and Saul's house in particular: 2 Samuel 2: 1,
2. For these you may add, the sworn Leagues, and Agreements of all Nations
among themselves, which do undoubtedly, with the same force and quality,
descend to their Posterity. But wherefore should I insist in a matter so
evident, and, at least as to the difference betwixt us, universally
acknowledged? If your meaning, in affirming that Children can not be bound by
their Fathers Oath, were only, that however, a promissory Oath, may be binding
upon the Posterity, in the nature of a promise, and for performance; yet the
religion of the Oath, is not so transmitted, as to render the Posterity, in
case of a breach, perjured; there might possibly appear to be some ground of
debate betwixt us; (of which afterward) but seeing it is apparent both from your
proposition, explication subjoined, and design aimed at, that you deny a
Fathers promissory Oath, even in the substance, viz. so much as a promise, let
be in the quality of an Oath, to be obliging as to his Children, you manifestly
repugne, not only to the instances given; but to the common opinion, reason,
yea and sense of all Men, Nations and Ages, whereby it is most constant, that
such is, and has been always repute, the power and representation of Fathers
quoad their Children, that their pactions and contracts, not only in matters
determined by divine precept; but also in things in themselves free and
indifferent, viz. their condition in order to the Society civil, whereof they
are members, yea even their state, as free men of slaves, have, without the
least challenge of Usurpation over Conscience, seeing founded in that Authority
which God approves, been holden perpetually binding. But that I may immoveablie
establish the obligation of this Covenant, which I am persuaded God will
require, for ever: I shall not content my self with these common concessions.
1. That the sworn Pactions and Covenants of a Nation or People incorporate in
one Body Politic, do, even in the quality of Oaths, descend to after
Generations; because, while the same civil form of their constitution remains,
they are still understood to be the same People, notwithstanding of the change
whether partial or total of the individual constituents, which does no more
alter the formal identity of the Nation, then the flux and change of parts in
our bodies, waters in a channel, or boards in a Ship, do change the samness of
the Person, River, or Ship. 2. That the promissory Oaths of Fathers, in all
things, whereunto the sphere of their Authority does extend, do at least bind
the Children, as promises, and to the implement: which concessions granted by
all, do nevertheless, above all scruple, confirm the obligation of our
Covenants, which you impugn: yet, seeing that I do apprehend, both the
disparity placed betwixt a Nation and a private person, to be narrow and
groundless, and the second position, to fall short of Truths full extent in
this matter; to remove from you all ground of scruple, I shall reduce the whole
matter to these certain positions.

1. That though assertory Oaths, being only accessory for further security, do
indeed intend, but cannot extend, the force of any Obligation, either as to its
subject matter, or the persons thereby bound, beyond its rational import; yet
such has always been the Religion, and Reverence of promissory Oaths as,
(nothing impeding either from the peculiarity of the subject, or other
circumstances, or from the declared will of the person engaging) ever to
ampliat, and extend the interpretation, and make the successors, as well as the
promiser himself, understood to be therein comprehended.

2. That the true ground and measure, both as to the determination of the
subject, and extent of the obligation, whereby the force of the Fathers
contract, expressly binding himself and his posterity, may be known and
defined; is, this Paternal power and authority, it being in it self evident,
that, as by reason hereof the Children follow the state and condition of the
Father, (unless in so far, as the favor of liberty, or positive Law has
made an alteration) so, where the Father by command may oblige to obedience, if
by his obligation he do bind to performance, he is thereby truly to be
understood much more, de facto, to exercise all the power he has, whereby he
may render his engagement effectual: Now in what things, and how far Fathers
may both dispose upon and command their Children, is sufficiently known, and
their undoubted Authority, not only to command obedience to the Law of God; but
also to determine them in matters free, are, by the examples of Pious Parents,
and that of Ionadab upon record, much more cleared, then is necessary to our
hypothesis.

3. Seeing it is from the virtue and influence of this paternal power, that the
Contract of Society, whereby Politic bodies do at first coalesce, does descend
unto the posterity, and so continue the Society, and its constitution to
after-generations; the reason wherefore the other Contracts, either simple or
sworn, engaged into by these associat people, do bind their successors, must
of necessity resolve into the same cause; and to refer it to an imaginary
samnesse, having no other reality then the first intercession, and continuance
of the fundamental Contract of Society, is but an empty Notion, importing no
real difference: for, as the perpetual obligation of the original Contract,
constituting the Society, can have no other cause then what is assigned; and it
were irrational to attribute its continuance, to a samness, which it produces;
so, it is only in the force and power thereof, that all other
after-National-Contracts, are binding upon the whole, and propagat to the
succeeding race.

4. This third position being certain, it necessarily follows, that the oath
taken by Joseph, of the Children of Israel, anent his bones, and that given by
them to the Gibeonites, both, by Scripture declared to be binding, as Oaths,
upon the Posterity, have no proper and peculiar reason, but do unanswerably
conclude, that wherever the Father's obligation, otherwise binding to his
offspring, is confirmed by an Oath, it is transmitted to them with the same
accessory force, to ^ender them guilty in God's sight, not only of breach of
Promise, but breach of Oath: which argument is so much the more evident, in the
first case of Joseph, that the Children of Israel were not, when they swear to
him, imbodied in a Politic state; but did only stand in their natural Relation
of Consanguinity.

5. Seeing we find in Scripture the Lord Covenanting with Fathers, for
themselves, and their Posterity; as in the case of Abraham: Fathers engaging to
the Lord in the same manner, as Joshua for himself and his house; the
abovementioned import, and extent of Ionadab's command, and (not to mention
the Fathers power of devoting their Children, and of making void their vows)
even the adjuration and curse of Rulers, taking effect, many Ages thereafter;
as that of Joshua against the Rebuilders of Jericho: with what show of reason,
can we deny (the matter, or other argument of a contraire intention, not
prohibiting) that the sworn obligations of Fathers, are binding upon their
Children, as well for the Religion of the Oath, as the Truth of the Promise? I
know that, as to man's tribunal and judgment, it is thought hard poenam
perjurij illi irrogari, qui ipse Deum testem ac vindicem non invocaverit, that
one should be punished as perjured, who has not himself invocated God as
witness and avenger. But as we do clearly see, the Lords judgment in the
contraire; does not the same reason, which, by making the Father's promise, for
himself and Children, also their promise, and therefore binding, by
transmitting the Oath in like manner, confirm its righteousness. I need not
here precaution, against the Children their invincible ignorance of the Fathers
Promise, and Oath; their innocence in this case, descending from a clearer
distinct head, and purging from breach of Promise, as well as breach of Oath,
does neither infer the liberty, which you plead for; nor impugn the
transmission of a sworn Promise, in its Religion, as well as in its Obligation

6. Our Covenant, being in the matter necessary and righteous; for the manner,
made with and before God, to be perpetually binding; and for its solemnity,
unanimously sworn, by almost the whole Nation, and confirmed by all the
Authority in it, has, such a concurring evidence, of all arguments, and
opinions, for its perpetuity, as an Oath, that your nibling at it, upon this
head, is not a greater proof of your perfidie, then testimony of your
inconsiderate ignorance; but if you be ignorant your self, you do well to make
your N, C^ no better: and therefore you make him objecte against your
assertion, that Children cannot be bound by their Fathers Oath: does not the
Fathers debt oblige the Son? and why not his Oath? But to give you the
advantage you design: I willingly turn the Argument to make for you, thus:
The Father's debt does not oblige the Son, unless he be also his Heir, and in
this respect, only as Possessor of his goods: therefore etc. To which I
answer, that as by the tenor of written Bonds for debt, it is clear, that the
Debtor does only oblige himself, and his Heirs, and Successors in his Lands and
goods, so, both Law and Reason do interpret, all ordinary promises for debt, to
be of the same nature, viz. to bind the person himself, and to follow and
affect his Estate, together with the person, who, enjoying, by universal title,
the promiser his estate, is, by the interpretation of Law, understood to accept
of the same, with that burden, and no further; so, that, if a Son, as Son, be
not liable, it is evidently from the restriction of the obligation, according
to the meaning of the parties; which I already told you, that an accessory Oath
does not exceed; and makes nothing for a Son's freedom in Conscience, as to
such other engagements, whereunto both the Father's power, and intention, do
concur to make him liable.

In the next place, I confess you do your N. C. reason, and as just now we have
heard, the ridiculous objection you put in his mouth; so, in this place, to his
unanswerable argument, for the Childrens obligation by the Parents Oath, from
the duty of our allegiance, descending from our Fathers their swearing the
same; you return as ridiculous an answer: viz. That we are not at all obliged
to the King by their Oath, but because the right of the Crown is in his Person:
who can forbear to laugh? are you a Doctor in Israel, and also a high pretender
for the King, and understands no better? You say the right of the Crown is in
his person, but supposing it came there by the original consent, and
allegiance sworn to his first Predecessor, (which I am sure is a title which,
in this place, you will not quarrel) is not the same that is the cause of his
Kingship, also the reason of our subjection? Or will you admit it to be the
Creating, and not also the Conserving cause? How do the most common maxims of
reason militat against you? You add, and we are born his Subjects: but, pray,
does our birth as men, or as men born in such a place, bring us forth with this
character? then should all men, or at least even strangers, casually born in
the place, be also born Subjects: whereunto then can it else be ascribed,
unless it be, that we are the offspring of such, who for themselves and their
posterity, did submit to the King, by a perpetual surrender, transmitted upon
us, passive with the same obligation? If these things do not satisfy, I entreat
you to reflect, upon the ordinary strain of all impeachments: where you will
find, the person accused of Treason, though he never actually swore, or
promised allegiance; yet constantly, and very congruously, charged, with breach
of Faith, Failty, and Allegiance: nay, I nothing doubt, but if you were
describing to us the crime of Rebellion, you would at great length prove, it,
to be both falsehood and perfidy.

Your N. C. proceeds to argue thus: How was Adam obliged for his Posterity, if
Parents cannot bind their Children? And in return you say, This is strange
dealing: and because you will have the instance an inapplicable mystery,
therefore, you recurre to secret Divine transactions, without either warrant,
or necessity: but, Sir, is not this a strange stupiditie in you; be it so, that
God's Covenanting with Adam, as the common Head of Mankind, so as upon his
deed, to make their standing or falling depend, is a difficulty, which only
Gods Soveraignity can explicat: is this therefore also a mystery, that Adam
might have been, any other father may be obliged, both for himself and his
posterity; so as to ty them to obedience, and upon their own (...) obedience
(not their Fathers, which is the singularity o^ Gods Covenant with Adam) to
render them guilty? or can there be any thing more plain, both in Scripture and
Reason, then that not only the Lo^ds command, according to his will, should be
perpetual to the Posterity; but also a Peoples Covenant, made with him to
observe the same, does oblige both them and after-Generations, to continual
obedience? as the 29. of Deuteronomy. most convincingly holds out. But you go on still
stumbling, thus: I Parents can bind duties upon their Children, they may as
well bind sins, and this is to make way^ or more Original sin then Adams. Who
would not pity such impertinencies? The thing asserted, is, that a Parent may
oblidge for his Children to duty: and you subjoin, he may as well bind sins
upon them: Certainly, Sir, these are not the words of sobriety: A Parent may
command his Son to duty, may he also command him to sin? the ignis fatuus that
seduces you, is that you appear to be dazzled, by an imagination of your own,
that we go about to im^ute to Children, not the Parents obligation; but their
deeds, their duties, or failings, which, truly we as little dream of, as
certainly you will find your present dream, about Original sin, when you
return to your self, wholly extravagant.

But the next lapse you make, is, in the person of your N. C. whom you cause in
place of adducing an obligement by a Father, binding himself and his posterity,
to bring in the instance of the Baptismal vow, undertaken by the Father, in
Name of the Child, which seeing it meets not our Question, you both objecte, and
answer to no purpose.

The next demand your N. C. makes, is, How then is Saul charged, and his
Children punished, for killing the Gibeonites? And to this you make a very
pleasant return, not unlike your answer made to our obligation of Allegiance,
viz Shat Saul is taxed for blood, and killing the Gibeonites, who by the Lords
rati^ying the Princ^s their Oath to them, had got a right to their lives; and
not for perjur^ against that Oath, which the Princes swore: Before I consider
this answer, let us first hear the Scripture. 2 Samuel 21. 2. [Now the
Gibeonites were not of Israel; but of the Amorites, and the Children of Israel
had sworn unto them, and Saul sought to stay them, etc. Wherefore David said
to the Gibeonites, what shall I do for you?] do not these words clearly
intimate, that the injury done them, was contraire to that former Oath, whereby
they were secured? To this you say, The Oath is only here mentioned, to reminde
the Reader of the former History; but does not at all say, that the Oath was
still binding: But, if the words be set down to reminde the Reader, certainly,
it is in order to some apposite purpose; and the blind account that you make,
is scarce worthy of your self, let be the Scriptures of Truth. Next, what can
be more evident, then, that the Oath is first mentioned, to show their right,
thence derived; and Readiness injury, being thereto subjoyned, it is manifest,
that for his breach thereby incurred, a reparation for an atonement is
offered: and seeing the Scripture says enough, if it say not expressly, that
the Oath was still binding, it seems only to be omitted, because in that Age,
there was none who doubted, much less of your opinion^ to deny it: Now as to
your answer, I must take notice of what you seem to insinuat, that the
Gibeonites were spared, not by reason of their Covenant, made with the Princes;
but by the Lords ratisying of it, whereby they became to be excepted, from the
rest of the devoted Canaanites; But Pray, Sir, do you not in so supposing
con^adict your Fellow-brother the Surveyer of Naphtaly who ranteth (as you use
to do) against his Adve^sary the Author of the Apologetical Relation, who
asserted the same which you here suppose. 2. You speak of a ratification of
this Oath of the Princes, by virtue of which, abstracted from the Oath these
Gibeonites were spared, which you would do well to explain and clear. Seeing
then you cannot but grant that the Gibeonites were spared, and enjoyed their
lives, by the right of that peace sworn unto them, my next reply is most
evident, viz. that your answer, alleging Readiness killing the Gibeonites, to
have been cruel, and bloody against their Right; but not perfidious against
that Oath and Covenant, whereby their Right was granted, can no more be said of
Saul, then it might have been said of the Princes, who at first swore, if so be
they had, the very next hour, brocken their Oath, and destroyed these, whom
they had saved, it being a truth most certain, that as every violation of
Faith, is, an injurious invasion of that right, which was thereby secured; so,
it is impossible for a right, arising from a Contract or Covenant, to subsist,
unless its cause do still stand, and be repute to be in force: You add, that
Saul is taxed of blood and not of perjury: A poor shift; But I have already
showed him to be noted for both; and bloody and deceitful are of too near a
conjunction, to allow of your negative inference, of the exclusion of the
other, because one only expressed. And now, Sir, I have ended this point: only
let me say it without vanity that as I judge, your folly in this last
discourse to be such, as no sober man could lightly fall into, without a
judicial desertion; so, I am confident if there be any ingenuity in you, the
return which I justly make you of the Epilogue, which in this place you so
vainly use, will cover you with blushes, viz. Thus I have taken more pains,
then was needful, to show the ridiculous fondness of your absurd notion. viz.
That Children can not be bound by their Fathers Oath; and have said more to
disprove it then ever you will be able to answer.

What follows in this Dialogue is a mere rapsodie of railing, and in the first
place to decline your N, C. too pungent demand, that for all you have said, you
cannot deny but the Covenant binds these who took it, you make a hydeous
noise, of that Little noise, which, you say, we made in breaking it in some
things: viz. In our silence, and not declaring against the Apostasy, Tyranny,
and Perjury of the Usurpers, and in our faint giving over to Pray for the King,
Sir, contemning your calumny, I answer, were not the Usurpers sufficiently
opposed in their evil courses, while there was hope? And is this all you can
say, that the Lord having broken us, and brought us under their feet, in the
humbling sense of his dreadful displeasure, we did not madly declaime against
such, to warn whom, after their rejecting of our brotherly admonition, the Lord
did not further require us: We love not to vye with you, or any other, either
in stedfastness in the Covenant, or faitfulnes to the King, in these confused
and calamitous times; but of this one thing I am most confident, that his
Majesty was more obliged to the Covenant, and these who to this day, adhere to
it, for the continuance of his remembrance, both with God and men, in the days
of his Exile, and in disposing to, and preparing the way of his return; then to
all the present high and false pretenders who are not ashamed, in their
flattering impudence, to aver, that the most notorious and base acts of
Compliance, whereof they were then guilty, were yet the effects of a pure and
constant loyalty: As for the thundering, you say, was in your Pulpits, against
your course, before we were silenced, and is at this day in our Conventicles:
is it not enough, that you mock at the warnings of the Lords Servants, whom for
no other cause, then true Zeal for God, and tender Love to your Souls, and just
indignation at your sin, you have beaten and expelled; but you must also
thereto add falsehood, in your alledgeance anent what you call Conventicles, and
insolent insulting over our undeniable short-coming, in due admonition, after
his Majesty's Restitution; whereunto an excessive desire, by faireness and
moderation, to stop the precipitant current of your late defection, did too
generally tempt us, before we were ejected: but the Lord hears, and regards^

You tell us, in the next place, That the Tyrann's cruelty did formerly terrify
us, and now we presume upon the King's clemency. If I had ever professed the
hundred part of that respect for Oliver that the Chief of your way did, I would
say, and say it truly, that what ever he was Titulo, he was no Tyrannus
Exercitio; however, I am far from justifying the Usurpers their practices, or
denying altogether his Majesty's Clemency, whereof the indemnity given to the
same Usurpers does exhibit so fair an evidence; but this I must say, that as
I do wholly impute the withholding of much of the Kings goodness and favor
from us, to the malign influence of the unlucky conjunction of accursed
Prelates, whereby some even of the great and most solemn acts of his Majesty's
intended bounty have been frustrat and depraved; so such has been, and is,
the implacable spite and rigor of their Malice, and Persecution, that not only
it has surmounted their resentment of the Sectarian invasion, and made them
ascribe all these Mischiefs to us, who were their most constant Enemies; but by
many degrees exceeded all the violences, wherewith the Englishes, during their
Domination among us, can be charged: If you require a proof; instead of a long
condescendence that I might adduce, the case of the then Tories in the North,
and late Risers in the South, with the respective measures, where with they
have been treated, being impartially pondered and compared, is an irrefragable
instance. As to the trip, you mention, of these who ceased, for fear of loss of
Stipend, public praying for the King, which they had in print owned for a
duty: As at the worst you can call it but a trip, which I think, if not the
respect you owe to your Arch-master Sharp, who, at that time, not only desisted
whith others; but, as he may remember, did overture it to his Brethren, to pray
in public for the then Protector; yet, the many horrid lapses whereof, upon
smal^er temptations, yours are guilty, might have made you forbear to mention
it, so, all circumstances being examined, and the practices of the Prophets and
People of God in old times duly considered, a Prudent correction of an
over-zealous assertion, will be found its more just censure.

But your N. C. adding oil to your flame, by telling you, that for our
particular failings, you have renounced all, you go on in your accusation, and
laying aside our private faults, as if our public alone were more then your
indignation can decipher, and expressly waving all design of reflection, that
by this smoothing unguent, you may render the spears of your envy better
pointed, you tell us, That all you do, is, but to let us see, we are but as
other men; and not such wonders as we would have the world believe? Sir, though
the world knows, that this is but your accusation, and not our arrogance; yet
I must add, that so strangely has the apostasy, and wickedness of your course
prevailed in this Land, that a very small measure of Faitfulness, is enough,
without any miracle to make any man both a sign and a Wonder: but you proced to
tell us of Monstrous faults we committed in exacting the Oath of the League,
over and above that it was a bond of Rebellion, as you hinted in your first
Dialogue, and I have fully there refuted: And as to the National Covenant, you
say, it was a cruel imposing upon Consciences, to make a Nation swear, what
they could not understand: A man would think that you having turned us from
being wonders o^ piety to be Monsters of Cruelty, and after so high a charge
given^ that you were big with some amazing discovery to ensue; but behold the
ridiculus Mus; you made the Nation renounce all the articles of popery, and
amongst the rest Opus operatum a Latin word, and abstruse conceit; with many
other niceties that simple people did not understand: and to mend the jest, you
add, was it not a contr^diction, to make them swear against Worship in an
unknown Tongue, and yet in the Oath, which is an act of Worship, to use it?
yea, you made them preface this, with a great l^e, that it was after full and
mature consideration, of all particulars whereof they were not capable, beside
the Tyranny of making men swear in matters, whereof some were debetable: etc.
Before I enter upon this weighty challenge of words: I cannot but note the
ingenuity that has escaped you: Your Brethren commence our work from the 37,
and tell us, that we were false pretenders to old foundations; but you by a
plain impugnation of the National Covenant, as it was first contrived, and
sworn, in the 1580. 81. and 90; do clearly intimate, the true consequentiall
extent of your common prejudice and very plainly signify, that Malignancie and
Popery, for all the industrious dissembling of your Party, are nevertheless
of a near cognation: nay forgetting, that this Covenant was framed at first by
King James his special command, and by his reiterat authority and example,
very solemnly confirmed, and even by King Charles, in the beginning of the
troubles expressly ordained to be renewed; so prevalent is the malice of your
error, that all the regard to the powers, whereof at other times you do so
vainly boast, does not here in the least restrain you from staging these two
Kings with us, as Monstrous imposers. But to the objection it self, It Is
answered, first, that it is indeed a cruel imposing upon Conscience, to make a
Nation swear an Oath, they could not understand; but do you think that because
opus operatum is a Latin word, that therefore the people, who, under Popery,
had been too much acquainted with Latin terms and phrases, and at the first
breaking up of the light o^ Reformation amongst us, had often, both in private
and Public, heard the Popish errors of Justification by works, Opus operatum,
etc. fully explained and refuted, neither did, nor could understand its
meaning? Or because to you, the opinion of Opus operatum, appears an abstruse
conceit, and many other Popish tenets, renounced in that Covenant, seem to be
but niceties: must they therefore be so to all? And was it impossible for these
Servants of the Lord, who where employed in the conversion of the Nation, and
did at first tender that Oath, to make the grossness of these popish falsehoods,
and of this in particular, though under a Latin name, sufficiently plain, even
to the meanest capacities? Certainly, Sir, the very simple ones, whom you
despise, do laugh at the weakness of this arguing. 2. As you do not remember,
that this Covenant was first taken, upon the back of our Reformation from
Popery, when all the errors, therein renounced, were recent in men's memories;
so, you consider not, that thereby we first declare, the true Christian
Religion, to be that which is revealed to the world, by the Preaching of the
blessed Evangell, and received and believed, by the Kirk of Scotland, etc. And
therefore do abhor, and detest, all contrary Religion and Doctrine; but
chiefly all kind of Papistrie in general, and particular Heads as they are
damned by the word of God, and in special the Usurp^d Authority of that Roman
Antichrict, etc, and finally, all his vain Rites, and Traditions, brought into
the Kirk, without, or against the word of God, and Doctrine of this reformed
Kirk. Now I would inquire, if these general clauses, clearly referring to the
word of God, as the only binding rule of Truth, may not be la^fully sworn to,
without a distinct knowledge of all the Particulars, that possibly may therein
be included? And if the condescending upon Particulars, does import any thing
more, then our sincere profession, that we judge the same to be comprised under
the general Rule, and therefore as such, do renounce them: seeing then, that
this enumeration, when omitted, does not invalidate; and when expressed, does
require rather a sincere acknowledgement, then a dilucide and through
knowledge; your arguing against it, from the possibility, nay even from the
probability of an incident mistake, while in the mean time the persuasion of
the truth of the blessed Gospel, as the regulating Rule is held firm and sure;
is nothing solid nor concludent: but because the two Latin words, Opus
operatum, are the great ground of your quibling, I suppose that the Oath, after
the positive part, and general abjuration of Papistrie, had only begun to
enumerate particulars, thus, [and in special, the usurped authority of that
Roman Antichrist, all his tyrannous Laws,] and in place of the rest, had given
us a fair et caetera: certainly as the premised, and subjoyned qualification
of this and caetera, would have fully salved its generality; so no doubt the
known signification of the words, had prevented the offense of their being
Latin: If in this you be doubtful, let me only reminde you, by way of Argument
ad hominem, of the Prelatick Oath ex officio, with its blind and caetera which,
though for its illimited laxeness, joined with its evil tendencie, did give to
all sober men, just ground of seruple; yet upon the account of the Latin, was
never quarrelled, by either Man or Woman.

But you say it was a contradiction, to make them swear against Worship in an
unknown Tongue; and yet in that very Oath so to use it: A witty knack indeed;
if you were arguing with the Apostle, against worship in a strange language,
because the unlearned cannot thereto say Amen, would you not account this
reply, viz. that it is a contradiction, to bring an argument from the
unlearned, not being in case to assent to a strange Language, when that very
assent is, as to us, so expressed, absurd and ridiculous? Why then does this
vain subtilty so pitifully delude you? And why do you not advert, that a Tongue
in general may be unknown, and yet, many of its words and phrases, not only
transferred to our Vulgar with a suitable accommodation (as is manifest in all
our speech) but also simply borrowed, and by custom rendered to all
significant? Seeing therefore, it is the Tongue, as unknown, and not as Latin,
Greek, or the like, that is the ground of the abjuration, against Worship in an
unknown Tongue; and yet in that same Oath to use a word from it, of a known
signification, is no contradiction.

Next you add, That we made the people preface this Oath with a great lie, of
full and mature consideration of all particulars, whereof we nevertheless knew
they were not capable: but why do you in fixing lies upon others, impinge so
manifestly your self? The Covenant does only preface, Long and due examination
of our own Consciences, in matters of true and false Religion: as to your
mature and full consideration of all particulars, it bears nothing: 2. As
every Oath is to be made in Truth, Righteousness, and Judgment; so, certainly,
the examination mentioned, is both every ones capacity, and duty; and no
doubt, in all times, when this Oath was taken, was not only recommended, but
sufficiently warned of, instructed, and promoved by these faithful men, by whom
it was administrate: but 3. Think you it so hard a matter, for any person
serious in matters of Religion, according to the truth revealed in Scripture,
to be able from mature consideration, to reject all these vain Popish
Inventions, and Superstitions, enumerate in this Covenant; whereof, as there
are a great many that, without any curious scrutiny into their nature, merely
for want of warrants and through Scripture-silence, come to be renounced; so,
in special, the conceit of, opus operatum, being contrary to the very life and
spirituality of Religion, must to every one, who knows that God requires the
heart, and is to be served and worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, certainly
appear to be most detestable? Sir, your scrupulous doubting and mincing in
these matters, do sadly intimate a greater measure of unsoundness, then I am
willing to express: But you tell us, that many of the things sworn against,
are disputable: Pray, Sir, tell us which, that you may be known? There are now
nintie years since they were all abjured, as Popish Errors and Superstitions,
without the least doubt in the contrary by any Protestant among us: If you
judge otherwise, it were better you were known, by a condescendence, then by
your general and subdolous hints, left to render men's minds unstable. But you
plead only charity^ and think it hard, that no man may be of our communion,
except he be of our opinion in all things: Sir, this is a groundless
accusation, seeing it is sufficiently plain, that, whatever tenderness we are to
exercise toward such, as in points less material, do modestly differ from us;
yet this Covenant, being entered into, in obedience to that command, Come out
of her (that is Babylon) my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins: and
be ye separate says the Lord: and touch not the unclean thing: the total
abjuration of Popery, as opposite to the blessed Evangell, the sum and end
of this Oath, does not in the least interfere, with that Christian forbearance,
which persons of the same communion, are mutually to show, in matters doubtful
and of less moment: And where you compare this Covenant, for rigor, to the
bloody and cruel conjuration of Trent, thereby interminis renounced, it is too
plain, that your turning of the adequate extent of a just and necessary
opposition, designed by this Covenant, to that wicked and impious Bond, to be a
ground of an invidious likeness, is only a demonstration of your calumny and
malice.

Having thus vindicate the National, Covenant, as it was first taken, I shall
only put you in mind, that the renewing thereof, in the 1638. and making the
people to stand to it, is so consonant to Reason and Scripture-practice, that
it needs not my Patrociny. But you say, it was a great trepane to make the
Nation swear it in the 38. and then by an after-game to declare that
Episcopacie was abjured in it. I might tell you that your so frequent use of
the terms of Art, do not a little insinuate, how expert a Jugler you are, in
the matter of Oaths: But it is answered, the Nation swore it in the 1638. in
the same terms wherein it was first taken, in the year 1591; but because that
some doubts, whether the Innovations of Prelacie, and the Perth Articles,
thereafter introduced, were by this Oath condemned; Notwithstanding that its
obvious meaning does abundantly import the same, both in the particular
abjuration, of the Popes corrupt Doctrine, anent the nature, number, and use of
the holy Sacraments, his unwarrantable dedication of Days, and his worldly
Monarchy, and wicked Hierarchy; and also in the general detestation, which
it contains, of all Rites, and Traditions, brought into the Kirk, without, or
against the word of God; And that the generality of the Godly in the Land did
so understand it; yet, such was the tenderness then used, that the practice was
only at first agreed to be forborne, and the determination of the Question, for
the gaining of the doubtful and refractory, referred to a lawful Assembly.
Now, if this Assembly, in the light of the reasons, already touched, and others
mentioned in their Act, did clearly determine this matter, and the Covenant was
thereafter taken, with an agreeable Declaration, where can you fix your
challenge? To allege, after an Oath is taken, that to be thereby abjured,
which does no where appear in it, is certainly, as false, as the terms you use
are scurrilous; but to declare from undeniable grounds, these things to be
contained, in a prior Oath, which only the temptation, and darkness, of an
after-defection did make to be questioned; is nothing else then a just
vindication and application, requisite to a faithful pursuance, and whereof
the instance of Nehemiah his renewing Covenant with God, with a more large
declaration of the manner of the Sabbaths observance, then is to be found in
the Law, is an undeniable warrant.

But reason failing, your passion and big words must be made use of, to supply
that de^ect: for you say, what violence did we use, to oblige all to bow on
this Idol? Churchmen refusing were deposed; yea both they and Laymen also
excommunicat. It Is answered, A faithful, and zealous prosecution, of the Lords
Oath, from the Conscience of his holy jealousy, is only the just and laudable
effect of his fear, and no ways to make it an Idol: But seeing you love such
expressions, to swear and forswear, as your party has done, without either
constancy or repentance, is certainly to make an Idol not of the Covenant
only; but of the Great God thereto invocked, who infallibly will one day avenge
it: As for the Censures you speak of, if the perfidie of that refusal, with
the other transgressions and delinquencies, whereof, the persons particularly
censured, were, for the most part if not all, notoriously known and found to be
guilty, be duly pondered, they will rather be found to fall short of, then
exceed the proportions of righteousness: And though I deny not, but the heats,
prejudices, and other temptations, inevitable, in such changes, to humane
infirmity, may possibly have rendered the lot of some few (and these very few)
recusants (rather obstinate then malicious) a little hard and apparently rigid;
yet, this is most obvious, that the late revolution, has so infinitely
exceeded, not only for iniquity; but also in the measure of its oppressions,
all the excesses chargeable on former times; that nothing less then an
impudence, suitable to the late perjury, could prompt you, or any of your
party, to move such an objection: but let us hear your conclusion: What man of
common sense can think this the Cause of God, which had such monstrous errors
in its first conception? Sir, though I think that in the matters of God, you do
appeal to an ill Judge yet I am so little diffident of the cause, which I
maintain, that only wishing you to be more sparing, in obtruding your own
ridiculous delusions for monstrous errors, I heartily refer our discourse,
to my greatest Opposite.

In the next place, making a step of your N C. weak and groundless concession,
That there were faults in the imposing of the Covenant, and taking it up at
your own hand. That the matters of the Covenant are in themselves indifferent:
you go on to argue, that seeing in these things, a man is not his own Master;
but by the command of God obliged to obey the Magistrate, in all things lawful,
a tie before all Oaths; as by no act of ours, we can be bound to break the
Command of God; so no more can we oblige our selves to do any thing, in
prejudice of another right, our Sovereign's Authority; and therefore, since
the King and Parliament, have by Law annulled the Covenant, and required
submission to Episcopacie, our antecedent Oath, a voluntary deed of our own,
can no longer ^ind us, against the commands of the Powers, which are the
mediat^ commands of God. I have set down this argument of yours more fully, to
the effect, you may perceive, that if I have not so much of your common sense,
as to comprehend it, as a clear demonstration; yet it is not for want of a just
and true apprehension; but really from the greater evidence of the answers
subjoined: and first, I say, your foundation fails, the matters of the Covenant
are not things indifferent; but in themselves true, righteous, and holy,
importing such an antecedent obligation, as, in the occurrence of the
preexistent circumstances, did render the taking and requiring of that Oath, an
indispensable duty: And this when you think good to quarrel, I am most ready
to make out. 2. Supposing with you, that the matter of the Covenant is
indifferent, and that in such things, the Magistrates power of commanding
cannot, by any Oath or deed of ours, be prevented or prelimited; yet, Sir,
think you, that your Omission, must so far charm us to oblivion, as to make
us forget, that as King Charles the first, did in plene Parliament, An. 1641.
under his handwriting, ratify the National Covenant, with the explication,
and Bond thereto annexed, and prior Acts made anent it, with such solemnities
and concurrent considerations, as it is impossible to question it; so, his Son,
who now Reigns, did, in the year 1650. and 51. take and confirm both it and
the Solemn League and Covenant, with such Oaths, Subscriptions, (as well
private and unrequired, as public) Declarations and Acts, that greater grounds
of assurance, were never heard of, amongst men: if then this was the case of
the obligation of these Covenants, at his Majesty's return (admitting all that
you suppose) dare you, or any say, that the King and Parliament had power,
either to resile, or to loose others, from the Bonds, which they themselves had
thus established? If a Fathers silence, and non-contradiction, to a Daughters
vowing, and whose vows he may disannull, do make her vows to stand; so that
he cannot thereafter make them void; how can the express, solemn, and sworn
confirmation of King and Parliament, in favors of a Covenanting people, with
any color of reason, be thought to be either, in it self ambulatory, or toward
others less effectual? But 3 to undeceive you, of the vain esteem you have for
this argument, the very grounds of it, are manifestly fallacious: For, granting
that, in things indifferent, we are by the command of God obliged to obey the
Magistrate; yet this subjection is nothing so absolute, as is requisite to the
inferring of your conclusion: viz. that therefore he has such a right, as no
antecedent deed, or Oath of ours, can stand in the case of a subsequent
annulling command: But, the solid principles whereby this matter is clearly
resolved are 1. That, as the Magistrate is vested from above with power,
requisite and proportional to the ends of Government, whereunto he is
appointed; so such is his right by virtue thereof, that no Subject can either
decline his lawful Commands, or yet bind himself in all events, by any such
antecedent Oath or other deed, as, being inconsistent with the condition of a
Subject, may fall to interfere with a supervenient rational command: for
example, sitting, standing, walking, are certainly things indifferent, and in a
man's power; if then, in these things, a man should bind himself, by an Oath, as
never to stir from such a place, or walk without certain bounds, though,
without question, the man left to his own liberty be rather to observe his
Oath; yet it is as little to be doubted, that in opposition to, or for
exemption from the Magistrat's lawful and rational command, it could neither be
binding, nor relevantly alleged: I say, Rational Command, because I am of the
opinion, that if the Magistrate, without any necessity, should for mere
o^tentation of his power, command the person contrary to his Vow, on purpose to
make it void; such an injunction would be both sinful in the Magistrate, and no
liberation to the poor Votarie. The 2 principle, I lay down is, That, as the
Magistrat's lawful power does indeed grant him a large right over a man's
liberty, in manner just now explained; so it is most certain, that there are
many things, still left to himself, and at his own free dispose, wherein he may
freely vow, and having vowed, must not break his word; but do according to all
that proceeds out of his mouth, and which are plainly of that nature, that
the Magistrat's countermand would be only an accession, and no excuse to a
breach: I need not adduce examples, every passage of our life, does obviously
exhibit them: if a man vow the Tenth of his substance to the Lord, it is
evident, that the Magistrat's power cannot discharge the performance: and the
Lord's express and well-cautioned concession of this dissolving power, only to
a Husband over his Wife, and a Father over his Daughter in familia, and that by
way of exception, to the general command, whereby all other free Vows and
Bonds are ratified, is such a confirmation, and extension of the Rules, to the
case in hand, as admits no evasion? But to give you entire satisfaction in this
point, the sum is, first, That God has bestowed upon men a fair liberty,
suited to their dignity: Next, He has also ordained the Powers, and clothed
them with authority and right, requisite to the ends of their appointment;
whereof the preservation of our just liberties, is not the meenest: as
therefore, by virtue of the former, a man, in recognizance of the Lord's
bounty, so far as his liberty is not restrained, either by a lawful
command, or by a visible inconsistencie of the thing vowed to any other duty,
may freely vow, and ought to perform; so all the effect of the latter, is
only to make void such vows, as are directly, or designedly made to frustrate
its right; and to suspend the execution of others, in so far as the famine
does eventually cross its lawful exercise: if you had perpended these things,
you would not have obtruded on us, such a raw discourse, for a clear
demonstration: the Magistrate has right to command, and, it is the will of God
that we obey him, in all things lawful; and this tie is before all voluntary
Oaths: but, does it therefore so swallow up our Liberty, that it leaves a man
no power in the same things, to bind himself by a vow, unto the Lord? or may
the Magistrate annul, and make void the same, at his pleasure? I am certain,
your own Common sense tells you, these things are too laxe, and liable to
another regulation. No act of ours can indeed oblige us to do any thing in
prejudice of another right, neither can any Covenant bind to deny obedience
to the Kings just Laws: but as I have already told you, that the Magistrate has
no such right, as does wholly evacuate our liberty, and leave us no power in
things indifferent, of binding our Souls by an Oath to the Lord: and that the
outmost extent of his power, in these things, is only to make void the Vow, or
restrain the execution, which is inconsistent with his Government, or does
check its lawful exercise: So I allow no such Covenant as binds directly to
deny lawful obedience; but such a Covenant, such a Vow, such an Oath, yea such
a Promise, as being freely taken, without any direct or designed inconsistencie
to the Magistrat's lawful power, and whereof the performance does not
eventually thwart any of his rational commands, I affirm to be so binding,
that it is neither in the Prince his power, at his Pleasure, to dissolve it;
nor can a supervenient Law enacted, expressly for that purpose, make void its
obligation: And this is the true and plain account, of the nature and
obligation, both of Vows and Laws, which while you, in your design to exalt the
power of the late Acts, above the Bond of the Covenant, do so iniquously
balance, as to make laws, the mediate commands of God, and Oaths, only our own
voluntary deeds, to which we are not bound, by any Divine precept, you grossly
forget, that he who has commanded Rulers to be obeyed in all things, committed
to their trust, has, on the other hand, not only ratified the Subjects their
reserved liberty, but also, by his own sanction, confirmed all the Vows, and
Oaths, that by virtue thereof, they do freely make: whereby it is most
manifest, that as the obligation, and binding virtue of Laws and Vows, is
coordinate, and not subordinate; so, no more can an arbitrary after-law dissolve
our Vows, at first freely and lawfully made, then our voluntary prior Oaths
can impair or prejudge the Magistrat's righteous Power, and Edicts. As for the
application of these things, to the case in hand, viz. whether the Covenant,
being once sworn, in matters at present supposed to be indifferent, the
Magistrate could thereafter, by an after-act, render the matter unlawful, and so
make the obligation to cease? It is very easy to expede: for, seeing all the
laws which you plead for its dissolution, and submission to Episcopacie, are
such as do most arbitrarily condemn it, without the least conviction to any
serious person, of the unlawfulness of our entering into that Oath, either from
its matter, or inconsistencie with Government, and its righteous ends; it is
evident, that to admit such as sufficient to make it void, were to destroy all
liberty, and render men in every Oath, how free and voluntary soever, obnoxious
to the Magistrat's absolute control, and plainly to ranverse both the freedom
of making, and necessity of keeping all vows; which nevertheless the Lord has
most expressly allowed, and confirmed. Sir, as I have, with you, supposed the
matters of the Covenant to be in themselves indifferent, and taken this pains
for no other end, then to rectify your Common sense, and refell your pretended
Demonstration, notwithstanding of so fair a concession: so, give me leave
again to remember you, and all concerned, that, seeing the matters in these
Covenants, were antecedently true and righteous, and are now concluded under
the great Oath of God, your pitiful quibling, upon the Kings power in matters
free and indifferent, is so far from licensing us to the least violation, that,
though we do further unanswerably allege his Majesty's supervenient
ratification; yet it is more for your redargution, then our own confirmation,
whose Consciences are, by the former ground, most satisfyingly established: And
here I might put a period to my reflections, on this Dialogue; seeing, that what
remains does nothing convel these sure grounds, whereupon we are founded; but
because, in pursuance of your conceit of the Magistrates power, of rendering the
matter of Vows, antecedently free, unlawful; and thereby making their
obligation to cease, you, in return to the Question, What could move the King
to prefer Episcopacie to Presbytery? pretend to many strong inductives,
whereby you suppose the change to be undeniably authorized: This calumny must
also be removed. And before I enter upon this matter, I cannot but commend your
providence, who, fearing that your allegations would be found false, do
prudently provide a refuge, in the profound and recluse deepth of Princes their
secrets, which you think should put a stop to the inquiry: which indeed
neither you, nor all men beside, are able to answer; but as the strange
wickedness and folly of this Act is such, as all the devices imaginable cannot
so much as vernish it, with any apparent color, and its consequences have been
so pernicious, as have left no Subject in the Nations unconcerned in their
smart; so, I hope, without the imputation of a mutinous curiosity, I may take
the liberty to tell you, that it was not our Leaders, which occasioned the
work, you hint at, to the King's Grandfather, his Father, and Himself; Art
thou he that troubles Israel? is an old and royal accusation of the Lord's
Ministers: I wish the answer now a days, were as improper, as I am tender to
use it: we have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy Fathers house, in that ye
have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed thy own
inventions: I need not put you in mind of K. James his engagements to defend
the Gospel, and maintain the true and pure Ordinances and Discipline of God's
house, and how he thereafter turned, and corrupted his way, by no less then a
direct invasion of Christ's Throne, manifest perversion of his Ordinances,
designed subjection of the liberty of the Gospel and its Ministry, to his lust
and pleasure, and open persecution of many faithful Ministers and Professors;
These things, if you were ingenuous, you should rather have essayed to answer,
as being already objected and proven by others, then provoked me to the
repetition: As to what you objecte, from latter times, I am sorry that by so
rude and false an accusation, viz. You involved the Nations in blood, and not
satisfied with all the security you could demand; you engaged with the King his
Enemies in England: and opposed the design of his deliverie An. 1648, you
should engage me to reflect upon a worthy, but abused, Prince, all whose faults
I think both may, and ought to be buried under his misfortune; but seeing this
you will not suffer, I shall only desire you and others to consider these sad
grievances, which are elsewhere undeniably cleared viz. 1. The Prelatick Tyranny
and impositions of these times. 2. The rage and fury wherewith they endeavored
to inflame and stir up all against this Kingdom, after that they had first
constrained us to just defense. 3. Their notorious and reiterate persidies,
whereby they rendered all security desperate: And lastly the sin of that
backsliding course 48. now so evidently unmasked, by the 9 Act of the late
Parliament, 1661 which, instead of delivering, did visibly precipitate his
Majesty's sad fate: these things are so manifest, even from the public
Records of the Nation, that I can not but admire the effronterie of your
confidence, that can so overly pass them.

But you add a Question, In a word, what jealousies had you justly raised in
the hearts of Princes, of your Government? Sir, I wish you had deigned your
self with another word of answer; for really I know none, except these old and
endless ones, the temptation, and sin of all worldly Powers, against the Lord
and his Anointed. As for our Tyranny 1649. against the Nobility, you should
first have answered for their breach of trust, 1648: But since they themselves
have publicly, by the Act above mentioned, avowed it; your charge of Tyranny
against the moderately disproportionate censures, then inflicted, merits no
answer.

In the last place, you say: our Ministers divided shamefully among themselves,
I grant, and sinfully also, though that all engaged were not equally guilty,
and this was a great trial; but since, that an excess of charity toward your
party, on the one hand, and a sounder judgment of your principles or rather
looseness, on the other, was the only cause of the difference, is it not
invidious in you, not only to have dissappointed your favorers; but to tax
the greater number, whom you have since so fully justified, as men of maxims
incompatible with Government: Sir, this is the sum of the account, you make
us, of the reasons of his Majesty's change, with what evidence, the Reader and
not you, must judge? If he miss your Sun in its Meridian, and find your light
to be but darkness, a more simple eye and heart, may be both his satisfaction
and your remedy: If I might enlarge in a more full return, I could easily
demonstrate, that, all things being considered, both before, at, and since the
Kings restoration, his adhering to the Covenant, and owning that interest, had
been not only his safety and peace; but his most certain establishment and
Glory: if the favor and countenance of the most High, the firm love and
loyalty of all good men, and the undoubtedly equal compliance and submission of
the other parties, may be fit media, in such an argument; the conclusion is
obvious: But lest you say, art thou made of the Kings Council? Forbear; leaving
events to God I shall be silent.

Having all along endeavored to burn, in the close of this Dialogue, you go
about to blow us: I am not for triffling with you, in such unsincere and mixed
complements: the Lord purge both you and us from all dross, and restore to the
Land Truth and Purity, and then shall we certainly enjoy Peace and Unity. As
for the liberty you tax in our discourses, and writings, I hope no right
discerner, will find it to be an invective; but the native, genuine, and
well-becoming freedom of Truth and Uprightness: whether the license that you
usurp, in your pretended justifications of the King, the Laws, and your
Consciences, be indeed uncharitable, bitter and malicious, I neither say nor
judge; he whose glory is concerned he also judges: But for the allowance of
your defense by Tongue and Pen, which you would appear to plead, from our
asserting of defensive arms; you cannot be so serious in the demand, as I am
free to accord it; seeing I am persuaded, that if the defensive arms, which we
maintain, were no better warranted, and as little to be feared, as the
self-defence, which you pretend, neither you, nor any other, would have
accounted them to be worthy of the opposing.

The fifth DIALOGUE Answered.
SIR, Neither envying you that poor applause, which you vainly captate, from
your Mock-Non. C. confessing himself to be by you much shaken in the matter of
Bishops, nor regarding the pitiful scorn, you would cast on us by making him,
or your self rather, ridiculous in avowing a blind aversation, notwithstanding
of his professed conviction, I come to consider his quarrel against the Bishops
on the account of your Common Prayer Book, and what you answer.

Your N. C. alleges That this Common Prayer Book is a dead and formal
Lyturgie, set up instead of the pure and Spiritual worship of God: In answer
whereunto, pretending as vainly, that these are but big words, as I have
already clearly proved, that the Government which we contend for, is the
interest, and does appertain to the Kingdom of Christ; and thereby manifestly
showed this your confidence to be mere calumny, you undertake to discover the
fallacy, by telling us what it is to pray by the Spirit: And you say, [ To Pray
by the Spirit, is, when out of a deep sense of our misery and need, and firm
confidence in God, we draw near to him, to offer up our prayers and praises to
him, through Jesus Christ:] And you add, [ That our hearts being molded in
this frame, we pray by the Spirit, use we words or not, the same or different;
Nay, it will appear we are carnal, when we need to have our devotion tickled,
and provoked, with new words:] Which description, and the deduction from it,
being laid for a ground, exciting your self, by the feigned interjections of
your N. C. surprises, at the wit and novelty of your invention, [ in
representing the Liturgie-worship, as Spiritual, and the conceived one, as
carnal:] You go one, to discourse [ of the differences, betwixt spiritual
devotion, and prayer by words,] the terms, wherein you are pleased, very
groundlessly, and impertinently, to state the distinction: [ And the former
(you say) lying in the will, and not in the fancy, and being affected with the
thing, and not with words, can with the newness of affection, make the same
prayer in words, though an hundred times repeated, at every return New: And, is
a still, humbling, and melting thing, and so equable, that it is above the
frisking fits of the fancy; neither does it require a variety of words; but, in
its sublimest exercises, can persist long, with great sweetness, in the
simplest Acts; whereas, multiplicity does perhaps lead out the mind, from pure
and still devotion, interior prayer, and spiritual converse with God: On the
other hand (you tell us, that) prayer by words, lying in the fancy, and its
gratifications, by the varying of things into several shapes, the devotion
raised by such Chimes, is only sensible, needing new phrases, to renew its
fervor; and words, and all the heat begot by words, are but a false fire, in
the natural powers of the Soul, which may heat the brain, draw forth tears,
seem to wring the heart, b^t amounts to nothing, save a sensible fervor, and
present tickling, wherein, he that abounds most in Mem^r^, Fancy, El^quence,
and Confidence, is likely most to excel:] from all which you conclude, [ that
it expresses a more spiritual temper, to be able to worship God in simple, and
constant Forms, and that extemporary prayer, cannot be called praying by the
Spirit; except by Spirit be understood the Animal or Natural spirits. This I
suppose is a true account of your first floorish, upon this subject, to what
purpose, remains yet to be inquired.

And first, I might take notice of the inaccuracy of your expression, of
praying by the Spirit; whereas the Scripture Phrase, is, to worship in Spirit,
John. 4. 23. Praying in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 18. to worship in the Spirit, Phil,
3. 3. to pray with the Spirit. 1. Cor. 14. 15. And though the difference be
more in words then matter; yet, as the Scripture-diction is certainly the
founder; so, I am apt to apprehend, that your not adverting to it, may have in
part occasioned your vain and impertinent digression, upon praying by the
Spirit, and praying by Words, as if these were by us wholly distinguished, and
the latter preferred. 2. I might observe, that the description which you give
us of Praying by the Spirit, is more suitable to the calm and serene progress
of a Christians course, then to these doubtings, fears, wrestlings,
depressions, and overwhelmings, so frequently found, in the experience of all,
to be thereto incident, which being no less removed from, and destitute of, a
firm confidence, then the staying and assisting of the Spirit, with groans
that cannot be uttered, is therein observable; your description appears to be
narrow, and inadequat: But the plain answer, which I return, is, that as the
stating of the Question, is by you wholly neglected; so the reasoning, whereby
you go about to maintain your lifeless and superstitious Liturgy, is
altogether inconcludent. The controversy betwixt you and us, anent your
Service Book is twofold. 1. Whether the Public worship of God ought to be
astricted to set and imposed Forms? And 2. Whether that form of Worship, which
your Book contains, be not in it self in many particulars, unsound and
impertinent, and consequently not to be received by way of directory, far
less acquiesced unto as a precise injunction? That these are the two hinges of
this debate, will easiely be acknowledged; but what your above mentioned
discourse does contribute to its determination, I must again solicit your
second thoughts, to render us an account. We have your definition of praying by
the Spirit; and we let it pass. Next you subjoin, and that with many empty
reiterations, that praying in words, specially extemporary and various, is
sensible, fancical, affecting and heating the brain in lower minds, and
producing only a natural fervor; and that thus it may be, with such, who pray
in words without the Spirit, was never by us denied; but darre you, or any man
else, not abandoned to utter irreligion, propose this as your opinion, of all
prayer in conceived, and not precontrived and prescribed words? Do not the very
truth of Religion, requiring both heart and mouth; the reasonableness of our
service, consisting in their Harmony; the practice of the Lords people, in all
Ages; the frequent examples, every where in Scripture; the experience of every
serious Soul; yea the common reason of all men, redargue the gross absurdity of
such a persuasion? Were David's Thanksgiving, 1 Chronicles. 29. 10. Solomon's
Prayer, 1 King. 8. 23. and I^hosaphat's Supplication, 2 Chronicles. 20. 5. all
without Book or Set-form, only extemporary heats? Are the praying Psalms, with
all the exercises of the Lord Servants, in the Nynths of Ezrah, Nehemiah, and
Daniel, and in other places, clearly flowing, as the Spirit gave utterance,
without any taught frame of words, frisking fits of the Fancy? Was our Lords
Prayer, Ioh. 17. only a sensible servour? (...), Sir, I would rather suppose,
that although your airy discourse, has wildly seduced your observation; yet
your heart abhorres such impiety: I will not therefore insist on the advantage,
which this your laxe inadvertencie so fairly offers; nor shall I content my
self with this obvious retortion, that where one instance can be given of
conceived Prayer, only managed by Fancy, and subsisting in its vain exercise,
thousands may be found of persons, through the practice and custom of
Set-forms, habituate to a most lifeless and superstitious mummery, more
suitable to the worshipping of stocks and stones, then to the service of the
true and living God: Nor lastly will I vex you, by showing, that the
distinction which you make of praying by the Spirit, and by words, is so
impertinently by you applied, to our present purpose; that though you endeavor
thereby, to impugn extemporariness, multiplicity, and variety of words, in
Prayer; yet, it plainly concludes all words to be superfluous: for, seeing that
in opposition to the spiritual worship of God, which we contend for, you tell
us, that we may pray by the Spirit, use we words or not, and that spiritual
devotion is a still inward thing: Is it not evident, that all outward Forms,
whether set or extemporarie, are thereby rejected? But freely waving these your
lapses, that I may come more closely to the present purpose, it is to be
considered, that the right and true worship of God, is certainly inward in the
mind, will, and affections: God who demands the heart, does thence expect,
that tribute of reverence, love, fear, acknowledgement, and praise, which in
his sight is acceptable; and all other outward performances, as they ought to
be the sincere expressions, and significations of this internal devotion, so
they are wholly and only regulable, by the prescriptions of Divine appointment.
If this truth were as seriously heeded, (as I am persuaded it is fixed, and
constant,) both by you and me, our controversy would soon be ended: The
Question then, is not, concerning the life and truth of internal Prayer,
wherein, without doubt, the spirituality of that exercise does principally
consist; but, seeing that you and we are agreed, that God whom we serve, is to
be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, the debate is, anent the manner, how this
worship, specially when Public, is to be performed? Whether in set and imposed
Forms; or as the Spirit gives utterance? Or if, for preventing mistakes, you
please to take it at greater length; whether it be lawful for men, to compose
and impose Set forms for Prayer, and Worship, and thereto to astrict the People
of God, in their performances? Or, whether it be more agreeable to the will and
service of God, that prayer and worship, which are to be performed inwardly, in
the liberty and truth of the Spirit and understanding, in their outward
expression, be left to be managed, by the free and sanctified use of the
rational faculty, for that end given, and in many observably gifted? By which
state, as you may easily perceive that I do allow, not only the antecedent
improvement of the expressive power, by all warrantable aides and advantages;
but also the free using, upon occasion, of such words, as others have formerly,
either dictated, or made use of: Nay even in so ne cases of several of you Set
forms; both which I conceive are very consistent with praying by the Spirit,
either as by you or by us defined: So, the precise point controverted, and to
which I would have you all along to advert, is anent the imposing, and
astricting, which I plainly judge to be both destitute of Divine warrant, and
contrary to the liberty of spiritual devotion; and so repugnant, in both
qualities, to that Worship in Spirit and Truth, which only is acceptable. But
before I proceed to a confirmation, there occur some mistakes to be removed:
one is, of some of your way, who, defining praying by the Spirit, the uttering
of such petitions, as are immediately suggested, both matter and words, by the
Holy Ghost, hold it for a Gift proper to the Apostles, and their times, and now
ceased: thus the English Debater, and your own headless allegiance, that
extemporarie Prayer cannot be called praying by the Spirit, unless we also call
it infallible, does also coincide: But, seeing by your description, above
mentioned, you do allow of praying by the Spirit, as not yet ceased, and do
thereby very justly understand, rather the Grace, then the Gift of Prayer;
although even the Gift, where it is (as it may be) without the Grace, may also
have the name of praying by the Spirit; and seeing that both the Debater, and
you, I suppose, would be offended, if any should affirm, that no man using the
Service-book-forms, could pray by the Spirit, I only add, that as the Spirit is
the great promise of the Gospel, its Grace, the life, and its Gifts, the
strength of all Christian duties; so, praying by or in the Spirit, can no more
be impugned, for want of infallibility, then any other good work, of the same
Spirit in us denied, for want of perfection: But who would not pity two
Doctors of the Church, either so disingenuous, or unable, as not to
distinguish, betwixt the Spirits ordinary measures, and extraordinary
assistances. The next mistake is, that reflecting upon the greater exactness of
phrase, attainable in a Set-form, above what can be expected in an extemporarie
work; and commending the propriety, conci^neness and gravity, that may be in
the former, in respect of that rudeness, incohesion, and levity, supposed to be
incident to the latter, you exaggerate the comparison, as if the whole stress
of the debate, did ly in this point, whereas he that duly considers, will
not only find your Forms, at best to be but humane and imperfect, and that the
Gift of Prayer promised, if duly improved, in and with the exercise of the
Grace, is, far more likely, to furnish sound, savory and acceptable words;
then these jejune and lifeless composures; for framing and enjoining whereof,
men have no promise of the Lords assistance: And lastly, that the whole word of
God, and the excellent patterns therein recorded, with many other helps, are at
hand, and allowed by us, by way of Directory; but he must also grant, that it
is not our choice, but the Lords own prescription, which he does accept:
Suppose your Forms were as much better, then our conceptions, as a Man's
Firstborn, is preferable to the beast of the field; yet, if not required, they
cannot come up with acceptance on his Altar: and therefore, I conclude, that
however the sincere Users may find grace in his sight; yet the peremptory
Imposers, cannot be innocent. A third mistake, is, that because in the use of
certain Set-forms, a man may possibly pray, with deep spiritual impressions,
and high elevations: Nay the sublimest acts of communion with God, may be
expressed in the simplest Forms, such as, Thou art my God; therefore you
conclude, that s^inted Forms, are more suited to true spiritual devotion, then
the multiplicity and variety of words, in an extemporarie exercise, which do
lead out, and do too frequently only excite a fantastic transient pleasure,
almost evanishing with the sound, wherewith they are pronounced: But seeing,
that the variableness of the condition of a militant Viator can hardly be
defined, much less the free actings of the Spirit, in such exigences, confined
to any prescribed Forms, and that the more Seraphick raptures of Divine
contemplation, do therefore subsist in few and plain words, because above the
reach of expression; it is undoubtedly certain, that neither the right
use-making, or rather agreeableness of certain forms to very sincere and
serious devotion, nor the simplicity of words, used in the nearest admission
of heavenly fellowship, do at all remove the unwarrantableness and
inconveniencie of the restraint of Set forms, when under the necessity of an
imposition. As for what is insinuate of these fancical heats and pleasures,
wherewith words, ex tempore, may possibly delude; it is only an accidental
inconvenience, from our corruption, and by the faults of your imposed Forms,
infinitely overballanced, as I have already showed. These things, being thus
cleared: for confirming of my assertion, against your stinted, and imposed
Forms, I say first, That these impositions are peccant against the Truth of
Gods worship; because the samine requires his own express warrant, and
prescript: It is in vain to worship after the commandments of men; the service
which he requires not, he abhors; Will Worship is an abomination: But such
is your imposed and commanded Liturgy: if now, what does the Lord require?
ought to be the serious reflection of every one, that draws near unto him;
if, in all things commanded, we ought to be circumspect, without adding to, or
diminishing ought from it; If the Lord did most exactly define the manner, and
every rite and ceremony of the legal Sacrifices and service, yea every pin of
the Tabernacle, with the whole contrivance and orders of the succeeding Temple;
if strange fire, made use of even in an offering to God, be so severely
vindicat; and the erecting of another Altar, then he had appointed, even for
his Sacrifices, what can we conclude, concerning your imposed Forms and the
manner of that service, which you so arbitrarily enjoin? That they are of far
greater moment in his Worship, then many of these things, about which we see,
his holy jealousy to be so attentively conversant, commonsense does evince:
how then can they be received without his warrant, without which, all humane
devisings are rejected? Say not, that the rigor of this strictnes was a part of
the old legal bondage: for granting that it may be so, as to the particular
manner of that dispensation; yet you are so far from being thereby helped,
that, as I have formerly showed that the burden of the things, by you imposed,
stands manifestly convicted by our Gospel-liberty; so, the immovable
principle, that, in his Worship, his own prescription is the alone warrant of
acceptable performance, does equally redargue the presumption of your imposing,
in whatsomever model, without his Command. But it may be objected, that, seeing
our extemporarie Prayers, are as well a part of Divine Worship, as your stinted
Forms, and that as to the frame of the words, the former can no more, yea
rather less, then the later, pretend to a congruity to the word and will of
God, the argument from the unlawfulness of Will Worship, does militat more
against us, then you: It Is answered, If the question in this matter were only
whether Set-forms, or extemporarie strains, may possibly be composed with the
greater consonancie, in words, unto Scripture Phrase, the objection might have
some, (though in respect of what I have already touched of the promised gift of
Prayer very little), weight; but seeing our debate runs clearly, concerning the
manner, how the true and Spiritual Worship of God is to be externally
performed; If the Lord, whole alone it is to prescribe in this matter, has in
a just congruity to the liberty of his own Spirit, left it to the night and
sanctified use of the rational expressive faculty, and the due improvement of
these helps and promises, wherewith he has instructed us; for man vainly to
arrogat a better contrivance, in his devised impositions, is an intolerable
presumption: and therefore, though the conceived, as well as the stinted
Prayer, be a part of Gods Worship: Nay, though this, as well as the other,
singly and sincerely used, may be accepted; yet seeing the Lord has allowed the
liberty of the former, and does not at all require the obligation of the
latter, the imposing thereof must, of necessity, be repute and cast, as an
humane invention. I need not stay to resume, that conceived Prayer, for the
reasons above mentioned, and in respect of the promised gift, and assistance of
the Spirit, whereof the composing and commanding of Set-forms is destitute, may
probably be, and is often found to be, the better phrased: Nor shall I tell
you, that the manner thereof is so undoubtedly the more rational, genuine, and
lively, that if even those of your way could be persuaded, that men were
sufficiently thereto qualified, they would easily grant the imposing and use of
Forms, to be less necessary: it is enough for us, that the Lord, who knows
the best of our performances, in whatsomever sort, to be but lame and
imperfect, has both allowed, and accepted of our extemporarie petitions,
whereas your injoined Forms are no where required. 2. I say, that the imposing
of Forms impingeth upon the Spirituality of Prayer and Worship; That which
boundeth and restrains the free Spirit of the Lord, in the motions and
breathings whereof, the very life of prayer does consist, impingeth upon the
Spirituality of Prayer and Worship: But so it is, that the imposing of Forms
restrains and binds up, etc. Therefore, etc. That the Spirit of the Lord,
whereby his people, especially in prayer, are guided and acted, is free, not
only in its gift, but also in its operations, both Scripture and experience do
teach; The wind blows where it lists, etc. and so is every on that is born
of the Spirit: where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty: not only from
the bondage of corruption, but in the ways and paths of the Lord; and more
especially, in the large and all-searching discoveries of the mind, yea of the
deep things of God: and what strange exercises have been, and may be, in the
experiences of the Saints, the result of this liberty, and of the variety of
our unstable condition, Jacob's wrestlings, David's heart commu^ings,
Spirit-searchings, overwhelmings, and again exultings, Ierimiah's mournings,
and Daniel's supplications, do exhibit a few examples. Now that the imposing
of Forms, which are set, certain, and determined, does stint this liberty, and
cannot possibly quadrat to all the variety above mentioned, needs no other
evidence, then that of an ingenuous reflection. I have already acknowledged
that in the right using of several of your Forms, a man may have his heart very
deeply affected; and now I further suppose for argument, that such may be the
aptitude of a full and sound composition, as may possibly suppeditat petitions
and expressions, convenient to every exigence; but yet, that the Spirits free
use-making, and men's stinting thereof to these Forms, do vastly differ, cannot
be denied; since that, notwithstanding of all conceded, the enjoining of these
impositions is not only inconsistent with the free methods, but also does
confine the illimited enlargements of the Spirit, as cannot but be obvious to
any exercised discerner: But that which, I suppose, does induce you and many
others into an error, in this particular, is a preposterous observation of
certain good motions, and sincere and servent devotions, which possibly some
may feel, in the use of your Common Prayer Book, whence you inadvertently
conclude, that the same Forms, not appearing obnoxious to the escapes, incident
to extemporarie expressions, may, more safely and sufficiently, serve to the
exciting and signifying the like spiritual motions and devotions, in all;
whereas it is certain, that as in the former case, these motions were only the
free breathings and stirrings of the Spirit, and in a manner accidental to
these Forms, wherein they come to be uttered; so to ty the same free influences
to the manuduction of a set of words, is more absurd, then the same words are
often found to be incompetent to the setting forth of the singularity that may
be in the case of the Supplicant, whether a whole Church or single Person.
Really, Sir, when I consider, that the Lord craves the heart, and that men
Worship him in Spirit, and that it is thence, and out of its abundance, that
the mouth ought to speak; and from a believing heart, that the tongues
confession is acceptable, I cannot but wonder, how this inversion of preceding
and leading Forms should be so much asserted: and certainly if we may, after
the Lord's example, Mal. 1. 8. reason, in these things, from self reflection,
may not the knowledge we have of our own way, in such supplications, to or from
our Neighbors, wherein the heart, and not the justice and merit o^ the suit,
comes to be regarded, teach us, to reprobate, and nauseate such impositions? If
in hearty requests, we ourselves can neither be confined, in the making, to a
rat of words put in our mouth, nor relish the like practice from others, and do
censure such methods, as too cold and indifferent; how much more should we
stand in awe, to obtrude them to the Father of Spirits, the searcher and lover
of the heart? I might arise higher, upon this subject, and demonstrate to you,
from the order of nature, which certainly the Lord has principally ordained
for his own Worship, Service and Glory, that the heart, and mind, and not the
eyes, common sense, or memory (unless in so far as is requisite, to the
joining of the hearers in Public prayer) ought to preceed, in all; and without
question did preceed, in the first acknowledgements rendered to him by his
creatures; but I neither love nor need to admixe such reasonings to these
Scripture-grounds already adduced: I shall therefore sum up this argument,
with answering two objections viz. That I seem 1. to forget, that our Ministers
in public prayer, do, as much, preceed and lead the peoples devotions and
affections, by their conceived words, as if they were set and predevised: 2. To
suppose, that all who can or ought to pray in heart, are also qualified to a
suitable utterance. And to the first it is answered. 1. That it is evident,
that the People may, and ought to join in public prayers, uttered by one as
their mouth, although the samine be by him conceived, and to them unknown,
until expressed^ this is clear from the practices of God's People, in these
public prayers of David, Solomon, Iehosophat, and others already mentioned:
and you your self lay it for the ground of an argument, viz that the people can
join, and pray by the Spirit, though the words be not of their framing. 2,
That although our Ministers do preceed in words; yet seeing the people are
gathered in the Lords Name, and he, with the power of his Spirit, in the midst
of them; and the Minister is called and appointed to oversee them, know their
condition and necessities, and to be their mouth toward God; and lastly, seeing
there is a promise of the Spirits public, as well as private assistance,
whereupon we may assuredly confide, both for a due instruction, sense, and
utterance in the Minister, of the Peoples state, and exigence, and a sweet
uniting of their hearts, in an harmonious concurrence, the agreeableness and
advantages of conceived, and not imposed prayer, are thereby abundantly
conserved: and the difference betwixt the Ministers preceding, in free and
Spirit-directed words, from the manuduction of your restricting forms,
manifestly held forth. Offend not that I say Spirit-directed words; for if I
should descrive Prayer in the utterance, to be the expressing of these desires,
which through the Spirit we make unto God, in the name of Jesus Christ, for
things agreeable to his will, in words directed by the same Spirit; and thence
draw an argument, for reprobating your vain devising, and rigid commanding of
Forms, which practice the Lord has neither ordered nor blessed, I should but
define the duty, according to the Precept and Promise, which is no more
impugned, by the mixture of your infirmities, then the account given by you,
either of internal praying by the Spirit, or external, by a Set-form, which, as
from us, do always labor of imperfection, are thereby made void. As for the
second objection, that I seem to suppose, that all that can, or ought to pray
in heart, are also qualified, to a ^u^eable utterance; I answer 1. That my
present discourse, of conceived Prayer, does no more suppose, all to be thereto
qualified, then your discourse of internal Prayer by the Spirit, does warrant
the like construction: how men do pray, and how they ought to pray, are easy
to be distinguished. 2. The Spirit of supplication, is no doubt promised, not
only for inward motions, but also for outward suitable expressions; and the
teaching of God is sufficient, and may be forthcoming for the one, as well as
for the other: Nay as we know, the expressive faculty, where the organes are
not impedite, to be always more or less subservient enough to the minds
conceptions; so, notwithstanding that the Gift, and Grace of Prayer, be
certainly distinct, yea in such sort separable, that the gift may be, where the
grace is wanting; yet seeing the Gift is promised, and given, for the help of
the Grace, at lest in general; (for, that in particular Persons, the gift may
be found without the grace, for helping of the grace in others, is not refused)
it is scarce to be supposed, nor can it be easily instanced, where one in whom
the Grace was found, was totally destitute of all measure of the Gift; I say,
of all measure, for that many have had the Grace, without that eminency of the
measure, that men do ordinarily term the Gift, cannot be denied; but the thing
to be principally here adverted to, is, that we judge not of the competencie of
this Gift, according to men's too frequent estimation. That the mixtures of that
woeful vanity, from which, of all vices, our minds are most hardly purged,
occasioned by a just aversion of Forms, ill framed and worse imposed, have too
far altered the ordinary Rule, from sincere and acceptable simplicity, is too
true a regret; certainly, if men were more denied unto their own wisdom, and
more surrendered to the conduct of the Holy Ghost, even for the words which he
teaches, both the ungodly scorn of many, mocking at apparent weaknesses, and
the pretended modesty, but real vanity, of others, their self-diffidence; and
lastly our true and undeniable insufficiencies, for a suitable utterance in
Prayer, would soon, and happily be corrected: But 3. admitting that most men
were more unqualified, and worse furnished, then really they are, for conceived
prayer, pray, Sir, what does your imposing of Forms help the matter? That the
representing of Forms, and other Rules by way of directorie, may conduce for
instruction, will easily be agreed unto; but that the imposition wherein the
evil of your way lies, adds nothing by way of help; but on the contraire,
is a presumptuous prescriving in Gods Worship, a manifest restraining of the
Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and plainly injurious, both to the exercise
and improvement of the Gift of Prayer, is not less obvious, to every ones
apprehension, then by the arguments adduced evidently evinced.

Having thus discussed the first part of our present debate, anent the imposing
of Forms in general: The second part, whether that Systeme of Forms, contained
in your Service Book, be not (for not a few of them) unfound, and impertinent,
and not to be received, so much as for a Directory, remains yet to be handled?
But since it is a little after, that you are pleased only to give a touch on
this head, and that the samine on our part, has been fully spoke to, by such,
who by their examinations and anatomies, have abundantly discovered, both the
Errors and Superstition, which your Liturgy contains; I proceed to answer,
what remains of your reasoning.

And 1. You lay it down as a ground, that, in opposition to your Forms, we hold
spiritual devotion to be only the using and pouring out of unprescrived words,
as if that were all required: Which is altogether false, and ridiculous; seeing
it is evident, that as no prayer is acceptable, unless made in the Spirit; so
we therefore call our way spiritual, yours formal, in respect, that ours is
suited to the liberty, and made dependent on the Spirits direction, whereas your
impositions, do both restrain the Spirit, and are plainly a humane invention.

2. You say, That it expresses a more spiritual temper, to be able to Worship
God in simple and constant Forms: But 1. That this does indeed import more
spirituality, then the imaginative strains of these, who only flow, and are
fervide in words, and are not fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord; which is the
very sum of your discourse, is no more certain, then impertinently by you
insisted on. 2. That the elevations of Spirit may, sometime, surmount the
faculty of expression, as I have already touched, is as little to your purpose.
3. That it expresses a more spiritual temper, to be able to Worship in a
set-form, then, in the same inward frame, to be able in free and
Spirit-directed words, in a more full and lively manner, then any stinted Forms
can pretend, to express our prayers, and our praises unto God; I utterly deny:
And am very confident, that when you attain to the experience, you will be
far from thinking, that this is a multiplicity, which does lead out.

3. You say, that if extemporarie prayer be by the Spirit, it must be
infallible: But poor man, do you not consider 1. That the Spirits direction,
and out imperfection are not incompatible. 2. That this does as much militat
against spiritual prayer, in, and by your humane Forms, which you so much
magnify; and yet they are neither perfect, nor infallible. 3. I have already
told you, that the Spirits extraordinary infallible assistance, and ordinary
presence and direction, are most distinguishable. 4. You your self plead, that
as we affirm, that the people may join with the Minister, and Pray by the
Spirit, though the words be not of their framing; so the Minister may also pray
in the Spirit, though he use words framed by others, and yet you know, that
neither the one nor the other are infallible. 4. You say, If one should with a
shorthand follow his prayer, whom we say prays by the Spirit; then, may not
that prayer be used over again? Or, is the Spirit in the prayer so volatile,
that it evaporats in the saving? Really, might I be free without offense, I
would tell you my fears, that both your Reason, and Religionare evaporat: art
thou a Master of Israel and ask such questions? do either we affirm, that
praying by the Spirit, does consist principally in the conceiving of words, so,
as another using, but not conceiving the same words, cannot pray by the Spirit?
Or, do you imagine that the Spirit in Prayer, is in the dress and form of
words, so that whoever does use them, does pray by the Spirit? And seeing that
both members are groundless, what can your question import? What it is to pray
by the Spirit, we have already heard, which, as it does not impede, why a man
may not possibly join, and pray in the Spirit, though in the words of your
Forms, when uttered by the coldest Form alist; so, neither is it by us tied to
the conceiving and expressing of words; nor does a man's praying by the Spirit,
yet in words, either composed, or uttered by another, in the least impugn that
spiritual liberty in orall Prayer, by us asserted, against your unwarrantable
impositions; which liberty, consisting in the unconfined use of words, left to
the Spirits direction, as it is most agreeable to the freedom of the Spirit,
and our rational service, which the Lord, who requires it, has not astricted
unto Forms; so, in respect of your carnal, restringent, and unwarrantable
imposings, is therefore, and most justly, termed spiritual. But it were only a
weariness to trace all your Mistakes, and inconsistencies in this question; he
who can conceive, that the spiritual manner of prayer by us commended, is
neither, on the one hand, a praying always in new words, nor, on the other,
such as can be lawfully tied up, to humane stinted forms; but is to be
performed, whether by a man for himself, or with and for others, in words
freely directed by the same Spirit, from which the inward desires and motions
ought to proceed, will easily tell you, that the case of a Ministers following
this Rule, and being astricted to words, framed by another, hold no parallel,
and with the same facility, unravel all your other quiblings, and pity your
impertinencies: and therefore I go forward. Your N. C. asks, but does not the
Spirit help our infirmities and teach us to pray? And you tell him, that, the
words aright considered, speak out a far different thing from what he would
draw from them, and that the Spirit does indeed teach us the matter of our
Prayers, and also the manner, to wit, the temper of our hearts; but, that words
are not meant, appears from what follows, and makes interc^ssion for us with
groans that cannot be uttered. But, Sir, if the Apostle commend the Spirits
assistance to us, in prayer, in intending our desires, above the earnestness
that words can express; does it therefore follow, that, in the directing of our
utterance, which is a lesser matter, his help is not to be expected? 2. Though
in this place, the Spirits help for the direction of our words were not meant;
can you deny, that, that gift, is not fully elsewhere promised? have you forgot
the anointing that teaches us of all things? The Spirit that gives utterance?
And the Father of lights from whom comes every good Gift? And who enricheth us
by Jesus Christ in all utterance and in all knowledge? Or, need I to remember
you of the promises, that the heart of the rash shall understand knowledge, and
the tongue of the stammerer shall be ready to speak plainly, or elegantly: and
again the tongue of the dumb shall sing: Really, Sir, if a man diffident of the
readiness of his expression, cannot from these open fountains draw supply, I
am confident that the brocken Cisterns of your imposed Forms, will make him but
small relief. After this, relapsing into your former prejudice, and causing
your N. C. to say, That in this imbodied state, we need to have our Souls
stirred up by the commotion of our Fancies, you accept of the acknowledgement,
and thence infer, That at least, such a way of praying, is not so sublime,
and therefore ought not to be called praying by the Spirit: But, Sir, as I have
already told you, that he, who being internally moved by the Spirit of Grace,
neither needs a Set-form, to obstetricat his expression, nor therein
confineth himself to it; but out of the abundance of his heart, and, in words
directed by the Holy Ghost, does flow forth in his Prayers and Praises; is
indeed of a higher size, then he who having the same devotion toward God, is
therein either stinted by another, or straitened in himself, to a limiting and
restricting Form; so, your talking in this place of the stirrings of the Soul,
by the commotion of Fancy, and the gratifications of Nature and imagination,
is, but the gratification of your own vanity, in as much, as it neither
pertains to the present Question, whereof the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
men's imposing Set-forms of Worship, and not the life or spirituality thereof
(wherein I hope we are agreed) is the subject; neither do we either teach or
defend, but plainly reject, these carnal methods, here by you supposed to
excite devotion by fancy, and kindle our affections by imaginations, where the
inspiration of the Spirit ought to warm the heart, and blow the flame, as
being the offering of strange fire unto the Lord, in place of the heavenly
fire, that descends from himself, upon his Altar: It is true, the heart, and
desires thereof, being once set on work, by this divine principle, may, and
ought to enlarge it self, by the summoning and exciting of its affections, and
whole mind and strength, for the intending of its fervor, and elevating of the
Soul; but this truth, does so little favor your impositions, in preference to
our way, that by a new argument, it further, and evidently confirms, the
narrowness and insufficiency of your stinted Forms, to that spiritual
Soul-devotion, wherein the Lord delights.

But you say, That, you will convince us of the evil of extemporarie Forms;
and 1. you say, That, I must long exercise my attention, to consider what he
who prays intends, and this strangely draws out the mind from devotion,
which cannot vigorously act two powers at once; and therefore you conclude,
that both in reason and experience, Set-forms do conduct a man's devotion, with
less anxiety, wavering or distraction: To this it is answered 1. That seeing the
Churches of Christ are united, not only in the same form of profession, but in
the same Spirit, and have the promise of the presence of the Lord and his
power, in all their Assemblies gathered in his Name, whereby both Minister and
People, may expect all due assistance in their performances; your supposed
unacquaintedness in the People, with what the Minister intends, with the long
attention, and strange out-drawing of the mind, which you thence infer, are
but your own groundless and faithless imaginations: 2. That a certain measure
of previous attention in joining, either with conceived, or imposed Forms, is
necessary to instruct our devotion, is neither by you, nor us to be denied; but
how you can thence conclude, that attention, as such, which in this case, both
in your and our way is absolutely necessary, directly preparatory, and leading
into, should lead out from the devotion to ensue; and by what Logic you make
the attention, or inclination of the mind, and the devotion thence arising,
almost as connected, as the inclining of the ear, and hearkening are, two
powers, (and not two acts) and these also incompatible, surpasses common
understanding: It is true, if I could suppose with you, that the People, nay
the Minister himself, going about to pray, were wholly ignorant, how he will
discharge it, and that therefore, they, either join blindly, or with anxiety;
nay further that our way labors under many abuses of tedious length,
scurrilous expressions, involved periods, petulant and wanton affectations, and
the like; I might possibly find some shadow of reason for your alledgeance:
but since, you not only speak as a stranger to the Grace and Gift of Prayer,
and to the unity of the Church of Christ, which is one Body, baptized and
united into one Spirit, having one Hope, one Faith, one Lord, one Baptism, one
God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all;
whereby Christians before Forms were imposed, are found both to have been, and
to have continued with one accord in Prayer, and Supplication, and (...) to
have lift up their voice, and that one voice, in the same extemporarie words to
God, in Prayer and Thanksgiving; but do also subtly and profanely take
advantage, from escapes incident to humane frailty, to proclaim the same as
gross abuses, and thereupon scoff and mock at the hearty and spiritual Prayers
of the Upright, wherein the Lord delights: I hope your own vanity and folly
shall reprove you: But 3. as attention is requisite, even in the public use of
your Forms, and in our way is attended with such advantages, that do both
render it sweet and easy, and fully secure the conduct of our devotion; so, by
your course, it not only happens, that oftentimes the attention is sore put to
it, and perplexed, as you objecte to us; but the very Rule of devotion is made
altogether insecure and uncertain: for proof of this, there needs no other
Argument, then that you observe these Forms, lately added to the English
service, that these were as uncouth to the People, at the first hearing, and
required as great attention, as our extemporarie conceptions; is clear and
obvious: But seeing beside this, the People are put to join in words, they know
not by whom framed, and for the composing and commanding whereof, their
appears neither precept, nor promise in Scripture; that their attention in
this case, must be more exercised, and their devotion in more hazard to be
distracted, then when they join with him, whom they judge to be appointed by
the Lord, to be their mouth to himward, and on good grounds suppose, to b^
instructed, both with the knowledge of their condition, and the Rule and
Spirit, whereby he ought to make the samine known, in supplications, unto God,
is beyond contradiction: neither is this the only inconvenience, of this sort,
in your manner, there is a Court-practice, that I could tell you of; how the
King pro re nata, uses to issue out a Form of Prayer, either for his own
Chapel, the Citie-Churches, or further as he pleases to extend his orders;
and if these novell prescriptions, be not more chargeable to the attention, and
disturbing to the devotion, then any thing in our way; nay, if it be not a
Method, as dangerous in its tendencie, as destitute of warrant, let men judge:
But this is the Supremacy, too high for you to have remembered: 4. If there
were a greater exercise of attention in our way then in yours; yet when I
consider, that attention, if not surcharged, or confounded, does certainly tend
to the quickening of the devotion, and that on the other hand, by the coldness
of your stinted Forms, both the attention, is, for the most part wholly
slackened, and the devotion deadened; the instance you make of a few serious,
it may be, but weak and peevish persons of your party, professing a great
stayedness in the use of Set-forms; whereas in extemporarie Prayer, they could
not keep their mind from distraction, does neither impugn these more lively
and powerful devotions, whereunto the Lord, and not man, has ordered our
Method^ nor, in the least, does it counterballance these myriads of dead
Formalists, whom your way does bury in utter security, and irreligion: In
this place you tell us by way of witty discovery, that the way of extemporarie
Prayer, was well devised for spreading of Error, or Sedition, in respect,
forsooth, that Ministers prayed over their Sermons; so that what in the
discourse seemed the words of man, in the Prayer was called the dictat of the
Spirit: But, Sir, darre you or any man deny, that extemporarie Prayer, was the
first manner of men's calling upon the Name of the Lord? Are you not then
ashamed, to talk of it, as a late device? 2. How come you to suppose, that
words in Prayer, spoken by us to God, may rather seem the dictat of the Spirit,
and more speciously seduce, nor the same words delivered in Sermon, in the
Name, and as the word of God? Certainly admitting you had forgot, that you did
already upon this very pretext, endeavor to divest Preaching of this
Authority; yet common sense might have told you, that in this there could be no
deep artifice: But 3. Wherefore may not a party given to sedition, or error,
devise and compose Forms to the same purpose, and with more success? If Forms
be but of humane invention, and if, as you suppose, they be more weighty and
impressing, then extemporarie words, it is obviously evident, that they furnish
a far more advantageous opportunity to this your excellent devise: I might
confirm this, by telling you, how much this Method has been made use of, and
prospered, for the propagating, and establishing of many errors and
superstitions in the Romish Church; but a nearer and latter instance of that
piece of Herauldrie, blazoning the Kings Titles, and Prerogative, very
irreverently and undecently, to God, foisted in by Act of Council, in your
Church-prayers, for inculcating and advancing the exorbitant Supremacy, may
satisfy the world, that your evil and vain conjecture against us, was
suggested by your own practice.

After the false and calumnious charge of gross abuses, incident to our
extemporarie Forms, given in by you, with much pretended tenderness and
insinuation, as I have already touched; you N. C. Answers, that we had a
Directory of the things we should pray for; Which, no doubt, if you had been
pleased to propound it, in its ^ull latitude, viz. That the whole word of God,
many other instructions and forms thence drawn and delivered, and left to us by
godly men, with our own public Directory, and these of other Churches, and
lastly, that the teaching of our Parents, Masters, and Pastors, are all given
to us, to guide us, and assist us, both for matter and words, in the prayers we
ought to make: And if you had understood it aright, viz. that seeing the rule in
our way, is, as certain, though not so stinted, as that in yours, and that our
Ministers appointed to be the peoples mouth, in public Prayer and Worship, are
not only tried, in their utterance for preaching, but also for prayer; And
lastly that any material aberration, is as discoverable and censurable among
us, as among you, you might have been fully satisfied, that neither the
infirmities nor abuses of men, are chargeable upon our manner of Worship; nor
does your peremptory imposing of Set-forms, more secure the matter, from the
like, and greater enormities. But being resolved to carp, you say, why may not
we have a Directory forwords, as well as things? It Is answered. 1. A Directory
for things to be prayed for, is no doubt a Directory for words also, if the
things be fully directed, the application of words, the known signs, can have
little difficulty: 2. The directory, distinctly and particularly ordering the
method, and condescending upon the heads of prayer, with as much exactness, as
the latitude to be reserved to the free grace and gift of God, will admit;
cannot but be received for a Directory, both of words and things.

But you add, That it was but a cheat, to cozen the World who might have
startled, to have seen us, without any rule for Worship, in as much as our
Leaders quickly wearied of it. It is answered, first, So long as any Church
does own the revealed will and word of God, for the rule of Worship, none, but
such fantastic Formalists as you will prove startlers at this sure and
acceptable simplicity: 2. Whence you allege our Ministers their wearying of
the Directory, as such, except from the suggestion of your own malice, I cannot
conceive: that our Leaders neither turned it, nor astricted themselves to it
as, to an imposed Liturgy, is very certain; but that they did not at all
regard it, is a groundless calumny.

In the next place, you add, that, Hence it clearly followed, that the
Preaching was the great matter of the Worship; but the constant acts, wherein
the Church should adore God, were thought too homely: How you will make out
this connection, seeing, both the ground is false, and the consequence does not
hold, I recommend to your second thoughts; though our Prayers and Psalms
related to our Preaching, yet it will not conclude, that therefore the
Preaching, was the great matter of the Worship; Your Service Book makes many,
both Prayers, Gospells, Epistles, and Collects, relative to certain festival
days, is therefore the observation of these days, the great point of Worship?
The great matter of Worship is the rendering of our acknowledgement unto God,
which, if performed by prayer, hearing of His word, and praises, and that in
such a harmony, as all the exercises may conspire, and be mutually helpful, is
thereby greatly advanced, and not in the least marred. As for these Constant
acts, which you desiderat in our Service; if thereby you mean your Constant
Set-forms, you are already answered; but if only the daily solemn performances
of Prayer and Praise, which in liew of the morning, and evening Sacrifice,
ought, as the stated and fixed recognizance of the great God, be observed and
kept up, in every Christian Society, when other things shall be restored, I
frankly promise you my assent.

In the last place, you say: It is the least evil of extemporarie Forms, that
a Minister is ready to pour out his Soul to God, in such devotions as are then
most in his own Spirit, Which may possibly happen to be very unfit for Public
Worship, Sir, this is so groundless a fear, and so plain a diffidence of the
assistance and presence of the Lord, that I shall not trouble you with any
further answer, then to add, that as a thoughtfull serious Spirit, is ever
found to be most prepared for duty, and divine influences; so, all experiences
do conclude, that a Ministers particular exercises, have been so far from
marring, that, on the contraire, they have always rendered his public
performances, more spiritual and lively.

And thus at length your dull N. C. comes to see that you are for Set-forms,
and demanding your reason, tells you, that the Apostles used them not, to which
you answer, that you cannot doubt, but they used our Savior's Prayer, and
really, though I do as little doubt, but they might have done it; yet I think,
both you and I, must acknowledge, that we find no vestige of their doing of
it. For as for your distinguishing, betwixt Mathew's after this manner
therefore pray ye; and Luke's when ye pray, say, the pattern to be proposed in
the first, and the practice intended in the second: seeing the form is formally
the same, in both places, and the patterm so proposed by Matthew, that the
practice might be its most exact imitation, and the practice so enjoined by
Luke, that yet the latitude of a Pattern, is not discharged, your notion is but
airie, and of no moment. But if it were needful, to give you my thoughts in
this matter, I would say, that considering. 1. That this pattern was given to
the Disciples, in the infancy of their knowledge, before the out-pouring of
the Spirit, as a short and easy rudiment. 2. That thereafter the Spirit is
promised, and that in such an abundant measure, as it should flow like rivers
of living water. 3. That our Lord in his last discourse, commands them
frequently to pray to and ask the Father, in his Name, and 4 that the Spirit
being given de facto, they were enriched unto all utterance, and both in their
own Prayers, and in their Directions to others, how to pray, do constantly make
mention of the name of Jesus, these things I say considered, I am verily in the
opinion, they did not precisely use, either this form of Prayer, or any other;
but leaving this digression; and esteeming this Form to be the most excellent
model, and the very Substance of all prayer, and granting the Apostles might
have used it; yea supposing with you, they did use it; yet what makes all this
for your imposing and enjoining of Forms, the only point of our present
difference?

But you go on and say, the Jews at that time had a Liturgy, and hours of
Prayer, which our Savior never reproves: ergo quid. I have told you already,
that to infer an approbation, from our Lords tolerance for a time, of either
the whole, or any of the parts of that service, which he was in a short space
to abolish totally, is bad Logic. 2. Admit this tolerance were an approbation,
how will you make it out, that the Jews their Lyturgie, was more then a
Directorie, and that they were thereby astricted, to an imposed Set-form?
Specially seeing we find, that where, in their best times, certain Forms of
Prayer and Thanksgiving, dictated by the Spirit, are committed by David, and
other men of God, to the Ministers for public use; yet the thing was both
done, and observed, without the mention of any precise astriction, or
limitation.

In the next place you tell us, that the Lords Prayer is word for word taken
out of the Jewish Lyturgie: and thence you think, that exception against the
English Service, that some of its Prayers are out of the Roman Missal and (not,
or) Breviarie, to be foolish and groundless: But pray, Sir, why talk you so
confidently of the Jewish Liturgy of these times, (for other posterior
Liturgies availl not) since to this day, though much search has been made, and
many forgeries have been obtruded, no such thing could assuredly be found:
Next, if such a thing sound and pure was in our Lord's days, think you it was
then no better Pattern, nor the Roman Missal, Ritual, and Breviarie were, in
the very profoundest darkeness, of that Superstition, immediately before the
Reformation broke up; and when the first glimmerings of that light, managed as
much by Police as Piety, did translate from it, the English Liturgy? The
disparity of these things is too palpable. 3. Admitting the Jewish Liturgies,
used in the days of our Lord, were yet truly extant, it will not be
sufficient for you, to show the words and sentences of the Lord's Prayer, to be
therein disorderly found, for so no doubt a good Christian prayer, might almost
be said, to be taken out of the Alcoran; but even for evincing, that our Lord
did respect them, so much, as Directories, you must make out the whole context
of his Prayer, to be formally found therein: But you add, that, Though the
Apos^les and others immediately inspired, might pour out extemporarie Prayers,
it does not follow, that every one may use the same liberty: Who would not
pity this folly? If infallibility be required in our extemporarie methods,
wherefore not also in your Set-forms? But seeing the Apostles, were only the
better assisted, and not singularly privileged, to pray ex tempore, by their
extraordinary Gifts; and if the same command of God, and promise of the Spirits
assistance, are still with us, for our warrant, and encouragement to this
duty, your argument here insinuate, is empty and inconcludent, and in effect,
does as much prove, neither the Apostles their Preaching, nor Praying, to be at
all by us imitable, as the point you aim at.

Your next Argument for Set-forms, you usher in, by the instance of the
Corinthians, who in their Worship used Hymns of their own composing, as well
as prayers, and then you add, that, you could never comprehend, why we allow
the Spirit to be restrained in Praising, as to words, and not in Praying: Sir,
whether you preface the custom of the Corinthians, for enforcing your imposed
Forms, or as the reason of your doubt, anent the difference used by us in
Praying, and Praising, does not appear from your words? However, as it is
evident, that in that Church, there was rather an exuberant liberty, then any
thing like to your stinting; so, our practice, and theirs, shall soon be
reconciled; but first, let us take your N. C. Answer to your main scruple, and
he and I tell you, that, because the Psalms and Scripture-songs, are a
collection of Praises, dictated by the Spirit of God, for Worship; and have
been so made use, both by the Church of the Jews, in the time of the old
Testament, and by the Christian Church, in all Ages; therefore, they are used
by us, to the same end, without either restraining the Spirit, in the
performance, seeing it is his own appointment, or tying all our praises, to
these Forms, seeing God has thereto, only tied our solemn praise, by singing,
and otherwise left and allows us, a further liberty: To your N. C. part of this
answer you reply, that never were more absurdities crowded in less bounds: And
if I may also anticipat, I am certain, there were never more profane and
ignorant fopperies, stuffed into a return, then in that, which you here do make.

And first, you say, it is clear we may worship in the Spirit, and yet be
restrained as towords; since we acknowledge, that God hes done it in praising:
But waving that, which I have already plainly, and so often told you, viz. that
it is the imposing of men, and not the free use-making of Set-forms, that we
condemn; how absurd is it for you, to allege, that a man worshipping in
words, prescribed by the Spirit, is, in so doing, restrained in Spirit? Could
you not advert, that the Spirits prescriving, and men's, are different, and that
he prescriveth to himself, without any restraint?

2. You say, there are many Psalms prayers; and why may they not be used for
constant prayers, as well as the other for constant praises? Nay why, for
instance, may we not use the 51 Psalm in plain words, with a plain voice, as
prayer, as well as in hobling rhyme, with a Tune^ It Is answered, That I may
first take out the waspish sting of your Mockery; is this the tender respect,
that you profess p. 70. to every thing, that relates to Gods service; to call
the Psalms in meeter, used both by you, and us, hobling rhyme? or is your
Poetic vain so nicely delicate, that you can endure no verses inferior to your
lofty Pindarick? Which yet, if Critics mistake not, does trote more rudely,
and lamely, then our hobling meeter: for my part, I see not what answer can be
given to these Questions, save this, that it seems both your tenderness, and
poesy, are but false, and forced: But to the purpose, 2. I answer, that the
Psalms-prayers, and particularly the 51 Psalm, may in plain words, with a plain
voice be used in Prayer, as Prayer, if so be, the Spirit do so direct our
utterance; but if by constant prayers, you mean, that the Praying-psalms, may
as well be imposed, and enjoined for prayer, as the other for praise; you want
the warrant of the Word, and Spirit of God, who has appointed the whole
Psalms, to instruct our praise; but not to regulat our prayers, and so you
widely miss your mark. But here you insinuat two difficulties; 1. How we come
to sing Psalms-prayers? and this you afterward enlarge by demanding, our
warrant, for using all David's Psalms, since many of them relating to
particulars of David's life, belong not to us? Others of them are imprecatorie,
hardly to be sung, and many things there are in the Psalms, which we
understand not, and lastly there were not above twenty of the Psalms used by
the Jews in Worship. To this it is answered, that being commanded we sing
Psalms-prayers, not with direct thoughts suited to the strain of Prayer, wherein
they were first framed, and said, before they were appointed to be sung; but
with a reflexe acknowledgement of the goodness and mercy of God, the hearer of
Prayer, who both turned the Authors mourning into a song of gladness, and has
appointed it to be so used by us, that we may be encouraged, and praise him, in
the like hope: if in almost all Psalms of Praise, we find the preceding
distress and afflictions, with the prayers and groanings, therein made, first
pathetically commemorat, as the ground of the ensuing praise, for the
deliverance; is it not easy to apprehend, how that a small reflection, might,
after the Lord's relief, have made the reciting of a Psalm wholly of
lamentation, the most exulting expression of the delivereds joy, and may
commend it to us, to the same purpose? For my part, when I read or hear the 88
Psalm beginning with crying, and ending with darkeness, and like Job's
imprecation upon the day of his birth, having no light shining, but a cloud
dwelling upon it, and yet find it a song of the Sons of Korah, directed to the
chief Musician, I cannot but acknowledge it, for a Psalm of high praise unto
God, who turned such doleful mourning, to be the matter of rejoicing; and
thus, if you will rightly consider, that the Psalms are ordained for the
matter of praise, whereof the manner, consisting in reflexe acts, directed by
the Spirit, unto such suitable meditations, as may excite our joy in, and
praises unto God, is most rationally, and warrantably expressed, by singing,
you may very quickly be satisfied, that the Saints their complainings, David's
particular History, Victories, and the like, with all the composures made
thereupon; yea, even these imprecatorie Psalms (which though in the direct
act, they appear to be hard, and to need a special warrant, may nevertheless
furnish, unto all, sweet reflections of praise) are, most proper for the matter
of song, whereunto they were, both at first framed, and have since been used:
are all the works of God wonderful, and such as may excite to praise? and do
you think it strange that the various exercises of his Servants and People,
should be accounted proper matter for this exercise? Sir, though I be no
pretender to Poesy, far less presumptuous PINDARUM AEMULARI; yet I conceive
the smallest intelligence of the Nature, and manner of Encomiasticks, and
Elogies, finding matter in every subject, might have guarded you from this
escape; but here I must digress unto a very pertinent discovery; I have already
told you, that though by command we use the Psalms in our praises; yet seeing
these Forms are prescribed by the Spirit, it can import no restraint, and
therefore can furnish no argument for your humane impositions; but now there
appears a more significant disparity, viz. That the Psalms being commanded by
the Lord, only for the matter of our praises, though many of them may suggest,
both inward elicite conceptions, and outward proper expressions of praise; yet
it is evident, that by the injunction, the reflex acts, wherein the nature and
exercise of praise does formally consist, are not in the least narrowed, or
confined, let be stinted, or restrained; whereas by your imposed Forms, framed
on purpose, not simply, to furnish matter, but to direct, nay to suggest, lead,
and express our Petitions, the very formal desires of the heart, and spirit, in
their substance, at least, though not in their degree, are so led and bound up,
that it is hard to determine, whether this restraint be more visible, or
injurious.

Having thus far diverted I return to our purpose: You say, there are many
things in the Psalms that we understand not. To sing without understanding is
certainly sinful; but unless you affirm the Psalms to be in themselves
unintelligible, you may not, because of our ignorance, or weakness, reject the
institution of God: Lastly you tell us, that there were not above twenty of
the Psalms used by the Jews in Worship. It Is answered. 1. You observe not,
that all this clatter, is no more against us then against you, at least your
Episcopal Church; for as for your self, I am almost in the opinion, that you
are yet so little fixed, that the clearest redargution, will prove no
conviction: 2. The very inscriptions of more then thrice the number of Psalms
by you named, do demonstrat the groundless confidence of this your alledgeance;
beside that we find, 1 Chronicles. 16. 7. the very first Psalm, delivered by David
to the public Singers, insert in the Book of Psalms, without any direction by
way of title, what may we then conceive of the rest? 3. Reforming Hezekiah
commanded the Levites to sing praises unto the Lord, with the words of David
and of Asaph the Seer; and this the opinion and custom of the Church in all
ages, have understood of all the Psalms: whence then is it, that you do assert
so boldly? The 2 difficulty which I am to remove, is, that you say we are not
bound, or rather have no warrant to use the Psalms in meeter or with Tunes. To
this I answer, That we are bound to sing is evident, both from
Scripture-precept and example; and that we are thereby warranted, to have the
Psalms in meeter with Tunes, is as clear, as both are necessary, at least
convenient in the propriety of our language, for the use of singing: I deny
not, but prose may be sung; but seeing it is certain, that our language has no
such exact Prosodie, as either to render it easiely measurable, or the measures
distinguishable by points and accents; nay that the import of the musici or
tonici accentus, in the Hebrew, qui olim moderabantur harmoniam musicam, is so
far now lost, and unknown, that if we were now to sing the Hebrew Psalms, we
could not make use of them: Pray, Sir, leave us but the way of meeter, in place
of points and accents, until you teach us better Grammar: whereas you hint,
that we may have all David's Instruments as well as Tunes, if you could learn
us to sing without Tunes, as we may well do without Organs, I shall not contend,
but seeing that David did, no doubt, invent and introduce these his Instruments,
as well by the special direction of the Spirit, as he did all other things,
anent the service of the Temple, and that the Primitive Christians, worshipping
more in the simplicity of the Spirit, then in outward shows, canebant assa
voce non (...), I think you may now put up your pipes, and spare the cost.

Next you say, Why may not the Christian Church compose new Hymns, as they of
Corinth did? And this you judge to be the more necessary; because that David's
Psalms have not such full and clear Hymns, upon the great Mysteries of the
Christian belief: And you think the liberty, which we plead for in Prayer,
should much persuade it. It Is answered, if you consider, that Scripture, 1 Cor.
14. and particularly the 26. v. you may understand, that as the Apostle's
business, in the place, is, to set an order to the use of extraordinary Gifts,
wherein that Church abounded; so, the Psalms, Doctrine, Tongue, Revelation, and
Interpretation, there spoken of, appear to be inspired and afflatitious
motions, which will not found you any argument: And you your self do so plainly
observe, that these Psalms of the Corinthians were framed by private persons,
that I marvel, that your remembering of the thing, to be extraordinary, did not
stop your translation of it, by way of Privilege, to the Churches in our days.
2. Seeing the Lord has provided us with a plentiful variety of Psalms and
Hymns; and beside, has allowed us as full a liberty of praising in prose, as
of prayer, I think it does fully remove, all that is here by you objected, and
abundantly warrant us, both to abide content with Gods institutions, and refuse
a superfluous mixture of humane Odes, with these Divine Psalms, which he has
appointed, for the matter of our more solemn Praises.

But your scope is, Why do not ye use the Glory to the Father, and your N. C.
answering, Because it is not in the Scripture and is but the device of men: you
reply, who would not be sick with such pitiful folly? Thus your nice
ceremonious stomach, nauseats sure and solid truths: You add, show me a reason,
why you make prayers and not praises? I answer 1. Whatever we make we impose
none. 2. We do not say, that we make either prayers or praises; our plain
profession is, that as the Lord, whose it is, has commanded, so we worship
him, using that allowed liberty of Spirit, and utterance, both in prayer and
praise, whereunto he himself has promised to direct and assist us: And as for
the Psalms given us by Divine appointment, for the matter only (and not for
the formal expression of our more solemn praising) we are satisfied with his
bounty; and therefore do refuse your vain superaddition of an humane
invention: That our Meeter-Psalmes are no device of men, seeing they are the
same in substance and sen^e, with these in prose, without any greater
variation, then the application of the command of singing to us Scots-men, does
both require and warrant, is obvious to any man's candid reflection: As to the
possibility of singing in Prose, as well as in Rhyme, I have already
acknowledged it, and when you shall make it plainly and safely practicable, I
presume none will dissent.

But you again return to the Doxologie, and asks, Why it may not be used in the
end of singing, as well as it is used by us in the end of praying? And this
second Demand heats you to be unmannerly, and to tell us, that such childishnes
makes you doubt our rational faculties: When in fair dealing, it would become
your charity better to inform them: but, passing your folly, I say, we close
our prayers ordinarily, with praise and glory to the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost; because it is warrantable from Scripture-practice, to wit, in
Blessing; and agreeable to the truth and liberty of Gospel Worship; and yet we
refuse it in singing, (mark it, not in praising) because, for that exercise,
the Lord having instructed us with a sufficient plenty of Divine composures, we
think it neither needful nor acceptable, that we should gratify an arbitrarie
imposition, in receiving the supplement of an humane addition: It is true, the
words are Scriptural, but can you say, that the Scripture bears any such
allowance, for their use in singing, as it does for the Psalms of David? Yea
and many other spiritual songs, in Scripture, whereof you might indeed with
some reason reprehend our too great disuse: Hence therefore it is manifest,
that not only the offense of your unlawful imposing; but also the want of
Scripture-warrant, does exhibit the reason of our different practice, in
praying and solemn sung praises, which you so hotly urge. Having thus, Sir,
vindicat, both the Truth and our rational Faculties, with how much advantage,
might I retort your reproach of Childish weakeness? suppose our Reasons for
refusing were no better then yours for imposing, is it not a childish
impotencie, to be angrie^ let be to make such a stir, for our scrupling to do
a thing, when you have no better reason for you, then because we exactly and
fully do the equipollent? And really, when in my self I consider, that on your
part, such is the nature of almost all the differences, that fill this Church
and Kingdom, with so much distraction, how can it be sufficiently regreted?
for Men, yea Christians, yea Christian Rulers, to vex and toss poor Innocents,
whom they ought with tenderness to protect, for no other reason, even in your
acknowledgement, but because, they will not surrendare their Consciences to
arbitrarie, vain and frivolous impositions, which the very natural liberty of
reason would disdain, is indeed a matter of wonder, which nothing save a
Devilish design to debosh Conscience, and judicial delusion from the Lord, can
satisfy: But I pray the Lord to open their eyes, who ought to see.

In the next place, returning to Prayer, you bid us consider how Hosea the
Prophet prescribes a form, when he says take with you words and say: Strong
reasoning! The Prophet is exhorting a backslidden, impenitent, and obdured
People, to return; and, for their help and encouragement, instructing them,
how by a short supplication to God, they might avert his wrath: And this you
make a warrant for men, rigidly to impose Forms: If a Nonconformist should go
^orth in the Spirit of the Lord, and proclaim, O Scotland return unto the Lord
thy God, take with you words, and say, take away the iniquity of a despised
Gospel, and brocken Covenant, and receive us graciously etc. would not you
think him very impertinent, who should thence conclude, that man to be for a
set Liturgy. But our savior prayed thrice still in the same words, and yet
the third time more ^ervently: I will not tell you, that even in the Text there
may be a little variation observed; but pray, Sir, who of us ever affirmed,
that fervor in prayer did consist in a varying of the phrase, which is the
inference you here make, against us; and yet that a stinted form, specially
when imposed, may restrain fervor, is as evident to any impartial discerner,
as that a deep fervor of Spirit may oftentimes fix in one short petition, nay
sometimes be intended to a degree beyond words, is certainly confirmed by
manifold experience. You conclude that in the Church they used Forms very
early: I will not tell you, that antiquity is not a better plea for Set-forms,
then it is for Bishops: And really in my opinion, it is so much the worse for
either, that it pleads so jointly for both; for that corruptions do draw on one
another, and especially a declination in Government, a declination from the
pure worship, though the first beginnings, and ancient examples were more
obscure, yet the joint progress and increase of these evils, in the Roman
Church, and the renewed late experiments, which we have had at home, confirm
it above exception: But my answer is first, that the liberty of prayer, which
we plead for, was in the Church long before Set-forms, even from the days of
our Lord, during the times of the Apostles and their Apostolic Successors, is
a most certain truth, and a better pattern then any after-alteration: why do
you not then hold to it? As for the Liturgies of James and Mark, you your self
disowne them, and they are notour forgeries. 2. Admit that in the third and
fourth Centuries, partly through declining formality, and partly for a remedy
of the then much advanced decay, both of Piety and Gifts in the Christian
Church, certain Liturgies were composed and used; yet the very variety of them,
which you acknowledge, as of that of Basile that of Chrysostom, that of
Ambrose, does sufficiently testify, that though they might then have been
proposed for helps, and so used; yet there was not one of them imposed by
peremptory injunction: As for what you say of the Reformed Churches, that they
have their Liturgies, and that so had we ours at our first Reformation, it so
exactly quadrats to what I have answered, anent the ancient Liturgies, their
being framed for helps, that there can be nothing more apposite; in as much, as
it is a most certain truth, that both our old Liturgy, (since you do name it
so) and these of the Reformed Churches, are so far different, and free from
the impertinencies, corruptions ceremonies, and rigid restriction of your
Service Book, by which it grossly bewrayes its foul Popish fountain, that they
do more oppugn, then fortify your principal intent: but the matter speaks
for it self: what shall we then say of your bold assertion, viz. That never
were extemporarie hea^s (as you love to speak of the liberty of prayer, as
rudely and profanely as if you were talking of race horses) used in the Church?
When not only frequent instances from the Old, the constant practice of the
times of the New Testament, the first and purer ages of the Church, but the
professed allowance, and known practice, of all the Reformed Churches, do so
directly witness against you: Verily this is such an impudence, that le^t it
tempt my Mediocrity, I rather leave it to your own Conscience.

In the next place, you make your N. C. allege. That our Church was purer then
any by you named, on purpose, that you may take the advantage to say; That we
were cheated to believe, that all the World was wondering at us, a cheat like
unto that of our alleged Prophetess: whereof you, and you forsooth, on your
word only, assure, that neither were true: Sir, if the grossnes of that lie,
anent the use of extemporarie prayer, wherein I have just now attraped you, did
not sufficiently secure us from the slander of your scoffing calumnies; I could
easily make it appear, that all the pains we took, in our own just
vindication, was many degrees inferior to that restless labor taken by your
party, to represent us to all, as most arrant Rebels, and load us with the
most atrocious reproaches, which the Father of lies could invent: but Cui bono?
It is sufficient for us, that as the work of the Lord, among us, was honorable
and glorious, many ways countenanced by his Grace, and Presence, ^oth in
ordinary and extraordinary appearances, particularly in M. M. whom, I suppose,
you have learned, from Balcanquels Mani^esto, and not from us, to call her our
Prophetess, and only levelled against the wickedness and tyranny of a Prelatick
party, enemy to all Conscience, and the scandal and betrayer of the
Protestant interest; so these hard and contrary things, that have of late
befallen us, in place of obscuring, do only tend to its greater manifestation,
and more universal approbation, from all that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity: But you proceed and tell us, that it is strangely inconsequentiall
for us not to pray in a Liturgy; yet always to bless the people in a
Set-form: But, is it not strangely rediculous for you, to dessemble such an
obvious disparity? And will you still arrogantly pretend to be a Master of
Ceremonies, in the Court of Heaven? The Blessing, used by us to be pronounced
upon the people, at the breaking up of the Assembly, is only a short formula of
a Christian farewell, warranted by, and coppied from, the practice both of
Moses under the old Testament, and the Apostle Paul in the shutting up of his
Epistles; and therefore in use to be performed, sometime in the words of Paul
only, sometime in the words of both, and sometime also with an^ agreeable
variation from both: What then can this make, for the imposing of set-forms,
for all public Prayer and Worship? Do not both the diverse nature of the
things, and the difference, betwixt a peremptory imposition, and a free
imitation, red^rgue this your reasoning? In civil converse, our ordinary ran
counters are commonly prefaced and concluded, with certain received Formulae of
a respective benevolence; should therefore all mutual addresses, be reduced,
and strainted to the same methods? Certainly the smallest attention will both
acknowledge the just application, and marvel that (as you say of us) you are so
little governed by reason.

But now to the English Liturgy, which commending as an excellent Rule of
Worship, and using other vain floorishes, not worth the noticing: in answer to
your N. C. you tell us: That it is far from being an easy way of praying,
and that a natural man, would be better pleased, to be runnig out with his own
conceptions; then to use the form of the Church, which is more simple and
humble. It Is answered, That there may be some conceated Hypocrites, from such a
carnal motive, despising Set-forms, I shall not controvert; but as I have
already told you, what are our just exceptions against their imposition; so,
that the generality of men, who, for the most part, do only lay clame to the
name, and make a slight profession of Religion, without busying themselves
further in it, are by the carnal easines, that they find in your way, not only
more engaged to it, then to ours; but habituat to a superstitious, stupid
formality, wherein placing the all of Religion, they ruin their own Souls, is
a truth that millions of sad instances do confirm: seeing therefore, this
strong^ food (as you term it) of your Service is indeed both rank and
poisonous, we wish that, that princely tenderness in our Sovereign, to which
you impute his forbearance to impose it, may at length, in its just exercise,
extend to remove and discharge it, in all his Dominions. As for the discreet
prudence of our Superiors (the Bishops no doubt) which you would also commend
to us, upon the same account; pardon us, Sir, if we be not such Babes: we have
shared too largely of the strong food of their Violence; and of the bread of
adversity and water of affliction, from their hands, to be so abused; He who
rightly considers will easily assent, that they have hitherto been sparing,
to enjoin these corruptions, for no other reason, then that which moved the
Jews to forbear to take Christ on the feast day, viz; lest there be an uproare
among the people. As for the ensuing contest, betwixt you and your N. C. anent
that dullness and stupidity, which we see occasioned by, and attending your
formality, the preceding discourse, does so rationally connect them, and
common observation so evidently confirm the matter, that your alledgeance of
some godly people, who, in a well-meaning sincerity, have, in the use of your
service, attained to some feelings of pure and simple devotion, does furnish
you no stronger exception, then what the Papists may also pretend for their
Mass and Latine-service.

After this, you make your Nonconformist objecte the vanity of your
Service-book-repetitions, in the often redoubling of Lord have mercy upon us,
and 2. its confusion, in that all the people say some of the Prayers together,
and use Amen: but seeing these objections are amongst the least of these
exceptions, made by ours against that Liturgy, which ye altogether neglect: I
only say, that as the 136. Psalm. containing a summare enarration of the great
things God did for Israel, and most pathetically interrupted by these frequent
eruptions of praise, agreeable to such a reflection, can be no precedent or
warrant for the framing, and imposing the battologies of your Letanie, vainly
composed, and as deadly exercised, in compa^ison to such a pattern; so, your
instance adduced from Acts 4. where it is said, that the whole company lift up
their voice with one accord to God, And the custom intimated by Paul, of the
saying Amen at the giving of thanks, do not remove the confusion objected, 1.
because, it is the opinion of some, that that passage in the Acts, was an
afflatitious motion, both dictat and uttered by the Spirit^s immediate
inspiration: 2. It may be doubted, if the whole company did all of them lift up
their voice, in as much as one speaking in a company, and the whole consenting
and joining, they may be properly enough said to lift up their voice with one
accord, though every single member do it not: 3. Supposing, as is not
improbable, that the great exultation of that small company, did then express it
self, in that extraordinary manner; would you make such extraordinary examples,
precedents for ordinary service? sure Reason repugnes, and the effect of
decency does not answer: 4. For your Amen, as I am certain, that the Apostles
words, may be understood of a consentient, though silent, Amen; so it is
evident, that, even in the point of order, your so frequently repeated Amen is
superfluous, and vain: but if you will reduce your practice to a decent use,
seeing the matter appears to be indifferent, if you love to express it, use your
liberty, only permit us the like favor of ours. As to what you subjoine, that
The people all with their voice, join in the Psalms, and therefore may also in
Prayers: the disparities are clear. 1. we are warranted, and commanded to sing,
which necessarily requires our own vocal performance and concurrence; whereas
the command of Prayer, either private, or public, has no such import. A man
may pray in his heart, or join with another, without using words: I hope you
will not say, that he can also properly sing, and not use his voice. 2. I
grant, your Liturgy being admitted, the joining of all with their voice in
Prayer, though not very orderly or decent, is yet practicable; but seeing we
refuse these forms, the reason of our different practice, in this matter, from
our use in singing, must by your self be acknowledged: Having considered your
answers to what you make your N. C. objecte, against the English Lyturgie, I
might give you an appendix of many more important exceptions: As 1. Its
scenical, and mimical composure throughout, very unbecoming the Worship of the
great God: 2. The many impertinencies of its Letanies, Gospels, Epistles, and
Collects. 3. Its mancking and confounding of Holy Scripture, specially in its
Collects: 4. The superstitious observation of days and other ceremonies,
twisted all alongs with its whole tenor, and exercise: And 5. Its corrupt
tincture, and unsavorie and unacceptable strains and methods, which it derives
from the Roman Idolatrous Missal, and Superstitious Ritual, and Breviarie.
whence it was translated; but seeing others have fully declared them, to whom
you have thought good to make no answer, civility forbids me to urge a
declining Adversary.

And thus we are arived at the controverted Ceremonies, viz. The five articles
of Perth: which you say, were all lawful, and most of them useful and
necessary: Sir, the matter of Ceremonies in general, and also of these by you
specially named, with all the pretenses that possibly can be alleged for them,
have been so fully treated and examined by ours, particularly by Didoclavius
alias Mr. Calderwood in his Altar Damascenum, and Gillespie in his English
Popish Ceremonies, that I marvel, how you had the confidence, to set forth
these poor mustie, and many times and ways refelled and basted reasonings,
which you adduce: Neither are you in this only censurable: but when I compare
that wit and acuracie, adhibit by others of your way, in the handling of this
subject, with that bluntne^s and confusion, wherewith you repone to us the very
meanest of their Arguments, not so much as in the least recocted, nay, that the
short motives and insinuations mentioned in the tenor of the Articles
themselves, are of far more weight, then all your superficial discourse, my
censure does almost exceed to accuse you, either of bold ignorance, or a
designed treachorie: However, since all the arguments, either used by others,
or abused by you, with all that could be invented, for maintaining your vain
plea, does stand by us, fully and evidently discussed; I mind not by a
disadvantageous repetition, to lapse into your error; and therefore shall
content my self, by a summare and close review of what ensues, in this
Dialogue, to bring it to a Period.

The first of the five Articles, which you begin with, is, Confirmation: And
you say, That if it had been introduced as a Sacrament, we had reason to except
against it; but seeing it was only designed for a solemn renovation of the
Baptismal Vow, that Children who do not therein engage themselves, when they
come to the years of discretion, may then do it; and is confirmed by antiquity,
the probable meaning of the laying on of hands mentioned, Heb. 6. and the
assent of most Reformers, the thing seems to be sufficiently warranted. It Is
answered, 1. It seems that in this place you forget your self: did you not tell
us, in your 3. Dialogue, that washing the feet, and anointing the sick with
oil; though in appearance, as particularly descrived, and as well warranted by
Scripture, as either of the Sacraments; yet, since antiquat by the Church, are
now lawfully difused, wherefore then may not the Church, having power to
exauctorate Sacraments, be also allowed the power to institute new ones, and so
establish your Confirmation, as a Sacrament, specially since the Roman Church
does so practice it? 2. Not to contend with you anent the name and definition
of a Sacrament: How come you to deny to the Church, the power of introducing
Confirmation as a Sacrament, and yet to allow it the power to appoint it, as a
solemn renovation of the Baptismal Vow? Certainly, whatever be the difference
betwixt the two, yet the unquestionable Rule, that in the house and ordinances
of God, men are not, without Divine prescript, either to add or change, does
equally refute innovations of all sorts. 3. You speciously obtrude your
Confirmation, as a solemn renovation of the Baptismal Vow; but, if you consider
the thing, as it stands in the Article, whereby it is enjoined, it is plainly
the Bishops solemn benediction of young beginners, for the increase of
knowledge; whereby it is manifest, that your description, importing the young
beginner his act, is manifestly different from the thing, (being the Bishops
act) which you undertake to maintain. But 4. Whatever way we take it, its
singular solemnity, wherein its form consists, is not only without all
Scripture-warrant, but plainly superfluous; seeing that, as the Bishop or
Presbyters their blessing is not thereby bettered, or materially differenced
from their ordinary benediction; so the ordinary profession of beginners, in
their examinations, and especially their after-partaking of the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, does more then supply your pretended solemn renovation. 5. As
this conceit of Confirmation, as it is explained by you, does evidently
derogate from the Sacrament and Covenant of Baptism, as to Infants; so, your
appropriating the administration thereof to the Bishop, objected by your N. C.
in his next demand, does yet more discover its vanity and evil design: To the
arguments therefore which you bring for it, and 1. to its Antiquity: I answer,
that the simplicity and purity of the first Ages of the Church, knew it not: 2.
As, its very first beginnings cannot be calculate, beyond the times of the
Churches declination, so, it is most certain, that from an arbitrarie
well-meaning institution, it has since been depraved to such an abuse, as may
sufficiently justify the total removal of its use. 2. As for your Scripture
probability, from the laying on of hands so notourly known to have been then
only used, in the conferring of the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, or in
the Ordination, or Mission of Ministers, neither it, nor your alleged assent
of most Reformers, do merit any answer.

Next you tell us, in defense of Private Baptism, That for us to confine the
Sacramental actions, to the walls of a Church, is gross Superstition: But, who
would have thought, when you clamor so much upon our Nonconforming Meetings,
you would have stumbled into such a mistake? Our exception against Private
Baptism is therefore, not the want of a dedicated House, as you do vainly
allege; but because our Lord, having, by his commission, annexed it to the
preaching of the word, whereof it is the seal, and it being the Sacrament of
our initiation into the Church, its performance does evidently appear to be
most agreeable to the ordinary Church assemblies, wherever held; beside, that
peoples minds, prone to superstition, may, by the practice of Private
Baptism, be readily inclined, both to apprehend the Popish absolute necessity
of Baptism, and thence to regard the exterior action, more then the spiritual
signification and efficacy, is confirmed, by undeniable experience, both in
your and the Roman Churches: For the inconveniency, which you poorly
exaggerate, from the distance of many Churches, the badness of seasons, and
tenderness of Infants: as, unto this day, it was never made the ground of a
real complaint, so you should understand, that the dispensations of Gods
Providence do not alter the dispositions of his holy will.

From Baptism, you pass to plead for the private administration of the
Communion to Persons on deathbed, and this you think, the seasonablenes of its
use, and the propriety of its ends to such a case, do abundantly persuade: To
which I answer, 1. That though at no time, Faith and Love need more to be
quickened, the Death of Christ more to be remembered, nor communion with the
Church to be declared, then in the approach of the last pangs, it will not
thence follow, that therefore the Communion may then be privately administrat:
for, since not the seasonableness of the fruits, but the warrant and Rule given
unto us, is first to be heeded, in the going about of holy administrations;
nay, since that, without this regard duly adhibit, the blessing and fruits are
but in vain expected, it is evident, that barely from the exigence of the
fruits, to conclude, in any case, the lawfulness of the celebration, is
preposterous Religion, and worse Reason: Now 2. That the rule set down to us,
in this Sacrament, does reprobate this your observance, is evident not only
from that connection, that there is and ought to be observed, betwixt the word,
and Sacraments: But, 1. From our Lords own pattern in the institution, keeping
this solemnity with the company of his Disciples, making as it were a little
Christian Church: 2. Because the Apostle in his regulation of this Sacrament,
according and with respect to his Masters pattern, does suppose the Churches
coming together into one place, and consequently the ordinary Church
Assemblies, as a necessary requisite, in the free and peaceable times of the
Church: 3. Because the very Mystery of the Lords Supper, representing the
union of Believers with, and their communion in Jesus Christ their Head and the
name that it has thence obtained, 1 Cor. 10. v. 16, 17. is not well consistent
with this private administration: It Is true, the Authors of your Articles, not
being able to decline the convincing evidence of this reason, do, among other
preparations, require that there be three or four, free of lawful impediments,
present with the sick person to communicate with him; but as such a packt
Conventicle, beside other inconveniences, has no just resemblance of the
Church her ordinary Assemblies; much less can communicating with hand-weal'd
companions be a sign of that free, equable and comprehensive communion,
signified by this Sacrament; so, it is manifest, that the forementioned
requisite is only a colorable evasion, manifestly acknowledging the force of
our argument, and in fraudem Legis, salvis verbis sententiam ejus
circumveniens: But 3. This your Private Communion is to be reprobate; because,
as the decumbents faith, love, and other graces, in that hour of his need, are
only best excited by the means at that time allowed and competent, and the
sanctified remembrance and improvement of other privileges, and ordinances,
formerly enjoyed; so, it is certain, that this observance has not only been
abused by the Papists, unto the abomination of their private Ma^^; but is also
rejected, by the Reformed Churches, not Lutheran, as found to be inductive of
vain Superstition, wherever it is used; and for this I need not go far in
search of confirmations, for you your self in telling us, That your practice
was very early in the Church, subjoin, that Justin Martyr says, they sent of
the Eucharist, to them that were absent, and that the story of Serapion shows,
how necessary, Christians then thought it, to be guarded by this holy viaticum,
which two instances, whether true or false, being generally held to be an
excess, both inclining to, and introductive of vain Superstition; and
therefore, reckoned among the first Naevi, appearing in the face of the
Primitive Church, and now generally disused, by all the Churches of Christ, as
they are by you adduced, do too evidently demonstrate, how much, both your
spirit and customs, do bend to a relapse, in these evils.

In the next place your N. C. asks you What you say for Kneeling in receiving;
sure this looks like Superstition and Idolatry: And in return you confess,
that it is the Article of them all, which you have least fondness for. And this
indeed, is very fitly expressed, in as much as it is evident, it can be no
rational or solid liking, which inclines you, to any of them; but since even
your fondness, as to this Article, is defective; how far must you be from
doing the thing in faith? And how much more sound and Christian would it be for
you, here to subsist, and say, since, for want of the warrant of Faith, this
Kneeling cannot possibly please God, let it be removed from his Holy Ordinance?
But you proceed and tell us, That since the kneelers do declare, that they
neither believe Christ to be corporally present, nor intend any Worship to the
bread or wine; but direct their Worship to God and Christ, for that death which
is therein showed forth, it is great uncharitableness, for us, to call this
kneeling Idolatry. It Is answered, Sir, as in the general, I have as dull a
faculty, and small an inclination, for constructive inferences, specially in
the worser part, as most of men; so really; if the purpose of this discourse
were only a contest of opinion, upon the practice of persons, professing, as
you say, and gracing the same with humility, meekness, and sincere love of the
truth, the great Apologists for a dubious performance, for all the evil
appearances, which I find in this matter, I think I ought rather to inform,
in the Spirit of meekness, by pointing out the error, then by a severe naming
of it, though just enough, both involve in more doubtful disputations, and
like wise irritate, but seeing our business lies with such, who, having rejected
and scorned all information, resisted yea gone over unanswerable light, and
showed perverseness in practice, do further go about, subtly to seduce, nay
rigidly and violently to impose upon others, who both have escaped and
renounced these vanities: If the purity and truth of Gods Ordinances, and the
very end of charity, do in this case allow, a more peremptory plainness, I
think your censure of our uncharitableness altogether unseasonable: Now that
all your Ceremonies, but specialy this act of Kneeling are Idolatrous, and that
not only reductive and participative, as they speak; but also directly, and
formally, by rendering Formalists such, Gillespie in his English Popish
Ceremonies, has so fully demonstrat, and therein has so diligently searched
you out, in all your subterfuges, and clearly discussed all imaginable
pretensions; that I should but wrong both him, and my self, and the cause, by
offering either to repeat, or add: Only to convince you yet more, how little,
in this affair, I am inclined groundlesly to tax your way of Idolatry: I
grant that your Kneelers do not only profess, as you say, which may as well be
alleged for Worship done before a Crucifixe, and yet does not purge it of
Idolatry. But further do acknowledge, the act of receiving and communicating
to be no direct act of Worship; but first commemorative, having the acts of
praise and thanksgiving, in the next place, resulting from it, and the gesture
of adoration to be thereto only ascriveable; yet, seeing in mediate Worship, the
media are necessarily objected, and of the very substance of the ordinance,
without which it cannot subsist, it is manifest, that external adoration
therein used, inevitably, though neither rationally, nor intentionally,
respecting and relating to these objects, must of necessity be Idolatrous: For
instance, suppose a person abstracting in profession, as much as you do from
all respect to the minister, who in his preaching sustaines his Masters person,
and declaring, that neither rationally he could, nor intentionally did,
attribute any more then becoming reverence to the word heard, should
nevertheless in hearing, still kneell, would not you and all men say, that such
an excess were superstitiously Idolatrous? How much more then, must this
kneeling in the actual receipt and commemoration, (an act nothing so immediate
betwixt God and the Soul, as that of hearing his word) of necessity respecting
the Elements, in as much as without the presence thereof, it would not at all
be by you exacted, fall under the same, yea a worse, construction? But, not to
dip further in a discourse, which I have already told you, that I judge
superfluous, as I have here exhibited the fairest interpretation of your way,
and yet there is nothing found, even under the legal Ordinances, wherein the
signs and instruments, often honored with a visible Divine glory, were
advanced to the highest pitch of a becoming reverence, that can, by any act of
adoration, thereto properly directed or relative, any where recorded, justify
your practice; so, when it occurres, that the samine is both contrary to our
Lords own example, incongruous to the meaning, and end of the institution, and
lastly known to be introduced by a Superstition, that very quickly discovered,
and brought forth, the most gross of all the Popish Idolatries; how strange
must this delusion be, that not only retains, but presses it upon others?
But when your N. C. urges you with our Lords example of sitting in a
Table-gesture^ you tell him, That none should allege this, but such as
communicate leaning, and after supper, and in an upper Room: And wherefore did
you not add in the house, where one carrying a Pitcher does enter; and in a
city like to Jerusalem: and the like, that so the folly of your reply might
have discovered it self, without my meddling? But the matter is plain: Our Lords
example is to be our pattern and rule, both for the substance, and in the
circumstances properly respecting its nature and ends: the substance of the
institution, is, a mysterious Eucharistick commemoration of Christ's Death, by
the symboles of Bread and Wine, used in the manner prescribed; the
circumstances are, that the samine be performed by way of a festivity, at a
Table, and the like: these things being observed, as the particular room, time
and manner of the Jews sitting mentioned in the Gospel, were only accidental;
so, the samine are variable, according to the customs of every People, and
Nation, without the least derogation from the Lords Ordinance, Nay if you would
but deall with ordinary ingenuity, in these matters; seeing that our Lords
familiar converse and Table Gesture, adhibite in this appointment, is not the
least testimony of that condescending love, thereby represented, the just and
fair imitation of his example, consisting in the like familiar manner, in
genere actus, regulate by a due decency, does equally reject, both the
affected reverence of your impertinent Adoration, and also the other extreme of
that rigid Apish conformity, in things purely accidental, whereby you go about
to redargue our censure of your Superstition. But you say, Seeing the Jews,
without any written warrant, did change the commanded posture of the Passover,
from standing to sitting, and Christ did thereto conform, wherefore may not
Christians, who are less restrained, change the first gesture, which is not
commanded, and only lamely exemplified, by leaning? It Is answered, The posture
mentioned, Exodus 12. 21. in the institution of the Passe-over, is, that they
should eat it with their loins girded, their shoes upon their feet, and their
staff in their hand: there is no express mention made of standing. 2. Some are
of opinion, that supposing standing to be imported, by what is injoined; yet
the posture was particular to that eating, at Isreal's departure from Egypt, and
that thereafter the posture was free, in respect that the formal perpetual
ordinance, given after the first celebration, Exodus 12. 43. makes no mention of
the gesture; and therefore, that the Jews did thereafter use sitting, at least
from the days of Joshua, in sign of rest and secure liberty: however, certain
it is, that as our Lords posture in eating the Passe-over, whatever it was, was
not contrary to the Divine prescription; so, the Jews their practice,
acknowledged by you to have been the same, can be no ground for your
Superstitious innovation of Kneeling, introduced contrary to our Lords example,
the Rule of the institution; and both introductive of, and tending to plain
Idolatry. As for that greater liberty allowed to Christians, which you here
plead; as we have already heard, that you only allege our liberty, from the
former rigor, to the effect you may impose your new yoke of a more i^rational
bondage; so, it is evident, that in this pla^e you mention our freedom of
Gesture, on purpose, (...) you may enslave us to the imposition of your
Superstitious Kneeling: but he truly walks at liberty, who keeps the Lords
Commandments. You shut up this Article with a perhaps, that more veneration is
due to this action now, that our Savior is exalted; then he could have allowed
of in his humiliation: But. 1. the veneration, that you here speak of, to the
action, sufficiently intimates, that for all the pretenses made in the
contraire, the Kneeling, which you plead for, is in some sort relative to the
Elements therein used, and therefore Idolatrous. 2. your perhaps, unsoundly
insinuats, that our Lord could not have allowed of the same adoration, now due
to him in Exaltation, in the state of his Humiliation; which you know to be
false. 3. at best, it is a conjectural intruding into these things, which you
have nor seen, and so not meriting any regard.

In the last place, you treat of the Article, anent the observing of days, and
denying that you pretend to make them holy days: you tell us, that it is
another thing, to keep peculiar days of thanksgiving, for the great and signal
mercies of the Gospel Dispensation, and in such customs you can apprehend no
evil? and really, Sir, I am confident you have seen as little good: but to be
short, remitting what may be said against this Article, to the pious and
learned Labors of these Authors, which I have already commended; I only add,
that although the construction which you put upon this observation of days, is
certainly the most plausible that can be made; yet you know so well, how
grossly these days have, in the Roman Church, been abused to superstition and
profanity, both in their dedication and observation, And it is so obvious to
any, how, to this day, the generality in these Reformed Churches, where they
are observed, do, in the persvasion as well as practice, continue the same
abuse, that I think, since they are only an humane invention, not good in
itself, your own rule, p. 70. that, when such things are grossly abused, then
there is ground to change their use, may fully satisfy you, as to the justice
and reason of our dissent.

But you affirm confidently, that in all Ages of the Church, Christians have
had a peculiar veneration for these days: It Is answered, a veneration for
these days, how does this language agree with the above mentioned
interpretation, whereby, reducing these days, to the condition of a mere
circumstance of a constant Anniversary thanksgiving, you go about to purge them
of all further Superstition? But this wind of your vanity can not he hid: it is
as the ointment of the right hand which bewrays it self. 2. These days, were
not in veneration, in the first and purest Age of the Church, whereby, both the
generality of your assertion, and your argument, from Antiquity, are subverted:
you tell us that the observation of Easter and Pentecost, are clearly derived
from Apostolical practices: what you understand by Apostolical practices,
concerns me not, seeing that the Apostles, and Church, in their times, knew no
such thing: And this Negative, proving it self, cannot be controlled: I grant,
the succeding Ages became soon fond of these vanities; but, what were the
bitter fruits of contention and schism, which the Lord in his justice, did
suffer this early corruption to produce, is notourly known, and certainly
such, as alone might have taught the whole ensuing generations, to be more
tender of Gospel purity and simplicity: Shall we then also refuse instruction?

But you say, Paul hasted to be at Jerusalem to keep the feast of Pentecost:
Pray, Sir, be more sincere; all we find in Scripture, is, that he hasted to be
at Jerusalem, the day of Pentecost: And I appeal to common ingenuity, if that
any rational man, considering Paul to be a Jew, and to hasten, against one of
their three great Feasts and Convocations, then by the Jews still observed, to
his own Country and its Metropolis, where the general and solemn confluence
of his whole Nation was to meet, can thence conclude, that he went thither to
keep the Feast of Pentecost, in the meaning by you insinuate and requisite to
your purpose?

In the last place you tell us that Paul says of the legal holy days, he
that regards a day, to the Lord he does regard it: Whence you infer, that
if Moses his Feasts might have been kept holy to the Lord, much more may these
be, which the Church has institute. Really, I am so wearied with this poor
stuff, that civility, forgetting it to be your own, does almost prompt me to
demand your pardon, for resuming it: The Apostle Paul in that Chapter, is most
expressly declaring, our Christian Liberty, and its right use, and in the case
of a weak Brother, esteeming one day above another, belike from the difference
made by Moses Law, he only advises, that he be fully persuaded in his own
mind, and seeing he regards it unto the Lord, he would not have him therefore
judged: Now tell me plainly, is this either the case or the controversy
betwixt us? Are Bishops the weak Brethren, from the abiding impress, of a
Divine dispensation fulfilled and evanishing, but not expressly antiquat,
tenderly and conscientiously overesteeming and regarding certain days; and
therefore only pleading a charitable forbearance. Or lastly: Seeing the Bishops
do not only, without warrant, keep up these superstitious observations; but
peremptorily enjoin and impose them upon others; whereas the Apostle in the
same place, does both declare our Liberty, and, with equal care, prescribe,
that, seeing he that regards not the day, to the Lord he does not regard it;
that therefore he should not be judged: Are they not by the very Text here
alleged manifestly convicted? But it is enough: And whether our dislike of
these Festivals, and the other Articles of Perth, be not well grounded, and
your observing and enjoining of them both Superstitious and irrational, I leave
it to the judgment of all the Lovers of Truth.

The sixth DIALOGUE Answered.
SIR, To this conference, very visibly contrived for the commendation of your
self and your way, and wherein pretending, by sublime speculations and the
swelling words of a fair profession, to elevat Souls to the solid hights, and
true liberty of Christianity, you plainly go about, to introduce a regardless
indifferency, for all these corruptions and superstitious practices,
whereunto, in a convenient compliance with the present course, you cunningly
endeavor to subjecte us; you make you N. C. preface, That there is no good to
be hoped from you, who are so fierce against us, and to add with little serious
reverence, but God be thanked an ill-willed Cow has short horns: Whence
taking the occasion, you tell us of your extreme aversion from fierce and
violent courses, your love to all Christians, your pity of such as you judge
mistaken, and that you quarrel with no man for his opinion, in these lesser
matters, Which are but the skirts and suburbs of Religion, and so forth. Sir,
if Censure were either my Genius or office, how easy were it for me, to strip
both you and your party of this your sheeps clothing: We have heard in the
preceding Dialogues, your frequent accusations of Rebellion and Faction, your
virulent calumnies of the most inhumane, unnatural, and barbarous Wickedness
that can be paralleled, your insolent mockeries at fancied mistakes, and
lastly, all that has preceeded, a continual quarrel about these things, which
you call lesser matters, and all this, against the generality, nay, against the
whole of the Godly and sober in the Land; but especially, the Lords faithful
and suffering Ministers; and yet you have the boldness, to wipe your mouth, and
make a boast of your singular gentleness, Christian love, compassion upon them
that are out of the way, and tender forbearance toward dissenters in lesser
things. But, I have already meddled too far in this concention, only, as I would
not have men mistaken concerning you, so, for preventing of their mistake of
us, from your N. C. suggestion, I assure you plainly, that though any man may
affirm, without fear of a contradiction, that the Prelatick Spirit, mingled in
the midst of you, is irreligious, false, fierce, jealous, cruel, covetous and
proud; and, in these few years bygone, has less or more appeared, in all these
evil qualities, yet as the seen fury, folly and prophanitie of your Bishops
and Curates, and a secret conviction, in all men, of the consistencie of true
Loyalty with the Countries just aversion from them, may in politic prudence,
induce our Governors to restrain some what of the rage of that Party, which
we are thankfully to acknowledge, so it is our Prayer to God, that he would
lead them on, to a full and just consideration of the true causes of all our
grievances, and to serious repentance and returning unto God, who alone, with
truth, can restore unto us true peace and establishment. You subjoine here the
late King's advice of Moderation to his Son, who now reigns; and would,
forsooth, have us to believe, that his words to express both your opinion, and
temper: and really, though I cannot altogether acquit their strain of
prejudice, nor carry their design higher then the ends of Policy; yet they
contain so much of sound reason, and the later part of them, viz. take heed,
that outward circumstances and formalities of Religion devour not all, or the
best, encouragements of Learning, Industry, and Piety, is so sadly verified,
in the present condition of affairs, that I cannot but with wonder reflect,
how such a rational instruction, taught to the Author, by long and costly
experience, should at his Majesty's return, have been so much neglected, and,
even to this day, after so visible an accomplishment, so little remembered? But
the use you make of this passage, is only to bewray your N. C. childishness,
and show a little of your own affectation, by causing him first to say, It
seems you are a Latitudinarian, and then by your answering, that if by latitude
be meant charity, you glory in it; but as I have already demonstrat, in the
second Dialogue, that it is conveniencie, more then sincerity, which relaxes
and dilates your charity; and, as it is too too evident, that it is the love of
Peace, more then of Truth, which does recommend men to the favor of your good
opinion; so, I would have you to consider, that rectitude, and not latitude, is
the measure and character of the ways of God: Nay, when I remember our Lord's
words, Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the
way, that leads to destruction; but strait is the gate, and narrow is the
way, that leads unto life: The fairest gloss, whereof your latitude is
capable, cannot reconcile me to the designation: It is therefore, in the
streightness, yea and straitnes of this Rule, and in the practice of the new
commandment of Love, that you may truly glory, but only in the Lord: The
assuming of Names, other then that of Christian, is but an empty vanity, and
that of latitude, is so little expressive of pure Christian charity, that you
see it is the very Gospel-epithet of the broad way of damnation.

In the next place, taking, as it appears, with this new name of
Latitudinarian, for all your disowning of it, within a few lines preceding,
you and your N. C. together, playing to others hands, compound a pretty
garland of praises, for your self, and accomplices: And where he acknowledges,
That you live very good lives, are strong witted People, sound against
Socinianisme, clear and free from Popish errors, you add on your part, That
your principles are neither dangerous nor loose; that there are none greater
haters of, and enemies to, Atheism; that you give a rational and convincing
account of Christianity, to all clear witted men; that with a due measure of
Charity for Papists, and regard to the union of the Catholic Church, you
disclame all errors, and give a most clear and scriptural account, of the
points debateable; and lastly, that even where the attributes of Gods
soveraignity, and goodness, seem to interfere, by faith, you stope the mouth of
weak reason: Certainly, then, the men of the latitude are sound, and orthodox
men; nay, no doubt, but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you: Yet,
if I might a little search you out, I would demand, 1. Why you thus distinctly
characterize your self, under a peculiar name; for, that you do not understand
these Epithets of all your party, nay, not of your Bishops, and most of your
Curates, is evident, even from the first, whereby you assert, that you live
very good lives, which, I am certain, many of them do not so much as pretend
to? 2. If the principles of you Latitudinarians, be the same, that we have set
down, in the preceding Dialogues, viz. that preaching is not to be termed the
Word of God; and consequently that Ministers are not his Messengers; that the
Church (and we know not what Church) may antiquat and cause to cease, the
obligation of practices, such as the washing of feet, and anointing the sick
with oil, though, as punctually and perpetually enjoined in the Scripture, as
either of the Sacraments; that Christ's Kingdom is so inward and spiritual,
that Offices, and Officers, can no more be thence pleaded for, in the Church,
then the stamping of Coin; that, if the inward opinion be left free, no
imposition upon the outward practice can wrong Christian liberty; that
extemporate prayer is but fancicall and carnal; that there is no praying by the
Spirit, unless in a manner and in words infallible; that the English Liturgy
is an excellent Rule of Worship; and many such like things: Certainly, if
these, I say, be the principles of the Latitudinarians, as they are yours, they
are very loose and dangerous, even subversive of the very foundations, the Word
of God, and the Ordinances therein appointed. 3. You take to your selves the
commendation of very good lives: I wish you may not be deceived; the Pharisees
made clean the outside of the cup and of the plater; but God requires and
searches the heart, and these things that come forth from the heart, evil
thoughts, deceit, blasphemies, pride, foolishnes, as well as adulteries,
murders, thefts, these defile the man: What of these may be found in this
little Volume of your Dialogues, especially, lies, calumnies, mockings, it were
too rigid for me to recapitulat; I leave it to the impartial perusal of what
both of us have said: Only as I desire not to be accounted so uncharitable, as
to propose this, as a proportional cognizance of all the writings and sayings
of the men of your way; so, I heartily pray the Lord, to make all of you,
indeed, rectitudinarians. 4. As for your strong wits, I wish you may be as
little puffed up with the conceit of them, as we are terri^fied by their
opposition; that you do not abuse them to Atheism, or Socinianism, we
cheerfully accept of the acknowledgement: Only let me tell you, that though we
be as loath, as you are, to deny Christianity, both in its Articles of belief,
and precepts of practice, to be highly congruous, to the dictats of right
reason; and do grant, that Religion, the highest accomplishment of Nature, is
suitable to man's supreme faculty; yet, that thus to propose them, is the most
convincing way to all clear witted men, labors of these difficulties, 1. That,
although there be not only as much obvious reason, in the revelation of the
Gospel, as may stop the mouth of all Gainsayers, and unanswerably confound the
vanities of Atheism, and all false Religions, but also, such a Divine congruous
light, as, once entering and dispelling the natural man's darkeness, causes
these things, which formerly were to him as foolishness, appear to be the
wisdom of God; yet, it is certain, that the things of God, depending solely
upon his free, holy, and unsearchable good pleasure, and decree, and being only
communicate by the revelation, and receivable in the illumination of the Spirit,
to think to propose and enforce them, by rational persuasion, for the
conversion of men in the state of nature, is vain and presumptuous: and
therefore, if it be in this manner, that you do understand your assertion, viz.
that thus to propose them, is the most convincing way to all clear witted men,
seeing, it both imports a sufficiency in the proposer, and a possible capacity
in the hearers, to convert without efficacy of Divine grace, and the light of
revelation, it is doubly peccant. 2. In what sort soever your assertion be
understood, the superlative preference, which it gives to your way of reason,
directly impingeth upon the Apostles their manner of preaching; which was not
with the wisdom of words, but in that simplicity, which unto these, that sought
after wisdom, was as foolishness: It was neither by the Wise, nor by the
Scribe; nor by the Disputer; but God choosed the foolish things of the world,
to confound the wise: Consider the Apostles their Sermons, yet extant;
specially Peter's, not only to the Jews, but also to Cornelius and the first
converts of the Gentiles, there can be nothing more simple, either in
persuasion, or in expression: Hear Paul's testimony of himself [ and I brethren,
came not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, declaring unto you, the
testimony of God; but was with you, in weakness, and in fear, and in much
trembling:] etc. and certainly, if you will be pleased to ponder the reason and
end, which he subjoins, viz. [that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of
men; but in the power of God] You cannot but perceive, both the difference of
this way from, and its excellency above that of rational persuasion, which you
so much commend. 3. As neither the undoubted congruity of Christianity to
reason once enlightened, nor the sufficiency of reason, by its own force, to
redargue proud mockers and despisers, do conclude its aptitude for the
discovery, explication, or right uptaking of the things of God, without the
Spirit, which alone knows them; So, it is justly to be feared, that this new
method, of adventuring by reason, without the testimony of the word, to propose
and explain these mysteries^ do not only prove ineffectual, for true
instruction; but also inductive of the Authors themselves, into many
misprisions and errors: For men to quite and lay aside the conduct of the true
and only light which is the best evidence and manifestation, both of its self,
and of its object, and in a vain curiosity, to set up and demonstrat by the
taper of Reason, in the sunshine of revelation, and to endeavor, to cause
reason lead or guide, which, with much difficulty, is able to follow, is a
presumption, not more full of pride then of danger: Paul was a man very
learned, long exercised, and no doubt mightily fervid in all the Arts and
Methods of reasoning; but from the time, that, that light from Heaven, above
the brightness of the Sun, shined about him, and laid him on the ground,
trembling and astonished, we find his speech in the matters of the Gospel, was
not with entising or persuasive words of Man's wisdom; but in demonstration of
the Spirit, with much fear: sometime indeed he disputes, and thereby also
confounds; but it is his preaching that mostly converts. Think not that, by
these reflections, I aim particularly at either the fault or fate of the men
of your way: no, let their writings speak for themselves; but that there is
such a vanity, too much in present practice, the late, more pretendedly
rational, then Scriptural, essays of many, do too sadly evince.

4. You say that you Latitudinarians are neither Papists, nor Cassandrians;
but, in effect, charitable Protestants, and that you are far from that hight of
rigor, of damning all Papists, which some of us own. It Is answered, That we
are sufficiently tender in this point, is notour to all, and this your
challenge, if rightly understood of Papists, that is of all, who live within
the verge of and own the Church of Rome, is as groundless as your needless
profession of an uncontroverted charity, because they hold the foundation Jesus
Christ, though they build upon it, wood, hay, and stuble: I confess that, seeing
thereby you plainly enough insinuate, that Papists, even as such, do not err
fundamentally, and consequently, under this reduplication may be saved, it
imports to me an excess, wherewith we ought not to comply. To join with the
merit of Jesus Christ, that of their own good works, nay, of their own
superstitious inventions; and to his Mediation, that of Saints, seem to me to
impinge upon the very foundation, which you acknowledge. What shall we then say,
of the avowed gross Idolatries and Superstitions, ridiculous penitences and
perverted morality, whereby, both the truth, and spirituality of Gods Worship
and Service, with the inward and genuine Grace of Obedience and Sanctification,
are subverted? Really, Sir, these appear to me, to be a superstructure of such
naughty stuff, as neither the sincerity of Grace, with which I judge them
incompatible, nor even the flames of their own purgatory, will ever purge away.

But you proceed: That though you will not say, that all things controverted,
betwixt the Reformed Churches and them, are matters of Salvation; yet in their
greater errors, such as the Popes Supremacy, the Churches infallibility, the
corporal presence etc. you condemn them, and perhaps on clearer grounds, then
we do: It Is answered, 1. That the things controverted with the Papists are not
all of them such, as do directly and necessarily, in belief or practice,
appertain to Salvation, is not by us denied; but, where, in this your latitude,
you do in effect intimate such a dissent from the Reformed Churches, as if many
things betwixt us and the Papists, were needlessly by us drawn in question, it
is such an undervaluing of the will and way of the Lord, whereupon, even in our
smallest differences, we hope, we are founded; that I could not pass it,
without an observation. 2. Whether you do indeed condemn the Papists, in many
of the points by you enumerate, let be on better grounds, is to me very
dubious? You say, you are against the Popes Supremacy; but how is it then,
that you have transferred it upon his Majesty, and that with a more ample
extent, then ever was conceded to, nay, or arrogat by any Pope? That the King,
may enact such Acts, and Orders, concerning the administration of the external
Government of the Church, and the Persons therein employed, and concerning all
Ecclesiastic Meetings and matters, therein to be proposed, as he shall think
fit, is more then any Pope ever assumed: Pray, Sir, is the difference betwixt
the persons of the Pope, and Prince, the hinge of the controversy? Or, is this
one of the clearer grounds, you talk of? consider it at your leisure. In the
next place, you tell us, that you condemn the Churches infallibility, and yet,
p. 31. of this same Book, your affirm that even in matters, as punctually set
down in Scripture, as either of these Sacraments, the Church may judge, that
God did not therein intend any perpetual obligation, and, by her practice,
oblige us to a cessation, and consequently, alter Scripture-determinations:
Beside, you know what power you attribute to the Church, to impose significant
ceremonies and other observances; which, although you tell us, for an evasion,
do not take away the liberty of inward opinion; yet you affirm, that they do
bind in Conscience to a conformable practice: Verily, if a Church so empowered
be not infallible, the concessions are too large; but the truth is, Scripture
defectible, the Church fallible, and nothing fixed, appear to be most
aggreeable, to the lightness of your brains, and the Conveniencie of your new
latitude. 3. You affirm, that you are against the corporal presence, and also
the worshipping of Images; and yet, you are for Adoration, to, before, or, in
order to, the Eliments: For call it as you will, you plead for it, as due
veneration, in the action, whereof, they are the necessary objects: how these
do consist, I see not: For my part, I cannot but judge, the Papists, though
more gross, yet more consequent. But we have enough of this subject, and these
few instances premised may indeed well justify the excessive love, which you
profess to the unity of the Catholic Church, wherein you include the Roman;
and your esteem for such, meaning by Cassander, and others of his way, who have
studied to bring things to a temper, do palpably hold out your bias to their
haltings: But if the unity and temper, that you aim at, be of this temper,
since it has not truth for its foundation, the Lord deliver his Churches from
it.

In the next place your N. C. and you fall a quarrelling, about Justification,
and after you have first taxed, then smoothed, and again, in a manner, rejected
the Papists their Justification by works, and their Merit, you proceed to
Justification by faith only: and when you have given us your explanation of it,
you make a pretty bo^st, as it, forsooth, by your right apprehension of
things, you had, in a few words, told that, which, with much nicety swells
amongst us to Volumes: Sir, I so greatly defire to find you walking in the
truth, and am so little in love with contention, especially in a matter of this
importance, that I am resolved, rather fanely to pass, then rigidly to strain,
even your more ambiguous expressions; but since you would make the World
believe, that, with you and you only, is to be found both Truth and Light; and
that, on the other hand, we do perplexe this point, with Nic^ties and
subtilties, it will not be amiss, that in this matter, I examine you more
particularly: which that I may perform, with the greater candor and
perspiciuty, I shall first exhibit your words, in their full context, and
thereafter review them in parts.

You say then, That Justification and Condemnation are two opposite legal
terms, relating to the judgment shall be given out, at the last day: For
though we are said to be condemned already, this is only, that we are now in
the state of such, as shall be solemnly justified or condemned. Now, at the
great day, we must give an account of our actions, and we must be judged
accordingly; but since all must be condemned, if God enter in judgment with
them; therefore God gave his Son to the death for us, that thereby we might
obtain Salvation: And all judment is, by the Father, committed to the Son: and
Jesus Christ has proposed life, through his death, to as many as receive his
Gospel, and live according to it: And as that, which gives us a title to the
favor of God, is the blood of Christ; so that which gives us an interest in
his death, is faith, with a life conform to the rules of the Gospel, and the
root of this new life, is a faith which works by love, purifyeth the heart,
and overcomes the world, and therefore Justification is ascribed to it in
Scripture: and this, you say, is the right apprehension of things; both
ascribing all to Christ, and declaring clearly the necessity of a holy life.
It Is answered; The matter of Justification, being, in effect, the very
substance of the Gospel, and its right uptaking, of the greatest moment, in
order to our Salvation, for as much, as you, by an affected simplicity, and
simulat smoothness, do palpably labor to involve and pervert it; I shall first
represent, in your words, and in its own colors, the error which you would
impose, and then discuss these reasons, and insinuations, whereby you
endeavor, rather cunningly to cover and convey it, then plainly to maintain it.

The scope then and aim of your discourse is, that the proposal of life in
the Gospel, through the death of Christ, is to as many as receive it, and live
according to it; that, that which gives us an interest in the death of Christ,
is ^aith with a li^e con^orme to the ral^s of the Gospel, and that because of
the fruits of faith, love, purity of heart, and victory over the world;
therefore Justification is ascribed unto it in Scripture. The meaning of which
expressions in plain language, is, that it is by good works, joined with faith,
nay, by good works principally, and faith referred to them, as the root
thereof, and not by faith only, as the instrument, whereby the perfect
Righteousness of Jesus Christ is laid hold upon, and becomes ours, in Gods
sight, that we are justified. Now, that this your opinion is false, and is to
be rejected, appears by these many, and plain Scriptures: By the deeds of the
Law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight, Romans 3. 20. The man is
blessed, to whom God imputes righteousness without works, Romans 4. 6. By grace
we are saved, not of works, lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. Not by
works of righteousness, which we have done, but according to his Mercy he
saved us, Tit. 3. 5. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them, 2. Cor. 5. 19. God has saved us with an
holy calling, not according to our works; but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us, in Christ Jesus, before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.
9. He has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him. 2. Cor. 5. 21. Jesus Christ, is made of God,
unto us, Wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1.
Corin. 1. 30. He is the LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS, Ier. 23. 6. We are justified
freely by Gods Grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Whom God
has set forth to be a propisiation through faith in his blood. Romans 3. 24, 25.
By the righteousness of Christ, the free gift came upon all men to the
justification of life: and by the obedience of one shall many be made
righteous, Romans 5, 18. 19. We are justified by the faith of Jesus Christ, and
not by the works of the law Gal. 2. 16. He that works not, but believes on
him that justifyeth the ungodly, his faith is counted unto him for
righteousness, Romans 4. 5. And lastly, A man is justified by faith, it without
the works of the law, To. 5. 28. This (...) hope is plain Scripture language,
without any subtil^y: How can you then join our works of the Law with the
righteousness of faith, even the righteousness of Jesus Christ, which faith
does apprehend, and appropriat for our Justification in Gods sight, contrary to
these most manifest testimonies? Certainly, if men would but seriously examine
and consider what Gods word does so plainly and rationally hold forth, anent
this purpose, how quickly would that pure and perfect light dispel darkness,
clear doubtings, and give us both a right understanding, and sound and easy
expression therein. God did creat and appoint man to bear, and be conformable
to his image, for the manifestation of his own glory; and thereby to partake
and enjoy his favor, for our felicity: for that end, he gave his holy and
righteous Law, on the one hand, being both the way to, and bearing the promise
of life unto the obedient; and on the other, pronouncing wrath and death,
against such, as should be disobedient: The sanction and pain of this divine
Law being by (...) incurred, and all mankind standing thereby condemned, and
bound over to wrath in Gods sight, the Grace of God that brings Salvation,
appears, holding forth Jesus Christ, manifested in our flesh, and therein
fulfilling all righteousness, suffering in both Body and Soul, dying,
shedding his blood, and making his Soul an offering, for a propitiation and
ransom, for satisfiing Divine justice, and reconciling us unto God, rising
again for our Justification, and being made perfect through suffering, became
the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him; that is, believe and
receive this Gospel Covenant (whereof he himself was also the Minister) holding
him forth, for Wisdom, Right, ousnes, Sanctification, and absolute
Redemption-to all that come unto and embrace him: And therefore, as at first,
Christ came into the world, by doing the will of God, and making his Soul an
offering for sin, to bring in everlasting Righteousness, even the Righteousness
of God through faith in his Name; so, because he was obedient unto death, even
the death of the Cross, God has therefore highly exalted him and given him a
name, which is above every name, and, vesting him with all power in Heaven and
in Earth, has made him the Head of all things, unto his Church, and committed
unto him all Judgment, that he may, one day, render both vengeance unto the
Disobedient and Unbelievers, and receive unto himself and the Fathers Glory,
his own, who, through faith in his Name, are justified in Gods sight, and by
his grace purifyed, and preserved unto his heavenly Kingdom. This being then
the plain Gospel-revelation, to lost and condemned sinners: what else does it
require, then, that in the knowledge and sense of this our sinful, wretched and
miserable estate, flowing from Jesus Christ our Wisdom, we, by faith, lay hold
on him and his Righteousness, for our ransom from wrath, and alone
acceptance in God's sight; and also for obtaining of Sanctification,
consisting in the purging away of all filthiness of the flesh and Spirit; which
the penitent Convert; as he fears its guilt and wrath, does, in like manner,
detest and abhor; and the perfecting holiness in the fear of God: And lastly
for complete Redemption from, and victory over, Satan, the World, the body of
this death it self, in the triumph of the Resurrection, and the plenarie
possession of Eternal life. By all which, it is evident, that whatever be these
other graces and blessings, which we partake, in and through our Lord Jesus;
yet it is through and by faith alone, as an instrument, and in respect of its
peculiar aptitude for that end, apprehending or laying hold on Christ Jesus,
the only Propitiation, and his Righteousness, the alone Satisfaction, that we
are justified in Gods sight. And really, Sir, when in this sincere and clear
light, I have proposed this matter, I wonder, what vanity or ignorance could
seduce you, to the doctrine which you here deliver. To grant, as you do,
Justification to be a judicial act, whereby, no doubt, we are to understand,
that God as the great Judge, attempe^ing justice with mercy, does thereby
accept of a Ransom and Surety offered, and therefore absolve, yea justify the
Criminal; and yet, notwithstanding of the evident Scripture testimonies, that
show the Lord our Righteousness to be, in very deed, this Ransom and Surety,
and faith only its instrumental application, to join good works with it, and
state both, as the condition of our Justification, is not only reproved by the
Papists their more consequent explication, who, because they admit of works in
Justification, do therefore hold it, not to be a judicial act; but rather a
gracious work; but by the common sense of all men, in these similare instances,
from which the manner of explaining these things is borrowed: If in our
ordinary Courts, the Law being transgressed, and the transgressor convicted,
the pronouncing of the doom of judgment, and its execution, were stopped, by
the interposition of a ransom and surety offered, so fully satisfying and
acceptable in the eyes of the judge, that, for his sake, the poor Criminal were
both pardoned and received to special favor, would any rational man say, that
the person guilty, were thus absolved and justified, either for his act of
laying claim to the price and pledge, as a condition; seeing it is only the
moral instrument, whereby the true motive of the ransomers satisfaction is
applied; or yet for the act it self, together with the absolved person his
consequent good behavior, which is the parallel of your interpretation which
is yet more absurd; And not rather affirm plainly, that it is for the ransom
and surety only, that the man is acquit and accepted? Certainly common
ingenuity, which must acknowledge all the defects of this similitude, to be the
manifest advantages of the point, principally pressed, will both cede to the
conviction of its evidence, and transfer it plainly to the case in hand.

Having thus set down a Scriptural and easy account of this important truth,
which (reflecting upon almost all Protestant Divines, with whom in this we
agree, and wandering in your raveries, after no better guide then Patrick the
Pilgrim) you say, is by us handled, with much niceness and subtilty: for its
further clearing, and the better discovery of your vanity: I shall now examine
your discourse in its particulars: and 1. you say, Justification and
Condemnation are two opposite legal terms. By legal, I know you mean judicial,
and therefore, in place of urging your mistake, I seriously wish that the tenor
of what ensues, had been consistent to so true and solid a ground: but you add:
That they relate to the judgment shall be given out at the last day: a strange
fetch to compass a false design, I might remember you, that the Scripture is
express, That being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ: and there is now therefore, no condemnation to them which
are in Christ Jesus, who (by their assured partaking of his grace, and in
consequence of their true faith in him, and Justification therethrough) walk
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: and that thence it is evident, that,
as it is God that judges; so it is by an act of his free grace, in Jesus
Christ, antecedent to the last judgment, that we are reconciled unto him, and
justified in his sight. But your own words, viz. For though we are said to be
now justified as the unbeleeving are said to be condemned already, this is
only, that we are now in the state of such, as shall be solemnly justified or
condemned; do sufficiently reprove you, because,

1. It is certain, that the unbelieving are not, improperly, and with respect
only to that future judgment, said to be condemned already; but, as by reason
of sin, judgment is already come upon all unto condemnation, and he that
believes not the Son shall not see life, is under the curse, and the wrath of
God abides on him; so it is manifest, that now it is, that they stand truly
under the condemning power and sentence of Gods holy Law, from which, it is
most unquestionable, that condemnation does directly proceed against all
transgressors; however, in the forbearance of God, they are not only for a
time reprived, but place left for a ransom.

2. To be justified freely through grace, does plainly import, the person
justified to be antecedently under condemnation; if by the offense, judgment
had not come upon all to condemnation, there had been no need of the
Righteousness of Christ, to the Justification of life: How then, can the
opposite instance of Condemnation, be by your referred unto the last day? Far
less made an argument to defer, until that judgment, our Justification,
which of necessity does presuppose it: Certainly, you cannot but grant it to be
most absurd, to think, that Believers shall, in that day, be first condemned,
and thereafter justified.

3. When you say, That it is in that day, that men shall be solemnly justified
or condemned, you clearly resolve the matter: viz. that as the solemnity of the
judgment of that day, shall be only declarative, and finally executive; so it
evidently concludes, that the judgment, then to be pronounced, was given and
established of before. Pray, Sir, do you think the Spirits of just men made
perfect, are not as yet justified?

But 4. you grant, that we are now in the state of such, as shall be solemnily
justified or condemned; which clearly shows; your insinuation premised to be
only a design, to obscure by words without knowledge, in as much, as the
question remains the same, anent this state, and how we now attain to it, as
anent the justification, which you would defer: And 1. What is the state of
Justification? Is it not that we who were under the Curse and aliens, are
accepted unto favor, pardoned, and brought near? Wherein does it then differ,
from actual Justification? 2. How is it, that we attain to this state? Sure not
by works, either alone, or in conjunction with faith, as we have heard from
Scripture, and shall be further evinced. But if it be by faith alone, as the
instrument laying hold on the sole meritorious Righteousness of Christ, our
difference is only verbal, wherein you foolishly resile from Scripture phrase:
If you shall further add, that by faith we do indeed attain to this state, but
only inchoatly, or unfixedly, and changeably, then you evidently impinge, both
upon the perfection of Christ's Righteousness, and the fair and certain grounds
of the Saints their perseverance.

It follows in your discourse, Now at the great day we must give an account
of our actions, and we must be judged accordingly: And I note in your ensuing
words That since all must be condemned, if God enter into judgment with them,
and that not only, if he should charge us with our transgressions, but even if
he should only reckon with us, upon our good works, and for that imperfection
and weakness, wherewith, as they are from us, they are tainted; does not the
certainty of this judgment, above all things, plead the necessity, and alone
sufficiency of the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, for our Justification? But to
restore your words to their own channel, you say, that since all must be
condemned, if God enter into judgment; therefore God gave his Son unto the
death for us, that thereby we might obtain Salvation: And though by this
passage, it be clearly enough imported; that it is before God, and by the
sentence of his Law, that all men stand condemned; and that therefore, he has
given his Son, whose Death and Blood is the Propitiation, and in whom he is
well pleased, to be a ransom, for liberation and acceptance to all that
believe on him; whereby Justification by faith in Jesus Christ, without the
deeds of the Law, is in substance granted; yet for ushering in your good works,
to share with faith, in Justification, by a strange connection, you subjoin: And
all judgment is committed by the Father to the Son, and Jesus Christ has
proposed life through his death to as many as receive his Gospel, and live
according to it. But I must take notice.

1. That by laying down the commission of judgment given to the Son, as a
ground to his proposing of the Gospel offer, you manifestly repugne to our
Lords own words and testimony, expressly distinguishing the character of his
first coming, which was in the form of a servant, to minister, not to be
ministered unto, and by performing the Fathers commandment, to save the World,
and not to judge it; from that of his second coming, which shall be with power
and great glory, to the Salvation of all that look for him, and to judge and to
execute judgment upon all, that are ungodly.

2. By making our Lords commission to judge, antecedent to his ministration of
the Gospel, you invert Truth and plain Scripture-evidence, whereby it is clear,
that our Lord was first sent into the World, to preach the Gospel, and lay down
his life for sinners; that, whosoever believes on him should not perish, but
have everlasting life: And then, because of his complete, and perfect
obedience, is exalted to be the Head of all things, unto the Church, and has
Authority also to execute judgment committed to him, because he is the Son of
Man.

But. 3. By this your doctrine, you in effect subvert the grace of the Gospel,
in as much as, in the place of the Gospel Covenant, offering pardon and peace
to poor lost sinners, through Christ Jesus, and, with and in him, all grace and
glory; you introduce our Lord, as having, by his death, indeed merited the
privilege of a new offer of life unto sinners; but making and renewing the
same, in no better terms, then these of the Law-covenant; for as the Law
says, that the man that does these things shall live by them; so, you tell
us, that the terms of the Gospel-tender, are to receive the same, and live
according to it: Now, if the Law does offer life, to such as receive and live
according to it; and our Lords proposal stand in the like terms, admit the
proposers not to be the same; yet the proposals are certainly coincident: and
therefore, although the eternal transaction betwixt the Father and the Son, may
be of Grace; yet it is undeniable, that, in your opinion, the tenders of the
Law and Gospel, as to usward, do rune in the same tenor; and the
condescendence of both, prerequiring our works, is equally to be reckoned of
debt: These being the consequences of that Gospel-method, by you here
contrived, and its design no less evident, to make works with says, the
condition and procuring cause of our Justification, at least in the sight of
Christ, as the Judge appointed: I add;

1. That your attributing of Justification to Christ, as judge ordained over
all, in the last judgment, is contrary to the Scripture, that tells us, that
it is one God that justifies, it is Christ that died, mark the distinction
made; and no doubt, reason it self informing us, that it is the Law and
Lawgiver, and not the Judge, which define duty, determine pains, and
condemn the transgressors, poenae enim persecution, non Iudicis voluntati
mandatur; sed legis authoritati reservatur: It does also confirm, that it
appertains unto God only, as the Lawgiver, to remit the punishment incurred,
and accept and justify sinners, upon an aequipollent satisfaction.

2. The Authority to execute judgment being given to our Lord, as the
Mediator; and because he is the Son of Man, in which respect, he is not the
principal Author and efficient, but only the meritorious cause of our
Justification; not the very act, but only the solemn declaration thereof, can
be ascrived to him, in this capacity; unless you can conceive, that our Lord is
not only, both the Ransom, and the accepter thereof, but that, by becoming the
Propitiation, he also becomes the party to be appeased, which are palpably
inconsistent.

3. The plain Scripture-truth, in this point, is that our Lord having
completely obeyed the will of God, and being made perfect through suffering, is
therefore highly exalted above every name, and has all power and judgment
committed to him; whereby, as he does, here in time, enrich with all Grace,
guide, support, and preserve all that believe in him; and also overruled,
restrain, and punish all his, and their Adversaries; so, shall he, in the last
day, appear, first, to receive and welcome all his redeemed ones, formerly
justified by his Righteousness, and sanctified by his Grace, unto his Fathers
joy: And then with them, to judge the reprobate, and take vengeance on all,
that know not God, and obey not the Gospel: by which it is evident, that
Justification proceeding from God, for Christ's sake, and necessarily
preceding, both our Sanctification here, and Glorification in the last day,
cannot be referred unto that judgment, which is only declarative and
executive, according to these words, Come ye blessed of my Father, nor
explicate, according to its scheme: And therefore, although our Lord do
therein, for our encouragement in well doing, and the commendation of the
riches of his bounty, make mention of our good works, and shall certainly, in
that day, also crown his own free grace in us, with a reward; yet, thence to
infer, that our Justification before God, and in order to his holy justice,
having for its alone cause, the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and imported in
the compellation, ye blessed of my Father, is founded, on our weak love, and
scant charity which, even the Righteous in that day, seem ashamed to own, is
both a groundless error, and high presumption.

But I proceed to your next words viz. That Christ Jesus has proposed life
through his death, to as many as receive his Gospel and live according to it.
That, this is a manifest perversion of the free Grace of God, whereby our Lord
Jesus does freely hold out himself unto us, not only for to be our
Righteousness for Justification; but also our Sanctification through his
Spirit, unto the glory of God; and therefore does not require our holiness, as
an antecedent condition, seeing, it is indeed his own subsequent Gi^t, the
obvious evidence of so clear a truth, may sufficiently confirm, and the
following arguments do unanswerably evince.

1. Our Lords own words, the surest Rule for understanding the proposal
controverted, do contain a free tender, and not the terms by you represented:
Hear what he says to Nicodemus: Whosoever believes in the Son of man, shall
no, perish, but have eternal life: For God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life, John 3. 15, 16. John adds, he that believes on the Son,
has everlasting life, chap. 3. v. 36. And again, our Lord says, this is the
work of God, that you believe on him, whom he has sent: And this is his will,
that every one which sees the Son, and believes, may have everlasting life:
Verily verily I say unto you, he that believes on me, has everlasting life.
John. 6. 29, 40, 47. Surely these are Gospel proposalls, yea the very sum and
substance of its offer, whereof your condition of a conformable life, makes no
part: I might add Paul's words to the Jailour, believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved; but it is so much the strain of the whole New
Testament, that it were unnecessary to enlarge.

2. If when we were Enemies, and not for works of Righteousness, which we have
done, we were reconciled unto God, by the death of his Son, then the proposal
of life, and Justification, is made through faith in his Name, without the
condition of these good works, which you join with it; but so it is, that the
antecedent is plain Scripture; therefore that the consequent is identick with
it, as Justification and Reconciliation are, cannot be denied.

3. That which is the end of our Election, Calling and Redemption by Jesus
Christ, and is his undertaking for us, in that respect, and is the fruit of our
faith, and of our acceptance therethrough, yea, and is the product of the
Fathers care over us, as accepted in the Beloved, cannot be said to be required
of us as a condition antecedent to our justification, no more then the same
thing, can be thought, to be really both antecedent and subsequent. But so it
is, that we are chosen, and called to be holy, and created in Christ Jesus unto
good works; through faith it is, and that not of our selves, it is the Gi^t o^
God, that we become partakers of Christ, for Reconciliation, and of all his
graces for Sanctification; and lastly we are in him, Gods husbandry, that we
may bring forth the fruits of righteousness. Therefore etc.

4. Your requiring of good works, together with faith, previous to our
acceptance by Jesus Christ, is an uncertain and desperate thing, in as much, as
it is evident, that unless we be first accepted of him, and united to him, it
is not possible for us to do any thing: without me you can do nothing, are our
Lords own words. Say not that this Argument, equally militats against previous
faith, if we did hold faith, as it is our act to be required as a proper
potestative foregoing condition of our acceptance, the objection might be of
some moment; but since we do affirm, faith to be only the instrumental act,
(to which the word of power exciting) the Soul does thereby lay hold on, and
close with Jesus Christ, it is thence manifest, that immediately, without any
other prerequisite, he becomes our propitiation, peace, and all.

5. To these may be added, that this your Doctrine joining good works to faith,
for attaining to our Lords acceptance, subverteth the peace, takes away the
joy of Believers, checketh Paul's exultation, in his so much professed
assurance of the love of God in Christ Jesus; and lastly, as to sinners in
extremity, called immediately before the twelfth hour, removes all ground of
hope; but I am already too full, in a matter so clear, and so largely handled
by many more able Pens. I might here subjoin, that as your joining of good
works, as a condition with faith, in the proposal of the Gospel, is a manifest
perverting of the free grace of God, upon which these good works, having a
subsequent dependence, cannot, by any real antecedent influence, possibly move
it; so your turning faith, by this conjunction, to be a motive of the same
nature, and to be also respected in the quality of a condition, is a palpable
depravation of its use, and comfort. Its true, our Divines taking the word
condition, in a large sense, as it signifies any thing prerequired, do
ordinarily say, that faith and faith only is the condition, on our part, of the
Gospel Covenant; but that it is not therein a condition, as a condition does
properly and legally import: viz. that which, though by convention only, yet
has a meriting or moving influence, upon the other parties performance, and
such as works, previously required, either in the Covenant of works, or in that
of Grace (as you would have it,) certainly has, and can have, no other, I
firmly maintain. I further grant, that the requiring of faith, as a proper
condition, does no less exact the existence of the thing, then if it were
repute to be necessary as an instrument; yet that it clearly changes the
office of faith, in the new Covenant, unto that of the condition of works,
under the old; and that by respecting it as a condition, on our part, it does
diminish that immediate regard, we ought to have to, and comfort, which we
derive from, Jesus Christ and his Righteousness, tendered unto us to be laid
hold upon, as the alone motive and satisfaction, acceptable to God for our
Justification, cannot be denied.

But I go on with your discourse, you add, And as that which gives us a title
to the favor of God, is the blood of Christ; so that, which gives us an
interest in his death, is faith, with a life conform to the rules of the
Gospel: But passing your conjunction, and this your third and which I am
certain would require more study, to discover therein a connection, then you did
adhibite in the using; let me ask if the blood of Christ gives us a title to
the favor of God, is it not then the sufficient, and sole price and purchase
of our Justification, in his sight? And must not faith its alone proper
application render us accepted to the Beloved? What then can your, So, further
import, Viz. so, that which gives an interest in the death of Christ, is
faith, with a life conform to the Gospel? Can you, or any man els^, conceive,
that a man by faith alone in the propitiation, the blood of Christ, should be
reconciled unto God; and yet not attain, to an interest in Christ's death,
without a holy life, superadded and concurring, in the same causality? Nay,
these things are plainly inconsistent: 2. The fairest sense that your words can
bear, is that, as we are restored to a capacity of favor with God, by the
blood of Christ; so, it is faith, with a life conform to the Gospel, that
gives us an actual interest in his Death, and thereby unto the peace of God;
but seeing the result of this, in plain language, is no other then, that our
Lord, having by his own blood ransomed fallen and forfeited mankind, has in
liew of the first Covenant, made with man and by him transgressed, proposed to
us a second, adding to the condition of a holy life, required by the f^^st,
that of believing. That this is altogether dissonant, both to the declared love
of God, and the grace revealed by Jesus Christ, in his Gospel, any Christian
may discern.

Your next words are, And (a fourth And) the root of this new life is a faith,
which works by love, purifieth the heart, and overcomes the world; and there
fore Justification is ascribed unto it, in Scripture: But pray, Sir, how is it,
that faith becomes such a fruitful root? Is it not by laying hold on Christ's
Righteousness, by which, pardon being obtained, and we reconciled unto God, we
have right unto, and so do attain, in due time, the benefit of all the
promises of Grace, which, in Christ Jesus, are yea, and Amen? or, that the same
faith, which lays hold on him, as our Righteousness in Gods sight, does also
unite us to him, for Sanctification, and ingraffing us, as it were in him,
through the communication of his grace, purifieth the heart, and overcomes the
World? Or lastly, is it not, that by faith we are brought to the blood of
Sprinkling, which is both the blood of atonement, that sprinkleth from an evil
Conscience; and also the Laver, which cleanses from all sin, and wherewith we
are sanctified? This being then, the Scripture account, and it being most
apparent, that Christ, through faith, becomes, first our Righteousness, for
remission of sin and Justification in Gods sight, and then our Sanctification
unto Good works; your own acknowledgement, that faith is the root of this new
life of holiness, may evince, that a holy life, subsequent to faith, and our
acceptance therethrough, cannot be therewith joined, as a condition, for our
Justification. But that which follows in your discourse, and therefore (i. e.
because of the above enumerat frui^s, which it produces) Justification is
ascribed unto faith, in the Scripture: is, the grossest error of all, because
1. It directly repugnes to Scripture, clearly intimating, that it is unto
faith, as the instrument only, whereby the Righteousness of Jesus Christ is
unto us applied, that Justification is in Scripture ascrived. If we be
justified by the faith of Jesus Christ, and if, by the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, the free gift comes upon all, to the Justification of life; if he be
the propitiation, through faith in his blood; and our righteousness, which is
of God by faith, are you not affrayed to say, that Justification, requiring a
satisfactorie righteousness, is ascrived to faith, because of its poor, and
imperfect fruits in us, and thereby to ^light and vilipend the perfect
Righteousness of Christ, the immediate object, whereon it lays hold, and our
only acceptance in Gods sight? 2. Because this your error derogates from
Divine justice. We have already heard you call Justification a legal or
judicial act, and consequently, an act, wherein free grace does not more favor
the lost sinner, then justice does regard a valuable ransom and surety: If
Justification then be ascribed in Scripture to faith, this must certainly be
understood, either as faith is in it self, or is relative to a complete and
adequat satisfaction. Now, to think that faith in it self, or as it is an act,
or habit, which is the Gift of God; or its fruits, which, (beside, that they
are also the gift of God, and our duty as from us, are mixed with much
weakness and imperfection: or lastly, that any thing else then the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ apprehended by faith, can be commensurable to
holy Justice, is more then redargued, by the simple proposal. 3. This your
ascribing Justification unto faith, in regard of a holy life, which it
produces, does no less detract from the praise of the glory of the grace of
God wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved: Is it the praise and
commendation of this wonderful love, and grace, that he spared not, but gave
his only begotten Son, to be a ransom for sinners; and that it is in the
Beloved, that we are accepted and justified; and should not you be ashamed to
say, that it is unto faith, as the root of a holy life, and not as it does
respect and take hold on him, who was made to be sin for us, and knew no sin,
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, that Justification is
in Scripture ascrived? 4. This your error, as it is contrary to the Scripture,
and derogatorie to the Righteousness of Christ, the Holiness of Divine
justice, and the Glory of free Grace; so, it is the manifest product of, and
cannot but be a most dangerous temptation to, that inward and spiritual pride,
in the heart of man, of all sin the most subtly insinuating, deeply rooted,
and pernicious: A price, or something meriting, or moving, at least of our own,
is that which the natural man likes well; nay knows not how to renounce: was
it not a subtle and strange effect of this pride, and corrupt self? Shall I
give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my
soul? When as the thing required by the Lord, was to do justly, love mercy, and
walk humbly with God. And whence did the Jews their stumbling at the Gospel
proceed? Was it not, that they went about to establish their own
righteousness; and therefore, they did not submit themselves unto the
Righteousness of God? Say not, that this accusation against you, is
unwarranted: I know you tell us, That your explanation ascribes all to Christ,
through, whom it is, that our sins are pardoned, our services accepted, and
grace and glory conveyed to us, But it is evident, that these are but vain
words; in as much as, though you here tell us, that our services are accepted
through Christ; yet almost immediately before, we heard you say, that it is
faith and a life conform to the Gospel, by way of antecedent condition, which
gives us an interest in his blood: Now, that our services cannot be
prerequired, by way of condition, to his acceptance of us, and also only
accepted as performed by us, in him^ is of it self manifest. 2. Though you
should, more clearly, and consistently, ascribe all unto Jesus Christ; yet by
turning his grace into a condition, the subtilty and folly of your pride does
but the more bewray it self: For, as simply to obtrude our own good works,
which in the acknowledgement of the most exact and confident legalist, are both
commanded and given us of God, is a proud presumption; so, the more you
attribute either the strength or the acceptance of performances unto the grace
of God in Christ Jesus, while, in the mean time, you do still arrogate them, as
a condition on the creatures part, you the more declare the folly, but in
nothing diminish the sinfulness, of your vanity. These things need not to be
illustrat: questionless, who ever does consider his lost condition, by reason
of sin and wrath, and hearkeneth unto that fundamental Gospel-precept, deny thy
self, imprimis all self-righteousnesse, and believe; will find the power
thereof so deeply descending into his Soul, that all the desire, trust, and
hope thereof, will be fixed on Jesus Christ alone, and to be found in him, not
having his own righteousness, which unto his sincere reflection, will be so
far from appearing a condition, that it will disappeare as dung; but that
Righteousness, which is through the faith of Christ, the Righteousness which
is of God by faith. But who can sufficiently declare and regret the madness and
ingratitude of this pride of man? Jesus Christ is made of God unto us,
Righteousness; and yet we will thereto join our own, for Justification in Gods
sight: He is also made unto us Sanctification, that in Him we may bring forth
the fruits of holiness unto the glory of God; and the very same fruits, will
we impropriat, to be the condition, and, as it were, the price of our
acceptance, even with himself, who is our only acceptance, and our all. Sir,
be not deceived, as they who in the sight of sin, and fear of wrath, f^ee unto
Christ alone, for a refuge, do find his Righteousness, not more sufficient,
then freely offered, to every one that wills, for Justification in Gods
sight; so, your Doctrine, requiring both faith and a holy life, as the previous
conditions, to give an interest in Christ's Death, and ascriving Justification
to faith, because, forsooth, of the pitiful fruits of our righteousness, and
not that perfect Righteousness of Jesus Christ, which it does apprehend, is
wholly dissonant unto the method of the Gospel, and cannot possibly attain its
end. What shall be then said of your ensuing words? Now judge, but a little,
what it is, to have a right apprehension of things? since I have, in a few
plain words, told you that, which with much nicety, swells among you, to
Volumes: Really, Sir, if I may use the liberty of answering, by you permitted:
I would say, what a sad thing is it, to have a wrong and conceited apprehension
of things; since you have in a few involved words, in such a manner, obscured
and confounded a plain point of truth, that notwithstanding of express
Scripture Light; yet it has necessarily required a great many words, clearly
to unsold it. There remains now to be considered the main reason, whereby as
you shut up, so you would seem to enforce, the opinion which we have heard: and
that is the necessity of a holy life, which you say, Your way of Justification,
does clearly declare; as being that, whereupon we shall be solemnly judged,
justified, and absolved, at the last day: and afterward, you add, That it may
correct the error of many carnal Christians, who love well to hear of
Salvation, by the death of Christ, provided they be bound to do nothing
themselves, that they may be saved. It Is answered.

1. That there are many seeming Christians, who have a name that they live and
are dead, who have and do delight in a form of knowledge, but want the power;
of whose delusion, the error which you mention, may be a part, is an old and
true regret: And yet the explication by you delivered, being so many ways
unsound and peccant, as we have heard, cannot possibly be an antidote.

2. As these carnal Christians, pretending to lay hold on Jesus Christ for
Righteousness, and yet wholly neglecting the study of holiness, are, of all
men, the most sadly deceived, and most wretched deceivers; so, your manner of
Justification, derogating from the holy Justice of God, and the perfect
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, flattering the natural man's pride, to which, of
all vices, we are most prone, and seducing souls, from the free Grace of the
Gospel, cannot be less dangerous and pernicious.

But 3. This your reason, for departing from Justification by faith only, as
encouraging to licentiousness, is so directly the objection which the Apostle
Paul takes notice of, and fully answers, after his having declared the truth
of Justification, as by us professed, that we are thereby exceedingly
fortified: The passage is thus, the Apostle having showed, that it is by the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, that the free Gift comes upon all men, to
Justification of life, and that it is by the obedience of one, that many are
made righteous; and summing up the whole matter, that it is grace that reigns
through Righteousness, unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord; he
subjoineth, What shall we say then? shall we continow in sin that grace may
abound? Seeing it is not by our works, but of free grace, through faith in the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, that we are justified from sin, shall we
therefore, in as much as sin commends grace, and our good works availl not,
continow in sin, that grace may abound? The plain insinuation of what you
object: Now hear the Apostles answer both for us and himself. 1. He saves
justification by faith only, cannot encourage to sin; because such as do
thereby, truly lay hold on Jesus Christ, partake of his death, and are made
conformable thereto: How shall they then, that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein? Sin may indeed remain, but that they who through faith in his Death,
are planted in the likeness thereof, and become as crucified with him, should
live any longer in sin, is not possible: To the same purpose it is, that the
Apostle John, says, whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, and he
cannot sin, because he is born of God: And yet, if any false pretender, should
therefore say, either that he cannot transgress, or that his transgressions are
no sins, and so license himself unto wickedness, he but deceives himself, and
the truth is not in him. 2. Paul says that Justification through faith
imports a more certain assurance of good works, then any thing by you urged.
The necessity of good works, which ye plead for, is only that of a condition,
strict indeed, as to its obligation; but very uncertain, if not desperate, as to
its cause and real existence; being previously required, unto our acceptance
by, and being in, Christ, as I have already showed: whereas the Apostle tells
us plainly, that according to the truth of Justification, by him and by us
asserted, the necessity of good works, is causally certain, depending upon such
infallible causes, that wherever true Faith is, the study of holiness must
necessarily ensue; and where this is not, the pretense of Faith, and
Justification thereby, is but vain and groundless: For seeing by Faith, the
only requisite, on our part, for Justification, we are not only dead indeed
with Jesus Christ unto sin, but planted together with him, in the likeness of
his Resurrection, and alive through him unto God, that we also should walk in
newness of life, the necessity of holiness is evidently thereby as much
assured, as the acts of life are in their proper principle: How can it then be
alleged, that, in our way, the necessity of holiness is less secured, then in
yours? Nay, such is the certainty of this truth, that true Faith in Jesus
Christ, is the root and principle of the new life of holiness, that, as it is
by you acknowledged; so, I cannot but wonder, how reason could so quickly
desert you, as to think, that any necessary effect, such as you must grant good
works to be of true Faith, can be rationally joined with its cause, in the
consideration of a condition, which your discourse imports? If fire or life
were, in any case, required as a condition, he that should thereto join heat or
motion, necessarily thereon dependent, were plainly ridiculous: I need not take
notice, of what may be objected, from these seeming Believers, who, because of
their profession, are said to be in Christ, and yet for want of fruits, to be
cut off; as it does not more militat against us, then against you, who
acknowledge true faith to be always fruitful; so, it answers it self: But 3.
because by necessity, its like that you do understand, the obligation to
holiness, as if, in your way, it were rendered more binding and pressing, and
thence would commend your explanation, as more engaging unto a holy life; I
shall not here resume, what I have already declared, viz. 1. That to press the
necessity of holiness, antecedently to our being, and acceptance, in Jesus
Christ, is vain, and fruitless. 2. That to join our imperfect holiness, with
Christ's unspotted and alone sufficient Righteousness, which is faiths value,
is proud and presumptuous; but rather represent these true grounds of the
necessity of holiness, which are found in our way, equally, yea more obliging,
then all your vain pretenses.

And 1. We say with the Apostle, that the holy and just and good Law of God
remains in its entire force, threatening and condemning all sin, wherever
found; and as the poor sinner convicted, is thereby urged to flee for refuge
unto Christ, who alone delivers from the wrath to come; so, he who expects
Salvation, by the Death of Christ, and does not witness the truth of his
profession, in a holy life, is, in so far, no less exposed to its severity
and terror; neither can the Believer sinning, whatever may be the difference of
his state in Gods sight, more pretend to the peace and favor of God, without
repentance renewed, and faith in Christ reacted, whence the study of holiness
will undoubtedly revive and flow; then the wicked, persisting in his
impenitence: What is then the difference betwixt you and us? You must
acknowledge, that the great obligation of holiness does descend from the Law of
God; and we grant that this holy Law continues, in the same force and power,
against all sin (I say not sinners) wherever found, whether in the Believer or
Unbeleever; so, that thereby, in our way, licentiousness to sin must be
equally excluded. If you say, that by requiring Faith alone for Justification,
we relaxe the study of holiness; I must again tell you, that true faith in
Christ Jesus, the thing which we require, cannot be without the study of
holiness: Next, if any person should thence delude himself unto licentiousness,
the Holy Law of God remaining in the same severity against it, cannot but, in
our way, wherein that high aggravation of turning the Grace of God unto
wantonness, is more manifest, be also more powerful. If any man go on to urge
us with the possible delusions of presumption and libertinisme, whereunto the
Devil both has, and may abuse the truth and free grace of God, he but fights
with the Devils weapons, whereby man's wretched frailty is indeed discovered;
but the truth, by Paul plainly asserted against the like cav^^^a^ions, and by
us owned, not in the least impugned: Nay, I may further affirm, that as all
error is delus^on, and inductive of more; so, where one has been tempted to
abuse the proposal of free Grace, hundreds, through Natures pride, both
desiring, and overvaluing propriety, have stumbled upon this your so descrived
conjunction of our good works, and fallen into that, not entire submitting unto
the Righteousness of God, and a going about to establish their own
Righteousness; by which sin, the rock of Salvation became unto the Jews a rock
of offense.

2. As the Law, in the severity of its sanction, does still abide in force, to
deter from all sin, to bring in and reclaim unto Jesus Christ our
Righteousness and also our Sanctification; so, its more binding Authority,
derived from the greatness and goodness of God, its own holiness and
perfection, are, upon none so powerful, and in none so effectual, as these,
who, through faith, have laid hold on Christ Jesus, for Righteousness, and
therethrough alone have attained unto peace. I need not tell you, that true
repentance, discovering the sinfulness, as well as the guiltiness of sin,
cannot but endeare holiness; and that God appearing in Christ Jesus, in that
inconceivable glory of his Holiness, Justice, Love and Mercy, and justifying us
through Faith, in his Name, cannot, but beget a deeper reverence, and a greater
regard to his will and commandments; then all the thunderings of mount Sinai,
the greatest motive to holiness in the construction of your way. But when I
consider, that Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness, and that the
Law through Faith is not made void, but more established; and therefore we are
chosen, and created in him unto holiness, and good works, to the Glory of God;
when I observe the connection, that God has established, and his word holds
out, betwixt Justification and Sanctification: (1.) In his purpose, Ephesians. 1. 4.
2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. (2.) In his promise, Ezekiel 36. 25, 26, 27. Micah 7. 19. 2 Pet.
1. 4. (3.) In his precept, Tit. 3. 8. (4.) In Christ's purchass, Tit. 2. 14.
(5.) In the Gift of Christ to his people, 1 Cor 1. 30. (6) In the sincere
desire of and great d^light in holiness, as well as pardon, recorded of the
Saints, in all the Scripture, specially Psalm. 51. and 103. 3. (7.) In the
description of lustification, given us by Paul, in the first 6 chap. Romans and
Gal. 2. I seriously wonder, how you, or any man, can doubt, but a holy life,
both in its obligation, and also in its performance, is, by the way of
Justification by Faith only, molsty assured.

3. In the way of Justification by faith only, not only the obligation of the
Law of God remains, in the manner declared; but also, our Lord, for our further
encouragement unto holiness, has graciously intimat, that even these good
works, which we perform in his strength, shall be, by the same grace from
which they flow, also graciously rewarded: Wherefore the Apostle says, That
being made free from sin, and become servants to God, we have our fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life. Now then, if there be a constraint in
love and gratitude, above the persuasion of fear; and if the desire of reward
be powerful, above the apprehension of punishment, these considerations are
certainly cumulative, and, in our way, above any thing that yours does contain.
That I may therefore sum up this discourse, anent the necessity of holiness:
Know, that without holiness none shall see the Lord: But hence it does so ill
follow, that holiness by way of previous condition, is to be joined unto our
Faith, in order to our Justification, that on the contrary, as God has elected
us in Christ Jesus to be holy; so, he also justifies us through Faith in his
Name, not because we are, but that in, and by him, we may be partakers of the
glorious riches of his free grace, in begun holiness here, and consummat
holin^ss in Glory hereafter; and hereby is our obligation unto and study of
holiness, so far from being remitted; that it is both promoved, by the same
standing fiery Law against all sin and ungodliness, and strengthened, by that
alsufficiency of grace, which is in Christ Jesus for our completing, to whom,
through Faith, we are united: And lastly, we are bound and encouraged unto it,
by all that is most binding in the Laws Authority, and obliging in Divine
bounty. To all which, this consideration may also be superadded; that, as the
exercise of holiness remains with us, still under the obligation of Divine
precept, and is certainly the end and effect of our acceptance in Gods sight;
so, the same being the necessary consequence, and inseparable effect of
believing, and thereby becoming its most assured test, must, upon this ground,
stir up as effectually unto the truth and sincerity of Faith, whence it
flows, and which does again incite to the sincere, closs, and constant study of
holiness, by a reciprocal influence, as your vain stating of it, as a condition
in our Justification, does but lamely persuade its persuite.

But I hasten to the last part of your discourse, viz. That it is upon the
necessity of holiness that we shall be solemnly judged justified and absolved
at the last day: I cannot now enlarge upon these mistakes, that are again by
you crowded into these few words, it may here suffice, that I tell you, that it
is without all doubt, that, on that day, all men shall be solemnly judged,
according to the holy Law of God; and therefore seeing, by the deeds of the Law,
there shall no flesh be justified in his sight, The righteousness of God, which
is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe, without
the mixture, or conjunction of our imperfect righteousness, in the often
forementioned respect, is only thereby the more recommended 2. Where you say,
that it is upon this, so understood, necessity of holiness, or upon our
holiness, that we shall be, in that day, solemnly justified and absolved; you
err, and impinge most grossly, contrary to Scripture-evidence, the value of
Christ's Righteousness, the holiness of Gods Justice, and the glory of free
Grace. as I have already demonstrat. I grant indeed, that, in that day, when
our Lord shall gather into one, welcome, and appear glorious in, all Believers,
he will also confess them before his Father, and the holy Angels, commemorate
their charity and good works, and, in the exceeding riches of his bounty,
reckon his own grace in them, unto the increase of their reward; but thence to
infer, that it is upon our holiness that we are justified, and absolved in
Gods sight, is destitute of all truth and reason: Nay, the very figure of that
judgment, wherever represented in Scripture, bearing, only, in order to
Believers, their solemn reception and welcome from our Lord and Savior, as
such, who are already, in him, blessed and justified, and by him redeemed and
sanctified, does, most plainly, and powerfully confute it.

And thus, I hope, I have evidently demonstrat, not in the language of men, or
in School terms, which on purpose I have declined; but in the express
revelation of the Gospel, that, that Doctrine of yours, which you make your N.
C. only to tax, as singular in its phrase, and you your self do the more
commend, as being closely Scriptu^al, is in effect, both vain and
antiscriptural, in matter, as well as expression. What you mean by preferring
the style of the Catholic Church to Modern and Scholastical expressions, under
which the Doctrine of all the Reformed Churches is unavoidably comprised, let
others judge: but as for the abuses which you mention, viz. the presumption of
such, who love to hear of Salvation by the Death of Christ^ provided they be
bound to do nothing themselves, that they may be saved: seeing there can be
nothing more engaging, and effectual unto holiness, then that, which in
Scripture terms we do assert; viz. That we are saved, and called with an holy
calling, not according to our works, or doings; but according to his own
purpose, and grace, given us in Christ Jesus, the sin thereof remains with
the Authors, and pure and certain truth, is neither thereby lessened, nor ought
to be stumbled at: And therefore having fully redargued the falsehood of your
Doctrine, and the vanity of all your pretenses, that I may, once for all,
vindicat this most precious and important truth, of Justification by Faith
only, from all calumny; and warn all of that delusion, which you would, very
unjustly, make proper to our way; I plainly and positively affirm, that the
study of holiness is a most necessary and indispensable duty, unto the
justified Believer, 1. By the necessity of Divine precept, at length above
declared. 2. By the necessity of loves constraint; holiness being both amiable
in it self, and the high path way leading unto the seeing and enjoying of God,
who therein delights. 3. By the force of fears persuasion, in regard of Gods
fatherly displeasure against all sin; a motive most tenderly persuasive to all,
that are truly godly. 4. By the obligation of gratitude, which is indeed the
cords of a man, and cannot but powerfully engage the Believer to the constant
acknowledgement of God's free love, and grace, and to walk worthy of him, who
has delivered us from death, and called us with so heavenly a calling. 5. For
the manifestation, to our selves, of our faith, and justified state, to our own
peace and comfort. 6. For the adorning of the Gospel, to the edification of
others; nay, in a word, if our felicity be in God; if glory be our desire; if
free grace be the most powerful attractive, and sufficient help; and if there
be any dread and terror from Gods displeasure, the study of holiness, is by the
united force of all these motives, most strongly recommended, and by the
wonderful free love of God, in our Justification, through faith in Christ
Jesus, only yea infinitely intended.

In the next place, your N. C. having acquit you of Popery, how justly, or
unjustly, I leave it to the Reader: You make him say, but are you not,
ARMINIANS? And to that I must confess, in the words of your N. C. you answer
with so much Legerdemain, that you are not easily discovered; yet these few
things are manifest.

1. That such is the strange extent of this your latitude, that it is more
inclineable, and favorable to any Sect or Party, then Conscientious
Non-conformists: If you deal with Papists, then all their gross Idolatries and
superstitions, yea and their horrid Rebellions and Cruelties, are forgotten,
and they forsooth, hold the foundation, and only build upon it wood, hay, and
stuble: And you earnestly wish for a temper, which, undeniable experience
shows, your party has endeavored after, at the rate of a hundred fold more
condescendence, then is required to the appeasing of all our complaints: If
Arminians, come in your way: not one word of all these errors, so highly
injurious to the Doctrine of the certainty and immutability of Gods holy
Decrees; of the freeness and efficacy of his Grace, of the extent of the merit
of Christ's Death; and to the comfortable truth of the Saints Perseverance; nor
yet of these disorders and tumults, wherewith, we know, they have infested the
Reformed Churches: but away with these controversies, the itch of multiplying,
and canvassing subtle questions, has proven the chief pest of the Church: It
is good to be sober-minded: And, thus, we see, they do indeed vent, profess,
and seduce, according to their pleasure, whereas, if this your tenderness of
Religion, and sober-mindedness, were real, would not the first more readily
teach you, that the departing from the simplicity, and humility of the Gospel,
has been the visible inlet to all the wickedness, and darkness, at this day
in the Church of Rome? And the second, that in nothing sober-mindednesse, is
more sober, then anent imposing upon such, as do really scruple in Conscience,
things that the Lord has no where commanded: which two, are the hinges of most
of these debates, which at present disturb us. Now on the other hand, how you
have treated Non-conformists, all alongs, I leave it to your own, and every
man's obvious reflection: Rebellion, Hypocrisy, and Peevishness, you, falsely,
make their ordinary Epithets: And for your inclinations toward them, a short
look forward exhibits them in Verse, wherein, after your approbation of the
blood and fynings, that we have suffered, you melodiously sing.

This strange distemper does all skill defy:
Physicians hopes still falsify.
But as a joint, which Gangren does corrupt,
Must be cut off, from the sound lump,
Better the body grow a stump;
Then by such members, banckrrupt.
And then again, lest such rigor may prove a stain to your Christian and
Catholic latitude, you add a forbearance for us, such as it is, wherein,
though your own interest plead for a delay; yet you can forgive nothing, it is
only Till brimful be their cup;
Then chaffed justice, shall the chaff devour,
And Angel-reapers bring the Just to Heavens floor:


This, this, I fear, is the inside of your pretended charity; and it but too
plainly evinces, that all your professed stretches of a fair and comprehensive
Latitude, are, in their regard to us, but the forced product, of your own
conveniencie.

2. By your opposing to the Soveraignity of God, which the Arminian opinion
does proudly impugn, his infinite Goodness, and Holiness, which they make
their great pretense; and declaring, that the reconciling of these attributes
is beyond your capacity; it is evident, by resolving this objection in the
common difficulty of the unsearcheablenesse of Gods judgments, both by them
and by us acknowledged, you take part on their side; however it is not my
purpose to draw you unto debate; the Counsel o^ God, though imperscrutable, yet
it stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his: The
Soveraignity o^ God, though part ^^nding ou^; (...) it only so much the more,
establishes the liberty and certainty of his Decrees, without all shadow of
unrighteousness, and in stead of interfering with, does plainly render, both
his Goodness and Holiness, the more eminent, and glorious: These are the
ref^ections, that the Apostle makes upon this subject: Pray consider the
passage, Romans 9. where the Apostle, after having showed, that before the
children had done any good or evil, God in his free purpose according to
Election, not of works, but of (...) that calls, prefers the Younger, and
passes by the Elder, loving Jacob but hating Esaw, to vindicate the
Righteousness of God, which is your stumbling, recurreth to his Soveraignity,
having mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will hardening: And he
is so far from conceiving with you, that the Soveraignity of God, on the one
hand, and his infinite Goodness and Holiness on the other, are to humane
capacity irreconcilable attributes; that it is from this high Soveraignity,
that he not only deduceth the excellencies of mercy, and illustrateth the glory
of Gods power, and wrath; but rationally answers, the proud reply of poor
clayes carnal arguings against the Lord, its infinite maker, and free and
absolute disposer. But you say, that you may well take his own oath for it,
that he takes no pleasure in the death of sinners: And so you may indeed very
safely, if either you understand it, of the death of sinners, simply and
abstractly in it self considered, or with respect to his serious call, to them
to repent, and live, as the context of that passage does hold out; but if you
would thence deny, that God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power
known, purposed from all eternity, to pass by such, on whom he wills not to
show mercy, enduring with much long^ uffering the vessel^s of wrath, fitted to
destruction; you directly contradict the Apostle, and all these other
Scripture-passages, whereby God, and the Saints their rejoicings, in the
manifestation of his righteous Judgments, are clearly holden out.

But 3. wishing to you, and all men, much fear, sobriety, and
Scripture-simplicitie, in the Doctrine of this high mystery of Predestination,
and not urging further the designed indifference, which, under a fair general,
you clearly go about to introduce, for all Arminian tenants; my earnest desire
is, that the Rule, which you give for a conclusion, may indeed both stint
curiosity, and direct practice, Viz. Let none of our good be ascribed to our
selves, and none of our evil be imputed unto God.

You proceed to make your N. C. allege our Ministers their jealousies, of this
your new way; that you man again appeal to, and make a boast of your fruits;
but since I have, without boasting, abundan^ly searched, and shaken you, and
left all to open view; I also refer the judgem^nt, to that most righteous
cognizance.

But now, you are wearied of these your wranglings, and therefore you resolve
to leave these dry, and arid matters, and talk a little with your N. C. on
better subjects. Sir, your resolution is just and good; only transfer not the
faults, of your vain, airie, and insipid reasonings, upon the matters
themselves by you treated: If you have foolishly and petulantly impugned, not
only the work of God, and his Covenant, in these Lands; the Ordinances, of the
Government, Discipline, and Worship of his House; but also endeavored to
unsetle and subvert the very foundations of Justification by Faith in Christ
Jesus, without the deeds of the Law; a sent Gospel-ministerie, determined
Sacraments, and Christian Liberty; And if your N. C. pretending to be the
Respondent, has on the other hand, manifestly betrayed the Cause, by such a
faint, ridiculous, and absurd defense, as you were pleased to suggest, the
folly of this your wrangling remains with your self alone; the matters
therein handled, as they continow still to be the firm truths, signal
blessings, and especial means given us of God, for the declaring of his Glory,
and the promoving of our Salvation, and are not by your discourse, in the
least, prejudged; so, they are so far from excusing, that they greatly
aggravat these jejune and gustless Methods, wherewith you manage this your
conference; but foreseeing this censure, you cunningly cast in our way, the
mention of better subjects; whether with a design thus to evade, or by your
insinuat distinction betwixt the forgoing matters, as dry, and arid, and your
subsequent speculations, as these better things, only to be pursued, to drive
on the deceit of an irreligious indifferency, so much at present studied by
the Adversary, and his Emissaries, let others Judge? Two things only I must
say. 1. That to go about to smooth the World, with the pretensions of sublime
and Seraphick seize, and, in the mean time, from these hights, as it
were, but really, in a convenient accommodation to every guise, whereunto
carnal ease does invite, and outward peace persuade, to slight, despise, and
labor to relaxe from, the conscientious observance of these ordinances and
midses, which the Lord has given and appointed, as the only way, leading to
himself, and the felicity of his favor, is the most delusive appearance of an
Angelick light, wherewith Satan can possibly palliat his blackest enterprises.
2. Though your subsequent discourse were much more sound and candid, both in
its tenor and scope, then truly it is; yet, therein to figure your self, to
be, as it were, a new burning, and shining light, teaching your N. C. in such a
strain, as if all of us, whom by him you personat, were wholly ignorant of the
truth of Religion, both in its methods, and ends; and altogether strangers to
its life, is visibly more disingenuous and arrogant, then sincerely charitable:
Say not that I am ill natured, if you find these words a little more pointed,
its you that has sharpened them: Nay, if I should assume a further confidence
of boasting, in behalf of the Lords Ministers, and the true Seekers of his
face, found amongst us, according to the measure of the grace, which God has
distributed unto us, and even become a fool in glorying, for the abasing of
your self-flatterie, I do neither want a just provocation, nor a clear
precedent, for my warrant. But seeing there are several things by you here
proposed, which may be for the use of edifying, to a serious and considerat
Soul, and wherein a real union would indeed prove a most effectual corrective,
both of sinistruous designs, and evil mixtures; I shall therefore wave the
direct prosecution of such discoveries, and wishing that, that power, light,
and life, which is in true and pure Religion, may indeed end all our
differences, I heartily join my assent to your subsequent discourse, with all
the harmony and affection, that truth does allow. That some do place Religion
wholly in debates, others in external Forms, others in some private devotions,
others in the regulation of the outward man, and others in certain inward
speculations, and self-devised strains, are things not so strange, as grievous;
but as to know the Father, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, is the sum and substance of Religion, and Eternal life, in which
profession we are all agreed; so, it is the power of this knowledge, descending
from Christ Jesus our Wisdom, and apprehending him, for Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, which is mostly, and most sadly wanting: If in
the conduct thereof, men were abhorring and denying themselves, and in the
acknowledgement of him, who has called us unto Glory, and Virtue, laying hold
on these great and precious promises, which in Christ Jesus are all yea and
amen; then, from the application of His Righteousness should the peace of
reconciliation, and joy in the Holy Ghost abound; from the communication of his
life and grace, should the Divine seed propagat, and diffuse it self through
the whole man; and from and by this truth, and power of Religion, Believers
should be transformed, into the likeness and image of God, and rendered
partakers of the Divine Nature, by which, it is manifest, that as Christ Jesus
is the only foundation; so it is, that in him alone, there is Salvation,
neither is there any other name under Heaven given amongst men, whereby we must
be saved: The power, as well as the reward, of Natures light, was long since
forfeited in Adam; and though in the succeeding Ages, God left not himself
without a witness, in that he did good, and gave the invisible things of him,
from the creation of the World, to be clearly seen, being understood by the
things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead; yet, the ungodliness
of men still prevailing, and holding the truth in unrighteousness, this weaker
light, served only to render them without excuse: it is true, the Patriarchs
were burning and shining lights; but it was from Divine revelation, and the
oracles, and promises of God, in which they saw Christ's day and rejoiced, and
not from natures light, that this their radiancy was derived: The dawning
opened by Moses, had certainly a great splendor, and therein Christ Jesus, the
end of the Law for Righteousness, was very observably held forth; but as it
pleased the Lord to vail the glory of this discovery, with many types and
shadows, not making it a great ridle, as you do unadvisedly affirm; but
keeping and conducting that people, under the Pedagogie of that more burdensome
and severe dispensation, until the fullness of the time should come; so then it
was, that he sent forth his own Son, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the
glory of his people Israel; to bless them, in turning away every one of them,
from their iniquities: to turn them from darkness unto light, and from the
power of Satan unto God, that they might receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified, by faith that is in him: and thus
our Lord Jesus abolished death; and brought life and immortality to light
through the Gospel: and the great designs thereof not lying in that
preposterous in coherent order, by you represented, are first, by proposing to
us that stupendous mystery of the Redemption of sinners through Jesus Christ;
and proclaiming, that whosoever believes on him, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life; to reconcile us enemies, and bring us aliens, nigh unto God;
and then being thus accepted, that in the same Lord Jesus, we may be filled
with all grace, by the Spirit of grace, to the knowledge, and acknowledgement
of God his wonderful bounty, his unmeasurable love, his glorious holiness, his
eternal truth and faithfulness, and unto the exciting, in us^ of that ravishing
and constraining love, that filial and persuasive fear, and that comforting and
joyous hope; which graces, more and more moulding us into a lively conformity
unto him, that loved us, and washed us from our sins, in his own blood, and is
become our life, our light, and our all; and thereby causing us, to bring forth
the fruit, of holiness, meekness, patience, brotherly love, and of all
virtues, to the praise of God, are the sweetness, excellency, and delight of
Grace, here, until it shall be perfected by, and swallowed up of Glory,
hereafter: This, this is the work and purpose of the Gospel. And seeing, it
shall availl us nothing, to gain the whole world and lose our own souls, it
ought indeed to be the great design of our lives, to conform unto it, even to
hearken unto the call of God, and by believing in Christ Jesus, that we may be
delivered from the wrath to come, to labor to be found in him, not having our
own righteousness, which is of the Law; but the righteousness, which is of God
by faith; that so we may know him, and the power of his Resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, and still reaching forth, unto these things which
are before, press toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God, in
Christ Jesus. The way then, to purify and save our souls, is not barely to
affect a little virtue, or morality; nay, nor yet, from our selves, without the
Mediator, to apply our minds to God: God not in Christ Jesus is a consuming
fire, the contemplations of his Glory, and Holiness, instead of deriving, into
our souls, his excellent perfections, would but fill them with amazement and
horror: If the external show and figure only of this sight, was so terrible
even to Moses, that he said, I exceedingly fear and quake; How do you think,
that poor sinners can approach? We are therefore, to apply onr mind unto God;
but, only in and through Christ Jesus, that by him, obtaining peace, and from
him, grace, we may have access, and by faith (not by speculation only) have our
hearts purified. Your precepts of stilness and abstraction of mind, to become
of a thinking temper, and give up with passions etc. and use much inward
recollection: As by you proposed, for the way to spirituality, without Jesus
Christ, who is the only true way; are but stoical dreames^ and deluding
vanities: The awakened sinner, whom sin affrights, and wrath terrifies, finds
no rest nor refuge; but in Christ Jesus, and the peace, and favor of God in
him; and being in him accepted, is by his grace purified, and made to partake
of that blessedness, pronounced by the procurer of it, Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God: And thus with open face, beholding as in a
glass, the Glory of the Lord, he is changed into the same image, from glory to
glory, until that hereafter, he be brought to see him, as he is, and thereby
be perfected; these are the great means, to attain to, and continue in,
converse and fellowship with God. If any man love me, says our Lord, he will
keep my words, and the Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
make our abode with him: And thence, no doubt, it is that, not only all that
sweetness of the meditation of God and his attributes, the admiration of his
mercy and love in Christ, the adoration of his excellencies, and these soul
breathings, and continual aspirings toward him, which you here mention, will
flow in into the soul, to its constant satisfaction, in an entire submission
and delightsome complacencie, in all Gods ways and actings; but also the
Believer will be stirred up, prompted, and animat, in the holy and pure zeal of
God's Glory, to fight out the good fight of faith, acquit himself strenuously,
in that warfare, with the World, Sin, and Satan; wherein now we stand engaged,
and readily to embrace every occasion, whereby he may approve himself unto him,
who has so dearly loved us; and walk worthy of God, who has called us unto
his Kingdom and Glory: but to suppose, that a man may think himself into this
frame, or by the simple means of that Metaphorick ass^^ilation, that is in mere
thinking, attain to this Divine likeness, is no less groundless, then the
active militant state of Christians, within time, is ill defined, by your
imaginary stilness. Now, if any man would understand, wherein the sweetness,
that is to be found in Divine converse, does consist? The stilness, wherewith
the mind is overflowed; the clearness of the judgment, stedfastness of the
will, and calmeness of the passions, wherein you place it, are indeed
qualities, which do highly advance a man, unto the perfection of his nature;
and the Divine touches, that you mention, whereby the soul is sometimes carried
unto sublimities not utterable, are also found in the records of Christian
experience: but the only proper answer, which can be returned, is, O taste and
see, that the Lord is good! The unsearcheable treasures of his goodness have no
measure; the excellencies of his glorious perfections, have no parallel; the
poor narrow soul, admitted unto these felicities, by attributing unto God, the
very form, essence, and substance of all its pleasure; and magnifying him, as
its alone love, joy, and delight, has, by these, as by the application of
whatsomever else it does conceive to be amiable and delectable, endeavored to
adumbrat this Divine satisfaction: But as the constant result of these
ref^ections has been ever admiration and wonder; so, a forced silence in that
transport, of the Spouse her raptures, yea he is altogether lovely, is only its
most significant period. What part our affections and passions have, in these
enjoyments, it is not needful to mention; certainly, God who has commanded,
that we love him, with all the heart, with all the soul, with all the strength,
and with all the mind, will both purify and satiat all these capacities.

As for your telling us, that sensible passions may be very high, in an impure
mind, and of a natural devotion; specially in a person melancholic, a woman,
or hysterical, which may mount very high; but does not humble, or purify the
mind. I judge it, to be such an unsavorie and little pertinent mixture, that I
must express my fears, that it does denote a mind, in your self, little
humbled, and less purified: But that which you add, of Persons Divinely acted
their deniedness unto all things, their absolute resignation unto, and intense
delight in, and desires toward God, as the blessed effects of the souls union
with him, is that which I rather observe. And here indeed it is, and in your
declaring self abhorrence, and abnegation, and humble applications of the soul,
unto Jesus Christ, to be that strait passage, and low gate, which is by
violence to be entered, for attaining unto that heavenly state, wherein,
spiritual solaces here, and immediate Divine enjoyments hereafter, do not only
compense and swallow up all the preceding anguish; but surpass all possible
apprehensions of that unconceived glory, that I do most heartily embrace that
saving truth, if rightly understood, of Faith and Repentance, which hitherto I
have desiderat. O that in the possession of so great a joy, and the hope of a
greater blessedness expected, we would all vigorously set about the duties of a
Christian life, not intangling our selves with the pollutions of this world,
nor with the affairs of this life, how to serve our own lusts and ease, and
comply with every device, and invention of men, but enduring hardness,
contradiction, reproach, and all persecution, that we may please him, who has
chosen us to be Soldiers! Certainly, he whose heart is thus fixed on God, in
and through Christ Jesus, his life and actions will quickly manifest, that he
has not only the form, but the power of Godliness; his rational and
unconcerned contempt of this present world, his hatred of base and debasing
lusts, his undervaluing of the things of sense, his well squared and solid
indifferency for all conditions and occurrents; and lastly, his love of truth,
and study of innocence, and delight in goodness, in all his words, and works,
do evidently show forth the love, and fear of God, to be, as it were, the vital
springs of all his thoughts and motions, while self-denial emptieth, and
humility vaileth him, as nothing, and out of the world, the native and genuine
luster of free grace in him, is thereby rendered more conspicuous, and his
light, does the more shine, unto the praise of God, who has called us unto
Glory and virtue: He peaceably, and cheerfully obeys the public Father of
his Country, but only in the Lord; he remembers and honors such, who watch
for his soul, who speak unto him the word of God, of these he is a follower, as
they are of Christ, following their faith, and considering the end of their
conversation; he pursues Charity, as the Crown of perfection. Be ye therefore
perfect, even as your Father, which is in heaven is perfect, has not with him
a more commanding Authority, then an inviting and soul^a^ishing attraction:
Hence it is, that as his bounty and beneficence toward men is prompt and
unconfined; so, his obedience toward God is most punctual and circumspect,
having respect unto all Gods commandments, and esteeming his precepts,
concerning all things to be right, and hating every false way; a latitude of
love, and good will toward all men, he heartily acknowledges, and rejoiceth
in; but a latitude of compliance with sinful courses, and indifferency, even in
the smallest matters of God, under whatsomever pretext, he from his heart
abhors. These, indeed, are a few of the fair lines, that compose the
Christians Character, by which, as you may see in part, wherein Christian
Religion does consist; so, it is too too apparent, that many, who in their vain
vaunting of serene and still speculations and high abstractions, do allege the
strickness of Conscientious practices, to be but loud pretenses, do themselves
sadly and most dangerously, recede from it. O how much is it to be desired,
that not only such, but all, would, in their secret retirements, often review
and examine their actions, that, discovering their errors and fa^lings, they
may be humbled and brought, unto the renewed and more serious exercise of
repentance, stirred up by a more lively, and active faith, to lay hold on Jesus
Christ, and from him, and by the power of his grace, quickened to new vigor
and alacrity, in the ways of God! Then should the Divine love, in Christ
Jesus, inflame and elevat the soul, and captivate the whole powers thereof,
unto these pure and free resignations, wherewith God is well pleased; then
should the power of the grace of our Lord, mortify sin, overcome temptations,
and advance, in every thing acceptable, unto God. And lastly, then should the
offerings of our praises to God, for all his mercies, especially for the
invaluable and unspeakeable Gift of Christ Jesus, ascend with gladness, and
bring back the returns of more grace, and joy: and our prayers and
supplications, in the name of Christ, according to the will of God, for all
things, that we may be careful in nothing, and for all men, especially for
Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet, and peaceable
life, in all Godliness and honesty, should be set forth before him, as incense,
and mount up, as the evening Sacrifice: And it is, from these heavenly
exercises, and the communications of Grace, which flow therein, that the heart
is firmly fixed and strenthened, to order and do all to the glory of God, and
the mind continually bended, by the strong applications of fear and love, to
direct all its ways, as in his sight: And these truly are the frame, and
fruits, of inward and secret devotion. As for public Worship, he who
considers it, as commanded by God, for the avowed and more solemn
acknowledgement of our dependence upon him, and testifying our union with his
Church, and that therefore, not only in reason, but also by express precept, it
is to be seriously and sincerely performed, with and from the heart, and in
that holy and pure manner, which he himself has prescribed, without the
contaminating mixtures of men's presumptuous and vain inventions, will certainly
go unto the congregation of the Lords people, met together in his Name, and
sincerely professing thus to seek his face, not out of custom or formality,
whereunto, of all things, the devising and imposing of humane forms and modes
do most powerfully delude; but, that he may, jointly with others, cordially
adore, and praise his Maker, and Redeemer, and give, not only an external
concurrence, according to the Rule and decency of the Worship; but with his
soul, and all that is within him, will bless his holy Name, and join his Amen.

Thus you have my hearts assent, to the truth that I find in your conclusion,
my desire to God is, that both you, and we, were by a serious, humble, and holy
practice; and not by talking only, experimenting the solid edification, and
pleasure, that lies in these heads: If this you had minded more, you and your
party would have been far from vexing the Lords Church and people, in these
Lands, contrary to the Word of God, solemn Oaths and Covenants, established
Laws, sound Reason, and Policy, and the general inclinations of all, with that
grievous yoke of wicked and pervese Prelacie, and these vain and burdensome
corruptions, wherewith, in all Ages, it has been attended: Which things, as to
your own recollected thoughts, they appear to be but extrinseck, and of little
moment; so, pray Sir, whence did they proceed? And what have they produced?
Certainly, if either serious reflections upon all the Ages of Christianity,
especially upon these alterations, that have happened amongst us, since the
Reformation; or a just consideration, of the present condition, and state of
affairs, could have place; as the pride, and avarice of corrupt Churchmen,
and consequently, of the worst of men, assisted, since the rejection of the
Pope, with the same irreligious spirit, and practices, observed in former
times, of an aspiring Supremacy, moving under the specious pretexts of order,
and peace, will appear to be the only spring, and cause; so, ignorance,
profanity, violence, and distraction, will be found, the woeful fruits of these
innovations. But it is of the Lord, for the punishment of our iniquities;
especially, our not receiving, and walking worthy, of the glorious Gospel, that
judgment is far from us, neither does justice overtake us, we wait for
light, but behold obscurity, for brightness, but we walk in darkness: We look
for judgment, but there is none, for salvation, but it is far from us. The
Lord see to it, and let his Arm bring salvation, and his name be glorified.

As for the concluding complement of affection, which you do here give your
Nonconformist, and make him to repay, at our cost, with the confession of his
former unmeasured fury, it is but too palpably the wantonness of your own
extravagant fancy, wherein to look for more truth, then you do show
constancy in your resolution, to put a point to these matters controverted,
and never to resume them again, were great weakness. You add in words, Let us
provoke therefore one another to charity and good works, and yet we know your
practice to be, to press your trifling conformity, and provoke the Powers,
against such, as cannot comply: We have indeed a blessed exercise for our
tongues, even with them to bless God the Father; but since you do persist, in
your maligning the ways, work, and people of God, your mouth must, and shall
be stopped, if the small endeavors, by me used, might make you mind the
pursuance of truth more, then the study of your so often repeated Temper, my
satisfaction would be little inferior to your advantage; but seeing both your
words and works, do show, that thou art neither cold, nor hot; but lukewarm: I
counsel the, in the words of the great Counselor, To be Zealous therefore, and
repent: behold he stands at the door, and knocks, if any man hear his
voice, and open the door, he will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with
him. To him that overcomes, will he grant, to sit with him in his throne; even
as he also overcame, and is set down with his Father, in his throne. And thus
passing your preposterous postscript, and your Icarian Pindarick I proceed to
your Continuation.

The Continuation, OR The seventh DIALOGUE Answered.
SIR, Beginning this your seventh Dialogue with your ordinary insinuations,
whereof the slender artifice, obvious to the first view, needs no further
discovery, I only take notice, that where your preface affirms that the true
reason of your consenting to the publishing of the former Dialogues, was, That
since you had allayed, a great deall of the heat you met with in your N. C.
upon these matters, you presumed it might produce the like good effect in
others. It is an alledgeance too serious to be groundless, and beyond what the
license of the fictitious form of your conferences will allow; and therefore,
since any excess of heat that appears in your N. C. is not ours, but purely
your own invention, your pretense of having allayed it, does both bewray your
vanity, and show this to be indeed the true cause of the publication. As for
the advantages you reckon upon, you reckon before your Host, reckon again, and
then boast of your Reason. But you would also be accounted a Droll forsooth,
though you say, you have only adhibite somewhat of that, not out of humor, but
for sweetening the transitions, according to the manner of all Dialogues;
certainly you Latitudinarians are all brave comprehensive spirits, Masters of
all good qualities, whether you possess them or not, and yet I dare affirm,
that a pleasant humorist, will laugh more at this passage of your
conceitedness, then all the drolries that hitherto you have vented.

But now begins your half-proselited N. C. and without connection tells you,
that some charge you with Socinianisme, others with Poprie, others with
Arminianisme, and others with Quakerisme, though as it seems to him upon very
slender grounds. Sir, what may have moved you, after what we have heard in your
sixth Dialogue, again in this place to resume these things to so small purpose,
I do not conceive. You show as if you were extremly picked by such reproaches,
and tell us, that you know the arts of such, who will tell their people, that
you are unsound and heteredox, and back there hard words, with grave nods and
ivry faces. Poor man, your passion is stirred, and I am sorry to find you so
impotent, as again to relapse in such a childish reflection, whereas to have
used it once before was too much and unworthy of your gravity. Bu^ sure who
ever are your accusers, (who really to me are unknown,) they have too visible
an advantage, in this your weakness; and if many men be not mistaken, no less
ground of retortion in your own scenical gesticulations, and affected grimaces.
The thing I am concerned to notice is, why being so sharp in your resentment,
are you so scant in your purgation? You ask, if they do understand things, who
charge him with Socinianisme, who believes that Christ is the eternal Son of
God, and hopes for salvation only through his blood. And I grant that these
things being truly understood and believed, as I hope you do, are indeed the
truth opposite to the Socinian errors: But seeing you know that some Socinians
do also very easily admit, and acknowledge the same form of words, and that the
cardinal point of this Controversy is, whether or not Jesus Christ the Son of
God, be indeed essentially and natura Deus, according to that Scripture, And we
are in him, that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God
and eternal life. I wish you had chosen the same positive assertion for your
vindication.

As for your clearing your self of Poprie in the matter of Justification,
because forsooth, that you ascribe all we receive in this life, and in that to
come, to the love and grace of God, thorough Jesus Christ. It is so far from
being a sufficient test of your orthodoxy, that I am confident, there is scarce
one understanding Papist, who would not say it were a calumny, to charge them
with the contrary. Nay you your self, in your sexth Dialogue do plainly say,
that they hold the foundation Jesus Christ, and expressly wave their opinion of
Justification, in the enumeration of their errors, which in effect amounts to
all by you here asserted; however, having already at great length handled this
purpose, and not loving to vex any with odious names, I shall only add, that
when you shall believe and teach, that Christ alone, is our Righteousness and
Peace, and that it is by the faith of Jesus Christ, and not by the works of the
Law, that we are justified, then shall you have a good report of all men, and
of the truth itself.

Next you subjoin, that we know that all that Calvin and his followers aim at
in the matter of Arminius his points, is that all our good be ascribed unto
God, how then can he be erroneous in this matter, who asserts that? Sir, having
already waved these debates, I shall not now resume them, but though I have
formerly accorded, and am still persuaded that this general principle, rightly
understood and seconded with a sincere practice; would prove a happy antidote
against the Arminian errors; yet I am far from the opinion, that its bare
profession, which hardly any other then an Atheist will disown, should acquit
you as to soundness in these controversies. Where you say that Calvin aimed at
no more, I might tell you, 1. That that might be true, and yet he and Arminius
differ in the manner. 2. It is certain that Calvin's aim was farther from
Scripture-revelation, to vindicat both the Soveraignity of God, and the deep
mystery of the Divine counsel and decrees, from men's narrow self-devised and
presumptuous notions and apprehensions, and also more evidently to defeat the
errors of Universal Redemption and the uncertainty of Perseverance bottomed
upon the same ground: But since Arminius himself and all his followers, would
be far from denying God, to be the alone Author and fountain of all good, what
need of more words, for redarguing such a pitiful vindication.

Now follows your purgation of Quakerisme, which I confess is plain and
positive, and I am indeed convinced, (though ignorant of them) that the grounds
of that accusation, which you are ashamed to name, are in effect ridiculous;
the severity of that mode, is no doubt too strict for yours of the Latitude:
However it shall still be my wish, that its large comprehension, may not at
least include some of the peculiar principles of that Sect, which to the
discerning of all, that have penetrat into its deeps, you do very justly term
the subtilest device yet broached for the overthrow of the Christian Religion.

To this you add, but if that spirit be not the womb, from whence all these
Sects and errors have sprung amongst us, let all that look on judge. Pray, Sir,
what spirit do you mean; that there is a chasma here is manifest, but whether
in the print, as is obvious from the letter, or rather in your brains, as the
futility of the reasons subjoined do more evidently persuade, may be very
rationally doubted: In the mean time, if for the better examining of your
discourse, I may supply the first, I suppose you mean, that the Presbyterian
spirit is the womb spoken of; and this you go about to prove, because none fall
to them viz. to Quakers, as I judge, but such as were formerly most violent in
their. i. e. the Presbyterian (for all is here manck and conjectural) way. But
1. If you knew how to reason fairly, to give your Argument a color of
probability, you should have taken it, not from the falling away of the most
violent, which may be the issue of that excess from the soundest profession,
but from the most serious in whom the natural tendency of opinions is best
discerned. 2. That the more serious Presbyterians do remain steadfast and
unbrangled with these delusions, is that which you dar not deny. 3. Even of
these most violent that you speak of, the number fallen away is so few, that
urged to a condescendency you would be ashamed to reckon them. 4. Your
argument, whatever way understood, is no more applicable to Presbytery, then to
Christianity; nay if such loose reasoning, were of any moment, the thousands of
heresies, which the Christian Religion has occasioned, should postpone it to
Paganism.

But you say, though you are sure, that we are far enough from being Quakers,
yet our principles have a natural tendency that way, and for evidence, you
demand, whence, think you, have they sucked there rejecting of all forms and
order (under a pretense that the spirit is not to be prelimited) but from your
notions against Liturgies and for extemporary heats. It Is answered. 1. Seeing
that we disprove your imposing of Set-forms, and reject your Liturgy from
solid Scripture-grounds, as I have already evinced, the Quakers their abuse
thereof being the same, whereby they pervert the plainest Scriptures,
signifies nothing in your behalf. As for the mention you make of extemporary
heats; though your profane spirit, does not stick to mock at the true manner of
spiritual prayer, so much practiced in Scripture, and by the people of God in
all ages, under this false character, yet I think your own vanity, may make you
blush at such a conceited repetition. 2. If I did not love to exceed in candor,
more then you do hate calumny, I could retort to you with very good reason,
that it is not so much the very abuse of our grounds against your Liturgies,
that have deluded the Quakers unto the rejection of all form and order, as it
is the manifest irreligion of your rigor in imposing, and dead formality in
practicing of these vain inventions, that have stumbled not only Quakers into
their fancies, but many thousands into palpable Atheism.

Next you tell us, that the liberty we take to meddle in matters too high for
us, and judge of every thing, without thinking on the reverence we owe the
Church, opens a wide door for their pretensions, to a liberty of the spirit,
renouncing all modesty and humility. Really, Sir, this arguing appears to me
so mean, that I can scarce repete it without blushing, we have heard you
frequently object, that our Ministers did labor much to ty up the people, in
an implicit faith, and here you tax us for the contrary excess; if you say,
that the fault here mentioned might be true of our Ministers, and your former
challenge hold of the people, you miss your mark, since you cannot charge our
Ministers with that falling away which you object; but why do I trifle? As you
cannot convince our way, either of the excessive liberty or irreverence
alleged; so it is evident, that it is only our not subjecting our faith to
your Lordly Prelacy, and complying with every foolish device of man in the
matters of God, that moves your spleen.

But you proceed to object, that our humor of separation, begets that giddiness
in people, that no wonder they, being shaken from the Unity of the Church, also
stagger through unbelief. Thus you move every stone that you may reach us; in
former times the rigor of Presbytery against separation, was a great clamor,
and no doubt, if you had been Prelatick in those days, you would have made it
a far more plausible medium for the same conclusion. And now our constancy to
the truth once received, and most solemnly engaged unto, and our abhorrence of
the falsehood and perjury of such, who, casting off all fear of God, and regard
to their own reputation, either as Christians or men, have subverted the
righteous and pure constitution of this Church, usurped its name and authority,
and are turned to be persecutors of such who cannot comply with all this
wickedness, is made by you not only a charge of separation, but exaggerat as a
preparative to the Quakers their folly. O with how much more reason, and
undeniable evidence, might the perjurious lightness, and versatile falsehood of
your Prelates and their adherents, who have been carried about by every wind of
tentation, be accused as the cause, not only of the Quakers their giddiness, by
you objected, But of all that contempt and regardless indifferency, whereinto
at present, we see Religion thereby precipitat.

Your next quarrel is, that we cherish in our followers, a dejection of mind
too much, as if Religion, which gives a man a right to the purest joys, should
become a life of doubting, and this, you say, introduces a spirit of
melancholy making way to pretended enthusiasme. Whether or not this your
challenge does not in effect coincide with the cavils of the profane world, and
directly encourage that spirit, which continually decrieth Religion, as a ^our
melancholy and inconversable conceit, let every serious soul judge. It is
enough for our vindication, that we do not teach any other dejection, then that
of humble repentance, mortification and self-denial; this is indeed a hard
work, compared in Scripture to the most bitter and grievous mournings, nay unto
death it self; and seeing the superstructure of grace and glory thereupon
founded, is exceeding weighty and high, it is certainly very necessary, that
these foundations be firmly laid, and ever the deeper the better: But as it is
by the power of the spirit of Jesus, and in the sense of his wonderful, both
depressing and exalting love, that these things are best performed, so an
excess of humbling (if not despairing) abasement in this matter, is no just
fear, and more unjustly made our reproach. As for Religion, no question it
gives a man a right to the purest joys, and is also even in this life,
attended with a most ravishing foretaste, and a most glorious and satisfying
hope: but if in this our bodily estate, the same pure excellency of the thing,
and searching discoveries which it makes, do by reason of the enmity of Satan,
and detestable and yet inevitable importunities and warrings of the World and
the Flesh, render us necessarily obnoxious to many doubtings, fears and
oppositions, against which we are oblidged and by the word commanded to pray,
watch, wrestle and fight continually; do you therefore, because we thus warn,
justly accuse us, as if we made Religion a life of doubting, let be to
countenance these melancholy affectations and pretended enthusiasmes? Sir, if
you were as serious in the practice, as you appear affected in the speculations
of Religion, your experience of the many devices of Satan, the deceitfulness of
your own heart, the uncessant oppositions of the Flesh and Spirit, together
with the oppressing and grievous sense of a body of death and sin which does so
easily beset, would certainly convince you, not only that security and not
doubting is the common bane of professors, but that our brightest shinings of
joy in time, are after the saddest shours of mourning, that the most relishing
wine of our consolation is made of the water of Repentance, that it is from the
seed of tears, that the harvest of our joy grows; nay that our blessedness
here is in a manner wrapped up in mourning, and that it is hereafter only that
we are to look for the times of refreshing when we shall be fully comforted:
But the Lord grant your more real and solid dejections, and deliver you from
the vanity of an airy imagination which both in it self does bend to, and is
frequently in righteousness plagued by these enthusiasmes, wherewith you do
reproach us. And thus all men may see, how unjustly we are by you blamed, for
the progress that Quakerism makes amongst us; and how directly, not only that,
but most of the irreligion and profanity of these days, is chargeable upon
your way. To this vindication I could further subjoin a very significant
testimony viz. How that King James, in his first and more innocent years, did
make his boast of the constitution of Presbyterian government, as the most
effectual bulwark against error and heresy, but the certainty of this truth
needs no such support. For your insinuation of piety and love here subjoined,
we have so often found the most keen arrows of your calumny dipped in this
ointment, that I think you oblidged to my civility, when I pass it as one of
your poor sweetening transitions.

In the next place you license your N. C. To characterize you freely, to the
effect that, seeing you are resolved to let him prove nothing, even what is
truth in his charge may be construed prejudice: but seeing it has been my
endeavor, so to draw and design in vive colors, that naming would appear
superfluous, I need not prosecute such a representation. As for the answer you
return of your brave temper against reproach, Apostolic firmness against all
reports, your pure anger without sin, and more then humane goodness even to die
for your hating traducers, it were folly in me to question the truth, where
sincerity alone would be an incredible happiness; but seeing these elogies are
the smoke you cap^at, I grudge you not.

You go on, and truly I believe with no less candor, to class us, in some sober
and modest, and others sour, heady, uncharitable and unsociable: and for the
first, you honor them, great civility, and honor them the more, for their
first founder Calvin, great wit, and then lest this be taken for a jeer, you
tell us that the first being ever Presoytery had, was in Calvin's brain; and
this you assure, a great evidence indeed; and verily whether your civility,
wit, or evidence be the greater, it were hard to determine; only as it must be
an extraordinary complement, to which a scoffing jest does make an accession,
and an extraordinary jest, to which falsehood gives the point, and an
extraordinary falsehood which both the Scriptures, the practice of the first and
purest times of the Church, and the more judicious and ingenuous of your own
party do redargue; so questionless in all the three you are eminently singular.

Now for the second Class of us, which you make to consist of narrow headed,
hot brained, cross grained Fanatics, you must be licensed to use them
severely; and with all my heart use such as you please, only use the whole
party and their cause truly, and then I am confident this member of your
distinction, will be found but a groundless malicious forgery; but to confirm
it, you remember a passage of one of our Preachers, allowing Sharpness in
defense of the Truth, and to check the proud conceit of Adversaries, and though
it arise most natively from the words, and be clearly verifiable in all times
and occasions; yet, loving to rake in our former divisions, you will have it to
be directed against the insolence, forsooth, of the then protesting party, and
to serve as a complete apology for any sharpness you have used: But, Sir, as
you cannot subsume in the terms of that doctrine, either upon your own defense
of the Truth, or upon our proud conceit, and consequently do fall short of your
designed apology; so your reflecting upon these differences, wherein you are
nothing concerned, being plainly intended for the disgracing of the whole
party, does far more discover your malice, then our infirmities: and therefore
to use the words of the Text, seeing you use these of the doctrine, although
there be mockers with us, and our eye does continow in their provocation, at
which upright men may be astonished, yet let the innocent stir up himself against
the hypocrite and the righteous hold on his way, and he that has clean hands
shall be stronger and stronger.

The next wedge which you set and drive for to divide us, is to tell the world,
that our humors and sollies, are not chargeable upon the whole Presbyterian
party, that the English Presbyterians are ^ar beyond us in moderation, as
appears from Baxter's Disputations on Church Government, and all they desired
in the late treaty, was to be joined with the Bishops in the exercise of
Discipline which we refuse. It Is answered, what your opinion is of the whole
party, shall not be taken from your fraudulent insinuations, but as these are
plainly enough confuted, by your more free expressions in other parts,
particularly in your, 1. Dialogue, Page 6. Where you say, Rebellion was the
soul of our whole work, and the Covenant the bond thereof, and Dial. 4. P. 62.
where you charge both English and Scots, with all the blood of the late war; So
these umbrages of differences, which you allege, either from a particular
person his problematick disputations, or a streatch of Accommodation, flowing
in a great pressure of necessity from men not by oath tied with us to this
preservation of that where unto they had not actually attained, but only to
endeavor a Reformation according to the sure rules therein set down, ought not
to be either a matter of stumbling, or an excuse to your deceit.

But now forgetting your distinction, with the same breath you exhibit one of
your former charges against us all in these words, before the late dissorders,
all the Presbyterians in Scotland, did sit in the Courts for Church Discipline,
and why may not you as well do the like; And to this you make your N. C. Answer
upon the old legal establishment then standing, and never rescinded until the
year. 1662. On purpose that you may surprise him, as you speak, with a new
discovery forsooth of an Act published, and printed now 57 years ago, whereby
you say, the Act. 1592. S^tling Presbytery, was expressly annulled, and hereupon
you pretend such amazement, and do make such exclamations upon our disingenuous
forgery, or intolerable ignorance and groundless and presumptuous shisme, that
this whole passage, saving your reverence, does plainly appear to me to be but
the schareleton tricks of a pitiful impostor. For,

1. I told you before upon your. 4. Di^l (Where I confess I waved this matter
as not worthy the answering) That the reason of our different practice now in
order to your meetings, from what was used formerly, is plainly this, that
Prelacy, being at first introduced in this Church mostly by cunning, and a lent
procedure, our true Presbyteries were not thereby discontinued, but only
injuriously invaded and usurped upon; of which practices, any honest Minister
being free, and purging himself of all appearance of accession, by open
protestation, might very lawfully sit still, and serve his Master therein: but
in the late overturning, all things being carried at a far different rate, and
not only the old Presbyteries distol^ed, but a new foundation being laid, of
the Kings Supremacy, and all the power and jurisdiction of this Church therein
fountained, and both Bishops and the present pretended Presbyteries, thereon
founded, it is most manifest, that your present meetings, being no lawful
Church^ in^sicatories, are not to be countenanced by any true Minister of Jesus
Christ.

2. You make your. N. C. lay claim to a legal establishment, as a necessary
warrant to empower Ministers to meet in Ecclesiastick-courts, whereas you know,
that although we judge Magistrates bound to give Christ's Church the assistance
and protection of their authority and laws, yet we constantly hold the power of
assembling, as well as of Discipline, to be intrinseck in the Church, derived
unto it from Jesus Christ its head, and this is certainly a jus divinum, to
which all true Non-conformists do constantly adhere, and which your. N. C. does
very foolishly and weakly omit.

3. The noise you make, that it is in all our mouths that the law for
Pres^yteries, was in force until the year 1662. (Which for my own part, I may
declare, I never either thought or heard alleged, as the account of the
different practice wherewith you here urge us) and your pretended surprise, and
vain account of being undeceived, by a person of great honor who showed you
the Act. 1612. (Which I hardly believe, that there is any in Scotland of your
coa^ ignorant of) What do they signify, but the dress of a ridiculous fable, to
impose upon the simple to our prejudice?

4. If the matter were worth the contending for, I could show you, that, that
person of great honor, is not much oblidged to your report for the credit of
his knowledge, in as much as your words do import that both he and you do
understand the Act. 1592. settling Presbytery, to have been by the Act 1612.
totally rescinded, and Presbyteries thereby totally disolved; whereas the
clause of the Act runs verbatim thus, annulling and rescinding the 114 Act.
Parl. 1592. And all and whatsomever Acts, Laws, Ordinances and Customs, in so
far as they or any part thereof are contrary or derogatory unto the Articles
above written, so that there being no Article or provision in the Act. 1612.
Making void the approbation, given to the being and meetings of Presbyteries by
the 1592. (Although I grant their power and privileges, are thereby much
diminished) It is evident, that the power of meeting, and doing all other
things, not altered by the posterior, did still remain allowed to Presbyteries
by virtue of the prior. Say not that the first part of the abovementioned
rescissory clause, relative to the Act. 1592. Is simple, and does there
terminat, as I heard once affirmed by one of your party, not, it is like, of so
great honor as your informer, but, I am sure, in this point, of more knowledge
then your self, who proving it by the point ordinarily set after the figures of
the year of God, would have the following restriction, only to concern the
Acts and Laws generally annulled. But as it is evident, that the point makes
no period, and protestant Religion contained in that Act. 1592. Should be
vacated and annulled; so the obvious tenor of the words, together with the
sense of the Parl. Anno. 1662. Who in the new establishment of your Prelacy,
did judge it convenient to the grounds therein laid down, to rescind de novo,
that old Act, in all its heads, clauses and Articles, whatever might be the
consequence, do abundantly elide this conceit. However I do again tell you,
that our consciences, in this matter, are better founded, and not squared to
such mutable rules: And, therefore, seeing our grounds are firm and stable,
let me in the words of your own exhortation, obtest you and your party to
consider your way better, cease from your persecution, repent of your apostasy
and usurpation, and return into favor with God and union with us.

Now follows a childish quarrel between you and your N. C. anent the tenderness
of your love and prayers in our behalf, above that measure which we use toward
you, and 1. You say, woe should be to you and you N. C. If the love of God to
you did appear in such effects as the love of some of ours does, the invidious
strain of their prayers being universally, that God would bring you down,
destroy the incorrigible, and show the rest the evil of there defection: but,
you say, how would we take it, if you should pray, that God would destroy our
party, and show us the evil of our Rebellion, and other wicked courses. It Is
answered, 1. Seeing that woe shall certainly be unto all such, and they are far
from the love of God, who are incorrigible, that God by making manifest his
righteous judgments, would glorify his own Name, and deliver his Church from
such adversaries, is a prayer clearly warranted, both from the word, and the
practice of the Saints, nor is it in the least discordant, from that Christian
charity, whereby I am really moved, earnestly to desire the Lord to deliver you
and all both from the thing, and its punishment. 2. That God would bring down
the proud that exalt themselves against Jesus Christ, and give repentance to
backsliders, is a prayer so agreeable to the will of God, and full of love to
the persons prayed for, that I am certain, whatever may be said against our
principles, which I remit to the impartial discerner, yet our practice in this,
as being both tenderly Christian, and fairly consequent, cannot but be
approven. 3. Mistake not, if you should pray for us, in the same strain, we
might possibly, and with great reason, account it an aggravation of the evils
of your other principles and practices: but we are not so narrow, as to
construe it a particular breach of charity: Nay for my part, as I would think
it rationally consequent, so, abstracting from the errors which it suppos^th, I
would take it for the greatest testimony both of your zeal toward God, and love
toward us. But if I may use a little freedom, why do you please your self so
much in vain talk? though we hear not many of your prayers, yet, I am sure, all
know, that we want not plenty of matter and instances for a retortion, in what
terms soever you please to frame your challenge: are we so short in memory, as
not to remember how your pulpits sounded, both in preaching and prayer, after
the late rising, and that not only against these poor broken innocents, but in
such a manner against our whole party, as, by false and fierce accusing of all
without distinction, might almost have excused in them the like attempt, to
save from that fury that thundered every where? If you would have any latter
and more particular instances, pray inquire after the B. of St. Andrew's
Sermons, specially that preached by him the 30 of Jan. 1669. and the other
before the last Parliament: you complain of the severe style of our prayers,
he, good man, being ill satisfied, with such soft and a^rie tools, and having
passionately fumed out a most bitter invective against our Presbyterian
Ministers, not long since his brethren and benefactors, did very agreeably
close it in these words, these are circumforaneous Demagogues, acted by a
spirit, otherwise to be cast out then by fasting and prayer. But what need I
mention your prayers, when indeed many of your practices have most visibly been
such, as may justly make your fairest words suspected of the deepest
dissimulation. I know some of you have a fashion of praying, that God would
unite this poor Church, and heall our breaches: But if that be all the evidence
you can bring, to show the healing and peaceable spirit to be on your side.
Pray tell me, why the Church of Rome, that may boast as much of the same
formula, may not as justly pretend to it? I might further add, that it appears
to be no extraordinary merit for such as are countenanced by the Powers, and do
Idolize peace and ease, to wish for an union with any whom they apprehend to be
their opposits, and that perhaps the more sober amongst you, for all their
compliance under the tentation, yet are not so far abandoned, as that they dare
in Gods sight justify there defection, and pray against the party and courses,
which they know they did not desert, from any conscientious conviction. But I
have insisted too long on so poor a subject, and I can in your own words assure
you, that we are not only ready to unite with you, but are extremly, though not
implicitly, desirous of it; and do therefore daily pray, that God would open
your eyes, reclaim you from your backslidings, and grant unto us union and
peace, in truth, to his glory. This is the Accommodation, that is only
desirable, if you pursue any other, I am certain, that, however it may be
consonant to your designs, yet it is altogether dissonant from your
pro^ession; and therefore, if we be more rational and upright, to hate all
sinful Accommodation, and rather to wish that our differences may stand, and be
perpetuat in the behalf of truth, then cemented by a sinful compliance, wherein
are we to be reprehended? Now that this is all that we teach in this matter,
the same books which you refer to, do testify; and that it is none other,
then the very doctrine of the School of Christ, the frequent
Scripture-injunctions to the defense of, and stedfastness in the truth, with
the commands of a just opposition to, and avoiding of every false way and its
promoters, do sufficiently evince.

But you add, Let all men judge, if there be not a bitterness in the Preface
to Mas^er Rutherfoords letters, the Apologetical Narration, and Naphtali,
unsampled in any satire, let be grave and Christian writing. Sir, since you are
pleased to engage me into particular vindications, I answer, That, seeing the
plainness of truth has always been an unsufferable bitterness to all perverse
spirits, this your reflection does not deserve any special notice, if I were
inclined to retort, it were not more easy for me, then evident to say in your
own words, and let all men judge, if there be not a subtle poisonous malice,
in your few Dialogues, above all the pretended bitterness against which you
clamor: But, seeing these Writings, that you here mention, are not only too
clearly warranted by undeniable truth, but manifestly approven by
Scripture-practice, and almost style, in the like cases of backsliding and
apostasy, your charging them with a bitterness unsampled in any Satire, has a
higher tendency then probably you did advert unto.

But you proceed, and what cursed doctrine is it Naphtali broacheth, concerning
private persons their punishing of crimes in case of the supinnesse of the
Magistrate? Pray, Sir, what is it? For really I am of the opinion, that,
notwithstanding of your insinuat supposition, the thing is only notour to your
self. We find indeed, that Naphtali, respecting the order and subordination of
ends, viz. the glory of God in the first place, the good of the whole Society,
wherein the safety of the particular members is included in the next place, and
thirdly, the maintenance of Government and Governors, for the procuring of
these other ends, does accordingly determine the obligation and duty of
Subjects; and as from this principle, both he and many others do, in the case
of intolerable and inevitable oppression, allow, even to the smaller part, the
right of self-defence; so, in the case of notorious Rebellion against God, and
perversion of his righteous laws, he, by an inference as much stronger and
clearer in this case, then in that, as the indearing importance of the matter,
viz. the Glory of God and the salvation of souls, is greater then that of our
perishing lives and fortunes, and a manifest revolt from God and open
overturning of his work, is a more enforcing exigence then any necessity can be
pleaded for self-defence, the principal grounds of that privilege, proceeds
to assert, to these small or great, few or many whom the Lord stirs up in
the ceasing and failing of other means, the power and right of Reformation; and
thence, by way of anticipation of an objection, he goes on to show, that the
deed of Phineas may not be made a cavil, and that the samine, being only an
heroic stretch of his more fervent zeal, and not an extraordinary act by
reason of any special express warrant, may, both for encouraging unto, and
justifying the like practices, very justly be regarded as an imitable example:
but as for your blunt and uncautioned general, viz. that private persons may
punish crimes in case of the supinness of the Magistrate, I am confident who
ever peruseth that whole passage in Naphtali, will find it no less calumnious
on your part, then it is remote from the account that I have exhibited, Now, if
you remain still of the opinion, that even the Doctrine, by me acknowledged for
Naphtali's, is accursed, when you shall have answered the reasons and
Scriptures by which he confirms it, and particularly the command given, Deuteronomy.
13. v. 12, 13, 14, 15. with the examples of Phineas executing judgment without
legal process, Readiness soldiers rescuing Jonathan from the Kings injustice,
Elijah killing Readiness Priests, not by any special command mentioned, in the
presence of the King, without his leave, as the King himself narrates it, 1
Kings 19, 1. and Azariah with fourscore valiant Priests, their resisting Uziah
in his proud usurpation, all of them less or more dependent, upon the
forementioned position, it will be seasonable for me to reply. It is true, one
o^ your party has been at the pains to survey Naphtali, and particularly, and
at great length, the points above mentioned, whether with candor, or with
clamor, by strong and sound reason, or by carping, wresting and falsifying
sophistry, I leave it to others to examine. Only when I consider, that where,
in the beginning, Naphtali does treat of their matt^rs, he does it expressly
and tru^ly by way of narrative from the doctrine and practices of our first
Reformers, and that with a very observable caution and moderation, and that
when in the end he does resume this purpose, he carries on his assertion, from
most simple and evident principles, by a very rational and pe^spicuous
connection, to the conclusion designed, I do indeed ma^vel at the method
wherewith I find him treated: but waving g^neral vind^cations, seeing your
whole party as well as your self, do not a little talk of Naphtali his making
use of that instance of Phineas, and do think, by the inferences which you
thence make, to render the truth odious, it will not be amiss that I enlarge a
little on this subject.

And first I say, that the fact of Phineas appears to me, not to have been
extraordinary, or to have proceeded upon any particular commission to him
given, but plainly to be such, whereunto in its then-proper circumstances, any
one of the Congregation was equally warranted, and which in the like exigence,
has still a laudable use for imitation. If you inquire my reasons, there can
be none more convincing, then the Scripture account of this matter, Israel in
Shittim, joines himself unto Baal-peor, and the anger of the Lord being
therefore kindled, the Judges are commanded to slay every one his men that were
joined unto Baal-peor; yet the plague by this execution is not stayed, and the
whole Congregation are weeping before the door of the Tabernacle, when, behold,
even in there sight about such an exercise, because of a destroying plague
raging in the camp, a man of Israel in his most impudent wickedness comes,
bringing a Midian^tish woman unto his brethren, which Phineas perceiving, he
rises up from among the Congregation ( tanquam quilibet) takes a javelin, and
going in after the Israelite brevi manu, in the very Act, thrusts both the
man and the woman through, and so the plague was stayed, and the Lord says unto
Moses, Phineas has turned my wrath away from the children of Israel, while he
was zealous for my sake among them, wherefore, behold, I give unto him my
Covenant of peace and thus Numb. 25. Which the Spirit of the Lord again
commemorating. Psalm. 106. Describes in these words, then stood up Phineas, and
executed judgment, and so the plague was stared; and that was compted to him
for righteousness, unto all generations for evermore; by which Scriptures this
deed, in it self upon the matter agreeable unto a positive and clear command,
being represented, as proceeding, in the Author, not from any special call from
God, or command from Moses, whereof there is not the least vestige in the Text,
but from the alone impulse of an holy and fervent Zeal, exciting him to stand
up to execute judgment, and therefore counted to him for righteousness, etc.
If these be not the undeniable circumstances and characters of a deed only in
the manner heroic, and which any person in that Congregation, acting from the
same sincere zeal of God, might without any particular warrant have performed
with equal acceptance, let all ingenuous men judge.

2. I say that whatever capacity may be attribute to Phineas, as the son of
Eleazar then high priest, (which indeed is all we find in Scripture concerning
him preceding this time) or upon the ground of any other conjecture; yet the
samine does no ways make out, that this deed was an Act of ordinary
administration, and consequently deprives not Naphtali, of its pertinent
application, in as much as it is evident, that Phineas did not do this deed,
either by virtue and using the power of any Authority, wherewith possibly he
might have been vested, or yet by Moses his order, or command, but simply from
the motive, of that sincere and high measure of zeal whereby, without waiting
the command of the superior Magistrate, or observing a legal procedure, he was
suddenly acted in such a flagrant, and openly provoking wickedness, immediately
to interpose and execute judgment; and therefore we see, that as nather by
Moses his command, nor by the judges there obedience, in slaying every one his
men that were guilty, the fierce anger of the Lord was turned away; so it was
only by Phineas his fact, as being of another nature, and his eminent zeal
appearing and prompting him in such a manner that the Lord was appeased, and
the plague stayed. And really when I observe, that it is in the readiness and
fervor of Phineas, his zeal transporting him, as it were, to the omission of
the ordinary solemnities of judgment, for the punishing of such a manifest and
provoking villainy, that the Spirit of the Lord seems to place the high and
singular praise of this action, I cannot but equally admire, how that any
person, should either attribute it to an extraordinary command, or account it
an Act of common obedience to Moses, or yet of ordinary jurisdiction.

3. I say, that although in certain particular cases, such as Abraham his
stretching out his hand to slay his Son, the Israelits there borrowing to the
spoiling of the Egyptians, and Samsons killing of himself with the Philistines,
all obviously interfering with the general commands contained in the law, where
an express warrant is not recorded, the samine may, and ought to be supposed;
yet where the deed is in substance agreeable to the precept, and the apparent
singularity of any circumstance remitigated by another extraordinary occurrent,
and where the performance is expressly ascribed to the actors zeal or
fortitude, and not the least mention made of any special command, there, to
recurre to tacit warrants, is altogether groundless. If this the author of the
Survey had adverted to, he could not in the pursuance of his alledgeance, that
the sovereign God can cross ordinary rules, and appoint some to execute his
judgments extraordinarily, wherein they are not to be followed without the same
special commission (a truth which we do not controvert) have thereto subjoined
examples so widely different, as Moses his killing the Egyptian which having
vengeance admixed over and above the quality of the Israelits defense, is by
Scripture referred to an express warrant Act. 7. 24, 25. Ehud's killing of
Eglon, which on the other hand was without all question lawful to any Israelite
against such an oppressor, Elias his destroying of the fifties with fire from
heaven, which no doubt does not more upon the matter require, then by its
extraordinary manner it is witnessed to have had an special command, his
killing of Baal's Priests, which on the other part I do nothing question, to
have been only a noble act of executing Gods judgment, which a wretched
uxorious Prince fearing to do, the people themselves might lawfully have done:
Abraham going to kill Issac, which is plainly and particularly commanded,
David's engaging in duel with Goliath as I judge, which any in the camp of
Israel might laudably with the same permission have undertaken, and lastly
Samson's killing (not murdering, as he inadvertently speaks) of the
Philistines with himself, which for the reason above assigned did certainly
proceed upon a particular license. But the Surveyer's design in this so
inconsistent a mixture is evident, viz. that having premised so many, part
pertinent, part impertinent examples to his position, he might with the less
observation add the Lords stirring up of Phineas as a suitable instance,
whereas it is obvious, that the same is not more unlike to the cases of
Abraham, Moses, Samson and Elias with the fifties, then it justly quadrats to
that other of Elias against Baal's Priests, and both this and these of Ehud and
David, are nothing referable to the ground he lays down, but do plainly
proceed by virtue only of general rules taking place in there respective
exigences without the necessity (what ever message Ehud de facto had) of any
special commission.

4. I say, that Phineas his fact, was indeed a stretch beyond the line of his
ordinary vocation, but so far from importing upon this ground the necessity of
a special warrant, that as the Scripture does clearly impute this his transport
to the rare measure of his zeal, inflaming him in a manner to the present
execution of a just vengeance upon such a detestable abomination; so it does no
less evidently hold forth how that particular and extraordinary exigences de
facto occurring, the very common principles of duty, may, without a special
extraordinary warrant, carry to singular performances. And thus we are arrived
at the main point, whereunto this example of Phineas is by Naphtali applied,
and about which both the Surveyer, and you do raise such a noise, and yet in
effect the matter does contain no greater difficulty in thesi, then that which
is fully satisfied and removed by the most common and ordinary distinction of a
man's calling unto that which is proper and particular, whereunto in the
ordinary course of things, he is regularly and commonly confined, and unto that
which is general, which not being circumscribed by any particular rule, does,
from the common obligation of the end for which all particular stations are
institute, in the clear exigence of an extraordinary incident according to the
general rules of righteousness bind, to an agreeable practice. I know Naphtali
in his tenderness to offend for preventing of mistakes, insinuates several
distinctions and subdistinctions, whereby an action heroic, and a call
thereto, may be discerned from that which properly and strictly is termed
extraordinary, and its call, and that the Surveyer in his rambling way, by
proponing the distinction of acts heroical and extraordinary to consist in
this, viz. that acts heroical do not deviat from the common rules of virtue,
but differ only from its common acts quoad modum perfectiorem, whereas acts
extraordinary go beyond ordinary rules and are founded upon special warrant,
goes about to impugn Naphtali in that wherein they both agree. But seeing that
all the difficulty of these distinctions, as I have said, is very easily and
plainly resolved by these several aptitudes of a person in order to a commanded
performance, which depending upon circumstances, may be thereby so diversified,
that what in the ordinary and unperturbed condition of things would be
accounted an excess of our particular calling and an usurpation, in an
e^^^aordinary occurrence becomes a necessary duty of our general calling, and
seeing the certainty and usefulness of this distinction, according to the
continual variety of humane affairs, may be undeniably instanced in thousands
of experiences, and particularly in that more ready then regular concurrence,
which we see practiced in the case of fire, or any such surprising calamity,
the more zealous then orderly interposition which all men would allow to a son,
even in the presence of a righteous Magistrate, for preventing or staying a
sudden outrage intended against his fathers person, that resentment of justus
dolor, which the common law indulges to a husband against his wife and an
adulterer found in the act in his own house, and in many such cases, I think, I
say, that these things considered without pursuing any further inquiry, I may
from the grounds already laid down fairly conclude, that as Phineas his fact
was not extraordinary in respect of any special warrant, neither probable nor
necessary in this subject, but a pure product of that large measure of holy
zeal wherewith he was endued, and whereunto all men ought to aspire: so there
may be certain exigences of the glory of God, which tristing with a suitable
degree of the same zeall without waiting the consent of a godly, far more
without regarding the opposition of an ungodly Magistrate, may, upon the general
grounds and obligations to righteousness, lawfully provoke and excite to
convenient action.

Now, if it be objected, that this conclusion being only general, allowing the
power, but not defining what is the exigence requisite to its exercise, may
more readily prove a snare and an offense, then conduce to any good purpose, It
is answered 1. That seeing my undertaking was, to vindicat the Scripture truth
of Phineas his deed, recorded for our instruction, from men's mistakes, and
Naphtali from their calumny, if I thence rationally elicite the inference made,
the accidental hazard of men's misapplication, flowing from their own weakness
and corruption, cannot more properly be charged upon Naphtali, then upon his
Surveyer; but it is in effect an inconvenience, which all are concerned to
explicate. 2. I freely acknowledge that such is the fervor of corrupt passion,
far more rapid, almost in all, then the pure zeal of God is to be found active
in any, that too much caution, tenderness and fear, can scarce be adhibite in a
subject, wherein even the most warrantable provocation of holy zeal is
ordinarily attended, with such a concurrence of self-interest and other carnal
temptations, as it is impossible without the signal assistance of the Spirit of
grace, to have its exercise, in any notable measure or manner, without the
mixture of a sinful allay, beside the evil of ill example, whereunto, it may be
very readily and most pernicio^sly drawn; and therefore seeing the
consideration, resulting from the concurrence of all circumstances, whereupon
the right dignoscing of such deeds does mostly depend, is oftentimes most
difficult, and delicate, the more easy and safe course, and best use of this
whole doctrine, is rather to give judgment upon a case of that nature, when
actually existent, and its whole contexture exposed to certain examination,
then to set down general rules directive of such practices, But 3. As the Lord
has delivered unto us the rules of righteousness, in themselves certain and
evident, and absolutely comprehensive of all cases incident, so he, who knows
and does the same, is no doubt of a good understanding, and whose heart is
sound in the Lords statutes, walking therein continually in fear, humility and
uprightness, he walks surely and shall not be aehamed; The Law of the Lord is
perfect converting the soul, the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise
the simple, the Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart, the
Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. Here is the complete
and fixed Rule, and who so takes heed thereto diligently, in faith and fear,
is not only fitted and prepared for all ordinary duty, but thoroughly furnished
unto all good works. It is true, that in all heroic, and more elevat acts,
beside the rule and common virtue whence it flows, we do find the exciting and
impelling motions of the Spirit frequently mentioned, as customary and
necessary thereto; but seeing unto every righteous performance, the assistance
of grace is requisite, and the impulse and excitation mentioned is nothing else
but a greater measure of that assisting grace, which the extraordinariness of
the case, and the difficulties therein occurring, do call for, and, at most,
does only determine to the species (as Lawyers speak) of the action; but it is
not at all its rule and warrant, the interveening of such motions dot not alter
the rule, or restrict its obligation, nor yet hinder the action so performed,
to be to all an imitable example. That actions following from and depending
upon special antecedent commands, which, for the most part, are singular in
their matter, as well as in their manner, are not to be taken for examples, is
very readily confessed: but that an extraordinary motion, first supposing duty,
and in the next place only requisite and given because of some uneasiness in
the execution, should restrict the duty in general to the person so gifted,
when the same or the like measure of assisting grace is rather to be by all
desired, is not at all agreeable. I say first, supposing duty; for, that great
gi^ts, or strong impulses are not the rule of duty either under an ordinary or
extraordinary exigence, much less do give men a call to go beyond the rules of
their calling (as the Surveyer captiously alleges Naphtali to suggest) is by
me heartily conceeded, as a very important point for clearing the truth which I
maintain: That which only remains to be adverted to is, that although these
singular motions and impulses be indeed subsequent and subservient, both to the
rule of duty, and to a man's calling resulting therefrom, and from the
circumstances wherein he is stated; yet, they seem to have such a peculiar
determining influence in these heroic performances, as to the species of the
action, that it is not so much the particular deed, that we are to heed for our
imitation, as we are to emula^ the grace and principle of zeal, which produces
it, and is therein so conspicuously relucent, for our upstirring to acts in
like manner, as God shall give us the opportunity. From all which it is
obvious, that as it is the opportunity, res facti, and the assistent motion of
the Lord's Spirit, which chiefly do determine, by way of excitation, as to the
particular species of an heroic enterprise; so, it is only from the known and
immovable Law of God, and the nature of the occasion, wherein the samine does
take place, and from which two our calling does proceed, that the obligation of
Phineas his deed, and of all other the like practices, does descend, and
according whereunto they are to be examined, and in their conformity thereto be
proposed for imitation

These things then being thus explained, I shall take leave to lengthen this
digression a little further, for the removing the Surveyer his calumnies and
objections against Naphtali on this point. And first, he says, That Naphtali
by adducing the instance of Phineas, for the Patrociny of such, whom he would
have esteemed, as having acted from the like warrant and principle, makes
every man judge in his own private discretion, to fall in hand with such
practices, and consequently gives leave to all or any, upon pretense, or
because he thinks that Rulers have fallen into Apostasy, by any means to cut
them off. But 1. if Phineas his fact be indeed such, and of use for imitation,
as I have already proven, the perverseness of the Surveyer's Malignity, is not
so much levelled against Naphtali, as against the very Scriptures of truth,
whence his doctrine is taken 2. Where does Naphtali allow men's private judgment
and discretion to be their warrant in such practices? That every man does de
facto judge, and practice according to his own private discretion, is indeed no
more requisite to the procedure of rational agents, then, because of man's
ignorance and corruption, it has both in matters of this kind, and all other
matters of truth and righteousness, been the sad productive of many great
inconveniences; and if, for such inconveniences, the sure rules of truth and
righteousness must be altered, I am certain, as there is nothing truth, either
in natures light or Scripture revelation, which has, through man's abuse,
produced so many and so sad evils, as that of the power of, and submission due
to soveraignity, which almost every where, and in all ages has been perverted
unto tyranny and oppression, and, for one instance of disorder or sedition
that, can be charged upon popular liberty, is attended with thousands of far
greater extravagancies; so the Surveyer and his party of all men ought to be
most sparing in the sophistry of such objections: but seeing Naphtali allows
no other judges de jure, save these unerring rules, which the Lord has
appointed, this fallacy which the Surveyer does continually and most foolishly
beat upon, through all his Survey, alleging still where Naph. allows to
rational men a discerning faculty, (without which it is most certain, that
nather reason nor morality can subsist) that therefore he does set up this
judgment of discretion to be the only dictat of righteousness, is by that most
notour and obvious distinction, of the last result of the practical judgment
from the fixed rule of righteousness, unanswerably refuted, it being thereby
manifest, that, as the former is, de facto, the necessary interveinent medium
of application to every moral action; so, the later is that, by which, de jure,
both the judgment it self, and the action thence ensuing, ought to be regula^
and judged, and without either turning the use of our discerning, unto an
implicit and stupid deference and submission, or exauctorating the rules of
righteousness, by a lawless licentious liberty.

2. The Surveyer urges Naphtali with another calumny; and that is, That
although Naphtali does allege, that he holds not such instances as that of
Phineas for regular precedents, for all times and persons; yet he gives no
caution against the false pretense of heroical excitations, it is easy to
raise the devil, but not so to lay him; if he could set down rules to bar a
headie people from tumult and confusion, he would say something to
satisfaction. But 1. Is not his declaring such instances to be no regular
precedent, but restricting their imitation to the cases of extreme necessity,
or the like manifest exigence, a very considerable caution. 2. Naphtali does so
plainly require, not only that the matter of the action be just and lawful, and
of it self natively and really conducing to the glory of God, but, in an
evident necessity, formally intended by the actor from a Spirit of holy Zeal,
wrought and excited by the Lord, with whom is the residue of the Spirit, and
who thereby breaths upon people and persons, when and as he lists, that I
marvel how the Surveyer was not ashamed to contradict so clear an evidence^ But
if he say all these things may be pretended, where they are not, and for this
there is no caution given. It Is answered, seeing it is impossible to adhibite a
better caution against hypocritical shows, then the touchstone of truth,
whereby they are to be tried, and the abuse of lying pretensions is incident
unto the most evident and certain duties, Naphtali, requiring truth and
reality, and not admitting men's delusions, and imaginations, cannot be herewith
justly charged; but, the truth is, the Surveyers whole representation of
Naphtali in this matter is so foully calumnious, that, without following him
further, I shall content my self briefly to review the objections, which he
makes against the doctrine delivered, anent the imitableness of Phineas his
act, where finding himself caught by Scripture-evidence, how with disjointed
reasons, and lame testimonies, he strangely tosseth and turns himself for an
issue, the impartial eye, in his eight particular Answers to Naphtali
subjoined, will easily discern.

And. 1. He doubts if Phineas was a private person, and thence does
groundlesly pretend the warrant of his ordinary calling, as to the fact
controverted. 2. Departing from this, upon the supposition that he was a
private person, he, without any reason, insinuates from Moses his being
present in that great assembly of the people, and his after-approving of the
deed, that therefore it was done by his authority and command 3. He
impertinently differenceth the case of Isreal's sin, from that of our present
backsliding, whereas (waving the too manifest parity of our present open
rebellion against the Lord, usurping his Kingdom, changing his ordinances, and
filling the land both with the idolatry of popery and all lewdness, to the
then horrible idolatry and villainous whoredom, wherein he places Isreal's sin)
the main disparity of a then godly Magistrate, is Naph. undeniable advantage. 4.
He falsely, and inconsistently with his former grounds, alleges, that Phineas
acted by special commission, of which the Scripture is not only silent, but
does very significantly intimate the contrary, as we have heard. 5. He
foolishly cautioneth, that actions specially warranted, are not for common
rules, to which I freely add, that not only such, but even these, which are
special from the sole reason of their singular exigence, are not to be drawn to
common example. 6. He needlessly quarrelleth, anent the distinction of Acts
heroical and extraordinary, and misconstruing the Lords approbation of Phineas,
Numb. 25. He plainly wresteth the elogie. Psalm. 106. And that was counted unto
him for righteousness, as if its emphasis were not the rare commendation of
the deed, but that otherwise it might have been imputed to him for sin, unto an
inconcludent inference of a special command and calling. 7. He calumniously
asserteth, that Naphtali holds great gifts, and secret impulses to be a
sufficient call for men to go beyond the ordinary rules, which God has set to
them in their callings, whereas, all we find in Naphtali is, that joining a
zealous excitation to the Lords command, in an exigence of extreme necessity,
he thereof, for superabundance, makes up a sufficient call to the heroic
action thereon ensuing, And. 8. And lastly, he grossly perverteth the question,
as if any of us did affirm, that we have warrant now to look for extraordinary
persons, having Gods special and secret mandat to do works, which neither
Reason nor Scripture do warrant, when, on the contrary, Naph. Labors mainly,
to show, that even Phineas had no such character. Now that these are the
Surveyers reflections upon this fact of Phineas, and this their success, the
perusal of his Papers with what I have here said does abundantly clear.

It remains, in the next place, that I declare, how that, as Naphtali's
doctrine, here vindicated, is by him only narrative delivered from the records
of our first Reformation; so, the samine is there truly and more fully to be
found; and that Master Knox and our worthy Reformers were of the same opinion,
as to the instance controverted, and from the ground thereof did give a
resolution, in a case far more debatable, then that of Naphlali, the following
passage may evence. In the year 1563 the Queen having emitted a proclamation
against the Mass, and yet conniving thereat, and the Kingdom being visited by
an universal death, which master Knox says, was for the idolatry of our wicked
Rulers, and our ingratitude, that suffered them again to defile the land with
that abomination, the brethren generally offended, determined to put to their
own hands, and to punish, for example to others, and so they practiced on some,
and made intimation to the rest. The Queen offended here at, sends for Master
Knox, and deals with him earnestly, to persuade the people, and principally
the Genlemen of the West, not to put to their hands to punish papists. Master
knox, on the other hand, exhorts her to execute justice, which, if she
omitted, he feared some would let the papists understand, that they should not
be suffered so manifestly to offend without punishment. To this the Queen
answers, will you allow ^that they shall take my sword in their hand? Now
observe his reply The sword of justice, Madam, is Gods, and is given to princes
and rulers for one end, which if they transgress, sparing the wicked and
oppressing the innocents, they, that in the fear of God execute judgment where
God has commanded, offend not God, although Kings do it not; nather yet sin
they, that bridle kings to strike innocent men in their rage, the examples of
Samuel s^aying Agag, Elias Jezabels Prophets, and Phineas, Zimri and Cozbi are
evident. And so, Madam, your Majesty may see, that others then chief
magistrates have lawfully punished, and may punish, the crimes that God commands
to be punished.

By which discourse it is evident, as the sun light, that Naphtali in place of
being the broacher of this doctrine does indeed come short of that, which Mr
Knox has long since asserted; it is true, in his conclusion he says, others
then chief Magistrates, and as if meaning by inferior thereafter subjoines, that
by act of Parliament power is given to all judges, to search and punish
mass-mongers and hearers; but seeing the same is only spoken with an
accommodation to the then case, and that both the grounds of Master Knox his
reasoning, in this place, and his declared opinion, in his appellation and
admonition to the commonalty, viz. that the punishing of idolatry and such
crimes, as touch the majesty of God, does not appertain to rulers only, but to
the body of the people, and every member thereof, according to his vocation,
and according to that possibility, which God does minister, together with the
manifest consequence of clear reason, give no less power to the people against
subaltern then to subaltern against supreme magistrates,

I need not hereupon enlarge, far less to answer the Surveyers profane and
inconsistent reflections upon these times: if the opposition then made to
idolatrous and persecuting Rulers, had been indeed sedition or rebellion
sinfully raised for some unjust cause extrinseck to the matter of religion, by
our first Reformers, as many professors of that time were no dout too palpably
guilty of sacrilege and self-seeking, there had been ground to have placed all
into one category, and vindicate the Lords word from the sin of such
instruments: but seeing, the then-resistance was visibly made in the same
Spirit, which, in the preceding dispensation of and call to suffering, had so
patiently and constantly endured fiery and bloody trialls, for the testimony of
Jesus, and was carried on by these reformers, who continually testifying
against the sacrilege and self-seeking mentioned, did from clear
scripture-grounds, out of the manifest zeal of God, and for the maintenance of
his Gospel, strenuously assert and promove these courses, it is certain, that
their testimony is very significant, adding as much confirmation, as can be
drawn from humane authority: and the Surveyers alleviating thereof, by
alleging that our Lord was crucified by wicked hands, and yet the result was
the worlds redemption, that reprobat ministers have saved their hearers, a
leprous hand may sow good seed, and that heirs of glory may be gotten in
bastard^, is not more impertinent from its non consequence, these works being
manifestly evil, then wickedly contumelious and ungrate: but behold the
instability of this double minded man, who having vented all this foul malice,
against these doings of our first Reformers, subjoineth, let it be so, that
much of their way was justificable upon the account of these motives, which
then impelled them; yet how unlike was the case then, to what it is now, etc.
Whereby it is evident, that it is neither Naphtali's principles, nor yet his
doctrine concerning Phineas, but the Surveyers different present apprehension
of the hypothesis and consequently the blindfolding charm of self-interest
against the power of truth, that seduceth him and his accomplices to their
absurd contradiction.

Having thus asserted Naphtali's doctrine against your malign
misrepresentation, it is time that I consider, what you objecte against him.
And you ^ay ransack all the Provincial letters, Escobar or the other pro^ane
Casuists, you shall not find a more impious and detestable opinion among them,
then this doctrine concerning private persons their punishing of crimes, in
cas^ of the supinnesse of the Magistrate.

But pray, Sir, 1. Wherefore do you enumerat the Provincial Letters, so
elaboratly write against them, among other profane Casuists? This your escape,
if designed, should be a bad reward for the Authors pains taken against that
wicked School,

2. Though the assertion, as by you indefinitly laid down, be not a little
invidious; yet seeing it is undeniable, that Phineas and Elias did, neither as
Magistrates, whatever was their capacity, nor by special warrant, punish crimes
and execute judgment; and that desperate disorders in the public government,
may, by the force of necessity, license to private persons, specially parents
and masters, this power controverted, to affirm without exception that the
doctrine concerning private persons their punishing of crimes, in case of the
supinness of the Magistrate, is cursed, seems rather to be the effect of
passion then of reason.

3. Divine impulses have been and are still casible, and that the Lord thereby,
without the giving of any special commission, may stir up to such an heroic
act, as though necessarily debording from common methods, may not the less, in
its whole tract and event, be attended with so peculiar a luster and evidence
of Gods approbation, as may even force from you an assent, notwithstanding that
the deed can only be maintained by these general positions, which you seem to
disprove, is to me unquestionable. And therefore, your so severe disowning,
without any reserve, of private persons their punishing of crimes, in case of
the supinness of the Magistrate, excluding all possibility of divine
excitations to that purpose, appears to be very precipitant. Are the
contingencies of humane affairs, and their surprisals and pressures such as to
move Kings and Princes on earth, over and above all fixed and regular courses,
to define certain causes and occasions, Quando liceat unicuiqne sine judice se
vindicare, velpublica^ devotionem, and subjug are edicto quod serum esset
punire judicio, it a ut cuncti, adversus latrones publicos, desertoresque
militiae, jus sibi sciant, pro quiet communi, exercendae publicae ultionis,
indultum: And if, in the far more pressing and conspicuous exigences of the
glory of God, when Soul-murderers and Christ-deserters, are not only permitted
but patronized, the Lord, in that case, animat private persons to heroic
undertakings for his glory, when all other judgment fails, shall the
justifying of such practices, though otherwise countenanced by many undeniable
testimonies, be exclaimed against as accursed doctrines? far be it from us, and
all that love the Lords glory, and adore his soveraignity. I say, otherwise
countenanced, etc. for that some men, under these colors, may pretend to the
like warrant, when in reality they have it not, is indeed to be regreted, nay,
that the present loose, and lewd practices of some, who most licentiously
invade Conformists, under cloud of night, in their own houses, to no good
purpose whatsomever, but to the great scandal of Religion and prejudice of the
Country, are such as by many clear circumstances, are utterly to be condemned,
whatever they may pretend, is, I hope, manifest without any observation, and
needs not any further caution.

4. If I may come a little nearer on this subject, wherein, I protest
sincer^ly, I have no design, but to vindicat the truth and ways of the Lord,
with all tenderness and fear, and with all due regard to the deceitfulness of
humane passion and corruption, are there not many suppositions casible,
wherein, to speak roundly and freely in the extreme pressure either of our
own, or our neighbors interest in matter of life or estate, both you, and I,
and all others, whatever be our shynesse in opinion, would have a clearness to
act many things of the same nature with, or as important as the punishing of
crimes, not only without, but even, in some cases, against the Magistrate: how
can we then deny the like obligation and warrant to the highest and most
important concernment of the glory of God, in its just and manifest exigence?
Sir, I know that the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God: but,
verily, when I reflect, how that in many cases relating to self, the most part
of men, and even dissemblers in profession, are nevertheless in practice
firmly persuaded, and, in some cases, all without exception, are even in
opinion most determined, as to their right and obligation of defense and
resistance, And withal consider, that our love, which is certainly the
foundation of this right and obligation, ought to be infinitely more intended
toward God, then toward all things else, I cannot but wish, that both the
persuasion and zeal of all men, in his matters, were accordingly proportional
to their value: But oh! who is now on the Lords side? and who are they that
aspire unto Levi's blessing, who said unto his father and to his mother, I have
not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own
Children?

5. Although the position be by you exhibited, in such a laxe Manner, as if,
upon the emergencie of every crime, every private person were constitute the
Magistrates overseer and exacter of his administrations, that you may the better
load us with your forged absurdities; Yet Naphtali's doctrine above declared,
over and above the just exigence required, is so clearly set down in the case
only of gross and notorious backsliding and defection, countinanced or connived
at by the Magistrate, wherein the concernment of Gods glory, and our call to
assert the same, is far more discernable and manifest, then in the punishing of
other crimes, that, I hope, I have said enough to cut off vain and impertinent
cavillations. It is therefore certain, that though this doctrine concerning
private persons their punishing of crimes, in case of the supinnesse of the
Magistrate, in its undefined and uncautioned latitude, may be obnoxious to
gross abuses, yet absolutely to deny the same, and thence to condemn not only
many fair scripture-examples, but all heroic excitations, which, in their
suitable exigences, are by a clear concurrence of circumstances manifestly
demonstrate to be from the Spirit of God, as to the matter warranted by his
command, and, in their manner dependent on his soveraignity, were most rigid
and unjust,

But you go on and tell us, that what cursed effects this cursed doctrine
produced, all the Nation saw, when in the sight of the Sun, a villain, with a
pistol, invaded the persons of two of the fathers of the Church, and that in
the chief ^^rect of our royal City What an empty pomp of words have we here to
make out this cursed effect, a villain, fathers of the Church, chief str^et,
royal City, big words indeed. Sir, the way to be just in your resentments, is
first to be equal, and then I doubt, but if you have as much respect to our
Lord Jesus, King over his Church, as you pretend to your fathers of the Church,
that the wrongs and invasions by them villainously committed, with a high and
insolent hand, in the sight of all the Nations, against his glory and
prerogative, will not only make you give to them the epithet, wherewith you
censure their invader, but account the effects of their wickedness a
hundredfold more accursed: But lest I offend you by such extenuations I verily
think, all circumstances considered, and their exigence duly balanced, that
the deed was rash, precipitant and of evil example; but wherefore accursed,
since against such a sacrum caput, and a person self-devoted, upon whom and his
associats, by executing justice, both our Rulers, and the whole Land, may so
certainly consecrate themselves unto the Lord, that he might bestow a blessing
upon us, I confess I hesitate.

In the next place you add, that though the providence of God sheilded one of
your fathers to^ally from his fury, and preserved the life of the other, though
with the loss (or rather disabling only) of his arm; yet his malice was not to
be blamed, for that assassinations were only wanting to complete the parallel
betwixt that Spirit and the Jesuits, which is indeed the same moving in
different characters. But, seeing you would appear so accurate an observer of
Providence, why do ye not also remember, how easily and safely the invader did
escape? Surely whatever may be the moment of these circumstances of the sight
of the Sun, and the chief street of our royal City, as to the aggravation for
which you adduce them; yet, in order to this passage of the escape they are of
a more important consideration to render it remarkable. If you say that
eventual impunity, does not argue innocence, the retorsion is so just and
manifest against your reasoning from the Bishops their providential
preservation, that I need not insist. But this was an assassination only
wanting to complete the parallel betwixt that Spirit and the Jesuits, which is
indeed the same moving in different characters. Sir, if I did intend the
patrocinie of this fact, I could tell you. 1. That there can be no proper
assassinat, without an interveening price, which in this case, you do not so
much as allege. 2. Admitting your meaning to be only of a deliberat
insidiating murder, yet, I would have you to consider, that it is from the
matter, and not from the manner that the guiltiness of many deeds, does
principally descend: For, as we must acknowledge the greatest villainies to have
been sometimes perpetrat in form of justice, so it cannot be denied, that very
eminent acts of righteousness have been performed without any legal process, as
the deed of Phineas and the other examples above adduced, with many such like
Histories that might be alleged, do plainly hold out; and really, when I
consider but this one viz. how Readiness murdering of the Lords Priests, and Iehu
his killing of the Priests of Baal; as to their summare manner of procedor, of
so near alliance, nay, that this later has plainly, in respect of the
dissimulation used, a worse appearance then the former, I think this one
reflection may direct you unto a more solid judgment in their matters. 3. The
Jesuits their mischievous plots, flowing from a pernicious principle, enslaving
men's consciences to an implicit compliance to their dictats, without all
regard to forms of justice, and being levelled against innocent persons, in
order to their most wicked ends, and designs, are not only most remote, yea
most opposite to Naphtali's doctrine, but nothing countenanced by this very
fact wherewith you urge us. But having above, seriously disowned this rash and
inconsiderat attempt, and already cleared, how that it is not only the matter,
but the concurrence of circumstances, bearing such a pressing exigence, as
either cannot be satisfied by, or needs not to attend the ordinary course of
law, which does sustain their more singular and heroic attempts, your
paralleling of that Spirit (of Naphtali's I suppose) so congruous both in
principles and practice, unto undeniable scripture grounds and precedents, with
that perverse and cruel one, working in the Jesuits, and making them to be the
same moving in different characters, is like unto the rest of these bold and
groundless calumnies, wherewith you study to reproach: However, it were to be
wished, that you who, upon so unlikely grounds, have the confidence to draw
parallels, were upon the other hand as ingenuous, as to consider these most
certain and evident arguments of pride, violence, falsehood and irreligion,
whereby your prelatick Spirit does discover it self, to be not only Jesuitick,
but unquestionably Antichristian and diabolick.

Now in the close, and after having made it your work all along to brand any
measure of zeal for God to be found amongst us, with the characters of a ^our,
unsociable, violent and cruel disposition, you add, that you charge not this
fact upon the party, but acknowledge that all of them abhor it; but yet you
subjoine, that, without all uncharitableness, you may charge it on the Author
of Naphtali: And thus having before mentioned Naphtali, as one of their Books
and Authors, at lest owned by them, the vanity and deceit of this your
insinuation is too too palpable. But seeing that which is crooked cannot be made
straight, it shall suffice me to say, that, as I have evinced Naphtali's
doctrine to be none other, then the just vindication of Phineas his practice
copied from our first Reformers, and also showed, that the fact, which you do
here objecte, has not thereon any rational dependence; so your particular
charge, with all the foolish clamor of your party, upon this account, against
Naphtali, does not so much reflect upon him, as on Phineas, and the Holy Ghost
by whom he was acted.

After this, you cause your N. C. complain, of your design, To make him
regardlesse of the state of the Church, and neglective o^ the interest of
Christ, contrary to that tender affection we ought to bear him, and the example
of his Saints, and only after the manner o^ Gallio's indiff^rency. And to this
you Answer, That all things have two sides, and so this doctrine o^
resignation, on the wrong side, seems like unconcerned stupidit^; and yet,
rightly considered, it is one of the highest pieces o^ Christianity. Whence you
go ^n, from the infinite Power, Goodness, and Wisdom of God, to reprove the
^olly and pres^mption of anxiety, a^ent the Lords management o^ matters,
specially the conc^r^^ments of his Church, and to persuade us to commit the
^ame to him, and to rest securely on this, tha^ all things cooperat etc. But
still you say, We are to concern our selves in the good of the Church, as by
fervent soliciting of ^od in her behalf, w^ereby our zeal for God's glory, and
charity to the Brethren are expressed; so by improving all opportunities of
doing good in as for as we are called, upon all hazards: Yet, even in this, we
are, with David, not to meddle, in matters too high for us, And with Paul, not^
to s^retch our s^^ves bey^nd ^ur line: And with all not to let de^ecting
melancholy possess our selves, contrary to the end and contrivance of Reli^ion,
which is to beget in us ^verla^ing joys, which by such sorrows are mostly
marred. Sir, I have set down this passage at large, not that I find in your
answer abstractly considered, any error; seeing it is very certain, that the
wrongs done to these most dearly affecting concerns of God's Glory and his
Churches welfare, ought not to be more tenderly afflicting, and powe^fully
exciting to duties of prayer, and all righteous endeavors, then the Lords high
and holy Soveraignity is both most strengthening to these duties, and
comfortably exc^usive of all sinful anxiety and dejection, the heav^nly return
made to our Lord, I have both glorified my Name, and will glori^y it again,
does abundantly hold out this consistency; and is so far from being contrary to
a holy touching grief, upon that account, that on the other hand, you may find
the necessary cercainty of God's Glory, the ground both of the earnest and
assurance of our Lo^^'s supplication, and of the comforting answer made to his
troubled soul, whence it did proceed. But, that which I would enquire, is how
you come to make such an answer to your N. C. challenge, which being very
rational and sound, complaining only of a stupid misregard and profane
indifferency, without the least ^^exure to the other extreme of sinful
anxiety, had, in my thought, been better and more ingenuosly answered by a
simple denial, then by your unnecessary cautions: To oppose one truth to
another can have no innocent design: Nay, i^ I may use your own maxim, that
all things have two sides, I fear this your discourse prove also double faced,
and that, under the colou^ of excessive anxiety and dej^cting melancholy, you
do indeed condemn that mean of a concerning solicitude for Gods Glory and his
Churches welfare, which you seem to allow, and by i^sinuating, joy to be the
end and fruit of Relig^on, resolve all its seriousness into the indifferency
objected.

But lest you judge this challenge, which is only an anticipation, to be want
of charity, I proceed to what ensues, which is first your N. C's reply, to wit:
That all this your preceding discourse is still contrary to the holy men of
God; the Psalms, Prophets, and Lamentations are full of sad complaints, and
certainly a greater measure of zeal becomes the more clear manifestation of the
love of God under the Gospel. And to that return which you give to it, running
out upon the difference of the old and new dispensation, showing forsooth, that
outward desolations and losses, which under the former were curses and
grievous, under the later are pronounced blessings and matter of joy, and so
forth. What strange dealing and doctrine is this? Your N. C. tells you of the
complainings and mournings of the holy Men of God in old times, for the
desolation of Gods house, departing of his Glory, and the blasphemy of his
Adversaries, Which I am certain every serious soul will take to be no other,
then the same careful regard to the Glory of God, and the good of his Church,
which just now we heard you approve, and is, no doubt, inseparable from the
true Love and Zeal of God in all ages: But you, in your present Answer, would
have these regretes to be only suitable to a carnal dispensation, and nothing
agreeing to that of the Gospel. Now, if this be not a palpable discovery of
your sinistrous design, let all men judge: Or if you think that I do wrest your
words, do you, or any man else, make them pertinent, in any other sense, and I
am content to bear the blame.

But neither is this your doctrine in it self more sound: You say, That
outward desolations and afflictions, were of old, signs of Gods displeasure,
and curses: but now they are pronounced and made blessings. Pray Sir, make you
no distinction betwixt a sign of Gods displeasure, and a curse: Or do you
think, that sufferings and afflictions, may not be, both signs of displeasure
against sin, and yet profitable corrections, yea matter of joyous consolation
in the event? Certainly, if you had consulted Scripture in this matter, you
would have found, that, as the sufferings of Gods People under the New
Testament: are accounted chastisements, and consequently signs of the Lords
displeasure against sin, which thereto provokes; so, under the Old they were no
less to be by them regarded, as the chastenings of a loving father, and the
rebukes of love: But it seems you have forgotten the exhortation, which under
both dispensations speaks unto the Lords People, as unto children, My son
despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked of
him; for whom the Lord loves the chasteneth and scourges every son whom he
receives. Nay, blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach
out of thy law, being so plainly said of old^ I wonder how you could lapse into
their mistakes. I grant that the Jewish dispensation is much countenanced by
temporal promises, and that even the manner of divine service thereby
appointed, did much depend upon their performance, Whereas that better Covenant
being established upon better promises, is, in effect, so ordered, that
afflictions and persecutions did and do tend rather to its advancement: But, if
thence you conclude, either that the People of God in old times were to regard
their sufferings, as they respected themselves, differently from what is
commanded to, and commended in Christians, or that their complaints for the
corrupted or suppressed Worship of God, and the departed Glory by reason of
prevailing backsliding, or outward desolation, may not now under the Gospel, in
the like calamities, be lawfully and laudably resumed, over and above your evil
design mentioned, you bewray palpable ignorance.

I might here further add, that you may not only observe the same patience and
fruit of chastisements under the old, that is found under the new dispensation,
but also read the grace and glory of their confessions and martyrdomes, in
almost the same terms, wherein you go about to represente the sufferings under
the Gospel as new and singular. Others were tortured not accepting deliverance,
they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were s^ain with the
sword, they wandered about in sheepskins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented, of whom the world was not worthy. Pray Sir, who were they, or
wherein is this account short of that, which you exhibit of Christians their
rejoicing in sufferings, except in the vain excess of your superstitious
festivals, viz. the days of the death of Martyrs, observed by the Church under
the name of Natalitiae Mart^rum? But I have already sufficiently demonstrate
both the folly and falsehood of this your impertinent distinction: And the
mixture of the cup of Gods Children, being clearly confirmed by the experience
of all ages, your taxing of our mourning because of a broken Covenant, a
profaned Sanctuary, and abounding wickedness and violence, as sinful repining,
because of personal sufferings, notwithstanding that the joy and strength of
the Lord has been very conspicuous in our dying Witnesses, and our other
Sufferers, does plainly add malice to your ignorance.

But in our complainings you reprehend both injustice and excess, and for
injustice you tell us, That the reason thereof is only the alteration of the
Law's and the Magistrat's denying to us further encouragement, and punishing us
not for Conscience, since none has suffered because he was for Presbytery, or
against Episcopacy; but for unruly humors and practices. Sir, if our
complainings and mournings, were according to their just causes, viz. our high
handed Rebellion against God, unparalleled breach of Covenant, perjurious
subversions and alterations of the Ordinances of God, as well as the Laws of the
Land, with the profanity, ignorance and violence, that have thence abounded and
filled the whole Land, neither should I, or any of the fearers of the Lord,
have eyes to write or read this my vindication. It is true, all this iniquity
and mischief is introduced and established by form of Law, and thence you take
the impudence to smooth it over, as if there were no more in it, then the
alteration of Laws; nay, as if what before the Act and Law made were
righteously refused out of conscience, after the accession of an humane
injunction could not be forborne, but out of humor: And as if Conscience and
Laws could not inte^^ere, you go on to tell us, That the reason of our
suffering is neither our adhering to Presbytery, nor our non^ compliance with
Episcopacy, but only our unruly humors and practices. But seeing the color of
Law, which you p^etend, is indeed no relief of conscience, but the greatest
aggravation of that Apostacy and persecution, whereof we complain, and that
notwithstanding of any reproach wherewith you do slander it, the true cause of
all our sufferings is none other then our stedfastness in the Oath of God,
binding us to the maintenance of Presbytery, and extirpation of your Prelacy.
And, lastly, seeing that we bemoan no violence, either to death, banishment,
bonds or spoil, which, the taking of your Declaration against the Covenant,
would not certainly have prevented, the witness of our cause and sufferings,
who is in Heaven, hears, and will reprove your lies.

As for our excess, you say, We make complaints to to God, as if Heaven and
Earth were mixed, and adapt all the lamentations of Jeremiah to our sorry
matters, comparing the overthrow of Presbytery, to the Babylonish captivity:
But oh that the causes of our grief were thoroughly weighed, and the hainous^ess
of our provocations, with the calamities come upon Gods House, Ordinances and
Servants, laid in the balance together; certainly then, you should more regrete
our defect, then now you mock at our excess: And in as much as sin is more
grievous then judgment, and judgments spiritual, heavier then judgments
temporal, Nay, Gospel Ordinances more precious, then these of the old
dispensation, You would judge the overthrow of Presbytery visibly accompanied
with breach of Covenant, and the rejecting and expelling of the Lords ministry,
far more important, at least in these respects, (whatever other aggravations
there might have been in that distress) then the Babylonish captivity.

To these objections you add, Now, were your way what you imagine, you should
rejoice that you are called to suffer for it, and not make such tragical
complaints. Who ever heard such ridiculous discourse in such a serious purpose?
Your N. C. does only plead for a due concerning regard to the state of the
Church, and the interests of Jesus Christ, you your self allow a fervent
solicitude to Godward, in behalf of His Glory and the good of His People: And
we do not only propose for imitation the practice and exercise of Gods
Servants, who, both of old and of late and in all times, have from the love and
zeal of Gods Glory, made the desolation of Gods Sanctuary, the corrupting and
removing of his Ordinances, with the persecutions of his People, matter of
heavy complaint, and deep mourning, but do also, greatly rejoice in that grace
and glory, whereby the Lord has countenanced and beautified the trials of
particular sufferers amongst us, no less then these of any other his Martyrs
upon record: And yet after you have confounded the complainings of the Lord's
People of old, for the desolations of his Sanctuary with their concernment in
their own private losses, and falsely, and vainly distinguished betwixt the
duty and deportment of Gods People under the old and under the new
dispensation, in order to afflictions, you say dully, without any connection or
regard to the mixtures of the cup of Gods People, Our way is not what we
imagine, else we should rejoice, that we are called to suffer for it. But the
Lord, who gives us both strength and joy in our sufferings, does also know and
hear our mournings, and will reprove your mocking.

But you say, That our bitterness against our enemies, looks nothing like the
mildness of Christ or the primitive Sufferers. How long will you love vanity,
and seek after leasing? That we approve not bitterness against our persecutors
upon any account, is our serious profession whereunto our practices ought to be
conform: But with all, that we hate their way, pray that they may lay aside
their opposition to the cause and people of God, otherwise, that such troublers
were even cut off, and when God enables and calls, do stand up for the defense
of the Gospel and our selves against evil doers, is so far from jarring with
primitive precedents that both Scripture, Reason, and the practice of all times
do allow it. And really Sir, when I consider these your discourses, so directly
tending to the blunting nay extinguishing of all zeal for God, and the
persuading of a stupid (not patient) endurance of all injuries, under the
pretext of Christian Resignation, that wickedness and violence, so much at
present prevailing, may the better be estabilished, as I cannot but regrete
this point of your conformity to primitive examples, (not indeed these of
Christians, but of their persecutors, who in the madness of their wickedness
did often when their violence, and intend their cruelty to the persecuted by
their scornful reciting of the gospel precepts to patient suffering); So, I
must tell you my fears, that your pretendings to the serene and dove-like
spirit, are only colors to palliat your deep deceit and malice.

But making your N. C. decline your instance of the primitive Christians with a
vain scoff of your own suggesting, that far fowls have ^air feathers, and
appeal to the practice of late Reformers, as such who universally resisted the
Magistrate, out of an exceeding veneration, as you pretend to the same
Reformers, you do undertake from undeniable evidence of History, to convince us
of the falsehood of that vulgar error, that the Reformation was carried on by
resistance. But here, in the entrance, you must give me leave, (though I
acknowledge that you take no advantage from it) first to rectify your
expression, that the Reformation in many places, where opposed by force, was
maintained by resistance, Is that which we with as plain and full an evidence
as can be instanced in any matter of fact, do very confidently assert: But that
it was carried on by resistance, Is not only inconsistent, resistance sounding
rather for the defense then the advance of any cause, or interest whatsomever)
but according to the proper import of the phrase, carrying on, intimating force
to have been the mean used to propogat Religion, very false and caluminous. 2.
I must premise that when I reflect on your undertaking in this place, and there
with compare that of Doctor Heylen in his Aerius redivivus, I can not but
observe the deep deceit of Sathan's contradicting Methods for advancing one and
the same error: for whereas to disprove the righteousness of Defensive Arms,
in behalf of Religion, you go about to show that all the lawful wars instanced
on our part for our assertion, had their rise from an other cause; he, on the
other hand, aiming at the same mark, is so far from referring these wares to
any other cause, that in his fury against Presbytery, he charge all home upon
the Reformed protestant Churches, as Religious rebellions, just as in an other
case, viz: for one and the same design of destroying Conscience and making void
the ordinances of God, we find the Devil the old Serpent winding him self in
courses no less opposite: for while on the one hand Taylour stands up for the
liberty of prophesying, and Henry More for his liberty of Conscience; And on
the other Hobes and Parker do no less plead for the subjection of Conscience to
the Magistrat's dictates; that both do jointly point, though differently, the
former by dissolute relaxing, and the later, by a wretched blindfolding and
enslaving, to make void Conscience and all its obligation in these matters of
God, which they would have to be Arbitrary, is evident as the Sun's light.

But passing these preliminaries, and without further prefacing upon the
strange and self contradicting Arguments, whereby you go about to make an
undeniable, nay generally on all sides an undenyed truth, a vulgar error, I
come to examine your proofs. And first, you say, The Waldenses resisted not the
King of France, as is clear in the History, notwithstanding of unparalleled
persecutions, viz. 60000. killed in one town of Beziers, and 7000. Murdered at
once in one Church. It is true that there were wars betwixt the Count of
Montfort and the Count of Toulouse; but Toulouse was a P^er of France, and a
vassal rather then a subject, besides he only ^ought against Montfort, who was
a bloody Emissary of the Popes, not authorized by Philip then King of France,
who only permitted his subjects to Arm in this war. So that here there was no
resistance of subjects against their Sovereign. A man would think, by the
reading of this passage, that certainly all these thousands killed at Beziers,
were in a submissive non-resistance persecuted to death by the Kings Authority,
else to what purpose is their not resisting of the King, notwithstanding of
their unparalleled persecutions by you mentioned? And what can the connection
import? For, if either they were not persecuted by the King, or not killed
without resisance, it is evident, that the instance is altogether impertinent.
And yet it is certain, that as this execution was indeed one of the funeste
effects of the war, which you afterward mention, and therefore not suffered
without resistance; so, you your self, upon the same consideration, do deny
the King's concurrence and there^ by plainly subvert the insinuation here made
of their submission, and discover your own absurdity. But that I may clear the
truth in this particular from your confusion and deceit; the matter of fact (as
by all recorded) Is most clear, viz. that, that time being the very hour and
power of darkness, wherein all the World wondered after the Pope, it was indeed
by his instigation, and, in a manner, under his banner, viz. The Croisade, that
this war was raised against the Waldenses; and consequently by him was the
Count of Montfort nominate to the conduct thereof^ and, for his better
encouragement, had, by decree of Council, the dominions of Toulouse gifted unto
him. But as it is most apparent that the King, who not only permitted his
Subjects to go to that war, but sent his Son to take the cross in it, as you
your self do allege, and also allowed of the commission, and confirmed the
Gift ^ade to Simon, did therein concur; So your denying thereof is both
groundless and absurd^ Groundless, because of the deeds of his concurrence
mentioned and confirmed, by all the Histories of these wars, and by your self
confessed; absurd, because if the King did not concur, the example proves not
your affirmation, viz. That the Waldenses did not resist the King of France
notwithstanding they were grievously persecuted.

Now before I proceed, for confirmation of what I have said both of the King's
persecution and the Waldenses their resistance, take the following testimonies,
viz. Hortatu Papae and Francorum Regis permissu, per univers^m Galliam, quam
plurima armatorum millia crucem sumpserunt etc. Nec vero tantum permisisse
Phil^ppum Regem hanc expeditionem; (quod plerique solum dicunt verum and
ipsummet, suo nomine sumptiousque exemplum aliis prebentem, quindecem millia
armatorum ad eam dedisse (^ipse namque aliis bellis detentus haud ire potuit ut
cupiebat) asserit Gu^ielmus Brito, qui tunc vivebat etc. Bitteras, Urbem
celebrem and copiosam, ^ed prae caeteris haeresi infectam vi ceperunt and
combusserunt, etc. 60 vel 70 mil^ ia internecione delentur, atque intra ipsius
Ecclesiam occisa septem millia; and quam multa castra and oppida, qua vi qua
deditione Simon Montisfortis, Dux belli electus cepit; and quae Simon in hoc
bello prestiterit, you may find at great length in the History Spond. ad ann.
1209 and sequentes, idem ad ann. 1227. Varia certamina, marteque vario inter
Inbertum Bellojocensem istarum partium regium rectorem, and Raymundum
Tholosanum haereticorum sive sectatorem sive fautorem, inita sunt: and anno
1228. sanctius atque illustrius rebus interea in Gallia sub strenuo and sancto
Rege puero, ac foemina prudentissima regni Procuratrice procedentibus, dum ex
una part etc. and ex alia perduelles Religionis, vi and suasionibus manus dare
coguntur etc. obsessa enim ab Imberto cum exercitu Regio Tholossa, etc. with
many the like passages which may be seen in this Author, Innocentius tertius ad
istam (Albigensium) haeresin extirpandam etc. arma in eos excitat, curam autem
belli Leopoldo etc. and Simoni Comiti Montisfortis demandat, urbes vi captae
erant Bitterae, etc. Item Francorum Regi instinctu Innocentii 3. Papae cum
Albigensium haereticis negotium fuit: belli Dux Simon Montisfortis erat,
Magdeb. Cent. 13. page 216, and 218. What then can be more evident, then that
not only these Waldenses resisted their persecutors, though countenanced and
authorized by the King; but that even though the King himself had been Dux
belli, as his Son, by your own relation, was belli particeps, he had met with
the same opposition. But you say, that the Count of Toulouse was a Peer of
France, and by Hugo Capetus constitution, Peers were rather Vassals then
Subjects. It is answered, ne ultra crepidam, if Peers be Vassals, as they are
indeed, being such Peers among themselves only, and not with the King, that
therefore they are of all the most strictly oblidged subjects, is notour to all
that know the fidelity and gratitude which Vassallage does import, so that
whatever privilege their Peerage may give them over their inferiors, yet
that, in order to their Sovereign and Liege Lord, they are in every respect
subjects, is uncontroverted. But why should I spend time on your triflings?
Admitting that the Waldenses, in this war, had not so directly and immediately
resisted the King their Sovereign, as not being their direct and immediate
Persecutor, have we therefore no advantage from this passage? And are there not
many other precedents in the History of that people, which do fully and exactly
infer our conclusion? And as to the first, do we not at least find, even in
your own concession, the Waldenses persecute for Religion standing to their own
defense. Now if once you allow to Religion the common privilege of a defensive
resistance, the main strength of your arguments, founded upon a pretended
singularity in the cause of Religion, as disowning forsooth all resistance,
and, in a special manner, astricted to suffering both by Gospel precept and
primitive practice, is thereby dissolved and removed. I may not here insist on
this subject: But, once for all, let me demand you, may not Religion be
defended as well as other rights and interests? If you say it may, but neither
that nor any other against the invasion and persecution of the King and
sovereign Power: This is indeed a consequent, but so destitute of all reason,
that, as there is scarce a man in the world so stupid or debauched by flattery,
that will not, in some suppositions, grant the lawfulness of resistance; so,
the most precious import of Religion, and the atrocity of the injuries, whereby
it uses to be persecute, can not but render it the first and most favorable
of all excepted cases. But if you say it may not; then, whether is it your
meaning, that it may not at all be defended either against Superior, equal, or
inferior? And certainly, the Scripture, and also many of the primitive
instances, abused to prostrate Religion unto tyranny, do seem to run in this
latitude, without insinuating any distinction, so that this generality, being
manifestly absurd, does of necessity evince them to have an other meaning, and
to be nothing conclusive to your purpose. Or do you understand, that in this
the cause of Religion is singular, that though against persecuting inferiors or
equals, Religion, as well as other rights, does permit defense; yet against the
Powers over us, it is subject to a special restraint. Assign me for this
speciality but any colorable pretext, and cris mihi magnus Apollo. That the
Gospel precepts, Resist not evil, Turn your cheek to the smiter, Love your
enemies etc. Have their holy and Christian use of patience and godliness, for
all manner of injuries from whatso^ever hand; And that these other commands of
subjection, non-resistance, honor, and obedience to Kings and all in
Authority, have also their righteous influence of determining, in every
occasion, our due compliance and submission, without the least vestige either
in all or any of the places, of injoining a singular subjection to Powers
persecuting for Religion, is obviously evident. What speciality you will gather
from primitive practices, the general mistakes that we find in their opinions,
as we may understand from Ambrose and Augustine, condemning private defense
even against Robbers, ne dum salutem defendit pietatem contaminet, may give us
a satisfying conjecture. From all which we may assuredly conclude, that seeing
Religion does lay no special prohibition of resistance^ in order to Superiors,
upon Subjects by them persecuted; and that the above-written passage of the
Waldenses does at least evince, that in other cases it has the common
privilege, your inferring of spec^al consequences, in favors of the Powers,
from abused generals, is but a politic improving of your lies unto base and
selfish flattery.

Now as to other examples that may be found among the Waldenses, Pray Sir, was
this the only passage in all that History, which you conceived did favor our
cause, or was you loath to follow them over the Alps, unto the valleys of
Piemont, to meet with instances, which indeed you have reason to think can only
be best answered by concealing them, in the obscurities of the places where
acted? And really, this omission is so grossly supine, that you must pardon me
to think it designed. However, the History that I refer you to, for a full
and particular account, as well of the faith, stedfastness and simplicicy of
these Waldenses in Piemont, as of their many and great persecutions by their
own Rulers and Princes, and their just and frequent oppositions made against
them, particularly from the year 1540 to the year 1561. And how in the year
1571 they entered into a League of mutual assistance, and from that year did
undergo many vicissitudes, sometimes of peace and quiet, then of cruel and
barbarous persecutions, wherein they testified great constancy and patience,
and sometimes of necessary defensive resistances, wherein they witnessed no
less uprightness and courage, even until the year 1658, wherein the narration
terminates, is that of the Evangelical Churches in the valleys of Piemont, very
faithfully and acuratly collected and written by Mr Morland, Where, I am
confident, every ingenuous person will find the case of defense, for the cause
of Religion, against persecuting Rulers, so justly stated, so tenderly and
submissively proceeded into, and, lastly, so singly and moderatly prosecuted;
and that not only once or twice, but often; that as he will be thereby greatly
confirmed in the righteousness of this practice, so he can not but observe the
inexcusable omission of your silence.

The next instance which you undertake to vindicate, is that of the Bohemians
under Zisca, their fighting and resisting when the chalice was denied them. And
for answer to this, you bid us consider, that the Crown of Boheme is elective;
in which case, certainly the States of a Kingdom share more largely of the
Sovereign power. But 1. You hereby plainly acknowledge that Religion is not
indefendible, except by mere subjects, against their Sovereign: So that again
we see, it is not from the cause of Religion, but from the quality of the
persons, that you foolishly go about to exclude Religion from defense, which
yet notwithstanding, in several excepted cases, all inferior to that of
persecution, is to subjects against their oppressing Princes by all almost
allowed. 2. That the States of a Kingdom share more largely of the sovereign
Power, in an elective, then in a successive Kingdom, has no proper dependence
upon the way of election, but is thereto merely accidental, the Dictators in
free Rome were elected, and that only occasionally, and for a short space, and
yet were uncontrollable: The Roman Empire, though elective, yet gave to the
Emperors absolute Soveraignity: And, on the other hand, we see many Kingdoms
successive, wherein nevertheless the Soveraignity is divided betwixt the King
and the Estates; so that your ground does not hold. As Grotius de jur. belli l.
1. c. 3.. 11. in explication of that distinction, aliud esse de re querere
aliud de modo habendi, does fully clear. 3. Admitting the Crown of Boheme to
be elective, which yet you know, in the competition betwixt Ferdinand and,
Frederick, was much controverted; and that the Estates do indeed share largely
of the Soveraignity, And further, that they were the Authors of this
resistance, which also you ought to have alleged; yet the opposition by them
authorized upon the denying and with holding of the Chalice, and undertaken
upon the common and just grounds of defense, considering the participation of
power, which our Estates, before his Majesty's restitution did constantly
acclaim, and oftentimes by themselves exercise, this similitude of the cases
does only the more assimilate this instance to that of our last Reformation. 4.
Although the Hussites, being numerous in Bohem, and their provocation very
injurious and intolerable, the success of Zisca, their Chieftain, did in a
little time draw the whole Estates of the Kingdom to appear on that side; yet
it is apparent from History, that the beginnings of these troubles were so far
from being authorized by the Estates, that they were rather occasional, and, as
it were, tumultuary, upon the hindering of some Hussites in the town of Prague
to celebrat the Lords Supper with their accustomed solemnities, which the
Hussites by force resisting, it was from this spark that the flame kindling,
the party became to be headed by Zisca; and he and they advanced, breaking down
Images, and dissipating Cloisters, until at length he contracted a just Army,
and strenuously stood to his defense, and thereby obtained the concurrence of
the Estates against Sigismond then both Emperor, and upon Venceslaus his
death, become King of Boheme: Now whether this was not a clear resistance of
the people, begun at least without the States, against their Sovereign, upon
the account of Religion, I remit it to your second thoughts.

But you say, that Comenius gives but a slender character of Zisca and his
business, extolling him chiefly as a good soldier. And, I pray Sir, what would
you have him to say more? beside that it is not Comenius his testimony, but the
practice of the Bohemians, which upon your own appeal, we are concerned to
notice.

In the next place you tell us, That the Iustifiers of the late Bohemian wars
never run upon this strain of subjects resisting their Sovereign, upon the
account of Religion, but upon the laws and liberties of that elective Kingdom.
I entreat you, Sir, to consider what you say, That the injuries provoking to
that war, were the invasions made upon the Liberties of Religion, formerly
confirmed by Maximilianus and Rudolphus, is notour and manifest: Now, if in
this case they did aggravate the wrong, not only from that liberty, which is
every where due to truth, but from these royal concessions thereto superadded,
certainly this can make no disparity to our prejudice. But if you mean that
these Resisters had not only law for them, as to the making out of the wrongs
which they suffered, but were in a legal capacity, as being the States of the
Kingdom, to resist the invasions of their Prince, I have already told you how
much this, if it were true, would make for and not against us. 2. You must
consider, that the opposition, which gave the immediate occasion to the war
1618. and the war thereon ensuing, did proceed from, and was carried on only by
the Religionis Bohemicae socii Ordines, and not by the whole Ordines Regni,
which were partim P^ntificii, partim Religionis Bohemicae. So that the share,
which the Estates of the Kingdom had of the Soveraignity, in this case, does
not assist you. I grant, that the Ordines Religionis Bohemicae, at first
prevailing, seem thereafter to have attained to the whole power, and so to have
proceeded to the election of Frederick. But the lawfulness of his election is
not now the point in question.

You add, Neither were the Protestants too well satisfied with the last
Bohemian business. And it is very like, that the briskness of the first
assaul^ upon the King's Counselors, with other miscarriages in the progress of
that business, might possibly offend; but can you thence infer, that either
these defensive wars were not undertaken for Religion, or that on this account,
the Protestants did dislike them? As for what you subjoin, Yea K. James
notwithstanding of his interest in the elected King, was no way cordial for it.
He who desires a true account of King James his deportment in this affair, and
how, contrary to the inclination of all English Protestants, the advice of his
best Councellers, and the earnest solicitation of Archbishop Abbot, he
strangely delayed to assist, and in effect deserted both his Son in Law, and
the cause of the protestant Religion in that juncture, may find it at length
in. Mr. Rushworth^s collections. But the truth is, his Majesty in that
particular was so possessed and captivat by a design, or rather an humor, that
then overacted him toward a Spanish match, not only in prejudice and to the
ruin of his own Daughter and Son in Law, his own and Englands honor and
interest, but contrary to his sounder opinion in ^^vors of the French
protestants necessitate to a resistance, that if you had consulted the honor
of his memory, you had in this matter chosen to be silent.

Your third instance is adduced by your. N. C. In these words, But you know
there was fighting in Germany upon the account of Religion, To which you
answer, This shows how overly you read History when you bring this as a
precedent. And truly Sir. I do conceive, that the most overly reading may give
so full and entire satisfaction, as to this point, that I exceedingly long to
hear, how your more accurat perusal will convel the evidence. You say when
Luther rose the Duke of Saxon, moved of God, did receive the reformation
peaceably into his principalities, etc. And what then as to the matter of
defense? But you add, that in the years. 1524. and 1525. There arose a war in
Germany fomented by some troublesome Preachers, as says the Historian, who
pretended the liberty of the Gospel for their chief quarrel; And this war of
the Rusticks was again and again condemned by Luther as an execrable rebellion,
nay opposed and broken even by protestant Princes. All the concludency of this
passage on your part, depends upon the supposition, that this war of the
Rusticks, was by them necessarily engaged into, for defense of themselves and
the true Religion, against their persecuting Adversaries. Which though you be
bold enough indirectly to insinuate, yet all your confidence durst not
positively assert: But, that all men may see your disingenuous dealing, in this
allegiance, it will not be amiss that we take a more exact account of it, in
Sliedan's own words, where we find in his fourth Book, mense novembri, Ann.
1524. Ceperunt a suo domino Comite Luphio suevo dissidere homines rusticani,
propter onera quibus gravari se nimium querebantur, idem and alii deinde vicini
faciebant in suum quisque Magistratum. Here you may perceive that the liberty
of the Gospel was not so much as pretended to be the quarrel, let be the chief
quarrel; but that as oppression only and not Religion was the cause which they
held out, so their too prompt and illegal resentment by way of violence,
without the pressure of an extreme necessity, is that for which they are very
justly censured. The next mention we have of them is in the same Book, the
following year, Cujus vere primo per Sueviam, etc. altera fuit exorta tempestas
Ordinis plebeii contra quosdam proceres Ecclesiasticos. jamque jurejurando ac
fide data societatem coibant obducta causa, quasi and Euangelii veritatem
tueri, and servitutem ab se profligare vellent: And the author adds,
Magistratus quidem cognoscere de quaerimoniis ipsorum, and quod iniquum esset,
emendare se velle dicebat; verum illi perseverabant, and eorum postulata, mox
aliis communicata, passim novos incendebant motus. Which obstinacy and refusal
was certainly unjust. Now what these postulata were, I need not repeat, in so
far as they did only demand the liberty of the Gospel and the relief of their
oppressions, all men will judge them reasonable; yea Luther, for all his
vehemence against them, Yet upon these considerations, does not only seriously
admonish and reprehend the Princes for their persecution and tyranny, and tell
them that, talis est vester dominatus, ut eum homines nec possi^t, nec velint,
neque sane debeant far diutius, and cujus Deus aut per plebem, aut per novos
hosts quos excitabit, poenam exposcet: But also concluds, that if neither the
one nor the other party will abate and hearken to right counsels, se fore
utriusque ruinae spectatorem: nesas enim utrinque versari, and bellum esse
plebi contra principes ut in oppressores ipsorum, salutis atque doctrinae,
magistratum invicem conflictari cum plebeiis ut cum latronibus, and iis, qui
nomini Christiano contumeliam faciunt. But the casting reasons against these
tumults, were, that in effect what was right in their demands was only
speciously alleged, to palliat an unjust design of a licentious levelling
liberty in all, and a more wicked ambition in their chief leaders and
instigators, and that as carnal impatience and revenge, did give the rise to
these stirs; so, their contagion and progress every where was carried on rather
by an inconsiderate and fatal fury and rage then any show of reason, or good
conduct. Whence it is manifest, that these courses, being so plainly seditious,
cannot be paralleled to the cases of defense by us mentioned.

But you say, they were fomented by some seditious Preachers, who pretended,
the liberty of the Gospel for their chief quarrel? Thus you love deceitfully to
insinuate where you cannot justly accuse. But because that Thomas Muncer,
quiting first the truth, and then his station, did, under that general fa^^
pretext, with some others his associates, heeding their own delusions and
dreams, and aspiring to enthusiasmes, become ringleaders to a mutinous rabble,
for the cutting off, of all Magistrates as wicked, and the destroying of
propriety, Dare you thence infer, that the practices, which we defend, are of
the same nature, And that the Lords Ministers amongst us were no better?
Certainly your calumny not hardy enough to turn this oblique reflection unto a
direct accusation, does clearly enough evince its own falsehood.

But you add, that Luther wrote again and again unto them, condemning what they
did, as an excerable and cursed rebellion. It is answered, what Luther did
write, first in answer to their appeal and demands, more soberly, by way of
disswasive, and then upon their eruption unto hostility, more vehemently by way
of incentive, to incite all, even private persons, by what somever manner of
way, to repress and kill them, is extant on record. And ^eing that I have
already cleared, how widely the rising of these Rusticks, does differ from the
defensive risistances by us asserted, I am very free, upon the matter, to
subscrive to his judgment. But because I confess his reasoning does proceed
upon the same grounds of subjecting to the Magistrate, not resisting of evil,
and our Lords hindering of Peter to fight in his defense, which the men of your
persuasion do commonly abuse, and are indeed handled by him in such a manner,
as may seem to give you an apparent advantage, You must pardon me, for this my
ingenuity, to use a suitable liberty, and tell you, first, that although Luther,
in his first discourse does make certain suppositions, viz, of the Magistrat's
being intolerable for persecution and oppression, and that we suffered as
atrocious injuries from him, as Peter and the rest of the Apostles did when our
Lord was taken and led away from them; and even in such cases does prohibit
fighting; yet examine his words, and you will find, that it is to restrain
from revenge, and not to prohibit, that he there uses these passages. As for
example, after having said, Sit Magistratus plane intolerabilis, he adds, non
tamen idcirco excitandi motus: Nec enim cujuslibet est coercere maleficia etc.
And after having mentioned Christ's commanding Peter to abstain from his
defense, he subjoyneth, gravi lata sententia in eos qui gladio ^eriunt, hoc
est, qui contempto Magistratu vindictam privatam exercent: So that albeit his
words after the usual manner of dehortatives, do seem some what tending to the
contrary extreme; yet his scope being fairly adverted to, as the surest rule of
genuine interpretations, they ought not to be extended beyond the condemning of
impatient revenge. 2. I say, that as all humane authorities are but accessory
and not leading Arguments, And Luthers judgment in the matter of war, as in
other things, was but progressive, and not at first thoroughly enlightened; So
although he had been more positive against us, at this time and upon this
occasion, it ought not to stumble us; for as much as, in the first years of his
Reformation, from which this war of the Boures was not far removed, Sleidan
tells us, that he wrote not only that the Magistrat^ was in no case to be
resisted Lib. 8. But that to war against the Turk was to resist God; who uses
him as a scourge to chasten us. Lib. 14. Both which he afterward, in his own
manner, did retract and qualify as you shall hear. 3. Albeit the Boures their
wars, were unjust, and seditious, as we have heard; yet that Luther in his
arguing against them might, and did overstrain, beside the arguments already
adduced, is easy to be gathered from his excessive vehemence, in his second
writing, wherein, forgetting his main principle of appropriating the sword of
justice and vengeance unto the Magistrate, he instigates even private persons
to take vengeance on them, and (if you will understand it a right) to turn
Phineases in the case, and this Sleidan says, ut nimis aerem et cruentum multi
passim vituperabant. The next thing you allege anent their wars, Is that the
Protestant Princes stirred up by Luther, did fight against the Boures and break
them. And why not; seeing their rising^ specially that of Muncer, against which
they took arms, was plainly seditious and rebellious? And thus we see, how
that by laying down of false suppositions, you do only accumulat
impertinencies. ^ But the best advice that I can give you, is that which your
confidence blindly offers unto your N. C. viz. not to hearken to the tatles
of ignorant persons, but read the History it self and there you may both
understand the truth, and the true estimat to be made of Luther's Papers.

In the next place you tell us, That upon the invasion and combination of the
Duke of Brunswick and others against the Lutherans, the Duke of Saxon the
Lantgrave of Hesse, and other Princes and free cities met at Smalcald to unite
among themselves: but Luther was dissatisfied until that from the Bulla aurea,
and other constitutions of the Empire, it was showed him, that it was lawful
for them to defend themselves. Whereupon he consenting, they entered into that
famous league. To this you add, and every one knows, the princes of the Empire
are Sovereigns within themselves, And that the Emperor is only the head of the
union. From all which, it seems, you would infer, that though this be an
instance of inferior Princes standing to their own defense, upon the account
of Religion, against their Superior; yet it can not warrant people to resist
their Sovereign: But here let me reminde you first, of your own undertaking,
which was to convince us of the falsehood of that vulgar error, that the
Reformation was carried on or mantained by resistance: Now, whether this
passage of the Smalcaldick league does answer your design, or not, I appeal
to your second thoughts: You present your self in the proposal, as if you were
to prove, that the Reformers were altogether for suffering, and not at all for
resistance according to the misconstructions that you make of the practice of
the primitive Christians; And yet when you come to this instance, all your
offer is a politic consideration de facto, incident, which neither as to
Gospel-rules, or ancient precedents, by you commonly abused, is of the least
moment, as I have already showed. 2. Although the provocation, which you
mention, to the Smalcaldick League, viz. the invasion and combination of the D.
of Brunswick and others against their neighbor protestants, do signify nothing
in your behalf, but be altogether proper and agreeable to the nature of
defense, which we do maintain; yet, seeing it is not so consonant to truth, in
matter of fact, and that the true and genuine rise and progress of that League
do much more illustrate our assertion, you must give me leave to note your
inadvertency, in as much as we find that the league of Smalcald was both
proposed and entered into, long before the opposition of Brunswick and the
confederacy of Norimberg, whereby it was fortified. And as to the first
beginning of the league at Smalcald, we have it, in the year 1526. At Spire,
where the D. of Saxon, and the Langrave calling the Commissioners of certain
Cities, tell them quoniam ipsis charam esse videant Evangelii Doctrinam, and
vero quid Episcopi moliantur, atque pontificii non sit obscurum, deliberare
sese dicunt number qua societas atque ^aedus iniri possit, ut, si quem hujus causa
periclitari contingat, mutua subministrentur auxilia etc. Thereafter when
several Princes and Cities had first protested against the second Decretum
Spirense, and, by many meetings and other previous transactions, had prepared
the thing, in the year 1530. these protestants meet at Smalcald, atque faederis
concipiunt formulam, non quidem offendendi quemquam, sed sui defendendi causa,
and huic continuo Principes subscripserunt, etc. Quod foedus postea Anno 1535.
In annos december renovatur; whereas it was in the year 1538. and after the Popish
Princes and Bishops had leagued together at Norimberg, against the Protestants,
that we find Henricum Brunswicensem totum ad rumpendum ocium publicum
spectantem, and in hoc incumbentem, ut belli fieret initium adversus
Protestants. And it was in the year 1542. that, Ob vexatas Goslariam and
Brunswicum Smalcal. Foederis Civitates Saxo and Langravius communi sociorum
nomine bellum ei faciunt, clear arguments of your mistake. But, by all these
and many other passages incident in these times, it is evident, that the
principles of the then protestants did maintain the lawfulness of resistance,
no less against persecution for Religion, then against any other injury. I
might here add the league made in the 1529. By the Argentinenses cum
Tigurinis, Bernatibus, and Basiliensibus for mutual defense in case of invasion
for Religion, and that other, made the following year, upon the same grounds by
the Langrave with the same Cities, but I forbear to insist on examples so
obvious and frequent.

As for what you say of Luther's Dissatisfaction, until that Lawyers showed
him, how that, by the bulla aurea and other Constitutions of the Empire, it was
lawful for them to de end themselves; That which I find in Sleidan to this
purpose is, that Luther had ever taught that the Magistrate was not to be
resisted: but when in this deliberation, Lawyers did show, that the laws did
sometimes permit resistance; and that now matters were stated in one of these
excepted cases, He ingenuously professes, that he knew not this to be lawful.
And because the Gospel does not impugn or abolish politic laws, and also
because, in that so doubtful and dangerous a time, many things might fall out,
so^ that not only Law, but the very force and necessity of conscience, might
make us take arms, He concluds, that a League for defense might be entered
into. Now, whether this passage do more favor your design, or our assertion,
is very discernible, if we consider, first, that there is no mention here of
the bulla aurea, which though it do indeed contain the rights, liberties,
privileges and Dignities of the Princes and States of the Empire; yet bears
no permission of resistance referable to this case. 2. The laws here spoken of
sometime permitting resistance, are, no doubt, no other then these ordinary
exceptions founded in the law of nature, whereby the laws of subjection and
submission, flowing from the inferior law of Nations, are by all Lawyers held,
in some cases, to be restricted. And though I grant, that many Casuists do
require to the lawfulness of subjects their resistance, beside the justice of
the cause, the concurring of inferior Magistrates; yet that the same grounds,
with better consequence, do also allow to the people by themselves (inferior
Magistrates either joining with the supreme oppressor, or deserting their
duty) the right of defense, is the opinion of the more judicious. Nay, seeing
it is most certain, as I have often touched, that there are certain atrocious
injuries, which do force, even from the most rigid royalist, a particular
exception in favors of single persons thereby attacqued, it is evident, that
all this controversy is more in hypothesi then in thesi. 3. If it be remembered
what were Luther's mistakes, in his younger years, in the matters of war and
resistance, and withal that beside the information of Lawyers, he had a
further and a most important reflection upon the force and necessity of
conscience, in times of uncertainty and danger; it must of necessity be
acknowledged, that this passage is not merely a politic discovery, whereof
before he was ignorant, but a manifest retractation of former mistakes.

I have already hinted, how absurdly the Scriptures, for not resisting of
evil, and for subjection to Powers, are abused, by Court-flatterers, to a
special prohibition of all resistance from Christians persecuted, for
conscience sake, against their oppressing Princes, Only for sooth, because
their unconcernedness in Religion, does sufficiently secure them from the
consequence; whereas it is clear as the Sun-light, that the same
Scripture-rules do make no distinction, from what cause, let be from what
person, the injury does descend; but equally and indefinitly enjoin patience
and submission, in their exigence and season' without the least prejudice to
these other rules of righteousness, whereby, as well in the case of persecution
for Religion, as of injurious invasions upon other accounts, the persons
invaded, when in an otherwise unrestrain^d capacity, are warranted to
resistance in their own defense. And for this, it may suffice, though there
were no more, that Luther tells us, that he ever taught, that the Gospel does
not impugn or abolish politic laws, much less then the fundamental laws of
nature, to which all politic laws do cede. But what he further adds, of a
force and necessity of conscience, thereby joining the obligation to the right
of defensive resistance, is certainly a ground, which if it were here
pertinent, I could improve to more then I have hitherto asserted.

But you say, that every one knows, that the Princes are Sovereigns within
themselves, and the Emperor is only the head of the union. How does this
blind Confident meddle without understanding. That the constitution of the
Empire is purely feudal, the Emperor Liege-lord, and all the Princes
feudataires recognoscing him, and subject to the imperial Chamber, where they
have been often doomed and for faulted^ Is a thing most obvious. What do you
then babble of united Soverraigns, and Sovereigns within themselves? By which
dialect of discourse, and a fair descent a Majori ad Minus, you or any other
private person may quo ad his reserved rights and liberties, be termed a
Sovereign within himself: We know, that by concession they have large
privileges, and that most of the regalia appertain to them, but are they
therefore Sovereigns? Or is the Emperor only the head of the union? Beside,
how will you make their things quadrat to the Hanse-townes and free Cities, who
certainly, for all their immunities and privileges, are immediately, and
directly subject to the Emperor, and yet have often engaged in these defensive
leagues and wars against him. Thus I answer you, in your folly. But, pray Sir,
do you think, that ever our Lord commanded, or the Gospel meant, that, though
the poor people may not defend themselves, when persecute for Religion; yet
great men their superiors, though subject to the Supreme, may? Or, if you be
more rational, can you imagine, that an oppressed people upon any account, with
the concurse of inferior rulers may defensively resist their Sovereign, to whom
all are subject, and that the same people, no more, but rather less subject to
these inferior, then all are to the Supreme, may not as lawfully, upon the like
provocation, defend themselves against both the Supreme and Inferror joining in
an oppressive combination? Specially, seeing it is most certain that, as the
Supreme has all his power from the peoples suffrage and consent; so, the
Inferior does wholly and precariously for the most part, subsist by his grant.

But I proceed, you say, As for the war that afterward followed betwixt
Charles the 5th. and the Duke of Saxe, besides that the Duke was free to defend
himself, as I have told, Charles the 5th. declared it was not for Religion he
fought. It Is answered, for the freedom of the Duke of Saxe, that it was no
greater in this case, then the people may acclaime in the like, as also, that
if the Duke of Saxe his war was lawful, upon the account of injuries, for other
causes then that of of Religion, Religion does only aggravat, and not alter the
case, I have already cleared. But what a pitiful allegiance is this, that
Charles the fifth forsooth declared it was not for Religion he fought? Whereas
first by the league betwixt him and the Pope, it is expressly convented, That
wherefore many years Germany had continued in great errors, for which the
Council of Trent was called and set down, And that these of the Smalcald
confederacy, did reject the same: therefore the Pope and Caesar, for the Glory
of God and safety of that People, have transacted, that Caesar levy an army
against Iuny next, and by force of arms reduce these Refusers of the Council,
and Defenders of errors, into the old Religion and obedience of the holy See.
2. The Duke of Saxe and the Langrave writ to him to dissuade him, closing, that
when ever they should understand his pretended causes for that war, they would
so answer, ut quivis intelligat, and injuriam nobis fieri, and te Romani
Antichristi ac impii Concilii Tridentini impulsu bellum hoc suscipere, ut and
Euangelii Doctrina and Germaniae libertas opprimatur, nec ullam aliam subesse
causam docebimus. 3. They at the same time, emit a public vindication for
themselves, proving by unanswerable arguments that Religion was the only cause
of that war. And should not you be ashamed, to obtrude to us Caesar's
groundless and calumnious assertion, against both the Princes their declaration
and reasons? 4. The very letters written by Caesar to the Argentinenses and
other Protestant Cities, wherein, accusing the Princes of Rebellion and
Oppression, under the pretext of Religion, he really makes out nothing,
together with their answer, wherein all his pretensions are taken off; nay
Sleidan's whole sevententh Book, containing the Pop's Bull, his letters to the
Helvetii, the distinct returns made to Caesar's demands by the Protestant and
Popish Cantons, with many other letters and declarations, is but one evidence,
and that irrefragable, against you. What impudence is this then whereinto you
are hardened?

But the Electors of Cullen amd the Palatine both Protestants lay neuters. And
what then? Do we not know how rare a things it is, in a time of danger, for all
concerned to unite even in the most uncontroverted duties? Beside, the Elector
of Cullen was then recently deposed and excommunicate, and his people
(specially his principal Clergy) and he at great variance, for the Reformation
by him intended. And the Palatine inclining to favor, and in effect aiding
the Princes with 400 horse, was by the evil success of the war forced to
retreat and excuse himself.

Next you add, That the Elector of Brandenburg and Maurice of Saxe armed for
the Emperor. And I grant, That Albertus and Ioannes Brandenburgici quanquam
erant religionis, and Ioannes quidem etiam foederis Protestantium, tamen quod
Caesar, non propter R^ligionem, sed quorundam rebellionis ulciscendae causa,
bellu^ sucsipi diceret, suam illi operam addixisse. But as their resting upon
Caesar's assertion and promise, for the security of Religion, was, by all the
circumstances of that war, declared to be but an empty pretext; so John's
breach of faith, in this his engagement, can as little be denied, as his
relation of Son in law to Henry of Brunswick, then detained captive by the
Langrave, seems to have been his great motive. However it is certain, that the
Elector of Br^ndenburg, for whom it is like, that, in your heedless way, you
take one of his above mentioned Brothers, did stand off neuter, endeavoring
rather to mediate, as the History testifies, and we may see by his interposing
betwixt the Elector of Saxe and Maurice, at the seige of Lipsick. As for
Maurice, his part, it was indeed foulest, and deservedly condemned by all equal
Judges. But seeing you can adduce no other arguments for your pretended
vindication, then undeniable wrong and perfidy, the truth and righteousness of
that defensive war, on the Princes their part, against the Emperor needs not
my further patrociny. And yet, As if you had said something to purpose, you
have the boldness to conclude in these words, So you may see what piti^ul
His^orians they are who allege the precedent of Germany. O os durum! Who would
not Laugh at such excessive confidence, above the excuse of all possible
ignorance?

The fourth instance which you go about to clear, is that of Sweden, and you
say, That King Gustavus, with the States of that Kingdom, did in the Year
1524. peaceably receive the Reformation, and who would not wish that Religion
and Reformation might have had the same fate every where, Neither were there
any broils about it, till after seventy years, that Sigismond King of Polland,
the Son of their former King, and therefore by them acknowledged, though a
Papist, was by force entering the Kingdom, resolving to root out the
Protestant Religion: Whereupon they deposed him; no strange thing in the
Sweedish History, that being before an Elective Crown, and but newly then
become hereditary, and the States still retaining the supreme Authority. Sir, I
must confess, that this is a passage, whereunto I can make no reply; your
undertaking was to convince us, by undeniable evidence of History, of the
falsehood of that vu^gar error, That the Reformation was carried on (that is
maintained as, I have before showed) by resistance; and here you give us an
instance of a Kingdom, not only resisting, but deposing their King, because of
his invading of Religion: Which, in place of a vindication, is a full and plain
concession: For, as to what you insinuate, that that Crown had been a little
before Elective, I told you, upon the instance of Boheme, that though it had
been even for the time Elective, yet it could not make for you, much less when
you acknowledge that then (for, as for your own or the Printers escape,
referring the change to the Year 1644. I urge it not) it was become successive.
And where you allege, that the States did still retain the Supreme Authority,
if you understand it otherwise then according to that power and privilege
which appertains to our Parliaments, it is only your own fiction. But you,
subjoyne that, If this serve not to vindicat the Sweds, at least, the
Reformation was not introduced by wars among them. And pray Sir, who of us did
ever defend such a practice? To introduce, and to maintain, are things so
different, that they can not be fairly confounded. The last shift you make is,
That the actions of that state were never looked upon as a precedent to others:
But, if so, why then do you mention them, and if they be indeed a precedent,
certainly it is hard to determine, whether you be more false in your general
assertion anent the establishing of the Reformation, or ridiculous in this part
of your vindication.

The fifth instance you mention, is, That Denmark received the Reformation
peaceably. But seeing this hypothese excluds the question controverted, anent
the maintenance of Religion by arms, not casible without the antecedent
violence, It is evident, that it is rather transiently then pertinently by you
adduced.

The sixth instance is tabled by your N. C. thus, But you cannot deny there was
force used in Helvetia and Geneve. And to this you answer both in the manner
and terms of your accustomed vanity, That this shows, what a superficial
Reader of History your N. C. is. And then you tell us, That Zurich received the
Reformation peaceably, but being maligned by the other Cantons, and by them
injured, at the Popes instigation, it broke out into a civil war, purely
defensive upon Zuriches part, Likeas the Cantons are not subject to one
another, but free States only united in a League. It is answered, that here,
upon the account of Religion, there was force used in Helvetia is clear from
your own narration. How then do you tax your N. C. for this allegiance, as a
superficial Reader of History? As for that, that it was used by one associat
against another, and not by subjects against their superior, it is only
accidental from the condition of these Cantons, and the other circumstances of
that war. And seeing, that neither the Gospel, nor Reason, do lay any special
restraint upon subjects, in case of their Superiors intolerable persecution
because of Religion, as I have already showed, this precedent is no small
confirmation of the practices by us maintained. 2. I must tell you further,
that this war, on Zuriches part, was not so purely defensive, as you give it
out, in as much as it is certain from Sleidan. 4. and 8. Books, that the
provoking injuries were, for the most part, committed upon their citizens
without their territories, and the first act of hostility, by the interclusion
of passages, was done by these of Zurich, so that, although their guards were
indeed surprised; yet dating the war from the hostile interclusion, it appears
rather to have been assertive then purely defensive. 3. The advantage, which
this example does give us, is the more observable, from that preface they make
to their expostulation, emitted to their confederats in these words. Christus,
inquiunt, unam ferienti maxillam jubet alteram quoque preberi feriendam, hanc
eius doctrinam sequ^ti, multa profecto toleravimus and patienter quidem: Nunc
autem quando nullus est injuriarum finis, aut modus, cogimur ad illud confugere
quod Christus usurpavit, and, si male quid egimus, doceri petimus illud atque
demonstrari, etc. Whereby understanding the patience; which our Lord enjoynes,
according to its just exigence and measure, and, by a very exact and sound
observation, holding out how in a continued tract of injuries the duty of
patience may at length cease, and the liberty of defense then take place, they
plainly reject these abusive inferences of absolute subjection, or rather
stupidity, in the cause of Religion, which men, assured by their indiffe^encie
in these matters against the temptation and hazard, would thence infer. 4.
When you remembered the practice of the Suitzers, in the point of Reformation,
how came you to forgett Basile, Where you may find ( Sleid. l. 6) that after
the Reformation was in a manner established, the Papists nevertheless did
prosecute their own design, until the citizens thereby provoked, assemble and
supplicate the Senate, that certain of their number, countenancers of the
popish preachers, might be removed; Which being refused, they make an other
Assembly and Supplication and quamvis sine armis, ^ non tamen tam demisse quam
antea, whereupon the Senate returning a second displeasing answer, and the
people being more offended, because of the apprehended usurpation of a few,
they openly declare that they would take a course, not for Religion ( viz.
simply and only) but for the vindication of their own right: And so they
instantly take arms, And the same day, one of them casting down a certain
statue, they suddenly take the occasion to throw down all the idols and
statues within the city making answer to such, who came from the Senate to
compose the matter, that what the Senate had been advising upon, for three
years, they would perfect in one hour, that idols might no more be the cause of
contention. Upon which the Senate grants them all their desire, removing the
suspected Senators, abolishing the Mess, and settling the reformed Religion.
In which passage, subjects their maintaining and asserting of the Reformation
by arms, against^ their superiors, is so evident, that it is very easy to
conjecture the reason of your silence and omission. It is true the people do
mention the vindication of their right, and not religion, as the immediate
cause of their taking arms: But seeing their meaning is plain enough, that
their just demands in behalf of Religion were in such a manner refused, as not
only their common right, but their special privileges were injured; and seeing,
in the progress, the cause of Religion was by them most directly intended and
pursued, it is manifest above exception, that, as it was the occasion, so the
Reformation of Religion, was the principal motive and end of all this stir.

As for Geneve, you say; the Bishop fled from it out of a pannick fear, when
the Reformation was received. And it is true the History saves, that upon the
change, Episcopus atque Clerus irati discesserunt ab urbe. But is it then
pertinent for you to observe, that no force was used where there was no
provocation. But you subjoine, that Geneve was a free Town, neither subject to
the Bishop, nor the duke of Savoy. And no doubt you give this caveat for that
war, which, you know, was made against them, in the year 1534. By the duke of
Savoy, adjutus ab ejus urbis Episcopo, vel potius instigatus partim ob
Evangelii pro^essionem, partim aliis de causis. But, seeing although Geneve was
a free Town, yet it had a considerable dependence upon the Bishop, and though
it had not, yet the instance is no less concludent for us, then that of the war
of Zurich, I will not insist in any longer reply.

The seventh instance, you also adduce by your N. C. Questioning what you say
to the war in the Netherlands. To which you answer, that you say still they
fought not for Religion: And that they fought not for Religion, that is, to
propagate it by Arms you are in the right: But that persecution for Religion,
carried on by the making of new Bishops, the Inquisition, and bloody Edicts,
was the principal cause of all these wars, Historians on both sides, such as
Bentivoglio, Strada, Grotius, Grimstoun and his Authors do so fully attest,
that your confidence is to me admirable. But you say, Papists and Protestants
did jointl^ concur in it. It is answered, 1. That the cause of these wars
being complexe, the Spaniard endeavoring no less to subvert the liberties of
these Provinces, then to extirpate the Reformed Religion, it is nothing
strange, that there should have been a joint concurrence i^ the opposition.
Specially seeing, 2. even the persecution at that time, practiced upon the
Protestants in these Countries by the Spaniards strangers, was so tyrannous,
ragefull and pernicious, that many of their Compatriots, though otherwise not
of their Religion, were yet induced to favor their cause. But 3. As it was
the spreading of the Reformed Religion in these parts, that first gave the
Spaniard occasion to exercise tyranny, and, by violating and subverting their
Liberties, to design an uniforme royalty over all his Dominions; So it is
unquestionable, that Religion and the cruelty practiced upon its Professors,
were the original and principal cause of that war as the Apology, set out by
the Protestants, after their first defeat, in the end of the Regency of
Margaret, does fully witness. And here I might tell you of the joint
supplications and confederacies made about that time by these of that Religion
for their own preservation, and also the concessions made to them in that
behalf; But the History is so large in this matter, that it were superfluous in
this place to be more particular: And therefore I say 4. That although in the
beginning, the mixed design of the extirpation of Religion mainly intended,
and of the erecting of an uniforme Monarchy assumed through the occasion
thereof, carrying along a manifest and most injurious violation of all rights,
liberties and privileges, did at first engage even Papists in the resistance;
yet it is most certain, that the principal cause of the war, viz, Religion,
more and more prevailing, of the Flamings themselves there were few, save
Protestants, that took part on the defensive side. And as for the French or
others, who joined afterward upon a clear ground of interest, it belongs not
unto the present consideration.

You add, that Egmond and Horn beheaded, by the D of Alve, as the chief
instruments in it, died both Papists. It Is answered, Egmond and Horn plainly
accused of having joined to the confederats against the inquisition, and for
remisness in the maintenance of the Romish Religion, were very early cut off,
even in the first fermenting, as it were of these tumults, before the ensuing
war was formed; but, however, certain it is, that although they professed and
practiced mainly for the liberty of their Country against tyranny, yet they
greatly favored the persecute protestants, and also much inclined to their
way, as is clear from their very accusation, and also from the manner of their
death, specially Horn's, who, for all Grotius his saying, that they were
execute, post sacra romano ritu peracta; yet, at first refused to confess to
the Bishop of Ypre, saving that he had confessed himself unto God. What then
does this allegiance, destitute of reason and little favored by truth, avail
you?

Your next argument is, that the States by a Placaet declared it scandalous, to
say they fought for Religion. Sir, I wish you had given us the words, at least
the date of that Placaet: For, sure I am, that in what terms soever, the
Estates in policy might think fit to declare and publish the cause of these
wars, and to assign for the same rather the invasion of liberties and
privileges, which was the effect of the Spanish persecution, then Religion,
which was the more remote cause; yet whoever reflects upon their first
beginnings will find that it was after this manner. The Flamings receiving the
light of the Gospel, and being therefore sore vexed by long and cruel
persecutions, the same upon the succession of Philip to his Father Charles, are
by the Spainards much intended, and a resolution being taken, to root out the
Protestants, new Bishops are created, the Spanish Inquisition is threatened, and
many terrible edicts emitted, by which courses, not only in themselves wicked,
but also contrary to the privileges, and destructive of the liberties of that,
people, many tumults and confusions were in all parts occasioned, until at
length the Nobles do confederate for resistance, and mutual assistance and
relief; in consequence whereof, they petition the Regent, and applications are
made to the King, when in the mean time, on a sudden, these of the Religion
seeing no success that way, keep their meetings and assemblies openly, assuming
arms for their own defense aggainst sudden violence, and by the meaner sort
of the people, images and idols are as with a whirl-winde ( quales olim saepe
motus Iudeorum erant which is Grotius his remark) thrown down almost in all
places. These things make the Regent more easy toward the Protestants, and
force her to remit bygons, and indulge their Preachers: but the Lords retearing
to their respective charges, for rendering the concessions effectual, and being
terrified by the reports of the King's implacable displeasure, betake
themselves to divided Councels, whereupon the Regent resiles from the
agreement, renewes the persecution, levies new forces, imposes new oaths, and
the Spainards, supposing the whole people one way or other to have been
involved in the late tumults, conceive them, as guilty of rebellion, to have
forfaulted their former liberties, and to be become obnoxious to an absolute
domination. This being the condition of matters when the Duke d'Alva was named
to the government, the Prince of Orange and Brederode, both Protestants,
retire. Brederod his forces of the same Religion resist and are beaten, and
many shift for themselves: then the Duke arriving fills all places in a moment
with tyranny and persecution, putting to death many Lords and Gentlemen, and
many thousands beside, because of the former confederacy, and upon the account
of their Religion: And the Prince of Orange, being cited and not compearing,
his Estate and Lands ar seized on, and thereafter takking arms by the
persuasion of the banished, and declaring to the world both the injuries done
unto him, and that he was of the Religion, he is once and again beaten; so that
there remained no opposition to the Duk's rage and violence, save what was made
by a few, escaped from the former defeats given to the Protestants, who made
war in the Princes name, partly by piracie at sea, and partly from woods and
forests, against Priests only and Officers of justice. In this deplorable
estate, under most insolent tyranny and violent persecution, these poor
Countries remain, until the Earl vander Mark with his Protestants or sea
Gueux, as they were then called, surpriseth the Town of Breill, after which
Flussing and several other towns in Zealand and Holland, refuse spanish
garrisons, and being Protestants revolt to the Prince of Orange, who having
implored the aid of all Protestant Princes, after a successess enterprise for
the succor of his Brother Ludovick at Mons, and a proclamation emitted,
declaring the cause of his engagement to be for relief of these Countries form
Alva's tyranny, and from the cruelty and oppression of his proclamations,
edicts, taxes, and imposts, comes unto Holland, from which time the war for
Religion and liberty, proceeds through many and various accidents, and both
are in all places equally restored. This is the plain and true and account of
the rise of these wars, at which period, even Grotius, who, of all the writters
of that History, does most decline and wave the cause of Religion as an
ingredient in the quarrel, notes, Religionis causa primi talibus caeptis
sociaverant Smalcaldico faedere Germani, post quos Galli proceres plurimis
etiam Scriptis disseruerant non peccare, in fas obsequii minores potestates qui
invito quamvis principe divina ac publica jura, vitam que innocentium, si
necesse ^oret, armis defenderent, etc. And a little after, romanae ceremoniae
ejectae templis, etc. Whether or not then persecution for Religion appears to
have been the cause of these wars, let all impartial men judge.

But you tell us, that the true ground of the quarrel, as we may read in all
the Histories, was that their Prince was not an absolute Sovereign, but limited
in his power and that by express compact, they might use force if he
transgressed his limits, as he notoriously did. Sir, for the true and proper
ground of the war I have already clearly narrated it, from the best
Historians: that which you point at here, is rather a justification of their
resistance from the right and capacity whereunto their Prince was astricted.
But 1. You cannot deny that persecution for Religion, whereby they were injured
both in their special privileges, and common and natural rights and liberties,
was the provoking cause of these wars; and consequently that Religion no more
then other interests, does not forbid to subjects necessary defense and
resistance against their Superiors. 2. For all the vain talk that you and
your fellows make against us for allowing to the people a discretive
judgment, anent their Princes actings, yet you not only suppose and approve
it, in these of the Netherlands, in order to their Prince, but stick not to
vent your aim, in saying that the King did most notoriously and tyrannically
pass his limits. 3. Though we should urge this instance no further then you
allow it; yet it still remains a very agreeable precedent for justifying our
late courses, it being certain, that not only the rights and privileges of
both Kingdoms were violate, but that the undoubted privileges of Parliament,
and the resticted nature of the Kings soveraignity over us, did give us as good
and sufficient a warrant for the oppositions then made, as upon this head can
be alleged and instructed by these of the Netherlands. And really, when I
reflect upon the particular case of the late wars betwixt the King and
Parliament, and how that in the Papers printed by consent of both, for clearing
the controversy, there appears nothing, save the pretensions and pleas of
prerogative and privilege, and yet all do acknowledge Religion to have been
the original cause, I think this sole consideration might have made you to
forbear this poor vindication.

It is true, Grotius says, and seems to lay much weight upon it, quod Brabanti
illud quoque proprium pacisci solent, ut, principe leges violante, ipsi fidei
and obsequii vinculo liberantur donec demantur injuriae. But not to draw you to
long discourses, anent the effect of an irritant provision adjected to a mutual
contract. 1. It were no great difficulty to show you from undeniable reason,
nay from Grotius himself, in his de Iur. Bell. that as there is such a
connection in all contracts, that the failzeer of the one party does in so far
liberat the other from his mutual and corresponding engagement, and repone him
to his antecedent condition and liberty; so in the present case, an irritant
provision, though, in other cases, it may sometimes extend its virtue and
influence beyond the intrinseck import of the failzie whereby it is committed),
appears not to have any special use, but only to serve, ad majorem, quia
expressiorem cautelam. 2. It might here be sufficient to make that answer for
us, which Grotius a little, after in the same place makes for the other
Provinces, viz. ab aliis quoque Belgarum nationibus idem jus moribus usurpatum;
which may be verefied as to Scotland and England, by many most pregnant and
luculent examples. But^ 3. As I grant that a reservation of these things, which
otherwse would be imported in the peoples surrender, and appertain to the
Sovereign, fortified or not fortified, by an irritant provision, may give to
the people when therein wronged, the liberty of asserting their own right,
which without a special reservation had been none; so undoubtedly, as to such
rights, which do reserve themselves, and are so much ours, that even by an
express surrender, they cannot be absolutely resigned (such as the right of
Religion, our lives and whole fortunes are, the preservation whereof, being the
very ends of go, vernment, can not be understood to be permitted to the
Governor's absolute arbitrament) the people therein invaded, by virtue of the
power inherent to rights reserved and the liberation, flowing from all such
failzeours, though not expressed, may very justly resist, and demand
reparation. And, is it indeed possible, that any rational man should think,
because of a reservation of things of less value, and therefore within our
power, a Prince transgressing may lawfully be resisted, and that nevertheless
these high and atrocious invasions, in matters of the greatest value, and which
therefore can neither be absolutely surrendered, nor do need an express
reservation, should and ought to be stupidly swallowed down? But seeing the
greatest Royalists do, in certain suppositions, wherein their own sense and
interest do give them a better understanding, not stick both to acknowledge and
practice, according to this principle, it is very evident, as I have often
said, that it is only their indifferency in matters of Religion, and the
security that they thence derive, which makes them and us to differ on this
subject.

In the close of this instance, you tell us, That for all this, you refer us to
Grotius. And for matter of fact, I decline him not, as you may perceive, but if
his too manifest prejudice in matters of Religion, do make him less express to
our purpose, I hope the supplement of other Authors, and also of solid reason,
shall obtain from you and al men a just acknowledgment.

The 8th instance that you would vindicate, is that of the Civil wars of
France, and first you say, Their first civil wars, were managed by the Princes
of the blood, who by the laws of that Crown are not ordinary subjects. And
certainly by all law and common sense, extraordinary persons may well be said
not to be ordinary subjects; but are they therefore not subjects? Surely the
conferring of high dignities and great Authority, may well intend their
obligation, it does not alter their condition. And how often have we heard and
seen them accused and forfeited for rebellion? Why do you then render you^
self ridiculous by such a pitiful alledgeance?

But you add, besides, the wars were begun in the minority of the King. And do
you seriously think, that (setting aside the greater incapacity it might have
put them into) had the King been major, they would have been of another mind?

But you say, that, in this case, the power of the Princes is greater; And we
have indeed often heard, that the dignity of the Princes does consist mainly in
two, viz. their right of succession, and privilege of Regencie, during the
Kings minority or absence: but as, in the matter of Regencie, the nearest, and
not all the agnati of the royal blood can pretend to it, and that only in the
case of no nomination made by the preceding King, and during the space of the
young King's pupillarity, just according to the common rules of tutela
legitima; so you may remember, that the wars, we speak of, falling out in the
reign of Francis the Second, being for the time, at least, sixteen years of
age, there was no place for the Princes their pretense of Regencie: beside the
first appearance of these wars was only supposed to be countenanced, but not
openly by them owned. And as for the continuation of the war, in the nonage of
Charles the Nynth, it is certain, that the King of Navarre, to whom, as
nearest agnat, the Regencie belonged, did voluntarily renounce his pretension,
in favors of the Queen mother, nay that he joined with her and the Guisians,
and died fighting against the Protestants headed by Conde and the Admiral. And
likewise, these wars were again renewed in the King his Majority; But, not to
enter further into these iliads of tumults, and confusions, occasioned by the
restles perfidie and unsatiable cruelty of the adversaries, though I should
admit, that these wars were not only incited and provoked to by persecution,
but that also, even on the Protestants their side, they were not a little
influenced both by particular interests and passions, and the general fervor of
that Nation (Which in effect is the very worst account that even the enemies of
the truth do give of them, and cannot be received by any impartial inquirer)
Yet, seeing it is most evident, that persecution for Religion was the true cause
moving the body of the Protestants to their own defense, and that their
Ministers and Teachers, whom God had honored to be instrumental in their
conversion, as Beza and others, did countenance these wars, and constantly
maintain, that a defensive resistance to subjects in a due capacity, was no
more prohibit, upon the account of persecution for Religion, then in the case
of any other intolerable oppression. The mixture of man's corruption
(inseparable even from his best actions) in the prosecution of so good a cause,
can neither prejudge its justice, nor deprive us of the advantage of this
precedent.

But knowing your former answers to be weak and unsatisfying, you subjoyne,
that you do not deny their following wars to have been direct Rebellion. And is
this the vindication you promised? Only, you bid us, consider the fierce Spirit
of that Nation, and we must confess it was not Religion, but their temper that
was to be blamed. Well Sir, is this your candor? The question is, whether or
not Religion was the cause of these wars, which, if the lawfulness thereof were
not first supposed, were utterly impertinent; and you not darring to deny it,
do first tell us by a blunt petitio principii, that the wars were rebellion,
and then, that the French temper more then Religion is to be therefore, blamed,
Who should regard such a pitiful Sophister? But, seeing it can not be denied
that the many and great injuries, suffered upon the account of Religion, were
the just provocation to these wars, although some small censu^e either of
precipitancy, or of excess in the prosecution may possibly be imputed to the
hot temper of that people, or excused by the signal insolency of there
provocations; yet, sure I am, that neither the cause of Religion, nor the
justice of it, is thereby in the least disproven.

But now you say, many of the eminent men of that Church are fully convinced of
the evil of these courses, yea one of the glories of our Nation Cameron, in
the wars of the last King, directly preached against their courses as
Rebellion. I will not answer, that possibly it has befallen the eminent men
of that Church, as it did many of our own, who, as they were removed, from the
first times of the Reformation, and the then opposition of adversaries, and
from the evidence of the Lord's Spirit and presence that therein appeared; so
according to the influence of after temptations, were induced to condemn that,
which otherwise they would have approven. It is enough for us, that your many
eminent, whoever they be, are more then overballanced by many more and more
eminent still abiding on our side. And for Cameron, whom, forsooth, in your
pedantick style, you more then cannonize, by terming a Glory, you must pardon
us, who know him better, whatever be his opinion in this matter, not to be
dazzled by his splendor, specially seeing you know, that, if we were disposed to
vie with you in such vanities, we might by adducing King James his justifying
of the French Protestants their defensive wars, in his answer to cardinal
Perron, eclipse this your glory into obscurity: but what need of more words. If
these last wars were purely defensive for Religion, they could not be
rebellious; and if they were not, we only lose the instance, but not the
argument, as I have abundantly proven.

But to this you make your N. C. Answer by asking, How did the late King give
assistance to the Rochellers, in the last wars, if so be they were rebellious?
And to this you reply, That it proceeded from a particular reason, Viz. Because
the King of Britain had become the surety in the former pacification that the
French King should observe the agreement. Sir, If I had the management of your
N. C. part. I think I should not have troubled you with this answer. The
assistance you mention was so like rather to a treachery that both for the good
of these poor Protestants, and for the honor of our King's memory, I wish it
had never been. But, since you suppose it to have been real, how is it that by
your return, you do so pitifully betray your cause? For, seeing by your
acknowledgment the late King did in the pacification, after the second war of
Rochell, with consent of the French King, become surety to his Protestant
subjects for due observance, and, by this his accession, clearly acknowledged
the lawfulness and validity of the Protestants their treaty, it is a more
manifest confession of the Peoples right and capacity to restrain both by
contract and necessary force the unjust and persecuting violence of their
Prince, then all the instances adduced do afford.

It is true, you add, That this assistance was on our Kings part most just,
what ever the Subjects of France their part in it might be. But where is your
reason for this insinuat distinction? Or what Logick^ can prove that a just
concurring assistance may be given in an unjust war? That the King of Britain
interposing was injured and affronted by the King of France, his breach is not
denied by, or contrary to, us, more then the injury done by the French King
unto these his Protestants subjects. But to clear this passage of your foolish
quibles. The Duke of Rohan in the Ninth of his Politic Discourses, entitled,
His Apology upon the last troubles of France because of the Religion, plainly
tell us, that the King of Britain did, by a Gentleman sent to him, remonstrat
how he was surety in the last peace, and did compassionate the Protestants
their sufferings, that if by fair means he did not obtain relief, he would
engage his whole Kingdoms, and his proper Person in so just a war to which he
found himself oblidged in honor and conscience, providing that the
Protestants would take arms with him, and promise, as he would do, not to
hearken to any treaty, but jointly with him. And thereto the Duke subjoines,
that this promise of assistance was his principal engagement to arm: What
think you then? Do not these words plainly enough denote both Religion to have
been the cause, and what was the Kings approbation of these wars? Or, if you
doubt the French man's faith, pray take but a view of Mr Rushworth's
Collections as to this affair, and there, beside the confimation of what the
Duke says, I am persuaded you will find, the King so express, and the
Parliament so cordial, in their resentments of the wrongs done to these poor
Protestants, and in their readiness to assist for their relief, that you will
be ashamed hereafter to scorn your self by such confident childish conjectures
and distinctions. But, I am sorry, that by reflecting upon the part of the
French Protestants, in that war, as less just then the King of Britains, you
should have forced me to a discovery, which renders its event so dishonorable
to our King's memory.

Having run through so many examples, with such success, as we have spoken, you
conclude, And thus I have cleared the Churches abroad of that in^urious stain
you brand them with. But seeing I have so mamanifestly discovered your falsehood
and presumption, in this matter, I will not insult over this your folly. You go
on in the next place to our Britain, and tell us of the English Reformation,
and how that it was stained with no blood, save that of Martyrs, and that
indeed was no stain, but, as you do well correct your self, its chief
Ornament. But Sir, if the Reformation in other places were no less confirmed
and rendered glorious by this zeal and testimony, and withal the People, by
defensively resisting, when in a sufficient capacity, did evidence a greater
and more universal constancy, not versatile by every blast of Authority, and
ambulatory at Princes their pleasure, does it not rather augment then diminish
their praise.

You add, That in England, though a Popish and persecuting Queen interveened,
betwixt the first Reformation of King Edward, and the second of Queen
Elizabeth, yet none rebelled. And what then? Pray Sir, how or wherefore does
Scotland want that glory? Sure I am, that the Reformation being established in
Scotland, after a sharp war (and by the way, you may remember, that Queen
Elizabeth sided with the subject) both by Pacification, Authority and
determination of a General Assembly, yet we received Queen Mary from France, a
declared violent Papist, without the least question anent her right of
Government, or any opposition moved against her, until provoked by such
weakness and wickedness, as I am ashamed to mention. Wherein then in this
regard are we inferior to England, unless it be that neither for the favor nor
fear of a woman, we were moved by any publict act, let be by vote of
Parliament, as the Representative of that Nation, to deny the ^aith, and again
take on theyoke of the Roman Antichrist? Or how are you not ashamed, to
reproach your Nation with a nimious fervor, specially upon this occasion,
wherein our worthy Reformers did make the Court compliance, back-drawing and
lukwarmness of a few temporizers, their great and continual complaint.

In the next place, you tell us, that all that traveled the World, can witness
that we were not approven in our late rebellion, and passing by Diodat,
Spanhem, Rivet, Salmasius, Blondel, Amerald, de Moulin, and others, not named,
as all either in print or public discourse declaring for you, you say, There
was an act made by the Consistory of Charentoun that no man should be barred
the communion for the Scots Excommunication, except it were for a crime; And
this, forsooth was a loud declaration of their disowning of our practice? It Is
answered. 1. Though you could give a account of the opinion of the Nations
abroad, concerning our late wars, yet their judgment, in matters so remote
from their knowledge, and wherein, the favor generally born to Kings,
specially when so fatally unfortunat as Charles the first was, is able to
create in the most part, very little inquisitive, a very strong prejudice,
cannot amount to a testimony of any moment. 2. That the more knowing among them
did, both by their Histories and other writtings, and also by their letters,
approve our proceedings, might be very easily made out by an unanswerable
condescendence; nay that the generality both of Dutch and French Protestants
did condemn the King's party and their practices, I am certain, none of these
to whom you appeal, in this matter, can justly disown it. As for Diodat, and
the rest you name, why do you not e^hibite their words? You say indeed for some
of them, very wisely and safely, That they did only declare themselves in their
Discourses and Sermons. And for these I think you must be excused, because you
heard them not. But for the rest I engage, that whatever passages you shall
adduce from them on your part, I shall redargue either their information, in
matter of fact, or their reasons in matter of Right, to the satisfaction of all
unbyassed men: Beside Salmasius is most exceptionable, in respect he was
employed, and got money in the cause: and yet, in the judgment of many, though
he had unanswerable advantages, as to the main design of his defense, he was
even in that shamefully baffled. And for Amerauld, read but his own vain and
ridiculous Dedication of his paraphrase, upon the Psalms, to the King, in the
year of his restitution, and I am certain you will allow us to think the want
of his suffrage no prejudice to our cause. Now for your act made at Charenton I
confess your not producing of it does the more dissatisfy, because you
represent it in terms little consistent, viz. That the Sco^s Excommunication
should not debar, unless it were for a crime. That you take a crime in this
place in its larger acceptance, for an offense, and not in that more strict
and proper wherein Lawyers use it, it were disingenuity in me for to call it in
question. But then how Excommunication can otherwise proceed without the
allegation of any crime, as you seem to accuse us, is indeed to me a difficulty
inexplicable, and whereof, I am sure, our Church could not be guilty; and
therefore seeing the Consistory could not doubt that the Church of Scotland did
hold an offense and obstinacy to be the necessary causes of excommunication,
for them to have ^lighted the trial by us made, and judged the particular
grounds of our procedure not answerable to the general rule, had been breach of
Christian communion and charity, whereof your naked assertion shall never make
me think the French Church guilty: withal you know that the Bishop of Galloway,
whom you allege to have been upon this act admitted to the Lords Table,
notwithstanding of his excommunication, was excommunicate upon the accusation
of clear crimes. So that, what you call a loud declaration on the Consistories
part, I apprehend to be only a loud calumny on yours. But, whatever be in that
act, or the Bishops admission, upon his own information, in opposition to all
your vain pretenses of contrary Authorities, it is certain, that not only the
truth and right was on our side, but also that our practices were approven, yea
applauded and we therein encouraged by letters from several of the reformed
Churches, yet extant upon record.

But, in the next place, your. N. C. Demanding it, you undertake to tell him
ingenuously what precedents there are in History for subjects fighting upon the
account of Religion. And the first, you say, that you know, is that of Gregory
the seventh arming the subjects of Germany against Henry the fourth, from whom
other Popes taking example, they made no bones upon any displeasure, pretending
always some matter of Religion, to depose Princes, and liberat their subjects,
As you instance in Frederick the. 1. und 2. Jews of Bavier, and several
others, but the latest precedent, you say, is the holy league of France, from
which you think our whole matter seems to be transcribed. I have on purpose
exhibited these passages together, that men may the better perceive the malice
of your calumny, which prefacing and palliating with a great show of ingenuity,
you prosecute with mere falsehood and impertinency. But first, dare you, after
second thoughts, affirm upon your ingenuity, small as it is, that this History
of Gregory is the first precedent that occurres to you of fighting for
Religion? I have already told you, how, before Constantin's Empire, the
Christians in the East, the Armenii by name, did by arms assert the liberty of
the Gospel, and rout Maximinus their Persecutor, and that the Persian
Christians, persecute by their Princes, did implore the assistance of the
Romans against them, is obviously notour. Are not these then ancient and
undeniable precedents? But 2. What likeness find you in Gregory's case to these
practices that we maintain? An usurping Prelat, according to the Spirit of
pride and violence, moving in that order, quarrels with the Emperor, anent the
investiture of Bishops, whether upon just grounds or not, is not the present
concern, and thereupon excommunicating him, extites his Subjects, yet unstable
after a recent rebellion, to a second rising. Pray Sir, was this a war provoked
to by persecution and the necessity of defense, in which points, the justice of
our courses does chiefly Consist? Sir, do you think that a war, being sometime
made upon a false or unjust pretense of Religion, should be an instance
sufficient to disprove all wars whatsomever upon a Religious account?
Certainly, if we admit of such reasoning, the most necessary and just defensive
war that ever was or can be supposed, may by the objecting (though most
groundlesly) of any of the most arrant rebellions, by the same consequence be
condemned. Seeing therefore that Gregorie's course was plainly wicked. 1.
Because his meddling with the Emperor after this sort was a proud usurpation.
2. Because whatever right or wrong was in the matter, abstractly considered,
yet, without doubt, the Emperor's pretense was better founded, then the Pop's.
3. Because he not only abused the spiritual censure, but perverted it to the
instigatting to perjury, rebellion, and blood, for his own tyrannous lust and
ambition, your reproaching us, who from our heart detest all such ways; either
with this or any the like act of the papal insosolence and domination, is but
dull and ridicluous envy.

As for the Holy league of France, from which, you say, our whole matter seems
to be transcribed, Was it not contrived and entered into, at least in pretense,
for the restoring and settling of Romes superstition, and consequently for the
extirpation of the protestant Religion? How then can our necessary undertaking
for the defense of our selves, in the maintenace of the true Religion, and
covenanting together, in this cause, expressly against Romes designs and
instruments, be assimulat to that precedent? Out of what Topics will you prove
such direct opposites, as a League for establishing error against truth, and a
Covenant for truth's defense, to be parallel? Or do you think, that the same
common name and form of a League, or the accidental similitude of certain
ordinary methods and circumstances is sufficient to conclude all engagements,
accordingly modelled, under the same character? But it is so certain, that the
most wicked combinations of the ungodly may proceed in the same form and
manner, with the righteous Covenants of the faithful, and that as these may
join themselves to the Lord, in a perpetual Covenant, so those also may
conspire against the Lord and against his anointed, plote against the just, and
make a Covenant even with hell and death, that I am ashamed of your futility.

But you say, That herein we symbolize with Courtiers, Canonists and Jesuits
the worst gang of the Roman Church, and yet fill heaven and earth with clamors
against the Church of England, for innocenter resemblances. Sir, This your
(herein) needs explication; for that as they did, so do we enter into
Leagues, is too general to import any reflection: and as to the specifications
of that popish League, seeing they disterminate our cases to no less opposition,
then that of error, persecution and destruction, on their part, to truth,
necessary defense and preservation, on our part, what remains to make out this
your objected agreement? It Is true, these French leaguers were subjects, and
did pretend for their Religion, with an avowed preference to the subordinate
duty of their allegiance to their Prince: but seeing their religion was a false
superstition, and their engagement neither provoked by injury, nor limited to
defense, but in manifest malice, Without the countenance of Authority, entered
into, to suppress, by blood and violence, truth and innocenie, our Covenant,
authorized by^ the unanimous vote of the Estates of Parliament, for the
necessity of defense, in an exigent, very demonstrable both from our first and
chief obligation unto God, and unquestionable liberty and privilege of self
defense, can not without an impious effrontery, be compared to that wicked and
cruel Bond. And here, if comparisons were not more odious then pungent, it were
easy for me to prove, that as our National Covenant was at first made in
opposition to the bloody decrees of the Council of Trent, and the combinations
framed for execut^ing thereof ^and our League and Covenant afterward engaged
in, upon the express consideration of the continual plotes and conspiracies of
the enemies of God, against his truth; so, it is only the practice of your
Prelates, their persecuting bonds and subscriptions, with their persidious
^ellum Episcopale, and not our defensive Covenants, that can be reproached with
the imitation of these popish courses. But seeing the necessity and justice of
our cause was plainly such, as neither can be convelled by your aspersions, nor
needs the confirmation of the known precedents of the French, and other
protestants, counter-leaguing, in opposition to that wicked League devised
against them, I shall not detain you longer on this subject.

As for the Church of England's seeming to symbolize with Rome, in some
innocenter things, as you phrase it, I wish she were indeed as innocent in that
matter, as we are in what you objecte. But seeing what you would only have to be
a seeming appearance, is a manifest reality, already clearly Demonstrate, by
the Authors of Altar damascenum, and the English Popish Ceremonies; passing
this poor reflection, as one of your affected transitions, I follow you to your
next purpose.

Which you table by a challenge from your N. C. that you still retain the
papacy, and do only change the person from the Pope, to the King, whom you
make, and swear to, as Head of the Church. And to this you answer very
vehemently, that it is an impudent calumny, as you promise to clear by an
account of the whole matter. But behold the worthy performance; a lame,
confused, pitiful story, how the Pope, beside his general tyranny, did, upon
King John his base r^signation, exercise over England a particular authority;
that after the Reformation and the shaking of the papal voke, the Oath of
Supremacy was brought in, to exclude all foreign Jurisdiction, and reinstate
the King is his Civil Authority; That Henry the 8th did indeed set up a
Civil Papacy, but the Reformation of England was never dated from his breach
with Rome: that the Oath of supremacy was never designed to take away the
Churches intrinseck Power, or to make the power of Ordination, of giving
Sacraments, or of Discipline to flow from the King, that however, because the
generality of the words might suggest scruples, they are explained in an Act of
Parliament of Q. Elizabeth, and in one of the 29. Articles, and morefully by B.
Usher with King James approbation. And lastly since we have this oath from
England, none ought to scruple, the words being sufficiently plain, and the
English meaning ours. This is the full and clear account which you promise; But
who knows not these poor and insignificant pretenses: King John's resignation
was indeed so base, that by all disinterested it was ever held to be invalid,
and in after times scarce ever mentioned, let be pleaded. It is therefore the
Pop's general tyranny, and what it was, and whether abolished, in these
Kingdoms, or in effect only transferred from him to the Prince, that we are
here to consider. And, I think, I may take it for granted, that you judge the
Pope's exorbitant usurpation, specially his assumming to himself, not an
external assisting oversight (which we grant to be the proper right of Princes)
but, by way of an intrinseck and direct power, the sole and uncontrolable care
of the Church, her ministry and ministers, with his arrogating an
architectonick power in the ordering of Gods Worship, so that in all
Ecclesiastic meetings and matters therein proposed, he may enact what canons
he pleases, to be parts of the Papal tyranny, not only as in him, but in all
men under our Lord Jesus Christ, unwarrantable and antichristian; nay some of
these are points of so high a nature, that the greater part, even of the
members of the Romish Church, do reclaim against them. Now questionless if
this power be to the Pope unlawful and incompetent, all secular persons and
Princes are therefore much more excluded, in as much as the Pope being at least
in show a Churchman, and, according to the hypothese even of your Hierarchy,
the first Bishop of the western, if not of the whole Church, he is fortified
by certain seeming pretenses, of which the clame of civil Princes is wholly
destitute. To come then to our purpose, that after the Reformation, the Popish
yoke not only as to the particulars above mentioned, but also as to his
foreign Jurisdiction, unlawfully usurped over Churchmen in civills, to the
prejudice of the King's Soveraignity; was righteously shaken off, and the King
re-instated in his Civil authority, over all Persons, and also, in all Causes,
in so far as they are committed to his royal direction and tuition, is not at
all denied: If that matters had here sisted, and upon the abolition of the
Papal domination, the things of God and of Caesar had been equally restored,
who could have gainsaid it? But that, on the contrary, by the Pop's exclusion,
and, in place of this righteous restitution, the King, under pretense of the
vindication of his own Supremacy, did procure to himself a very formal and full
translation of what the Pope had not only usurped from him, but arrogate from
God, specially in the things above-specified, both the occasion of this change,
and the manner how this Supremacy has since been exercised, do abundantly
declare. And for clearing the occasion, it may be remembered, 1. That the
Peter Pence, called in the beginning the King's alms, imposed by on Ina King
of the West Saxons, was discharged by Act of Parliament in the reign of Edward
the Third, and the contention anent the exemption of Churchmen from the King's
Courts most hotly agitate, in the reig^es of Henry Second and King John, was
composed many years before the days of Henry the Eight: So that neither that
exaction, nor this old debate, and far less King John's most invalide
resignation, not worth the naming, could be the cause of King Henry his
acclaiming the Supremacy. 2. The only motive that we find in History, whereby
Henry was instigat to reject the Pope, and to declare himself to be supreme in
causes Ecclesiastic, as well as civil, was his purpose of divorce from Queen
Katharine, wherein, finding himself abused by the Pope and his Legates their
delays, he discharges all appeals to Rome, appointing them to be made from the
Comissary to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and from the
Archbishop to the King, and is thereafter first called by the Clergy, and then
declared by the Parliament, to be Supreme head of the Church, in liew of the
Pope, whose authority was abrogat by the same Act: These things then being
certain, and you your self acknowledging that King Henry did set up a civil
Papacy, It is easy to determine, that this change was not a bare exclusion, but
a plain translation of the Popes usurped power. We know the Reformation of
England was never dated from that breach with the Bishop of Rome: But what
then? Can you deny that this was both the rise and establishment of the
Supremacy, which being transmitted to Edvard the sixth, and then renounced by
Queen Mary, and again restored to the Pope, was by Queen Elizabeth reassumed,
and so continues until this day? It is true, that after the breaking up of
the more clear light of Reformation, whereby not only Rom's Superstition, bot
also the Popes usurpation and tyranny, in many things, was, upon better
reasons, rejected, and especially after the succession of Queen Elizabeth, to
whose Sex the former title of headship, for all the smoothings that had been
before used, was nevertheless construed not to be so agreeable. Many
explications were adhibite for qualifying the Supremacy, both in answer to the
opposition of Papists and for removing the offense of the Protestant Churches.
But the truth is, these explications, though more sound in their grounds, yet,
in their explication, were nothing conclusive as to the present debate, and
their Authors arguing for the Supremacy from the examples of reforming Kings
and Emperors, acting not by virtue of an assumed prerogative, but only from
that extraordinary power, which the necessity of the end, upon the failzour of
other midses, does measure out to Princes first, and to others also, if in a
competent capacity, did rather infer the justification of the work, then
conclude the approbation of the Supremacy, notwithstanding it was therein
employed. Nay, while by these their reasonings, they went about from such
extraordinary interpositions, only warranted by the exigence of necessity, and
the rectitude of the work thereby effectuat, to establish to the Prince a
constant settled authority, properly conversant about these matters, the
argument is far more absurd, then if because a Governor may, in a manifest
incident disorder falling, for example, in a Family, repone the Father and head
thereof to his paternal oversight, one should thence conclude to the same
Governor, a proper power and faculty of placeing and displaceing Heads of
Families, and appointing the Rules thereof at his pleasure. Now that thus it
fell out in England after the Reformation, and that the same (if not a more
exorbi^ant power) taken from the Pope, was transferred and settled upon the
Crown, as a perpetual privilege thereof, is in the second place by the manner
of its exercise, and its ensuing fruits, very evidently held out. For proof
whereof, the office and actings of the Lord Cromwell, as Vicare General,
appointed by Henry the eight, over the spirituality, though by the good
providence of God ordered to be a notable mean for advance of the Reformation,
is an undeniable argument. And as to the continuance of the same usurpation, in
order to other effects in themselves evil, and not to be justified, there
needs no curious search; the frequent practices of after Princes, laying
claim to this power, namely Elizabeth, James and Charles, in their
ecclesiastic medlings, but especially of his Majesty now regnant, in his
interposing in Church Matters, and thereby overturning a true Gospe-^ministry,
introducing a new model of Church Government, absolutely dependent upon
himself, reviving vain, groundless and antiq^^^ ceremonies, appointing and
imposing new Religions, Days and Forms. And lastly, giving Rules to Ministers
their doctrine, what points to preach and what to omit all according to the
device of his own heart, are an obvious demonstration: which things are in
themselves so evident, that I strange you should accuse Henry the Eight of a
civil Papacy, and so inconsequently acquit al his Successors: Whereas, in
effect, they not only acted in Church Matters after the same method by him
observed, using the same prerogative, in the grant of their High Commissions
and in other acts, which he exercised in his vicarious deputation; but he is
the Prince who (waving his haltings upon the other side, and considering the
necessity there was at that time, of an extraordinary remedy, for the good
things that he did) seems to have employed their usurped Supremacy most
excusably, and also very advantageously for the promoving of the Reformation.

Bot you tell us, that the Oath of Supremacy was never designed, to take away
the Churches intrinseck power, or to make the power of Ordination, of
Sacraments, and of Discipline, flow from the King. It is answered, seeing the
many evil effects of this Supremacy, do so pla^^ly evince its direct and
proper tendency, and its late explanation by Act of Parliament, does put its
nature and extent beyond all controversy, to tell us what at first it was or
was not designed for, is but a vain suggestion. And therefore according to
these ^urer grounds, I must now tell you. 1. That although the King, not likely
to be tempted by such an empty curiosity, has neither expressly declared in his
own favor, nor assumed to himself the exercise of this power of
administration; yet that by virtue of his Supremacy, as it now stands
explained, he may do both or either, when he pleases, is not to be doubted. I
need not reminde you that any Church Power, not acknowledging a dependence
upon, and subordination unto the Sovereign Power of the King as Supreme, is
abrogate and discharged. But, pray Sir, he who may enact what he thinks fit
concerning all Ecclesiastic meetings and matters, may he not, if he think fit,
declare himself to have the power of the ministerial function? Nay, what may he
not do? But 2. admitting that this was not meaned by the Parliament, in their
explanation, and that in probability the King will never affect the employment;
yet that the intrinseck power of Government belonging to the Church, both as to
a Society of our Lords erection, and by his express gift and concession, is by
the Supremacy taken away, I believe it will be so far from being disowned, that
it is rather vaunted of as its principal end and advantage. But referring the
truth and evidence of this point, anent the power of Government, given by our
Lord immediately to his Church, to what has been very fully by others declared,
and is by me above hinted at, I verily think, that though we had no other
argument, save the sad changes that of late have ensued upon the usurpation of
this Supremacy, the usefulness and excellency of this intrinseck Government, is
thereby rendered apparent, beyond the evidence of any further confirmation. And
really when, together with the authority of its founder, I consider the
undeniable necessity and expedience of an internal power of Government in the
Church, as the most significant mean for making all its other gifts, powers,
and offices effectual, And how much it is commended by the signal usefulness of
a proper Government in every Society, but more especially to our adversaries by
that high yea sacred estimat, which they so much inculcat of that
Civil-government, and all its punctilios, whereupon their interest depends, and
when, on the other hand, I reflect upon the pe^^^^ous and woeful influences,
that in all ages have constantly attended either the suppression or usurpation
of this great divine ordinance, I cannot sufficiently regrete, that the pride,
ambition and vanity of men, in setting up and advancing this Supremacy, should
be so sinfully subservient to the Divell's great design, of crossing the
progress of the Gospel, and propogating irreligion: Which evil is the more to
be lamented, that nothwithstanding that our own experience of its wretched
consequences, does evidently redargue this usurpation, yet these men who, in
the matter of Civil government, make every circumstance sacred, and exclaim
against the smallest innovation, as if all confusion were imminent, can and do,
in the business of Ecclesiastic government, with a more then Gallio
indifferency and coldness, slight all its concerns, in opposition to their
carnal designs, as questions of mere outward forms, and the skirts and suburbs
of Religion, far removed from its life and substance. Whereas it is very
certain, that eternal life and salvation, the great end, is not more preferable
to temporal peace and outward tranquillity, then our zeal for the government of
God's House, institute by himself in his Church, in order to our everlasting
welbeing, ought to exceed our regard to Civil government, which in this
respect, are but the ordinances of man, in order to our temporal interests:
Nay, so apparent is the lukwarmness and hypocrisy of men's reasonings in behalf
of this Supremacy, that though in the supposition that our Lord had by himself
immediately erected in any Kingdom, a Society or incorporation with masters,
laws, and a competent jurisdiction, in order to some temporal advantage, as he
has, in the acknowledgement of all, institute his Church with Ordinances,
Officers, and Government suited to its great ends, all ration^^ men let be the
members of that Society, would judge the King's pretending to an arbitrary and
absolute disposal of these previleges thus granted, to be an injurious invasion
and usurpation. Yet, in order to the Church and her rights and immunities, they
are not ashamed to cut off ^o even and just a parallel, and deny so evident a
consequence in behalf of her righteous liberty: But wisdom is justified of her
children. And how much were it to be wished, that, at the least, the children
of light were as wise as the children of this world are in their generation. 3.
Beside the invasion threatened to the Church, in its power of administration,
and the usurpation from the Church of the power of Government, which this
Supremacy imports, it further attributes to the Prince, according to our
Parliaments late explication, an illimited power in matters of Religion, proper
and reserved to God alone. To enact whatever a man thinks fit in
Ecclesiastic meetings and ma^^ers, I am certain, is that which the Lord did
never allow to any mere man under heaven; and yet that this power is assumed,
and how, by virtue thereof, old, unwarrantable superstitions have been
retained, new rites and ceremonies in Divine Worship devised, and Churches
turned and overturned, according to men's pleasure, is sufficiently known
without my condescendence. And therefore, seeing the King, by virtue of his
Supremacy, does not only intermedle, by giving his civil sanction and
confirmation to the intrinseck powers of the Church, by you mentioned, as you
do allege, or by acts imperate, as others, in contradistinction to elicite acts
in these matters, do use to express it, but does lay claim to an absolute
power in and over all Church Matters and persons, the filly pretense whereby
you go about to smooth it is not worthy of any man's notice.

In the next place, you tell us of some explications provided for removing of
the scruples, which the generality of the words of the oath of Supremacy might
suggest. And to this it may suffice for answer, that seeing these explications
are certainly confined to England, and by no public Act received or owned
among us, your allegiance, with your childish ground, that we have this oath
from them, is wholly impertinent as to our releife^ But seeing the setting down
of these explications, contained in the English act and Articles above cited,
(Which you do counningly omit) will not only, by comparing therewith the far
different practices of the Kings of that Realm, discover the inadequatnesse,
not to say the slightness of these sensings, in effect merely devised to
palliat an excess in it self nowise justifiable, but more fully manifest the
strange extravagance both of the practical acceptance, and late express
interpretation of this Supremacy. You may read them as follows; the words of
the Act in quinto Elizab. Declare her power and Authority to be a soveraignity
over all manner of persons, borne within the Realm, whether they be
ecclesiastical or temporal, so that no foreign power has or ought to have
any superiority over them, and these of the Articles, run thus. Art. 37. We
give not to our Princes the ministering either of Gods. Word or of the
Sacraments, the which thing the injunctions also lately set forth by Elizab our
Queen do most plainly testify: but that only prerogative, which we see to have
been given always to all godly Princes, in holy Scriptures, by God himself,
that is, that they should rule all Estates and degrees committed to their
charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with
the civil sword the stubborn, and evil doers. These being the terms of
these explications, what consonancie the medlings of their Princes in imposing
rites, ceremonies and forms of Worship, enjoining their own days, and
profaning God's, commanding what Doctrine Ministers should forbear, permitting
excomunication in their own name jointly with the Lords, and finally, by
sitting and ruling in the Temple of God, as in their own Court, do hold thereto,
is obvious to the first reflection: Only this I must say, that if the Kings of
England their Ecclesiastic actings be indeed sufficiently warranted, by the
foregoing explanations, the Author of the late discourse of Ecclesiastic
policy, who, in prosecution of the King's Supremacy, does plainly annexe unto
it the Authority of the preisthood, and power over the conscience, at least the
obedience of men, in matters of Religion; in place of that applause, wherewith
he is generally received at Court, deserves rather to be demeaned as the
highest calumniator and depraver of his Majesty's government.

But not to trouble you further with these double English senses, viz that
pretended by their Acts of Parliament and Articles, which I grant to be more
sound, and such wherewith many godly men have rested satisfied, and the other
more true, received and followed by their Court and Clergy, nor yet to insist
upon your incomparable and blessed (Who now has men's persons in admiration?)
Bishop Usher his more full interpretation equally redargued by what I have
already said. Let us consider our Scots most excessive, though more ingenuous,
explanation; and although, I do apprehend the words of the Oath of Supremacy
to be in themselves capable of a sound sense, and that by understanding supreme
Governor of this Kingdome^ not to be a limiting designation, but a plain
qualification of the nature of the government as being in order to its correlat
this Kingdom, in it self civil, and only in this notion, to be extended to
persons and causes ecclesiastic, all difficulties may be salved; yet, when to
the rise and manner of this Supremacy above declared, I add how of late it
has been made the ground of the King his restoring of Bishops, and framing
their government to an absolute dependence upon himself, granting of the high
Commission, appointing the constitution of a National Synod, and of other
strange acts before touched, and especially that as the Act Parl. 1592.
expressly and justly limiting this Supremacy, was by the first Act (...) 2.
Parl. 1661. Wholly abrogate and made void^ so by the first Act of the Par.
1669. The same Supremacy is ass^rted to that absurd hight, as does import a
plain surrender of Conscience, and submission of all Matters of Religion (for
as to civills, we are not so rash) to his Majesty's pleasure, in a more
absolute manner, then ever to this day has been acclaimed either by Pope or
general Council. These things, I say, being weighed, I think I may safely
conclude, that I look upon the Supremacy not only as a civil Papacy, but an
height of usurpation against our Lord, King in Zion, whereunto never Christian
Prince nor Potentate did heretofore aspire.

And here, your N. C. seconding my assertion tells you, that this Supremacy
clearly makes way for Erastianisme. To which you answer, That this is one of
our mutinous arts, to find out long and hard names, and affixe them to any
thing displeases us. But passing the childishness of this conceit, as if
either a long or hard name were more odious then a short, in my opinion, such
is the manifest wickedness of this your Supremacy, that it is one of your
^elusive arts to make your. N. C. rather vail it with an obscure name, then
leave it to an open discovery; and in the same manner it was, that the men of
your gang, after they begun to broach their dangerous, dissolute, and
undermining principles, thought fairly to have palliate all with the gentle
name of Latitudinarian, as apparently obleidging to all parties: But now that
they are detected, they turn their talk, and loath to mar their affected
smoothness by terming it otherwise then, the long name, they blame us for
loading them with reproach: whereas, to the best of my knowledge, it was their
own invention and choice. But not to detain you about names, which really I do
so little value, in any respect, that I do not so much as regard the name
Fanatic, nor these many other, wherewith the truth, and party, which I
maintain have been standered, let us proceed to what you say to the things.

And first you tell us, that in the old Testament the Kings of Judah frequently
meddled in divine matters, and the Sanhedrin, which was a civil Court
determined in all matters of Religion, It Is answered, did you not just now give
us an account of certain restrictive explications made of the Supremacy? What
do you then intend by these instance? Not that I do exclude Kings from a due
meddling in divine matters, or do decline the righteous practices of the Kings
of Judah, in the largest construction that they can receive; But certainly, if
what you say of their Sanhedrin be true, it will overturne all your pretended
limitatio^s, at least, give to the King a determining judgment in all matters
of Religon, which neither ought, nor can be admitted. But. 2. This threed-bare
argument, taken from the Kings of Judah and the Sanhedrin, for your Supremacy,
is so fully answered by others, specially by Mr. Gillespie, in his Aaron^s Rod;
and he has so evidently cleared, that there was a Sanhedrin ecclesiastic,
distinct from the civil, and that these two governments were not confounded,
that I wonder you are not ashamed of such jejune repetitions. And, in effect,
it is so plain in Scripture, that none of these Kings did interpose in matters
of Religion, otherwise then by their extrinseck oversight and assistance,
except either by immediate commission and direction from God, as it happened in
the establishment made by David and Solomon, not to be drawn in consequence, or
else in the case of necessary Reformation, in which, ordinary means ceasing, the
obligation of the end does authorize even more extraordinary endeavors, that
seeing the Lord himself did immediately reprove the usurpation of Uzziah, I can
not imagine from what particular precedent you do design your advantage.
However, of one thing I am most persuaded, and I am charitable to think that
all your confidence dare not deny it, that had any one of the Kings of Judah
arrogate to himself a Supremacy in all causes, and over all persons, as well
Ecclesiastic as Civil so as to declare that whatsoever he, should enact,
anent Ecclesiastic meetings or matters should be obeyed and observed by all
his subjects, he had been repute no other then a rebel and usurper against
God, and a proud contemner of his Law: And as for the Sanedrin, though it were
not proven that there was one Ecclesiastic, and ^n other Civil, yet their
distinct, sacred, and inviolable Preisthood, does so strangly plead for a
constant separation where we find the Lord to have made a divided institution,
that any conjunction in that Court, or any thing beside occasioned by their
singularly mixed Policy, can nowise infer the conclusion you plead for.

The next thing you say is, That the Christian Emperors did meddle in matters
of Religion, It Is ans. That the first Chistian Emperors did meddle in matters
of Religion, so as to confirm the truth and Ecclesiastic decrees by their
Civil sanction, to establish the Church in the condition wherein they found
her, to adorn her with certain privileges, enrich her with revenues, and
beautify her with fair structures, is not denied; But what is all this to your
Supremacy? And who is he who does not wish for a just measure of the like
favor and assistance? You add, that they called the first general Councils.
And why not? Who denies that the King may, within his Dominious, do the like?
But the point you drive, is to have this power to the King solely, and
exclusive of any right and power in the Church to appoint and meet in such
Assemblies, (what ever be the necessity) contrary to the Kings prohibition: And
that, for order and decency, the King's consent and countenance should first be
sought, nay, that his refusal ought to be of that moment as not to be
counter-ballanced, but by a very visible urgencie, is by all granted. Only that
he has an absolute veto in this matter, I positively and firmly deny: for,
seeing it is evident, that the Church, while under pagane Princes, did enjoy
this power, how she should lose it, upon their becoming Christian, otherwise
then to be tied, out of respect and for order, to make to him the first
application, to be regulable by his reasons, and very tender of his
displeasure, is utterly unexplicable, and were in plain terms to defer to them
as Christians, though acting as Antichristians, and worse then their pagane
predecessors. And further it may be considered, that the power of conveening in
Council, being founded on the same warrant with the Churches liberty to meet
for the duties of Worship, the former no more then the later can be made
dependent upon the Prince his pleasure.

But you subjoine, that they presided in these Councils: And to this there is
no answer like unto your own, viz. that in presiding they only ordered matters
but did not decide in them; which, together with a Moderator, after the example
of the first Nicen Synod, wherein Constantine presiding, Eustathius of Antioch
did by prayer open the Council, you know we do willingly allow. But to help you
a little in this point, I grant that Theodosius in the Council of
Constantinople seems to have gone a great length; yet all that we find upon
record is that the Council being divided without issue, by the opinions of the
Orthodoxe, and of the Macedonians, Arrians and Ennomians, the Emperor requires
their several confessions, and, after much earnest prayer to God for light and
direction, he declares for the Nicen Faith; whereunto the Synod agreeing, the
contrary heresies are condemned: And this was no doubt a very laudable
practice, warranted both by the exigent and the truth it self, whereby many
things less regular, without inferring an ordinary and proper power in the
Author for their warrant, have very often been sustained. A good turn,
specially when done in the cessation of other midses, does sufficiently subsist
by its own merit. Iehojada a Priest in a state of necessity, arms against a
Tyranne, and reformes the Kingdom: But can you or any man thence conclude,
that therefore he acted from an ordinary power and faculty, a privilege
proper to his office? Why then should men be so absurdly unequal, as from the
like extraordinary interpositions of Princes, in Church perturbations, to
attribute to them a proper inherent right and perpetual prerogative?

Next you say, That the Emperors also judged in matters of Schism. But seeing
that any judgment given by them was consequent to the Churches determination,
though perhapes with a little attemperation for convenience, whereof
determinations in these matters do very naturally allow, the instance is no
more favorable then the rest you have adduced. But the Code, Basilicks and
Capitulers of Charles the great show that they never thought it without their
sphere to make laws in Ecclesiastic matters. It Is answ. This objection shows,
that either you are little acquainted with what is in these Books, or little
advertent to the conclusion you have in hand. The laws you mention, are either
imperial confirmations of the truth, owned by the Church, or for condemning and
punishing of declared heretics, or for authorizing and ordering a slender
umbrage of jurisdiction called episcopalis audientia, granted to Churchmen in
charitable and favorable cases, or for restraining and correcting their
dissolute manners, or lastly, anent the regulating, of Hospitals, Almshouses,
and other things, pertaining to the outward policy of the Church. Pray Sir,
what make these for your Supremacy? Or was ever this part of his Majesty's
power by us questioned? But where will you find, in all approven antiquity,
that ever a Prince by virtue of a pretended inherent right in his Crown, or any
acclaimed prerogative and Supremacy, in causes Ecclesiastic, took upon him,
with one blow, summarily to overturne the established Ministry of a Church, by
himself formerly by solemn Oath confirmed, introduce new Office-bearers, set
up a new frame of Church Government, declaring himself to be the sole head and
fountain thereof, to whom all others, as subordinat, must be accountable for
their admistrations? In what ancient record did you ever read of a Commission
granted by a King for Ecclesiastic affairs, impowering Secular persons to
appoint Ministers to be censured by suspension and deposition, and Churchmen
to punish by fining, confining, incarcerating, and other corporal paints? What
Emperor or Prince did ever assume to himself, in the right of his royal
power, at once to impose upon a whole Church a new liturgy and form of service
never before heard of among them? Or, did it ever enter in the heart of a
Christian Potentat to declare for a Law, that what ever he should please to
enact anent Church-meetings and matters should upon the publication be by all
obeyed and observed, and, in suite of it, to statute, that if either Minister
or other person, not allowed by his or his Bishops authority, do preach, expone
Scripture, or pray, except in his own house, and to these only of his own
family, it shall be judged a Coventicle, and liable to pains of Law? These are
a part of the native fruits of your Supremacy. If you look back to confirm it
by ancient precedents, pray, give us but one parallel. I grant, that Justinian,
in some of his Constitutions, after having declared and confirmed the truth,
received by the Church, and d^termined by her Councils; not only condemns, but
anathematizes the contrary heresies. But seeing his using of that phrase
peculiar to the Church, and properly importing a power, acknowledged not to be
competent to secular Athority, does only express his more enixe detestation of
these errors, and approbation of the Church her censures against them, it
cannot with any color of reason, be made use of for your purpose.

But you proceed to tell us, that the Bishops, not excepting the Bishope of
Rome, were named, at least their elections approven by the Emperors. And what
then? For my part, if the Emperor, and all Christian Princes should agree at
once, to reduce them, as well as they advanced them, it should not be accounted
an invasion of the Churches power or privilege. But, because it is like that
these Emperors, you speak of, did indeed regard them, as true Church Officers,
and nevertheless meddled, as is mentioned, in their elections, I answer further,
that the true cause of Princes their first meddling in the elections of Bishops
was, either the diffidence of the Bishops, as to that office and title, wherein
not being satisfied from Scripture-warrant, they were inclined to apply to the
Emperor for the supplement of his confirmation, or else their solicitous
ambition, which, in thesearly contests that they had for precedence, did prompt
them, among other artifices, to fortify their pretensions by the Emperor's
favor and suffrage. However this is very certain, that whether the Emperor's
meddling was first procured by the Bishops address, or did flow from their own
proper motive, had these Churchmen contained themselves within the rules and
limits set to them by our Lord, they had never judged the Emperors
confirmation requisite to the validity of their office and title: and therefore
seeing the true account of this matter, is, that the aspiring of Ecclesiastics
did give the first rise unto this secular meddling, whether we take it to be no
usurpation, as being conversant about that, which, to say the truth, is not
Christian, let be Ecclesiastic, or to be a partaking in the Churchmen their
usurpation, either of the two does equally make void your argument.

After the reasons, which we have heard, you conclude, That Kings their meddling
in Ecclesiastic affairs, was never controverted, till the Roman Church
swelled to the hight of tyranny, and since the reformation, it has been still
stated, as one of the differences betwixt us and them. It is answered. If
Princes had at first exceeded and intruded too far in Church Matters, and then
the Pope acted by a worse spirit, and no less aspiring, had risen up against
his Masters, and thrust himself into their rooms, what would this make for
your advantage? Or does it to either of them conclude a right? Suppose a Papist
debating this question should argue thus, that the Pope his headship in
Ecclesiastic affairs in England was never controverted, till Henry the Eight,
impatient through lust, did arrogate to himself the Supremacy, and since that
time it has still been stated as one of the controverted differences, would
you think this reasoning pungent? Why then is not your discerning equal to
your judgment? But the clear truth in this matter is, that although the
Emperors of old did, at no time, lay claim to this Supremacy questioned, yet
they and the succeeding Princes, having too much connived at and countenanced
the Antichristian ambition, working in Prelacy toward the Papacy, it was from
the righteous judgment of God, that, upon its exaltation, they were blinded
and involved in these contentions, and justly plagued by the transcendent
insolence of an evil, which they had too much fomented: And therefore your
dating the period of these contests from the setting up of the Papal tyranny,
does contribute nothing to your advantage. And where you say, that since the
Reformation the Supremacy has still been stated as one of our differences from
them, It Is very certain, that it has been granted by all the reformed
Churches, that Princes may and ought to reassume their own power and Kingdom,
given unto the Beast, in so far as, in the times of the prevailing of the
mystery of iniquity, it was either by force extorted, or by fraud elicite from
them: But that any King or Prince, upon the pretense of recovering his own from
the Pope, should lay claim to all that he has usurped, either against our
Lord, or over his Church, nay to more then ever any Pope did arrogate, which is
the case and import of your Supremacy, is that whereunto, I am confident, no
true subject of Jesus Christ, and enemy of Antichrist can judiciously assent:
And therefore if in this we do more solidly and soundly maintain the
differences betwixt the Reformed and Popish Churches, and, while we assert our
Lord's prerogative and his Churches privilege against the Pope, do not betray
them to any other pretender, we hope our differing from you, as well as the
Papists, in this matter, shall only witness us to be the more upright defenders
and no deserters of the Protestants plea, and the truth of God. Now, this is
That Supremacy which as I have very plainly and graphically represented
without making use of Scolastick terms or distinctions, in my opinion not more
frequent then super^luous in a matter so palpable; so I am confident that every
one who has that true understanding of the fear of God, and the sincere love
of our Lord Jesus, will ever abhor it with all its wicked effects.

But you in your crastines do not only make your. N. C. cede as it were to your
reasonings, but in a manner own the late pretended Indulgence, as flowing from
the Supremacy, on purpose to fix upon these few Ministers of ours, who have
been thereby restored, at least, a constructive approbation of this evil. And
thus you move your N. C. to say that he hopes you are so much for the
Supremacy, as not to quarrel at this Indulgence lately granted; and by way of
reply you tell him, how good Subjects you are not to criticize upon your
Sovereign's pleasure, and how much more moderate then we, who would not have
received ann. 1641 such a proposition from the King in favors of the Doctors
of Aberdeen; And from this, falling to touch our opposing the readmission of
Malignants to the Army against the Englishes, you exceedinly please your self
in your own well-natur'd compliance, and would have even the jealousy and
aversion, which some of you have for this favor, commend your submission as
the greater virtue, because against your inclination. But, not to lose time in
these your trifflings, the weak shadowings of your vain imagination, to be
brieff and round with you, I differ from your N. C. and am so much against the
Supremacy, that I abominat the Indulgence under this name. That God has
disposed the King, to restore, in any measure, what was so sinfully taken away,
we account it a great blessing, wishing that he may be in such manner satisfied
with the fruits of this course as may more and more convince him of its
righteousness, and encourage him to its prosecution: But if you or any else do
think, by this poor and scant restitution, to bribe the Lords People to a
consent to the rest of your usurpations, and a more tame compliance with all
the other wrongs and mischiefs, that you have done and are still doing, we
trust the Lord shall deliver his own from so fearful a snare: And that as
hitherto our Ministers have looked upon themselves as such, neither of man nor
only by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father; so they will accordingly
acquit themselves, and in a special manner (as they expect our Lords presence
to be with them) testify for his right and ordinance against all invasions, and
that so much the more, as the hard condition of the present times has in some
sort engaged them to a seeming allowance, of which they ought to purge
themselves in the first place.

As for your being better subjects to the King then we are; we know indeed that
many, if not all, of you, either principally designing, or else simply deluded
by outward peace and ease, do, in order to this end, not only acknowledge the
King as Supreme, but in effect adore and revere him as the most high, and for
the freedom of your persons and fortunes, really enslave your consciences to
his dictates: But, as this is a subjection no more stable and fixed, then the
mutability of that interest, whereon it depends; so it is a measure thereof,
for which we do neither envy you, nor for the want thereof fear to be less
accepted, either with God or man. Only let me tell you, that I take your not
criticizing upon the late License, a thing, though very hardly resolved upon,
and no better digested by your evil natures and foolish malice; yet, in it
self, most conducible, and in its effect very advantageous to your ends, to be
so much the concernment of your interest, as scarce to be a mark of just and
ordinary subjection, let be to furnish a complement to your slavish flattery.

But you talk to us also of your greater moderation: O the impudence! The
Prelates having raged several years in persecution and violence against
persons, only chargeable with a simple not-countenancing of their evil
courses, to the ruining of a part, and distressing of the whole Country, and
to the manifest hazard of turning all to Confusion, a few of our Rulers more
wise (foreseeing the consequences) are at length persuaded to a small
relenting, and in hope thereby more assuredly to compass their end of
suppressing and extinguishing the party by them feared, they resolve rather to
allay and break them, by pretended favor and seeming indulgence: And this
having succeeded more happily, then either reason or sense can convince the
ever-jealous and cruel Prelatick Clergy, you would have us so stupid as to
applaud you for your moderation, as exceeding any thing by us practiced. But to
convince you, by the retortion of your own instance, Will you or any knowing
man affirm, that if there had been no more of necessity and interest to plead
for us, then appeared in the behalf of the Doctors of Aberdeen, we had
notwithstanding have attained to this favor? For my part, I think it may be
demonstrate, that had that freedom been used by us in open disputing and
opposing, which was permitted, nay allowed to the Doctors, instead of Answers,
and Answers to Replies, as they are termed, we had certainly got Prisons and
Gibbets. And yet for all your calumnious allegiance, that they and other
worthy persons (whom nevertheless you wisely forbear either to name or number)
were by us driven away by tumults and not by laws, It is known that all they
suffered was, after desperate obstinacy, to be removed either by Law or
Ecclesiastick-censure.

The next thing whereby you go about to make out your charge of rigor against
us, is, that we purged our Armies. And wherefore not? That evil men do not by
reason of sin forfeit their rights, and consequently may lawfully defend them,
is not denied: But that the Lord, having then so lately testified his
displeasure against the Malignant courses of the 1648. And we having thereupon
so solemnly vowed a detestation thereof, and a non-conjunction with all their
bettors, there was just reason, when the necessity was not such as to leave no
place for election, in the fear of the Lord's displeasure, to prefer his
Command. Deuteronomy. 23. v. 9. and our own engagements unto the then contrary
pretensions; and to keep us from every wicked thing, can not rationally be
disproved. However these things being now past, I love not to rake in them, my
hearts desire is, that the things which have since befallen us, and seem to
have so clear a dependence upon the unstedfastness, insincerity, mockery, heats
and contentions of these bygone transactions, may at length lead every serious
fearer and seeker of the Lord, unto a single and through discovery, and the
repentance which the Lord requires.

As for the advantage you would draw from this objection, I have already told
you that necessity and interest do too visibly influence all your pretended
moderation, to leave you any matter of boasting in your late abatements. But he
who pleases to turn his eye upon the other side, and there, with your former
Ecclesiastic rigors, behold your other methodes, in appointing the
Declaration, as an indispensable condition of State-trusts, and in your
manifest discountenancing all of a different persuasion, will certainly admire
to find you so much exceed, even in these very evils, which you would appear
to condemn.

Now to your stiffling of jealousies, which vex some of your more weak and
malicious Modells. We know too well their selfish and cowardly dispositions, to
impute their not whispering to any true respect to authority, more then the
compliance of others to your alleged moderation. To obey God more then man,
and therefore to suffer affliction cross to our inclination, is indeed a fair
accession to the praise of the grace of God in this greater virtue you vaunt
of, and wherein we desire to be found: But as for your submission against
certain blind persuasions, and peevish fears (which you call your inclination)
to that absolute overswaying devotion, which we know you bear to Peace and
Ease, many of you have so notourly already basely renounced, not only your God,
but your King (for whom you do more highly pretend) for this interest, that you
must pardon us, neither to applaud your obedience nor submission from such
suggestions. And so indeed you insinuat more intelligibly then you are awar;
for you say, that if we abuse not this liberty we have got, you shall never
complain of it: which according to the construction of abuses, held out by
your laws and practices, does so plainly sound, if you neither offer to
reclaim the people from their rebellion against, and backsliding from the
Lord, nor to warn and testify against the courses, and tendencies of an
antichristian Supremacy and profane Prelacy, that the benefit and security,
which you would obtain by the performance of this condition, does render your
pretended acquiescence almost ridiculous.

But you go on to add, Nay, you would rejoice to find it produce the effects,
for which it is designed, viz. to bring us to a more peaceable temper. And who
either doubts this in your sense, or refuses it in a just sense? could we
exchange a good conscience for Court-compliance, or prefer Peace to Truth,
which do plainly appear to be the terms of difference, wherein we stand, there
is no question of your victory and our agreement: But seeing this may not be,
and your design is at best preposterous, I hope, I shall more easily obtain
your concurrence in my wish, that the Gospel and godliness being by this
indulgence advanced, true peaceableness and peace may thence ensue.

The second effect of this Indulgence by you intended, Is to make us value and
love more one of the noblest and most generous Princes that ever ruled. Sir,
you just now commended your self for a better Subject, then to criticize upon
your Sovereign's pleasure, and, I think, I should at least be so civil, as not
to controvert his praise; but as I do heartily pray that the Lord would make it
a hundred times so much truly greater then it is; So, let me tell you, that to
state your superlatives of Nobility, and Generosity, upon the grant of this
License, a very mean and scant act of justice, elicit by a visible
State-conveniency, if not necessity, and many degrees inferior to the liberty
granted either by the King of France, to his Protestants, or the great Turk to
his Christian Subjects, is rather to betray then advance your Prince his
reputation. I say not this to diminish the just acknowledgement of his
Majesty's justice, that every good subject ought on every occasion to express;
but this your artifice, either to baffle our conscientious noncompliance with
your remaining corruptions, as ingratitude, or to stop the procedure of the
King's goodness, as being already in the next degree to an excess, must not go
unnoticed.

Your third effect designed, is to dispose us to a brotherly accommodation with
you, Which you say, the Fathers of the Church are ready to offer, on such
terms as refused will declare us to be schismatical. But seeing all along you
would have this license to be a free favor, and would thence plead its
obligation toward a brotherly Accommodation, as I have hitherto told you, that
I cannot regard it under that character; so, I hope, the insinuation that this
pretense may import, shall be of no moment to bias any to an Accommodation, in
the terms of so stated an opposition. Sir, mistake me not, it is not, that I
love division or study faction; union and peace in the Lord are the earnest
desire and prayer of my soul, and that not more for the manifestation of the
glorious power of the grace of God, in turning you from your evil ways, then
for that beauty, joy and strength, wherewith it is accompanied, and whereby
the pleasure of the Lord might be so effectually promoted: But while you
continue impenitent, yea obstinat in your perjury and rebellion, whereby you
have overturned the Lord's work, with the Ministry and Government of His
House, and do own that idol of Jealousy and root of wickedness, the
Supremacy, and its dependent Prelacy, whereby under the pretense of peace and
order, the Kingdom of our Lord, as well over Consciences, as in his Church, is
borne down, prophanity, popery, nay Atheism and all wickedness connived at,
and nothing become more odious and persecute, then a conscientious
acknowledgement of the most High, not prostitute to men's lusts and devices;
While, I say, you are still such, what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion has light withdarkness? And what concord
has Christ with Belial? Or what part has he that keeps Covenant with him
that avowedly breaks it? If these be schismatical insinuations, we are very
willing to be accounted such, and do heartily embrace the reproach: nay, if I
should tell you, that such are the nature and circumstances of the present
defection, that it does not only enjoyne a necessary separation from your
pretended and corrupt Ecclesiastic Courts, for eviting the sin that attends a
conjunction; but also a witnessing and withdrawing to testify against
backsliders, I might as easily evince it both from Scripture-precept and
example. But, may be I am too prompt; if the terms that you are about to offer
be as fair as is promised, that is, as can be demanded by any rational person,
no doubt they will satisfy all our scruples.

And therefore wishing that the event may redargue this apparent anticipation,
I go on to your following promise, viz. to give your N. C. at next meeting a
full prospect of the state of the ancient Church, and you doubt not to convince
him that their frame was better suited for promoting the ends of Religion, then
ever Prebyterie could be. Sir, your performance is expected, and for your
encouragement, I am free to tell you, that though the improbabilitie of the
undertaking may possibly give the world a disappointment, yet it will be no
surprise. It is not the first promise that you have failed in, upon more
unaccountable reasons: Mean while, you forbid us, to abuse our Sovereign's
royal goodness, nor the tenderness of these he sets over us. But this, in my
opinion, is a superfluous caution; the Prelates have taken a surer course to
prevent your fears; for such has been their care to secure this goodness and
tenderness from our abuse, that hitherto they have thought fit to keep it
without our reach. I know this will appear a hard reflection to some of your
party, who would have even the common air esteemed his Majesty's, and us to
breath it by his indulgence: But a flattering mouth works ruin, and the Lord
shall cut off all flattering lips. We despise not his Majesty's favor, nay, we
desire and long for it that it may come down like rain upon the mowen grass:
But while there is so great a short-coming in the things, which are right in
the eyes of the Lord, and righteous toward his servants, why should flatteries
deceive?

And thus we are come to your Conclusion of Prayers for and exhortation to
peace, love, and charity; a very expedient one to so bad a cause, so badly
managed: your rebellion against God, your usurpation against our Lord Jesus
Christ, the wrongs done to his Church and People, by which your Prelates have
got into the chair, and in compliance wherewith you your self do at least find
ease, If they cannot be mentioned by reason, yet may in a manner be secured by
peace. And, no doubt, the love and charity, which you crave would go a great
length. I will not say with Iehu, what have you to do with peace? But there is
no peace to the wicked, says my God; And that ought to be unto you of more
moment, then if Iehu, with all his fury and forces, were at your heels. But you
are of that number, who would have peace though you walk in the imagination of
your own hearts; nay, you seduce this people, and heal their hurt slightly, by
saying peace, where there is no peace: But if you had stood in the counsel of
the Lord, and had caused his people to hear his words, then you should have
turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings: am I a
God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God a far off. Can any hide himself in
secret places that I shall not see him, says the Lord, do not I fill heaven
and earth, says the Lord. I have heard what the Prophets said who Prophecy
lies in my name, and do cause my people to err by their lightness, yet I sent
them not, nor commanded them, therefore they shall not profit this people at
all, says the Lord. As for the love that you desire; should we love them that
hate the Lord: you know whose profession it was, do not I hate them, O Lord,
that hate thee? And am not I grieved with these that rise up against the? I
hate them with perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies. Neither are these the
words of one only under the old dispensation, which elsewhere you are pleased to
term, more carnal and fiery. He who wished that they were even cut off, who
troubled the Church, appears to be of the same Spirit. Nay, God who is love,
and perfect in goodness to all his creatures, is nevertheless a consuming
fire unto his adversaries. And our Lord Jesus, who came in lowliness and
meekness to seek sinners and dye for enemies, enjoining love as a badge, and
legating peace as his proper blessing to all his followers, does
notwithstanding pronounce many a sad woe unto the hypocritical, proud, covetous
and in a word (if as shamlessly irreligious) Prelatick Pharisee. Let us
therefore, above all things, in the first place contend for the love of God,
and to be found, and to abide therein: This once purging our hearts from
dividing and distracting lusts, will only happily cement us by its own bond.
But if you continue your opposition against God, perversion of his righteous
ways, and persecution of his Saints, you do in vain pretend to that peace,
which is the Saints their privilege, and without which, outward peace is no
better then one of these snares that the Lord raineth upon the wicked.

Your next wish is for charity, and O! that it might be both your and our
blessing, in its full extent; charity not rejoicing in iniquity, but rejoicing
in the truth, would quickly produce a desirable Accommodation, but this is not
the charity which you study; it is like a charity thinking no evil of your evil
doings, believing all your imposings, enduring all your usurpations, and
bearing all your rigours, would please you well. And at this rate the most
violent irreligious persecutor would become your concurrent. But we have not so
learned Christ. It is a very easy and advantageous thing, to men possessed of
their desires to wish for security in the peace, love, and charity even of
their adversaries. And yet we are not so short of rememberance as to believe
that this was always, the language of your party. At first it was, make a
chain the land is full of bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence,
and your cry was, raze it, raze it, even to the foundation. And when after much
cruelty and blood your Prelates would scarce by the restraint of more safe
counsel be taken off their eager pursuites, how hardly are they prevailed upon,
even by their own interest, to teach this doctrine of peace? It is not many
weeks since the chief of your Fathers, as you term them, preaching before the
King's Commissioner and many members of Parliament on that Text, Let us
therefore follow after the things which make for peace, told his hearers, in
the very entry, that the particular rules of mutual for bearance and
tenderness, given in that Scripture by the Apostle, were only convenient for
the then state of that Church wanting a Christian Magistrate: But now there
being a Christian Magistrate, his authority should quiet all scruples, and
might not be demurred by these pretenses: and going on to show that the only
way to peace, is to allow to the King not only an outward coercive power, but
also an inward, directive, architecktonick, uncontrollable power (O fear the
Lord all ye his Saints) over conscience, in the matters of Worship, with much
ado, as eye and ear witnesses do attest, he stammered through a part of the
first chapter of a new Piece, entitled a Discourse of Ecclesiastical policy.
And thus, he delivered to us the very same doctrine of peace, which, in several
places of your Dialogues, you do very plainly hold out. Whether or not then it
be in the same principle, and for the same end, that ye do here pray for peace,
love and charity, let men judge. For our part, your power, riches, and
dignities (in themselves, to say the truth, the very meenest of these trifles)
are by us neither coveted nor envied. Our souls desire and earnest prayer to
God, both in your and our own behalf, is that God would open our eyes, turn
back our hearts, heal our backslidings, and restore unto us his Gospel and
blessed Ordinances in power and purity. O turn us again Lord God of hosts,
cause thy face to shine and we shall be saved, then shall Glory dwell in our
Land, mercy and truth meet, and righteousness and truth kiss each other, then
should the work of the Lord appear unto his servants, and the beauty of the
Lord our God, even peace, unity and love be upon us.

As for these Scriptures wherewith you second your wish for peace, Were I not
more tender in opposing Scripture to Scripture, then you are in abusing it to
your own design, it were easy for me to repay your admonition to love, by a
more seasonable exhortation to you of repentance: But since the very
consideration of the words, by you cited, may rectify your misapplication, my
single desire is, that you had pondered or could yet ponder them. If there be
therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, let us fulfill the Lords joy, that we
be first of a sound mind, and then like minded, having the same love, being of
one accord, of one mind, Let nothing be done, through strife or vain glory ( a
short discharge of all the pride, persecution and pomp of your prelatick
order) but, in lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better then
themselves. Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge among us; let him show
out of a good conversation his^ works with meekness of wisdom. But if you
have bitter zeal, or envying ( For seeing that (...), wanting this adjunct,
signifies also envy, without the least reflection upon that holy zeal of
God's house which is said to eat up even the pattern of meekness and Prince of
peace, your poor criticisme, in altering the translation, shows more of your
malice then your learning) and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not
against the truth ((...) be Zealous there fore and repent of your perjurie and
Covenant breaking) this wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly
sensual and devilish; for where zeal or envying ( The word is indeed still the
same, and so is your folly in this remarke) and strife is, there is confusion
and every evil work. But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then
peaceable ( not first peaceable and then impure, as that of your party is)
Gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality, and without hypocrisy ( O desirable quality) And the fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace. Let us put on
therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another and
forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any, even as Christ
forgave us, so let us do; and above all things put on charity which is the bond
of perfectness. And let the peace of God rule in our hearts, to the which also
we are called in one body, and let us be thankful. Let the word of Christ
dwell in us richly, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another in
Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual songs, singing with grace in our hearts to the
Lord, and whatsoever we do in word or deed ( pray observe this fundamental
direction) Let us do all in the name of the Lord Jesus ( What shall we then say
to these who in the Bond to the Publict Peace would not admit the name of the
Lord to be mentioned) Giving thanks to God and the Eather by him. In all this I
wish we were sincerily agreed. And that these words were more deeply infixed in
our minds, for I confess I am weary of vain janglings, as much as you are,
and do long for truth and peace, as much as you do for your much courted peace;
and indeed there is nothing that does so much portend the Lords displeasure and
imminent wrath as that not any pleads for truth; they trust in vanity and
speak lies, they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity, they hatch
cockatrice eggs, and weave the spiders web, he that eats of their eggs dies,
and that which is crushed breaks out into a viper; their works are works of
iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hand; they do much love outward
peace, but the way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment in their
goings, they have made them crooked Paths, whosoever goes therein shall not
know peace. Therefore is judgment far from us, and justice does not overtake
us; we wait for light, but behold obscurity, for brightness, bot we walk in
darkness; for our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins
testify against us; for our transgressions are with us, and as for our
iniquities we know them, in transgressing and lying against the Lord and
departing away from our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and
uttering from the heart words of falsehood, and judgment is turned away
backward, and justice stands afar off; for truth is fallen in the street, and
equity cannot enter, yea truth fails, and he that departs from evil makes
himself a prey. Whether you or your N. C. account these words to proceed from a
fretted mind, or not, I know not; sure I am there is that truth in them that
though David's wished for wings may better suit your desire of rest, yet
Ieremiah's waterie head, and weeping eyes, with his retirement to a
wilderness, would be the more agreeable wish to our condition. But our relieff
is, that the Lord sees, and who knows, but he is displeased that there is no
intercessor, and that therefore his arm may bring salvation, when he shall put
on righteousness as a breast plate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head,
when he shall put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and cloth himself
with zeal (even that zeal which you go about to malign) as with a clock.
However this is most certain that the Redeemer is come to Zion and unto them
that turn from transgression in Jacob, says the Lord.

But your. N. C. recals me and tells us, that the further he sees in the great
business of Religion, he is the the more coovinced of a serene and placide
temper, which so qalisies the soul for Divine converse. And these words do
ravish and unite your heart to him in such a manner, that, for a conclusion to
these your roving Dialogues, you do very agreeably evanish in a fancied
transport. And really Sir, I do as little question that the further a man
sees, and is seriously exercised in the great business of Religion, he will
certainly be thereby rendered of a more serene and placide temper. The statutes
of the Lord are indeed right rejoyceing the heart, the commandment of the Lord
is pure enlightening the eyes; the divine light does certainly give pure joy,
and pure joy no doubt does elevat above all carnal perturbations, and drossie
pleasures: there is a virtue in Religion, that, powerfully rebuking not only
the winds of our tempestuous passions, and the tossings of our vain desires,
but the dreadful tempest of Gods anger, does make a great calm, which brings
unto Jesus Christ for refuge, unto God for our rest, and blesses us with his
peace that passes understanding, and fills us with all joy in believing. But
your insinuation, as if a serene and placid temper not flowing from, but
previously disposing unto, Religion and fellowship with God, were of special
influence as to divine converse, is at best but a continuation of your
delusion, I shall not say deceit, suited to your great design of preferring
peace, to truth, and fraiming Religion to your own accommodation. And truly in
order to that end, the advantages of a serene indifferency and placide
compliance, resolving all difficulties by the conveniencie of ease, and not
striving in any case against the Authority and commands of such, on whom our
outward peace depends, can not be denied. But seeing it is the great work of
Religion, first to open the eyes, and to turn from darkness unto light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, that we may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith, and in these excellent
graces true peace and full joy, let him who would have a mind truly serene,
and not only a placide temper, but a tranquil and joyful conscience, study
and walk in this light, discovering and abhorring every evil way, and by
purity and faithfulness, even in that which is least, make sure his peace, and
so shall he not only be qualified for, but certainly attain unto divine
converse. Serenity and tranquillity of mind, when flowing from that wisdom
from above, which is first pure then peaceable, and is the product of pure
Religion and undefiled, is no doubt, no other then that light wherein God
dwells, and that calmness and weakness of Spirit, wherein he delights. But as
for your serene and placid Temper, whith you exhibit to us, rather as
preparatory, then subsequent to Religion, I must again tell you my fears that
I find it so little agreeable to Religion's genuine method, and so very
suitable to your carnal designs, that I greatly apprehend, that, instead of
advancing you to true divine converse, it only seduce you into a fools paradise
of your own dreams and imaginations. Whether your ensuing raptures do thence
proceed, I leave it to others to judge. But, sure I am, were you as earnest to
pray, Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue, as
you would appear serious in the following regrete of having too long dwelt
among them that hate peace: You had rather choosed to suffer affliction with
the people, of God, esteeming the reproach of Christ (even treason and
sedition) great riches; and respecting and looking for the recompense of the
reward, the eternal love and peace of God, then to have taken the compendious,
way of a sinful compliance, for obtaining this worlds ease and quiet. Which I
am confident^ that holy man, whose words you usurp, would have abhorred at the
rate.

As for the thick fogs and mists of contention, which you complain of, if this
life were indeed to you a valley of tears, as you give it out, while all light
and purity is almost destroyed by the lust and ignorance of your prelatick
party, it would have been to these infernal vapors, and clouds of smok, by
which our Sun and air are darkened, and not to the just and necessary opposition
of a small faithful remnant against your apostasy, that you had ascribed the
noisomness which you mention. But, behold the nimblenesse, as well as the
delusion, of the man's fancy; he has for outward ease cast away a good
conscience, and preferred all along peace unto truth: All the disturbance he
mee^eth with, is the dissent of a few faithful unto God, and steadfast in his
Covenant; whom he and his party do therefore persecute: This small innocent
non-complyance he complains of, as if he were the most refined and tender
Saint, grieving for the wicked and rageful persecution of the ungodly, from
which imaginary and feigned distress, with the same artifice and facility, he
pretends that his relieff is in divine contemplation, whither, as to the
mountain of God, he flies, forsooth, for Sanctuary that he may take rest. But
this triumphing of your presumption shall be but short, the joy of the
hyhocrite is but for a moment, though his excellency reach up to the heavens,
and his head reach unto the clouds; yet he shall perish for ever, like his own
dung, they which have seen him shall say, where is he, he shall fly away as a
dream, and be chased away as a vision of the night: for who, Lord, shall dwell
in thy holy hill, and who shall ascend unto the hill of the Lord, and who shall
stand in his holy place? he that walks uprightly and works righteousness,
and speaks the truth in his heart; he that backbiteth not with his tongue,
nor does evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his
neighbor, in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but he honors them that
fear the Lord, he that swears to his own hurt and changes not; he that has
clean hands, and a pure heart, who has not lift up his soul unto vanity, nor
sworn deceitfully, he shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and
righteousness from the God of his Salvation. If therefore your pretensions be
such as you profess, you must not overlooke the way that God himself has
designed, but walk in it with fear. Your vain fantastic soarings will not
carry you, either over, or by it. Nay in the end they will prove a lie, and
tumble you into destruction: For what is the hope of the Hypocrite when he has
gained, when God takes away his soul?

Think not that these things are from ill nature, and spoken in bitterness;
Nay, Sir, I may very seriously protest, that when I reflect on your laxe and
unsound principles, not only in the matters of Government and Worship, but even
in the head of justification, and several other parts, that you have given me
occasion to touch, with your enmity and reproaches against the work of God, and
the Kingdom, Ministry and Ordinances of our Lord Jesus Christ, and how, on the
other hand, you endeavor to shreud your self under the high pretenses of
peace, love, charity, and devotion, wholly heavenly, I can scarce refrain from
trembling, in the thoughts of such deep and abusive hypocrisy. And therefore
though you should scorn my compassion, yet will I not forbear to give you my
best advice. You seem to have the form of knowledge, and of the truth in the
word. Nay thou make thy boast of God, and divine contemplation, the secret of
Gods presence, and the refreshfull shades of the Almighty, where joy
unspeakable, and the most pure solaces flow, appear to be your familiar
retreat. But as it is too too evident that neither your principles nor practice
are very suitable to this profession, nay, that there is no noise heard of this
profession, while you are bussied in serving men's designs, and your own
fancies: And that it is only after you have striven to the outmost in
persuading or contradicting, that you seek to evade or delude by these
pretensions; So my earnest request is that in place of fancy, that evaporats
all your knowledge into imagination, faith and love may suck down the truth
into your heart, to convert you indeed unto God, and reveal in you with power
his Son Jesus Christ, that you may love the Lord with all your soul and
strength, and trust in him always, have respect unto all his Commandments,
and observe all his Ordinances; then should you walk in the way safely, and the
Lord should be your confidence. And though you should be exercised with the
same perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, the same strife of tongues
and persecution of adversaries, whereof we have so large an experiment; yet
amidst all these boisterous winds and tossing waves, God would be your Rock,
light, joy, strength, and salvation for ever. Sir, this is our faith and also
our victory, for which, when you shall as seriously contend, as you do vainly
pretend to outward peace and man's favor, then shall true peace, even that
peace, which the World neither gives nor can take, abound unto you to establish
you unto the end. Let us therefore fight the good fight, keep the faith and lay
hold on eternal life, that we may finish our course with joy, so shall we
receive that Crown of Righteousness which the righteous Judge shall give unto
us at that day, and not unto us only, but unto all them also, that love his
appearing. Even so come Lord JESUS.

FINIS.

