A Modest APOLOGY For the SUSPENDED BISHOPS; WITH A Brief Vindication of the
Address which was signed in their Favor by the Grand Jury of the County of
GLOUCESTER: At the last Lent Assizes.

By a Gentleman of the said Grand Jury.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. and are to be Sold by Randolph Tailor near
Stationers' Hall, 1690.

To the Right Worshipful WILLIAM DENNIS, Esquire; The High Sheriff of the County of
GLOUCESTER.
Honored Sir,
I Here present you with a brief Vindication of Truth and Charity, from the
Insolent Spite of a restless Faction: For there are certain busy Gentlemen in
this Country, that pass a rough Complement on me and others, who by your
Precept attended their Majesty's Service at Gloucester. Nor are they content to
traduce and bespatter us; but they seem to join you in our Conspiracy. Their
common Language (and how are they tickled with the Music of the Expression!)
rans in the Cadence, that our Master High Sheriff's, Under Sheriff's Popish
Jury signed a Petition against Law. Certainly they will storm more violently
against this new Attempt; nor will the ensuing Discourse, which contains a
modest Apology for the distressed Bishops be grateful to them, who labored so
industriously to stifle our last Paper.

It would raise a strange Agony of Mind in any moderate Person, to consider the
sordid Malice of our Adversaries, and the impudent Calumnies with which they
have vented their Spleen against us. For they are become such topping
Proficients in the Devils School, that they can adapt a Story (be it never so
immodest) to the various Circumstances of Time and Place. By the Industry of
this black Art, they drew a dark Veil upon our Persons and our Designs, and
gave us a Character which they knew would disappoint the Success of of our
Hopes. For the Clergy of Norfolk having in most submissive Terms made their
Application to the Court, in Favor of their Bishop, it was the Fortune of our
Address to be preferred by us at the same juncture; and no sooner were Copies
of it conveyed to London, but certain Zealots took the sudden Alarm, and gave
out (according to their usual and profane Practice of downright Lying) that the
conforming Ministers of Gloucester-shire had signed a seditious Petition
derogatory to the Proceedings of his Majesty, and of the two Honorable Houses
of Parliament; and that this was performed by the joint Combination of the
Clergy of the two Diocesses. The absurd Story gained such Credit and Vogue in
the Town, that many honest Gentlemen were so far imposed on, as to be drawn
into the Belief of it. And a Reverend and good prelate (who was a famous
Sufferer in the last Reign) being sensibly afflicted with the Surprise,
dispatched a serious Letter to our Diocesan, in which he expostulated with him
on this Occasion: The Affair also was so foully misrepresented at Court, that
our Friends there thought it an unreasonable Attempt to promote either of the
two Addresses; by which Means they both remain buried in a Suspension with the
Bishops.

I think my self obliged, in Answer to the unjust Aspersion, to affirm, that no
Clergyman had the View of our Address before it was published at the Assizes,
much less could it be an Address of theirs. And I must also assure you, that in
framing the ensuing Discourse, I received no Instructions or Assistance from
them, but my own Meditations, which I acknowledge (without any Man's Opinion in
the Case) are attended with great Poverty of Thought, suggested to me the
innocent Design and Management of the Trifle, and by its mean Composure, you
will quickly perceive that I am no Plagiary.

Thus submitting the Justice of our present Cause to our good God, with whom
there is no Respect of Persons, and at whose Tribunal all intriguing Liars will
be sentensed to a dreadful Flame, that will eternally scorch their profane
Lips; I advise our Leasing-Makers to a timely Repentance, and bid them adieu,
till they provoke us with new Indignities. I am,

Honored Sir, Your Humble Servant, and Faithful Neighbor.

A Modest APOLOGY For the SUSPENDED BISHOPS, etc.
AS in the Roman History we may observe, that the Flattery of the People, by
which the Enormities of the Caesar's were professedly indulged, gave an
infallible proof to the distempers of a sick and languishing Government; so if
we reflect with just resentment on the like gross Vanity, which prevailed for
some Years in this Nation, and derived encouragement from the Court, which
ought to have been the School of more noble Exploits; we must acknowledge, that
the same slavish extravagance, so fondly entertained among us, ushered in the
fatal degeneracy and corruption of our State.

But among all the fawning Addresses which were Dedicated to our Kings, we may
esteem none more pernicious then those bold Advances of Officious Ceremony,
which, in Favor of most unjustifiable Proceedings, struck at the Foundation of
our Laws, and led in a direct tendency to their Subversion. For tho the
pretenses did bare a formal and sanctified Dress, and were armed with the
Phylactery of Pharisaical right'ousness, yet did the Design carry with it a
dreadful iniquity. The intrigue was begun in Hell, proposed at Doway, Licensed
at Rome, confirmed at Paris, and was ready to have delivered it is effects in
London, and our other City's, had not the Providence of God raised up to us a
Deliverer.

It is well known who in that Age of Trial were the Betrayers of their Country,
and who in compliance with a wretched Declaration, which seemed to Petition the
People for Addresses, were drawn into a most destructive Adventure. I shall not
therefore at present Pry into the full Mystery of that iniquity (it being in
part discovered in another place of this discourse) but leave it to the scourge
of Historians, and to other faithful Animadverters.

However I must not omit (since it falls within the compass of our immediate
review) a Comical Scene I formerly beheld at Gloucester, where that Skeleton of
Law Judge Allebon performed a meritorious part, and proposed in open Court his
Terms of Accommodation. The Holy Man told us, That our two Churches were agreed
in the grand-point of the real Presence, That the invocation of Saints was
enjoined by the fifth Comandment: That 'twas inconsistent with Christian
Charity to suffer Penal-Laws and a distinguishing Test to render the Religion
of a gracious Prince uneasy to the Subject; and that a general Toleration would
advance the dignity and Port of our Nation: He drew parallel Lines from the
prosperity of the Hans-Towns, and from the flourishing State of the
Low Countries; and I expected to have heard him sum up his Sermon with a remark
on the Blessed Effects which the uninterrupted course of Liberty produced in
Sodom, Laish and Gibeah of Benjamin.

The kind and tenderhearted Grand Jury (among whom were herded Saints of many
different Communions) were soon enflamed with a Sympathizing Zeal, and could
not but gratify the little Scarlet Image with a Paper, first conveyed in a
Whisper to them from a Factor of the Court, in which they dispatched their
public thanks to his Majesty for his Declaration, with the promise (if I
understood their meaning) to return, I should have said to elect (since the
other expression contains the Office of their Popish Sheriff) such
Representatives for Parliament, who might answer the Kings demands; or who in
plain English would break down all the Fences, which kept out Superstition, and
all the other invasions upon our just Libertys. This was an Address with a
witness, and highly magnified by many, who cannot be reconciled to the
sincerity and moderation of our last Inquest.

I cannot but admire the Wisdom and renowned bravery of our undaunted Heroes
the Bishops, who, in the midst of the impetuous storms of those licencious
Times, opposed the Buckler of our Laws to the new and unexampl'd enterprise.
They did maintain (not without the concurrence of an Almighty Power) our
Religion and Civil Rights against the Stratagems and brisk Assaults of daring
Enemies. Nor did they faintly repel the Force; but when they received the
express Command of a Potent King to be as base as other Men they remonstrated
in masculin Terms, and replied to their Sovereign with such Christian courage
as confounded the Papal valor, and silenced their Adversarys, and those who
were then jealous of the prosperity of their Mitre.

I would not be supposed to instruct or remind any Persons of the just Debt and
Duty of gratitude, if I affirm, that the calamity and rigorous sufferings which
befell our Church and those good Fathers after their inimitable conduct, proved
the Great Engine, and one of the most profitable pretenses, which the Authors
of the late Revolution used in promoting their Enterprise. The Separatists were
then indulged with Freedom, this being the successful Return to their
temporizing Addresses. The Apostles of Muncer, Nayler and Muggleton enjoyed the
Privilege of a Sanctuary: the other Dissenters whom we own (though against
their Wills) to be our Brethren, were lulled into a fatal security: All the
Factions, as they Danced to the Music of the Court, and gratified Father Petre
in the current of his desires; so they could not be supposed thus triumphing in
the Event and Luxury of their wishes, to afford any reasonable matter for the
Groundwork of our wonderful Deliverance.

His present Majesty had another Path to which a Divine Power led him, and his
Eyes were Arrested with more serious and pressing Objects. 'Twas then that the
Prince, like another Constantine, declared he would undertake the Patronage of
our Church, and made it is Defense one of the most Honorable and cogent Reasons
for his descent into England.

He saw Seven Bishops (and how renowned is that Mystical Number?) condemned,
like their Forefathers in Dioclesian's Rage, to a dreadful confinement among
Murderers and Traitors. He saw a suspension past on another Bishop, and the
like Thunder threatened against the rest of his Brethren. He saw the Divines of
both Provinces attacqu'd by the Tyrannical decrees of an Arbitrary Commission,
and Successors appointed to them out of the Storehouse of St. James's. He saw
the Franchises of the Church dissolved, and the Schools of the Prophets invaded
by seminary Priests. By this manifest Injustice, and deliberate Sacrilege, so
effrontedly carried on against the loud Oracle of our Laws, the Charter of our
Religion, and the common Principles of Honor, the Illustrious Nassau did
plainly perceive, that the whole Kingdom was put to Sale, and Sacrificed to the
Ambition of the French Monarch, who is the Darling of St. Loyola; he therefore
disputed the condition of the Tenure with the first unfortunate Proprietor, and
the Title of the Purchase with the other bold Pretender: God has been pleased
to Crown him with success against both; nor can it lessen the Glory of the
Atcheivment if (after his Majesty) we make an Honorable mention of our Bishops,
and Petition the Champion of our Church on their behalf, since the Umbrage of
their name has been so advantag'ous to his design.

In this confidence I presume that the Address, Subscribed by our last
Grand Jury, may be worthy of it is short vindication, because it speaks in
Favor of the very same Men who could never trifle with Earthly Princes: they
are those Reverend Persons who first taught us to Petition after a just and
Honorable way, and by their Prayers and Tears promoted a successful Address to
the Court of Heaven.

The Crime with which they now stand charged, does not consist in gross
Immoralities, nor is their suspensions (as I have already discovered) for any
base compliance with the noted miscarriages of the late Government, but it
proceeds from their refusal to swear in a certain settled Form of Words to the
present, under which notwithstanding they endeavor to live conformable. They
conceal their Reasons, and therefore in good manners I shall not dive into them
further then to suppose that in matters of such importance one and the same
standing Rule does direct them; so that if the expressions are so moderately
qualified that their Hearts may in so serious a performance move with their
Lips, an Oath does not bare the consideration of a scruple with them; but they
esteem Hypocrisy to be too mean a slave to intrude either into their external
Submissions, or to be Listed with them in the Service of their Prince.

Although this Practice be not agreeable to carnal Policy which serves as a
Weathercock to all Changes, yet in Matters of solemn Moment all hasty and
sudden Complyances are by the Rules of true Ethics strictly condemned: for as
we ought to chain the means and the end together, so must we never disjoyn the
Vtile and the Bonum. And therefore Prudence (which, being an intellectual
Virtue, is by Aristotle defined to be an habit of right Reason) does consult
not only of the Universal Precepts and Laws of Life, which are more certain
then to require much deliberate Study; but descending (and that more properly)
to particular Actions, and to their various Circumstances from which the
Regularity and depravity of those Actions depend, she brings them up the
Touchstone of Reason and Virtue: And having taken Counsel by a diligent
preparation of Mind, she then makes her choice, and adheres to that which is
best. Now; as a deliberation cannot be performed without freedom of Spirit, so
neither can there be a good Election, where the Office of deliberation is not
fully determined. For Conscience (which with respect to the knowledge of Right
and of Fact is a conjunct Science) must give its concurrent Vote in all Matters
of Practice, or else the Consultation is frivolous and irregular or rather no
Consultation at all, and therefore if the Mind does still strive with
Intricacies, and cannot be certain of the probability or rather the necessity
of Right, it will never admit the necessity of Fact, be the temptations
otherwise never so powerful. So that as Prudence does attempt nothing of
importance which has not an apparent Profit annexed to it, so does she esteem
that alone to be profitable, which is also good. The Wisdom of the best
Statesmen has still entertained this Moral Doctrine for a just Principle, and
certainly it does afford the best interpretation to that memorable Expression
of Vlpianus, which he delivered as a great Law of Politics to the Romans: In
Rebus novis constituendis evidens utilitas esse debet, ne recedatur ab eo quod
diu aequum visum est, and I cannot but believe it was also introductive as of
the late Practices, so of the present Sentiments of the Bishops; who are not
governed by a Peevish or Supercilious humor, but mourn in Spirit for the
Miseries of the Protestant Church and pray for the Prosperity of the English
Canaan, tho, like Moses, they are not permitted to enjoy an Inheritance in it.
This which some call Obstinacy, Pride and Prejudice (the three grand Enemies of
prudential deliberations) will appear, as I hope, no such dangerous and wicked
temper, when we have modestly considered it, and charitably interpreted it.

I am confident the World need not be advertised under what a dreadful
Hurricane our Nation has lately labored. I shall not make a sorrowful
research after a like Example into the Confusions of former Centuries, when the
Pagan or Popish Religion did bare a Regency in the Land. It is most certain we
have had nothing that Challenges the Affinity of an exact Parallel to those
Troubles since our Blessed Reformation: Our Bishops therefore who are
professedly studious, as of the Peace, so of the Glory of that Establishment,
were loath immediately to admit the sharp and extreme Remedies which were
recommended to them as necessary for their own Securities. Many others, and
among them not a few who Flattered and Addressed the Abdicated Monarch into his
Ruin, did rejoice and triumph in the Afflictions of that calamitous Prince;
but our Prelates scorned such an Unchristian Revenge; for, if in the Council of
Arles under Leo the First it was condemned for an heathenish Barbarity to use
Mirth in the House of Mourning, and to sport in the view of the melancholy
Incentives; how could our Holy Primate and his Brethren be supposed to Laugh
and Sing in the Agony of our Church and State? as Samuel mourned for Readiness
Abjection, so did they lament the late Kings Misery, and forgot his rigid
Severities exercised on them. They have in the great pangs of Spirit, and in
the anguish of their Soul often wept for their avowed Enemy, and endeavored
with their holy Tears, like the Sovereign Balm Tree, to cure his Wounds who cut
and mangled them. In short they were Bishops of the best reformed Church, and
were cautious how they intermedled in tumult and secular Tragedy.

And are they not now of the like unspotted Fame for their quiet resignation
and peaceable deport under the present Settlement? Are they not Sacred in their
Majesty's Register, beloved and pittyed by Men of exact Piety, and highly
admired by their greatest Enemies? Let us not then furiously pursue them, nor
deride the loss of their former Stations; for tho, during their present
Eclypse, they are not crowned with the brightest Beams, yet, like the
languishing Aecolampadius, they clap their hands on their Breasts, and say, hic
sat lucis, hic sat radiorum. To conclude; let them be accounted worthy of the
best usage now, who were so unworthy of the harsh Treatment in the last Reign,
we well remember how religiously they then conformed to the dictates of their
Consciences, and we are bound in Charity to believe they are not at this time
directed by a different Rule.

The Obligations of Oaths (and particularly those in which the Government does
concern its own immediate Interest and Security) has been in all Nations
attended with Veneration and Respect. The Romans styled it their Sacrament, the
violation of which drew after it such a dreadful Chain of Infamy, that exceeded
the most heavy Penalties, Hierocles, speaking as from the Chair of Pythagoras,
pronounces, that a great part of Religious Worship is contained in it; and does
plainly affirm, that the unstable or timorous ought not to engage in the
Solemnity of so Sacred an Act. Philo Judaeus does admonish every one to whom an
Oath is proposed, that he carefully consider all Circumstances, and whether he
has a right Notion of what he is doing, otherwise, says he, the great God is
blasphemed. The Books of Christians (and surely the Bishops have carefully
perused them) are full of the same Doctrine: for they tell us, that, to avoid
all Abuses in this Holy Service, we ought to take Three Companions with us,
viz. Truth, Justice and Judgment: so that we must no^ oblige our selves to a
thing we know is false or evil in its Nature, nor to that of which we entertain
a dubious thought, nor to what is unworthy the Majesty of the Holy God into
whose more especial presence we do approach.

No Person, who has ever treated of the nature of Oaths and their Obligation,
does on any account advise or allow the engaging in an Oath, which does raise
an unanswerable scruple in the Mind, and to which a Man thinks he cannot be
exactly conformable without hazarding his Salvation. Conscience is a Mark
beyond the stretch of Human Power, and bares a Sovereign Authority above the
Arrests of Parliaments, and the Edicts of Princes: Nec per Senatum, says
Lactantius, nec per populum solvi hac lege possumus. On this account all
Earthly Potentates are excused their Exercise of Jurisdiction, the King of
Kings having by his Apostle published as the Statute Law of Heaven, that
whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin. Nor do I think that any Monarch can be
secure in the Fidelity of those Persons, who have first broken their Allegiance
with their God: since therefore the Suspended Bishops are not yet satisfied in
the perplexity of their doubt, which so much affects them, I suppose that for
this Reason they refuse to Swear.

But truly when I consider the just Merit of these Prelates, with the divine
Spirit that reigns in their Breasts, and the memorable Experience we have had
of their former Gallantry; I humbly conceive (without any violence to the Rules
of common Reason, Religion and Policy, or derogation from the Sacred
Proceedings of the two honorable Houses of Parliament) that their Parol of
Honor to conform with Obedience to the present Government (which they are
studiously inclined to do) might have been at first accepted by the Legislative
Power as a sufficient Tie upon them without any more solemn Obligation.

We have Cases even in Pagan story which favor the Merit of Virtue; for the
Ephesian Judges, in consideration of the sincerity of Hermodorus, would not for
a time permit him to give testimony (nor be otherwised obliged) by Oath. And
Cicero in his Oration for Cornelius Balbus reports of an honest Athenian, how
that when he approached to the Altars on the like performance, the great
Council did reclamare, and would not suffer him to be sworn, of whose Faith and
Veracity the Gods and Men were so fully persuaded.

Nor are the Archives of our Senate destitute of Examples, which, being nearer
allied to our Case, are beyond Exception. Among these (that I may omit the
dispensation which was lately afforded to the Quakers) we have a proper
instance in the Reign of the last King Charles, when, notwithstanding all the
Tests, Oaths, and declaratory Provisions which were in true Prudence enjoined,
in order to our Security against the encroachments of the Court of Rome, and
the design of her busy Emissaries, Mr. John Huddleston, for one approved act
of Loyalty, was excused the Obligation, and discharged the Penalties of the
Statute.

And therefore since in this World there is no exact perfection in the greatest
Councils (the most important Affairs of State being sometimes performed in such
Rapid and Critical haste that it is impossible to consult every particular
Circumstance) we readily acknowledge that if the Convention had among their
many other serious and mature Performances copyed out any thing in favor to
the Bishops, as they would have introduced no new Custom, so had we not been at
the Labor of an Address: I could add more; but I choose rather to take up with
the Rule prescribed by a great Casuist (another learned Prelate of the Church)
Bishop Tailors Rule and Exercise of holy Living, Chapter p. 3.5.10.
who tells us, That we must not be too easy in examining the Prudence and
Unreasonableness of human Laws: for although we are not bound to believe them all
to be the wisest, yet if by enquiring into the lawfulness of them, or by any
other Instrument we find them to fail of that Wisdom with which some others are
ordained; yet we must never make use of it to disparage the Persons of the
Lawgiver or to countenance any Man's disobedience. I am sure our Holy Fathers
the Bishops are of the same Opinion: I shall therefore endeavor to apply our
Proceedings, and our Address to the same Topic.

The Address in few words was no other, then the return of our Thanks to His
Majesty for his repeated Assurances to maintain our Religion as by Law
Established, and for his Gracious Resolution to Grant to all his Subjects
(except such as in his Princely Wisdom he should distinguish from the rest) his
Gracious Pardon: And we humbly prayed, that the like favor might be extended
to our Pious Bishops particularly our Diocesan, that the incapacity they were
then under by not taking the Oaths, might no longer disable them from serving
Their Majesty's in their several Provinces.

It contained great deference to the Kings Royal Person, Charity to the
distressed, Malice against none; much less can it be arraigned as a breach of
the Law, or deserve the Character, that some hot Spirits have fixed upon it, as
the product of a Papistical and factious Zeal. In the discovery of this Truth,
I do appeal from the lofty Tribunal of our rash Critics, and bespeak the sober
Judgment of the honest and impartial Reader.

We therefore in the first place own, that we gave the public testimony of our
Thanks to the King, for his support of that Religion, in the defense of which
Cranmer, and the other mitred Martyrs spent their precious Blood: to which a
Virgin Queen was solemnly espoused, and of which our Suffering Bishops have
made a good Confession. Sure I am, the Church of Rome has the only cause to be
sensibly touched and tormented at this Reflection; nor can I judge but that the
moderate Dissenters do, in some measure, congratulate with us: For though many
of our homebred Pharisees did stiffly presume, that after the Ruin of our
Establishment, they should flourish under the Popes Influence, and gain strange
Advantages to the Protestant Faith from their new Patron; yet their golden
Hopes had put a notorious Cheat upon them. Those Temporizers would have
obtained no better Lot, than what befell the crooked Camel in the Fable, who,
being Heavens Favorite, petitioned the Gods for Horns; but Jupiter deriding his
Pretense, croped his Ears, and made him ever after bare the Mark of his
Presumption in a sanctified Dress. The Moral is obvious, and needs no
Explanation.

We thought it also not unbecoming the Exercise of our Duty, to thank his
Majesty for a Pardon he designed his Subjects; yea, we did not exclude the
trimming Latitudinarians of the last Reign; for we suppose their Consciences
have sufficiently chastised their evil Extravagance. Neither did we except
against the other violent and brutish Addressors, from whom King James received
the like Homage, which was paid to Mercury by the Heathen Sleepers, viz. a
Sacrifice of the Tongues of Beasts. We insulted no Faction; but calmly
considered the Favor of our Prince; and since an Amnesty was so seasonably
tendered by him, we conceived it would not have been construed in a vile Sense,
to desire his Majesty to include our Diocesan in the same Grace, and to render
some of the best Men in the World capable of his Service.

But in the Progress I now take, I must be so just, as to satisfy the most
plausible Objection that thwarts our Proceeding. Our Adversaries contend, that
for as much as our Case was already concluded by a positive Law (a Statute
having past a legal Disability and Suspension upon the Bishops) the King must
not be persuaded to break through the Obligation of an Act of Parliament, the
Consequence of which would be destructive of our Liberties, and again exalt the
exploded Idol of Arbitrary Power. To this specious Offer, we answer in the
following Terms.

First, We do observe, that our Address was penned in the Session of
Parliament, and therefore it cannot with reason be supposed we would incur the
Displeasure of that August Body.

In the next Place it is apparent, that we designed to thank his Majesty for no
other Pardon, than what he himself intended and prepared. And was it not
proposed by him to the two Houses, with an Assurance they would pass it, and
that it should derive a just Solemnity from their Consent? On this Account our
Address was the irreprovable Witness of our Sincerity; for after the King had
discovered his gracious Intentions to them, we paid our Tribute of Gratitude to
the Royal Favor, and desired him to extend the common Privilege of his Mercy
to our pious (though suffering) Bishops. Certainly if this be Criminal, or
destructive either of Gods Honor, or the Liberties of Human Society, there is
neither Justice on Earth, nor Truth in Heaven; for Virtue and Vice have lost
their Names.

If our Adversaries are not yet satisfied, but in the Burden of their
irreconcilable Animosity against our Prelates, still say (as I have often
heard them maintain) that it would have been more agreeable to the Usage of
Parliament, if one or both the Houses had first prepared and passed a Bill in
Favor of the Bishops, than that such an important Repeal should begin with his
Majesty, and descend to their Consideration, as from the Authority and Force of
his Will, and that therefore our Address ought rather to have been dedicated
either to the Lords or Commons, than to the King. I must take the Liberty to
assure the Managers of this bold, but impertinent Cavil, that they fail not of
their usual Levity, discovering as their gross Ignorance in the Customs of our
Nation, which entitle the King to be the Fountain of all Acts of Grace, so
likewise their profound Respects to his Majesty; for by the Consequence of
their Words, they declare that the Duty and Intercourse between the Prince and
People ought not to be reciprocal. I need not tell them that neither of those
honorable Houses had at that time given us the Cause (I speak with respect to
the first Dispatch and Draught of the general Pardon) to return them those
peculiar Thanks which made up the principal Frame of our Application to the
King, and that for this Reason they could not be the suitable and adequate
Object of our Address; but I answer, that we addressed his Majesty in
Parliament, because he there challenges a supereminent Power; and therefore, if
during the Session, it is permitted to any private Person to petition either
the Lords or Commons for a particular Redress; shall it be accounted heinous,
that the Grand Jury, who represented the Body of the County, and faithfully
delivered the true Sense and Desire of their Vicinage, should make their humble
Approaches to the King, who is the Sovereign Head, and supreme Intendant of our
Parliament? This is in effect to declare that his Majesty has a Chair of State
placed in the House, on no other account, than that he may be curtailed in
Stature, and appear less considerable than his many Servants who attend him.

Should any Diet or Parliament in Christendom pursue the Latitude of this
Doctrine, and therefore refuse to attend a most Religious and Solemn
Enterprise, because the Prince does first propose it to them; they would be
justly censured very positive and supercilious in their Determinations.
Examples of that Nature are very rare in well-disciplin'd Commonwealths, and I
know but one that does exactly square to the Proceeding, and this is related by
Eusebius. Histor. Eccles. l. 2. c. 2.
Eusebius, out of an ancient Father of the Church, and was a strange Violence
against the standing Law of Moderation in great Councils, the Story in short is
to this effect.

After our Saviors Manifestation among the Sons of Men, to whom, by the
exemplary Conduct of his triumphant Resurrection from the Dead, he gave the
most undeniable Proofs of his Divinity: Tiberius, in whose Time the Christian
Name made its entry into the World, communicated to the Senate an Account he
had received out of Syria Palestine of this great Affair; and having given his
own Suffrage to Christ's Divinity, he desired them to enact it into a Decree,
and to register him in the Catalogue of the Gods: But the lofty Senate
disdaining to be instructed in a Business which concerned the Exercise of their
own Power, rejected Caesar's Motion, and would not place our Savior in their
Festival Calendar, because they had not first approved the Matter, before the
Emperor persuaded them to it. This you may say was a brisk Maintenance of
Privilege against the Torrent of Prerogative; and I must I confess admit it,
but in a Sense that takes away the Authority, not only from the Person, but
from the Doctrine of our Savior, and seems to render unto the People the
things which are Caesar's, and unto Satan the things which are Gods: and I
hope the Example will have no tolerable Sway in the Christian World.

It is our Comfort that the English Parliament (though they have a just
Pretense to a great Power, in conjunction with their Prince) do not affect such
an unseasonable Grandeur which would disappoint the Success of his Majesty's
Piety. So that what Monsieur Talon speaks in Flattery of the aspiring Lewis, we
may conclude most true of King William; that to our August Monarch nothing is
impossible, especially when he endeavors the Intersts of Heaven: I am sure his
Favor to the Bishops will not lead him out of the way thither.

The Kings of England (and this the express Words of their Coronation Oath
contain) are invested with a Power to execute Justice in Mercy, and as they
carry an High Court of Chancery in their Breasts, so may they by their
indulgent Grace, and especial Favor, abate some rigorous Extremities of the
Law. This has ever been one of the Flowers of their Prerogative, to which no
others can pretend, and it is as truly annexed to their Crown, as the Royal
Dignity to their Persons. This Power has been often exerted by them in a
various manner, when the Necessities of State, or their own Royal Pleasure
required it; but it is then rendered more conspicuous, when it is published for
the common Benefit and Security of the Nation, and does, in order to the
quieting the Minds of the Subjects, dispense with the Frailties, Errors, and
Miscarriages of the People. Such an important Grant of Clemency is capable of a
twofold Management: for when the Prince does design a general Amnesty, he
sometimes issues forth his gracious Declaration of Free Pardon; or, if he
Judges it more necessary and expedient, or more agreeable to some weighty
Circumstances, he recommends the Affair to the Consideration of his Parliament,
which in most submissive Terms does either propose a Bill to his Royal Assent,
or else receives a Draught of Pardon from him with such Ceremony as is
expressive of their Gratitude. This latter Method has been used by his present
Majesty, and by the whole Proceeding our Adversaries may be soon convinced what
an Authority the Sovereign bears in the two Houses. For when some Lords, who
were excepted in the Act of Grace, did move in Parliament that they might be
heard by their Council, in order to give their Reasons why they should partake
of the Benefit of the Act, their Motion was not approved, nor was their Request
allowed them. I must not presume to render the Reasons which prevailed with the
Honorable House to dismiss their Petition, having not had the Opportunity to
examine the Records; but I suppose, from the Information I have casually
received from judicious Persons, that those Noble Peers did not petition in the
regular, direct and customary Order: for his Majesty (who best understood his
own Resolutions) sent down his Pardon to the Lords House, not to be altered or
enlarged, but to be passed into a Law; so that the Petitioners ought, in that
case, to have addressed the King, who, as he is the Life of Justice, so is he
the Fountain of Mercy.

I cannot therefore but pity the extreme Weakness of their Judgments, who
pretend to maintain, that our Grand jury did not pursue a right Course, when
they made their Application to the King in the Behalf of the Bishops; for, by
this Assertion, they seem to bare no Regard to the Authority of Presidents, but
speak against the Voice of our Laws, the Prerogative of our Prince, and the
true Liberty of the Subject. We could address no other Person, we could gain
Relief from no other Place; the King alone could grant our Request, who might
have been sensible of the Desires of his faithful People, had not evil Men
slandered us, and misrepresented our Design: but to proceed.

As many of those Gentlemen, who disparage the Conduct of our Zeal, challenge
us for an Insult upon the Laws; so others scruple not with open Mouth to tell
us, that we should not on any Account have petitioned for Bishops, that Title
being as odious to them, as was Hannibals Name to the Roman Matrons. In this
Hatred they are fixed by the prevailing Authority of Education and Prejudice,
and their spiritual Directors carefully improve those Maxims, with which their
early Judgments were possessed. Among them Lewis du Moulin has furnished his
Disciples with Invectives against the sacred Function out of the Writings of a
learned Man, whom he calls one of the sincerest Persons in the World (though he
confesses if Mr. Baxter be in an Error, he is the greatest of Liars.) Moulin's
short and true Account of the Advances of the Church of England toward Rome,
P. 64. etc.
The Episcopacy of the Church of England, says he, is absolutely contrary to
the Holy Scriptures, and the Practice of the Primitive Church: It is not
compatible with the Peace of the Church, nor with the Civil State. It is the
Cause of all the Sects, all the Heresies and of all the Schisms and Divisions
which have rent and torn and infected England for above this hundred Years,
banishing all likelihood of Reformation in Religion and good Manners. That it
shuts the Door against the Entrance of the Doctrine and Discipline of Jesus
Christ, letting loose the Reins to all Debaucheries, Intemperance, Luxury and
Idleness, making the Pastors lazy in the Discharge of their Ministry, fomenting
Ignorance, hatred of Piety, Plurality of Benefices. That it is a Government
that divests the Pastors of Parishes of the Authority to exercise the
Discipline of Jesus Christ, to invest the secular Persons with it, breaking the
Union of the Churches of England with those beyond Sea, and gratifying the
Enemy of our Salvation, and Persons of a sensual and depraved Life. This is the
Language of the Man whom our Author calls the sincere, and he does well deserve
that Character; for he has delivered the true Idaea of his Thoughts to us. And
indeed if Episcopacy were of such a monstrous and Antichristian Composure, and
did it carry such a Wolf in its Back as this old Angry Divine would persuade
us, an Address in Favor of the Bishops had entitled us to a severe
Chastisement. I need not intermeddle with the Merit of those Allegations with
which that luxurious Writer bespatters the Order and Succession of our Church;
but I beg leave to follow Monsieur Moulin himself in the full Stretch of his
own Argument, and shame his Party by giving them a Repetition of his Words.

The Reader therefore is to be informed, that in the Judgment of this unerring
Idem. p. 63. 65.
Rabbin, Dr. Tillotson is a Reverend and Learned Man; that Dr. Floyd and the
Canon of the Chapter, of which Dr. Tillotson is the Dean, have done good
Service by their Labors against Popery. That all the Three are every where
extremely valued and honored by the best Judges, and the holiest Men, and that
they live in the high Reputation of being eminently Learned and pious. These
are the Expressions of the double faced Janus in one place of his Book, but in
the reverse Page, he seems much afflicted that these Doctors have vindicated
our Bishops, and the Frame of our Discipline, and for this Reason he compares
them to those who made Panegirics on the Bloody Busiris, the Tyrant Nero and
the Tertian Ague. That it is with these three great Divines, as with Anselm,
Ives, and John of Salisbury, who by the Reputation of their extraordinary
piety, have established more strongly the Perpetuity of the Popes Empire, then
all the Diabolical Instruments of Gregory the Seventh, Innocentius the Third
and Fourth, and Boniface the Eighth.

The Monsieur is justly allowed his Pretense to an Insight in the Affairs of
Church History; for he managed his Conduct by the Authority of a great and
leading Example, treating our Doctors in the same Style, with which the
primitive Christians were entertained at Rome, Caius Scius, as the old learned
Apologist Writes, was esteemed as good and as rightous a Man as any in that
City, but he was therefore declared wicked by a pubilc Outcry, because he
professed Christianity: And by the same Analogy Dr. Tillotson and his Reverend
Brethren, after they had been acknowledged to be Angels of light, were soon
transformed into Instruments of darkness, because they asserted the Power and
Jurisdiction of Christian Prelacy: and if our Doctors are thus sentenced by the
ill natured Minister, what mercy can our Bishops expect from the Tongues of his
violent Party? Our Diocesan has been often allowed to have done glorious
Exploits (and his expense of Labor and Gold in the ransom of Christian Slaves,
and his hazards in the Rescue of others from Turkish Tyranny speak him a great
Man) but yet he is no Christian in the New Catalogue, because he is a Bishop.
Our holy Primate (and this his loudest Enemies confess) is a Person of
stupendous Gifts and admirable Piety, and is most Serpahic in the Austerities
of his Life; but he is therefore thought unworthy his Majesty's Grace because
he is a Bishop. In this Current and Chanel does Lewis du Moulin lead us, and it
is no wonder his Votaries will not subscribe to a Pardon for our Prelates, who
were the times answerable to their Wishes would blot out the Names of their
Persons, and pull down the Establishment of their Order.

I have often wished that those who assume the name of Protestants, and by
their great English Patriarch are Styled the Sober and Self-denying Men, had
not in their Practice maintained what he the sincere Person has delivered in
Thesi. It would have conduced much to their Reputation, had they been led by
the sweet and Angelic Spirit of Calvin, to which though they do in a large
Sense pretend, yet they never studied that part of Christian Imitation. I am
sure they have lost their Credit among all good Protestants, nor has their
Conduct been pleasing to the Lutheran, Hugonot and the Evangelical Churches;
for when our Dissenting Brethren enjoyed a full swinge of Liberty by the
Toleration in the late Reign, many of them could not bare the equal prosperity
of our Church and of our Bishops, but rather then not ruin both, they could for
once allow Satan their help to raise the Superstructure of his Kingdom. I am
unwilling to enlarge on what I before purposely avoided, or at least but
lightly touched; but their unpardonable iniquity cannot be concealed in this
place. I suppose they remember the Traffic they held with the Court, when they
accepted an Equivalent, and engaged by stipulation to assist the common Enemy
of Protestants in the Subversion of the best reformed Church in the World. This
in plain Truth was the pregnant Impulse, that gave breath to many of the
fulsome Addresses presented by that numerous. Party to the King, and raised
their Spiritual Fury to such a Degree, as readily to dispense with the
Fanaticism of the Church of Rome, on condition that what they called the Popery
of the Church of England might tumble to the Ground. Thus were they content to
have seen the Abomination of a cursed Aelia set up over our Archbishop's Gate,
to have seen the Popes Warehouse opened in our Ecclesiastical Courts, to have
seen Nuntios Apostolic whipping Heresy out of our Chapels; to have seen the
Separatists cherished by Royal Favor, and the Church of England alone
dismantled of all her Privileges. O the Religion, O the patience of the
pretended Saints, who to revenge an old quarrel could so tamely permit the
Roman Managers to mingle their Tyber in our Thames, and to make Lambeth the
Faubourg of their Lateran Palace.

I suppose all honest and judicious Men are by this example sufficiently
satisfied, that the Practices of some Men are agreeable to their Writings; and
that what was at first thought a difference in mere Ceremony, is changed into a
mortal Fewd. I would to God, these Men had bid Adieu to ill Nature under the
kind influence of our present Government; but alas! the same Doctrine is still
carefully conveyed from the Pulpit to the Peoples Ears, and from their lofty
Oracle you may hear long Prayers for the confusion of Prelacy. How may it
therefore with reason be supposed, that these forward Enthusiasts can have any
tolerable Charity for our Diocesan, and our other Bishops, or any Favorable
regard to those that undertake their Defense, who think it their Duty to
Preach, to cry aloud, and to act violently against their very Order and
Function? They love not a Bishop be he ever so good; they pity not a Bishop be
he ever so afflicted; they envy those Bishops that do conform, and they rejoice
at their Calamity who are Suspended.

It is now (I confess) high time to draw to a conclusion, but before I do it I
am obliged, tho not without some reluctance of mind, to direct a few more Words
to these very Men on a Subject, in which I had rather be excused with silence,
for since the same oppugners of our Prelates are (for a certain grand Reason
well known to themselves, but which I shall studiously at present conceal) much
averse to the Suspended Bishops, because they maintain the Doctrine of Non
resistance, and Passive-Obedience; I entreat the Readers Patience to attend me,
whilst I endeavor to vindicate the Good Fathers in this one distinguishing
Principle and Character of our English Church.

And therefore although to carnal and worldly Reason (which respects more
nicely the cadence and congruity of Words, then the sincerity of Actions)
Passive-Obedience may sound as harsh, and inconsistent as Passive-resistance;
yet the wholesome Doctrine which is couched under those significant Terms is not
so tamely to be hissed off the Stage. We have an Authentic Nomenclature in the
New Testament, where we find the Words registered both in the same expressive
language, and in the like Sense; and we have there a great Example, who was an
exact Copy of the Doctrine, and patiently permitted wicked Men to draw the
litteral Characters of it in large Capitals upon him. For if we trace our dear
Savior from his Temptation in the Wilderness to his Agonies in the Garden, and
from thence through the other dark scene of horrors to his Crucifixion, we
shall find, that his Command of more then Twelve Legions of Angels could not
prevail with him to attempt his Security by the Thunder of and Force against
the rude insolences of barbarous Sinners. The Author to the Hebrews tells us
that though Christ was the Son of God yet be learned, patience by the things he
sufferd; Heb. c. 5. v. 8. and St. Paul affirms to the Ephesians that the holy
Jesus became Obedient unto the death, even to the death of the Cross Chap. 12.
v. 8. which two Texts of Scripture do give a sufficient Authority to Passive
Obedience and to the very Letter of the Expression. We read also in St. Peter's,
first Epistle c. 2. v. 23. that when our Savior was reviled he reviled not
again, that when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to him who
judges righteously. From which as also from many other passages of Holy
Scripture the Doctrine of Non-resistance is fully cleared as a duty necessarily
incumbent on the Practices of true Christians, especially since the same St.
Peter (whose indstruction are a general Rule to all Ages) assures us in the
same place, that Christ suffered for our Example that we should follow his
steps. Now what is proposed for our Example I am sure is for our imitation; and
if we imitate our Savior in his patient suffering, I know what consequence
will be from hence naturally inferred. I cannot therefore but tremble at the
blaphemy of those wretched Men, who have so far Shipwrack't their Faith and a
good Conscience as to expose and ridicule the most Divine and Apostolical
Truths, by affirming that this Doctrine ought no longer to be maintained in the
Schools, in the State, or in the Church. We may on better Grounds conclude,
that those who in the pressure of Persecutions are not of the sweet temper of a
divine Resignation, and who cannot bare their afflictions without murmuring
against the appointments of Gods Providence, and without loud Clamors and
revilings against the Men who oppress them, can never pretend to the name of
Christians, much less can they be entitled to the merit of Confessors, or to
the glory of Martyrdom. Their whole Man must be employed in the Service of
their God; their Soul with it is Faculties, Powers, and Will, as well as the
bodily Members must concur and cooperate in so Divine a Work. For
Passive-Obedience (in property of Speech) does imply the Sacrifice of the mind,
and Non-resistance is a blessed effect wrought on the outward Man, which, by a
true and sanctified mortification, is dead unto all worldly Cares and
Interests, and moves by no other passion then that of Heavenly Love, and
unlimitted Charity. Of this serene Temper was the good St. Stephen, who did not
render evil for evil, and railing for railing; nor did he desire from God that
the Stones might rebound from him upon his Enemies; but he interceded for his
Persecutors that the sin might not be laid to their charge. Let us trace the
Christians in the first Century's, and we shall find the same genuin Principle
and Spirit reigning among them. They did not therefore suffer because they had
no Force and Power to resist, as some of our false Brethren in compliance with
the Jesuits Doctrine do maliciously insinuate, but they often cast off the
Soldiers Coat to wear the Livery of their Savior, and delivered up their own
Swords to the Use and Service of their Executioners.

I must not be thought by the tendency of my discourse to enervate the Minds
and Spirits of Christians, and to recommend Cowardice as an Article of Faith. I
desire no such interpretation may be made of my Words: for I know, that we must
not only suffer, but also plead for rightousness sake; for as every Man is
obliged by virtue of his being in a Society (whether it relates to the Church
or the the State) not to consent to any thing which tends to the apparent ruin
of it, but to refuse all such Acts for the sake and general end of the Society;
so would a compliance with a sinful Command be in effect a disobedience to the
Power that Commands, and to the Authority it self when stated and considered.
And therefore if the Magistrate Commands any thing contrary to natural and
revealed Religion, or destructive of the Fundamental Laws of the State or
Church we may rescribere Principi; we may calmly advise him of the
irreconcilable difference between his Precept and our Duty, between his
pleasure and voice of our conscience, between his Will and the more
indispensable obligation of Gods Word or the dictates of morality. And if he is
not satisfied with such Remonstrations, we may Petition, Address, and humbly
entreat him to supersede his Resolutions, but if he yet remain peremptory in
his Demands, we must obey him by suffering, and apply our selves to the
Christian warfare of Prayers and Tears. God in such a case has reserved all
Remedies to be expected by an Appeal to his own judgment Seat, for he has said
that vengeance is his, and that he will repay it; and as he is jealous of his
Honor, so will he not suffer any to go unpunished, who Usurp upon his Province,
and presume to forestal his final retribution. By these considerations were our
suspended Bishops led under their Afflictions in the last Reign, and God, who
is the rewarder of Innocence, was pleased to Crown their constancy with a
success far above our languishing hopes, and the prospect of a faint
Expectation.

I cannot therefore but strangely wonder why some Persons who speak
irreverently of the same Prelates, and write invectives against them, do at
this time accuse them because they are passively obedient, and resolve not to
resist. Are they desirous the good Fathers should encourage their many Friends
to rise in Arms on their Account? Would this be for the Security of the Nation?
Or is this the way to establish Peace and Union among us; I may assure those
troublers of our Israel, that our Bishops know not how to blow the Trumpet for
such an Alarm; long aliud sonat tuba Evangelica aliud concha Panis, aut cornu
Alectus. If his Majesty (with respect to their modesty and moderation) would be
pleased in a Parliament way to reinstate them in their former Capacities he
would not hazard the Security of his Throne or the Glory of his Name. I am
certain he would purchase as much Honor by this one Act of Piety, as he has
gained by the Atchievment of his Arms, when he passed the Boyn, and waded
through the other difficulties of War. But if they must be still chained to a
suspension, they will be also chained to Passive-Obedience and Non-Resistance,
let the World cast what censures it please upon them. I confess many others
(and those the great Enemies of this avowed Principle of the Bishops) have
formerly on many occasions taken the liberty to disturb the Peace of our
Government, and yet Mercy has been passively obedient to them; but I leave them
and their Party to another Tribunal where the proudest and most incorrigible
Spirits must, in a more dreadful Sense, pay a Passive-Obedience to the scourge
of infinite Justice.

In the mean time it is our comfort, that the good hand of Providence does
overruled the Affairs of this World, and that these furious and Antichristian
Men have not the Effect of their Clamors granted them: but that the Sober and
the Religious Gentlemen of our Nation do neither join with their interests, nor
expect their success; to these therefore I shall seriously apply my self in a
few Words.

I would desire them to consider with me the apparent Advantages our Enemies
reap from the present Suspension. How joyfully was the News entertained in the
Popes Palace and in the College of Cardinals? with what triumph and surprising
Pleasure did the General of the Jesuits receive the Express? how do they deride
the fickle instability of our People, who were so fond of the Bishops under the
last Reign, and seem now as violent against them? The Subtle Missionary (who
loves to breath in the midst of Tempests and Whirlwinds) takes occasion from
hence to persuade the Friends of our Church that our Hierarchy is endangered,
and that the Suspended Bishops must expect little Relief since their very order
is not altogether pleasing. What is become, cries he, of the old plausible Text
of Liberty, of Privileges, and of Conscience? Where is the comfortable and
long expected Amnesty, or at least the equal and just Administration, when
scandalous Sinners are exalted to a degree of of Eminence, when Outlaws,
Pedlers of Perjury, and Mountebanks of Treason are favored with a Pardon, and
the holy, the Orthodox and Learned are discharged the hopes and benefit of that
Grace? On the other hand the same Underminer of our Peace does insinuate to the
Dissenter (whose readiness to comply with his late proposed Equivalent renders
him an apt Subject for his further delusions) that now is the time to appear
rampant, to cry strongly against Episcopal Grandeur, and to beat down the
Fabric of our Church, our Doctors and Prelates being so variously divided in
their present Sentiments. To some he suggests, that our Church does suffer too
much by this procedure, and that the whole Kingdom ought to be violent in their
Demands for the Bishops Honor; but he assures others that our Church suffers
too little, and must be yet chastised after the dreadful Model of the Scorish
Reformation. Thus we see with what Topics the Ignatian Order is furnished to
widen the Differences among Protestants, and to blow up the flame of our
wretched Discontents and Passions: for as it is their sport and pleasure to
embroil us; so is it their Interest carefully to maintain those Heats and
Animosities which feed their own hopes and forward our destruction; and I know
no better Method to disappoint the Artifice, then to dare for once to be
Christians, and to love one another with true Charity and Compassion; which we
cannot be said to do, unless we renounce all savage and brutish Malice. If we
seriously study this peaceable Temper, the Suspended Bishops will not be long
bereaved of their Places; but may be admitted to a share in that common Concern
and Benefit of English Men as will render them serviceable to His Majesty, and
useful in their Generations. Sure I am, this was the true Design of our
Grand-Jury's Petition, and this was the plain and naked Sense of the dangerous
Paper, that has been so violently proclaimed against by some Men, who love to
be thought great at Court, where they would mis-represent all the rest of
Mankind, and themselves also, did not the eloven Foot discover their deformity.

And now having briefly vindicated the Title of our Address, and the Errand
upon which we dispatched it, I shall drop some words, and those but a few, in
answer to that other immodest Calumny, which styled us a factious Party. And
here, as I am not permitted to be a compotent Judge in the Case, so neither
will I allow the Testimony of our Opponents to the Truth of what they maintain,
but we will appeal to an Authentic Umpirage and be determined by it.
Tertullian; a most learned Civilian in the Opinion of the best Masters, has
left these words to Meditation. Tertul. Apol. advers. Gentes, cap. 39.
Illis nomen Factionis accommodatum est, qui in odium bonorum and proborum
conspirant, qui adversus sanguinem innocentium conclamant. They merit says he,
the name of a Faction who conspire in Malice against good and just Men, and
with loud outcrys demand their Blood. Which description is very apt and
significant, and to it agrees the Grammatical Interpretation which Scaliger
gives us of the same word, who writes, that a Faction is busied circa inimica
studia. By these settled and approved Rules we may, salvo. jure, conjecture,
that much wickedness conceived in the Cabanet of the Cabal, and as professed
Iniquity in the Actions of their Party, afford fit Ingredients to make up the
Character. Corah and his Company, Achitophel and his Convention, Caiaphas with
his Sanhedrim were in this Sense Factious and Turbulent Men; otherwise Moses,
David, and the Holy Jesus would be robbed of the Authority that is due to their
Innocence. If our Adversaries then will declare us liable to the same
Imputation, they must first prove, that our appearance in the Bishops Cause,
was a designed Conspiracy against Righteousness and Peace, and if they dare
confront us with this Libellous Assertion, I will say, they have hardened not
only their Consciences, but also their Tongues against the Impressions of
Truth. Certainly these busy Critics ought in good Manners to pay a better
Respect, if not to our Persons, yet to the Quality of our Office: for we held
no Club distinct from the appointments of Custom; but we met together to
consult the Peace of our Country, and to prepare Matters for the solemn
Proceedings of Justice, and for the regular Execution of the Laws: And if we
are accounted a Faction for freely speaking the Sense of our Neighbors, and
for doing our other Duty in the Kings Service, the Authority of the Government
is called in question, and we may esteem the honorable Judge to have been the
Ringleader of our Sect. If the Clamarous Gentlemen are not yet satisfied in the
present Notion with which I endeavor to correct the bitterness of their
Judgments, or if they desire to be more fully informed what the Nature and
Tyranny of a Faction is, I will for their further Improvement direct them to an
exact and perfect Mirror, in which perhaps they may see their own faces.

I suppose they remember the days of old, when the pretended Saints (holding
their solemn Councils at This Expression is borrowed from Mr. Milton who lost
his Eyes in his Zeal for those times.
Pandaemonium the High Capitol of the Usurper and his Peers) studied the Ruin
of the best of Kings, and plotted the dismal and black Tragedy, which was acted
in our Church. These were inimica studia in odium bonorum proborum and
innocentium. Then was the Use and Exercise of the Miter suspended, the Bonnet
was advanced over the Crown, and Scepters was subjected to the Flail. The
Liberaries of the Holy Usher and other Learned Men were ransackt by base
Plagiaries, and our most celebrated Scholars were reduced to such Streights,
that they lived (according to Dr. Prideaux's Language) upon their Books and
their Hangings, being necessitated to expose them to an uncomfortable huxstry
for their Support. Our Bishops were Imprisoned, Sequestered, Banished, and the
name Malignant, that as one observes) is attributed but once in the whole Bible
to the Devil, was affixed by accursed Hypocrites on the suffering Party. In
their Mint were our present and past Calamities coined, they stamped Wrinckles
on our Brow, and tried us like Gold in the Furnace of Affliction. Those
precious Sons of Sion (for in that Name they gloryed) perfected a Reformation
according to Mr. Sedgwick's Scheme, who in a fast Sermon before the Commons
assured them, that they ought in the performance to expect Zion's delive. Anno,
1642. p. 11.
Earthquakes, Church-quakes and Kingdom-quakes. To conclude; tho the furious
Priests persuaded the People against Organs in the Church yet they had their
own peculiar Music, even of that Hellish Composure, which Habet and mundus
Organasua, sed quae inferne reddunt sonitum inamabilem. Quid enim loquitur ira
fides? ulciscere, spolia ejice, occide. Quid sonet Ambitionis nervus? dilata
ditionem, nec Juris jurandi aut pietatis sit ratio, quoties agitur de imperio.
Quid erepit Auaritiae chorda? vides nemini been esse nisi qui plurimum
possides, per fas nefasque congere, rape, serva, etc. Haec nimirum est mundi
Musica. -- Sic pessomam barn oriam reddit Livoris and Obtrectationis Chorda,
etc. his modis aebrii, lymphatique sic belligeramur, tumultuamur, ambimus.
rapimus, irascimur, mordemus invicem ac mordemur. Erasm. Epist. ad Adrian.
Pontif. Praefix. Arnob. Comment. in Psalm.
Erasmus on a like sorrowful occasion describes to us, that entertained the Age
with the dire infernal Sound of War, Rapine, Ambition, Avarice, Perjury, Tumult
and Blood.

This was a Faction in terrible earnest, and I hope the Spawn of that Party
will no longer torment us with their own Title, lest we spare neither Paint,
nor Labor to describe them more fully to the World.

FINIS.

