The Case of the ACCOMMODATION Lately proposed by the BISHOP of DUMBLANE, To
the Nonconforming Ministers examined.

Wherein also The ancient Prostasia, or Episcopus Praeses, is considered; and
the Solemn League and Covenant occasionally vindicat.

Together With a Copy of the two LETTERS Herein reviewed.

Whereunto also is subjoined an APPENDIX In Answer to a Narrative of the
Issue of the Treaty anent Accommodation.

II. COR. XIII. V. VIII. For we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the
Truth. Printed in the (...) (...)

The PREFACE.
ALthough there be nothing more assured, both in the acknowledgement and
experience of all, then that the most important events of this worlds
concerns, do much depend upon, and are frequently turned by, the observation
or neglect of certain midses and expedients only, yea greatly, recommended by
this their subservient aptitude and influence; yet, on the other hand, it is no
less evident, that in the matters of God, and of our souls everlasting
wellbeing, even the Ordinances of life, by him thereto appointed, are, for the
most part, slighted by an abstracting undervalue: But, as it is beyond all
controversy that the full persuasion and just estimation of these high and
glorious ends, whereunto they are designed, would quickly intend our care about
all things and circumstances thereunto ordered in an agreeable proportion, and
also extend our commanded circumspection to a fidelity even in the things that
are least; so it is only unseriousness and insincerity in the main, together
with the diversion of other temptations, that occasioneth all the
indifferency, contempt and mockery, wherewith we find the simplicity and
meanness of Gospel-institutions commonly entertained; and hence it is, that not
only they are despised, and perverted by the vain pretenders to liberty,
gallantrie, decency, civil obedience or the like; But also they are all
contending for them, under the specious affectations of more calm, sublime and
serene contemplations, and the saucy reproaches of hot disputations and bitter
wranglings is endeavored to be eluded, and the things vilified into empty
formalities, and thereby an inlet made, in the righteous judgment of God, to
the delusions of men's inventions.

How much of these truths may be remarked in the ensuing discourse, I shall not
here anticipat by an unnecessary reflection; the point I aim at is to exhort
every one, desirous to be faithful to God in the midst of this evil
generation, wherein the strange variety and opposition of events that we have
seen do suggest such strong temptations, and interest has not more seduced
men's minds unto an irreligious lukvvarmness, then their Spirits are most
perniciously debauched by vvanton and vvild cavillation, to study, in the
first place, to have the mind enlightened with the true knowledge of the most
High soveraignity, and most pure holiness of God, the most wonderful love and
mavelous condescendence of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the great perfection of
the holy Law, and excellency of all Gospel O^di^^^^ces; and next to have the
heart established through the grace of God, by suitable faith and fear cleaving
unto God with the whole soul and strength, and hating every vain and false way:
Surely he that is thus qualified shall never be moved; but as he will be of a
good, sound, and quick understanding in all things, so in these so much tossed
debates, whereby the most part of this backsliden and light generation, at
best only seeking therein the gratifications of their own curiosity, are many
times sadly stumbled unto greater irreligion, he will easily discern and lay
hold upon the will and way of the Lord, being convinced that the meanest of his
matters are not of a lower appearance, then of a high and in estimable
tendencie.

To such therefore it is that I recommend and submit the ensuing disquisition;
(if the unconcerned world do laugh, if the foolish mock, and the wicked rage,
yet, I hope, my work is with my God, and its fruit shall be to all the lovers
of our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity) being moved by the excessive silence of
the one, and the immoderate boasting of the other of the two parties engaged in
this affair, to interpose for truth thus unequally treated, that by this poor
essay it may be, in some measure, vindicat, and a check given to the pride and
swelling words of the Adversaries, is all my aim. As for these of our
opposites who may find themselves more nearly touched in the few sheets
subjoyned, if they think me therein transported to any excess I do assure
them, that it is from the ungrateful violence of their provocation, and not at
all the choice of my own inclination: I acknowledge also, that there are other
Papers emitted by them, then the two that I do particularly review and annexe,
specially a long Letter supposed to be. G. B's. and written by way of
amplification of the former: But seeing I do fully discuss his Text, and after
trial discover that his excellent and noble friend's gold, as he speaks, is but
dross, I hope he will easily pardone my not prosecuting a further fruitless
search into what he calls his own ore. And thus I dismiss my Reader unto the
perusal of what follows.

READER,
Before thou read be pleased to correct with a pen these Errata.

Page 18, Lin. 29. read, probabilities. p. 19. l. 13. r. its. p. 21. l. 29. r.
Rule. p. 23. l. 15. r. an. p. 24. l. 13. r. preach. p. 28. l. 27. r.
ordination. p. 29. l. 17. r. the p. 52. l. 2. what. r. with. p. 55. l. 17.
with. r. which. p. 68. l. 31. r. revolutions. p. 68. l. 35. this, r. his. p.
72. l. 30. r. cussed. p. 73. l. 30. expressed, r. expelled. p. 74. l. 25. was,
r. were. p. 79. l. 29. r. wisdom. p. 88. l. 6. preserve. r^ prefer. p. 92 l.
18. he. r. the. ibid. l. 28. Masters r. Majesty. p. 106. l. 23. your, r.
their. p. 109. l. 18. r. change. ibid. l. 29. r. enjoyed. p. 114. l. 13. r.
piece. p. 115. l. 23. pretended, r. perpended. p. 118. l. 18. r. distinct.

The Case of the ACCOMMODATION, Lately proposed by the BISHOP of DUMBLANE To
the NONCONFORMING MINISTERS, Examined.
Wherein also The ancient Prostasia, or Episcopus Praeses is considered, and
the Solemn League and Covenant occasionally vindicat.
SUch have been the high and stiff oppositions, and no less contrary and
important consequences of Prelacie and Presbytery within this Church, that as
their Accommodation may be very desirable to all our temporizing pursuers of
peace; so certainly it does no less challenge the sincere and strict search of
all the followers of Truth. Upon which consideration, having been induced to a
more particular notice of the rise, procedure and issue of this affair, I am
resolved, for the impartial vindication of the Lords ordinance of Government in
his House, and our engadgements thereto; and in the conscience of that known
precept, (...), to exhibit my observations upon it, with the calmeness and
candor suitable to such an inquiry. And therefore, omitting to preface any
thing upon the first proposal of this Treaty, and the methods of its
prosecution that have since been practiced, I shall take its terms from their
most assured warrant, viz. the Articles lately given in at Paseley, to the
Mimisters there conveening, under the title, and of the tenor following,

Articles proposed by the Bishop of Glasgow to the dissenting Brethren.
1. THat if the dissenting Brethr^n will come to Presbyteries and Synods, they
shall not only not be oblidged to renounce their own private opinion anent
Church Government, and swear or subscribe any thing thereto; But shall have
liberty, at their entry to the said meeting, to declare and enter it in what
form they please.

2. That all Church affairs shall be managed, in Presbyteries or Synods, by the
free vote of Presbyters, or the major part of them.

3. If any difference fall out, in the Diocesian Synods, betwixt any of the
Members thereof, it shall be lawful to appeal to a Provincial Synod, or their
Committy.

4. That Intrants being lawfully presented by the Patron, and duly tried by
the Presbytery; there shall be a day agreed on by the Bishop and Presbytrie,
for their meeting together for their solemn ordination and admission: at which
there shall be one appointed to preach; and that it shall be at the Parish
Church, where he is to be admitted; except in the case of impossibility, or
extreme inconvenience: And if any difference fall in, touching that affair, it
shall be referable to the Provincial Synods, or their Committy: as any other
matter.

5. It is not to be doubted, but my L. Commissioner his Grace will make good
what he offered, anent the establishment of Presbyteries and Synods: and we
trust his Grace will procure such security to these Brethren for declaring
their judgment, that they may do it without any hazard, in contraveening any
Law: and that the Bishop shall humbly and earnestly recommend this to his Grace.

6. That no Intrant shall be engadged to any Canonical Oath or Subscription to
the Bishop; and that his opinion, anent that Government, shall not prejudge him
in this: but that it shall be free for him to declare.

These being the conditions offered, in order to the intended Accommodation, it
is evident, that for a due understanding of their import, we ought first to
know what is the nature of these Meetings called Presbyteries, Synods, and
Provincial Assemblies, to which the Brethren are invited: And for that end, we
must not only transpose the fifth Article to the first place, and supply it
with such other probabilities as may be had; but also arise a little higher, to
remember the changes that we have lately seen; and from what, and to what they
have carried us: For, seeing our joining in the present Presbyteries and Synods,
with, or under Bishops, as they are offered to be reduced, is that which is
principally demanded of us, it is so little possible, without this previous
examination, rightly and fairly to define the case in contratraversie, that I
can hardly acquit the preposterousness and deficiencie in the Articles, of a
greater error then a common mistake.

The thing then which comes first to be noted in point of fact, and which I
shall represent with that truth and impartiality, that I hope none shall deny
it, is, that this Church, having in the Year 1638. abrogat and abjured the
Government of the Kirk by Bishops, and set up Presbyterian Government in its
purest simplicity and paritie, we together with the renewing of the National
Covenant, solemnly engadged, Constantly to adhere unto, and defend the true
Religion then established, in Doctrine, Worship and Government, contrary to all
the novations and corruptions from which it was at that time reformed; and to
labor by all means, for the purity and liberty of the Gospel, as it was
established and professed before these novations. After which time the Church,
in our acknowledgement, did enjoy a Ministry and Government truly
Ecclesiastic, committed to them by, and depending upon our Lord Jesus Christ
alone, as King in Zion, and Head of his Church. Thereafter, by an Act
Rescissorie, it was declared and statute, by both King and Parliament, in the
Year 1640. and 1641. agreeably to the Oath formerly taken, that the sole and
only power and jurisdiction within this Kirk, did stand in the Kirk of God as
it was then reformed; and in the General, Provincial and Ptesbyterial
Assemblies, with the Kirk Sessions established by Act. P. 1592. and in like
manner, by the Solemn League and Covenant, entered into in the Year 1643. the
whole Kingdom does again swear to the preservation of the Reformed Religion of
the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government; and to
extirpate Popery, Prelacie, Schism, Superstition, Profannesse, and whatsoever
shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the Power of Godliness: Which
engagement, we are bound all the days of our life zealously and constantly to
continow in, against all opposition; and to promove the same, according to our
power. Thus matters stood, both in obligation and general observance, until the
Year 1661.

At which time, the Parliament then sitting, having prepared their way by
exalting of the prerogative, in opposition to, and for the overthrow of the
practices of bygone times, specially that of entering into Leagues and Bonds;
they at one blow rescinde all Parliaments after the year 1633. and the
Government of the Church, being thereby wholly deprived of the civil sanction,
and its continowance, by another Act, permitted and declared to be only
precarious, during the Kings pleasure: Afterward, all Ecclesiastic meetings in
Synods, Presbytries and Sessions, are, by proclamation the 9 January 1662.
discharged, until they should be authorized and ordered by the Archbishops and
Bishops then nominat by his Majesty, upon their entering into the Government
of their respective Sees. By which means, the former Government being
overturned and razed unto the very foundation, at least as much as the wit and
power of man could effectuat, the next thing that offers, is the new structure
and frame that is raised in its place: And in the year 1662. the Parliament
again meeting, by their first Act for re-establishing of the Government of the
Church by Bishops, laying it for the ground, That the disposal of the external
Government of the Church does properly belong unto his Majesty, as an inherent
right of the Crown, by vertew of his Supremacy, They do thereby redintegrat
the estate of Bishops, not only to their places in Parliament, and their
accustomed dignities and privileges; but also to their Episcopal function,
Presidency in the Church, and power of Ordination, Censures and all
Church Discipline to be performed by them, with the advice of such of the
Clergy as they should find to be of known loyalty and prudence. And, for
removing of all scruples, the Parliament does further rescinde all former Acts,
by which the sole and only power and jurisdiction within this Church, does
stand in the Church, and its Assemblies; and all other Acts whatsomever, giving
any Church Power, Jurisdiction or Government to its Office-bearers or Meetings,
other then that which acknowledges a dependence upon, and subordination unto
the Sovereign Power of the King as Supreme; and which is to be regulated and
authorized, in the exercise thereof, by the Bishops and Archbishops, who are to
be accountable to his Majesty for there administration: And moreover, by the
same Act, the Act 1592. (whereby Presbyterian Government was anciently
confirmed, and which, by vertew of the above mentioned Act Rescissory, did now
in so far, by the Act 1612. stand rescinded) in respect that it does also
limite the Kings prerogative to be without prejudice or derogation to the
privilege that God has given to the Spiritual Office-bearers in the Kirk,
concerning heads of Religion, Heresy, Excommunication, Collation, or
Deprivation of Ministers, or any such like Censure, specially grounded in the
Word of God. This Act, I say, 1592. is now for this reason totally annulled, in
all the heads, articles and clauses thereof: from which Act of Restitution,
although the nature of our present Church-constitution may be very obviously
gathered; yet there are two other also, to the same purpose, of which I cannot
but take notice. The one is that concerning a National Synod, wherein his
Majesty, by vertew of his Supremacy, does more absolutely appoint and determine
upon the manner and members thereof, then if it were a mere civil Court,
unquestionably dependent upon his Royal Authority; reserving to himself,
as well the proposal, as the final approbation of all matters to be therein
treated. The other is the late Act 1669. asserting the Supremacy, whereby the
Supreme Authority over all persons, and in all causes Ecclesiastic, is so
fully declared to appertain to the King, and that by vertew thereof, he may
dispose upon the Government and Persons Ecclesiastic; and enact concerning the
Churches meetings and matters therein to be proposed, as he shall think fit,
that a more absolute power in any thing can hardly be devised in his favors.

These Acts lying so well together, I could not but lay them forth to a joint
consideration. And from them, I suppose, it will be very evident, that the work
of the last revolution, was not only an invasion made upon the Churches
Government, by the setting up of Bishops, and their usurpation over
Presbyteries and Synods, as hapened in their former introduction, preceding
the year 1612: But that the alteration made, is plainly fundamental: and that,
by his Majesty's assuming all Church Power to himself, as the proper right and
prerogative of the Crown, without so much as pretending, with the Pope, a
Commission from Jesus Christ for this effect; and conveying the same by these
communications alone, which he is pleased to dispense; and to such persons and
meetings as he thinks good to appoint, and makes to himself accountable;
there is not so much as that Genus of Ecclesiastic Government recognosced by
Presbytery, as only fountained in, and derived from our Lord as Head of the
Church; let be its specification from our Classical form, at present to be
found in being in this Church.

But it may be said, that I seem to make a difference betwixt the former and
the latter erection of Episcopal Government in this Church; and yet when
Bishops were brought in, in the year 1606. the Kings prerogative was, by the
then Parliament, first enacted, and by the next Act, their restitution is
thereon also founded; and in like manner, by the Act 1612. Presbyteries and
Synods are turned to exercises of the Brethren, and Diocesian visitations; and
the power of ordination, deposition, and excommunication is given to the
Bishop: and to complete all, by the same Act, the Act 1592. was also rescinded:
So that it appears, that betwixt the former practices, and the late
establishment, there is no great disparitie. It Is answered, the apparent
resemblance of the things objected, is nevertheless accompanied by such real
and material differences, that it does only the more notably evince the
strangeness of the methods, and nature of the present establishment, beyond all
that the same designs in former times could suggest. King James was indeed
bent for Prelacie, as all do acknowledge; but by seeking thereby to qualify
and oversway the Government of the Church, in effect to subvert all Government,
given by our Lord unto his Church, is an absurdity which his better
understanding did prudently forbear; and nothing, save either the mystery of
this growing iniquity, or the precipitancie of our times could have produced.

Now that this is the true state of the difference betwixt our, and the former
times, the particulars following will easiely evince. And first, it is true,
the Parliament 1606. does, by their first Act, declare the Kings prerogative,
but only upon the narrative of the accession of the Crowns of England and
Ireland, and in general, over all estates, persons, and causes, without the
least derogation to the explication made in favors of the Church by the Parl.
1592. Whereas, in our days, this Supremacy has been asserted, declared and
exercised, in order to Ecclesiastic Persons, meetings and matters, not only
far beyond any thing pretended to in civils; but above all that ever was
arrogate, either by Pope, or temporal Potentate. Next, by the second Act of the
forementioned Parliament 1606. the Estate of Bishops is indeed restored; and
that upon the ground of the Kings prerogative: but to what? To ecclesiastic
power, presidencie, jurisdiction, etc. Fie! Not at all; but only to their
former honors, dignities, prerogatives, privileges, livings, lands, teinds,
rents, etc. And chiefly and especially against the Act of annexation. 1587.
These, though unjustly bestowed, were yet proper subjects for a King and
Parliament: as for other things, purely ecclesiastic, they rightly judged them
to be without their line: Whereas, by the late Act. 1662. the King, with
consent of the Estates, restores the Bishops, both to the same things, and also
to the exercise of their Episcopal function, presidency, power of ordination,
and others above rehearsed: declaring himself to be the proper and supreme
Head, whence all Church-pover does flow, and to whom the Bishops ought to be
accountable: An attempt so impertinent to secular Powers, and subversive of the
very subject matter of Ecclesiastic government; that the former times, not
from any greater tenderness in these things, but merely from a clearer
knowledge of their inconsistencie, did not once dream of: and therefore, in the
third place, King James, who knew well eneugh, that neither did his prerogative
extend to the proper power and jurisdiction of the Church, nor could this be
thereupon founded; and that for him to assume the disposal and dispensing
thereof, was in effect to destroy it; although by vertew of his Supremacy, he
restored the Bishops to their honors, temporalities and possessions; yet, as
to the power Ecclesiastic by them acclaimed, he applied himself to compass the
same only by the suffrage and determination of Church Assemblies: and
accordingly we see the Act, Parliament, 1612. giving unto Bishops their
Church Power and jurisdiction, not to be founded in, nor flow from the
Supremacy; but to proceed simply, by way of ratification of an Act of a General
assembly, made two years preceding; and by the same Act. 1612. The Act 1592.
establishing as well the Protestant Religion, as Presbiterian government, and
also limiting the prerogative, as I have said, is only rescinded, in so far as
the same is derogatorie to the Articles then concluded: whereas, the King, with
consent of Parliament, by the Act 1662. laying down the Supremacy for the
basis, and ascrybing to himself the origin of Ecclesiastic power, restores the
Bishops, in the same manner, as if they were his own Commissioners and
Delegates. And to the effect the Supremacy may transcend all, the Act 1592. is
totally rescinded, without so much as a reserve for the Protestant Religion; as
is above declared. Fourthly, in former times, whatever were the errors and
wrongs, either of Church, or State, or both, in the bringing in of Bishops; yet
this is very certain and important, that the Church Assemblies, at first,
conveened by warrant of the Churches intrinsic power, and after, confirmed by
the Parliament 1592. were not upon the change discontinued; but honest men did
therein maintain both their right and possession, except in so far as the same
were invaded, and they hindered by the Bishops their prevalencie: whereas of
late, not only were the former Presbytries and Synods raised and dissolved, but
the new meetings, now conveened in their place, were appointed to sit down, as
they sold be authorized and ordered by the Bishops and Archbishops; who
thereafter, are, by Act of Parliament, restored and empowered by the King, as
supreme, over Persons and Causes Ecclesiastic, and declared Arbiter by right
of his Crown in these matters: So that it is evident, that they both are called
in his name, and do sit and act, by vertew of a power, acknowledging a
subordination unto, and dependence upon his Soveraignity; by reason whereof,
they are also to him made accountable. I grant, that for better concealing the
mystery of this Supremacy and Prelacie, the present meetings were set up, for
the most part, in the same bounds, and much under the same form and name with
the old presbyteries and synods: But seeing their precarious dependence on
Bishops, with the Bishops their proper and absolute subordination to the King,
as Supreme over the Church, is undeniable from the above cited Act. 1662. that
therefore the present Church Government, as it is freqently called in the late
Acts of Parliament, so de facto, is his Majesty's government, and not that of
our Lord Jesus, who has not invested him therewith, either by deputation or
surrender, is evident above exception. Neither are these things so, only in the
law and appointment, as is by some alleged; no, the frequent examples of
Bishops, their deposing and suspending in Synods, after having asked, merely
pro forma, the advice of a few next to them, without the vote of the whole;
their renversing the deeds of Presbyteries, and controlling whole Synods by
themselves alone, with his Majesty's granting of the High Commission,
impowering Seculars to appoint Ministers to be censured by deposition and
suspension, as well as Ecclesiastics to punish by fining, consining and
imprisoning; his removing and placing Bishops at his pleasure; and his late
granting a Commission of oversight or episcopacie, for the Diocese of Glasgow,
to him who mostly scrupled at a Patent of the Bishopric, because of its
temporalitie: These examples, I say, do clearly bring up our practice the full
length of all enacted.

Having thus explained the condition of our present Ecclesiastic constitution,
in its authority, principles and practices, wholly different from any model
that ever was seen in this Church, I think, were it not for the clearness of
method, I might leave the description of the present Prebyteries and Synods, to
the Readers own ingenuous collection: but to render my discourse the more
easy, I say, that the Presbiteries and Synods, which are now so termed amongst
us, are meetings for Church Matters, conveened by his Majesty's call, acting by
his authority, in a precarious dependence upon the Bishops, and absolute
subordination to the Supremacy: and this definition, is so manefestly the
result of what is premised and composed as it were of the Act of restitution,
and supremacy, and proclamation so often mentioned, that none can deny it.
Neither is it the present question, whether we may simply join in these
meetings or not? For seeing, that not only this conjunction would be an
acknowledgement of the supremacy, nothing different from, yea rather worse
then the sitting in the High Commission, and an active submission to, and
owning of Prelacie in its highest usurpation; But even the Articles of
Accommodation, by offering a mitigation, do evidently suppose it to be
inconsistent with Presbyterian principles: It is clear, that a simple
unqualified Union, with and in these meetings, is not the case of the present
debate.

The point therefore that comes next to be examined, is, whether or not the
Articles do indeed contain such condescensions and conditions, as may fully
relieve us of our just exceptions? Which leads me to take notice of the Fifth
Article (as I said before) in the first place, as that which appears to be most
direct to this purpose: And the contents of it are; It Is not to be doubted,
that my L, Commissioner his Grace will make good what he offered, ane^^ the
establishment of Presbyteries and Synods; and we trust, his Grace will procure
such security to these brethren for declaring their judgment, that they may do
it without any hazard in contraveening any Law^ and that the Bishops shall
humbly and earnestly commend this to his Grace. These are the terms of the
Article, and for all that I have yet heard, I am not so doubtful of the
Comissioner's performance, as I am still uncertain of what was offered: The
Brethren, who conferred in the Abbey, told us, that Presbyteries were offered
to be set up, as before the Year 1638. and that the Bishop should pass from
his Negative voice, and so forth: But what may be the import of the first part
of this offer, or how far it may conduce to the clearing of our Consciences, I
confess I am still in the dark. That which the dissenting Brethren do, and
every true Minister of Jesus Christ ought to seek after, is a Court, meeting in
the Name, and acting by the authority and rules of our Lord and Master: Any
other Court called by the King, and acting by an authority derived from the
Supremacy, If in matters properly Ecclesiastic, is but a complexed usurpation
against Christ, whose the Government is, both in the Constituent and actors: If
in Civils, then it is wholly without the Ministers Sphaere, and not to be
meddled in by them. Now that before the 1638. the Presbyteries and Synods then
sitting, were, for the most part, our Lords Courts, in so far as they were by
Succession the same with these, which at first, by warrant of Power by him
given to his Church, did set up in his Name, and were not depraved from his
institution by the Bishops their usurpation, and the subsequent corruptions, is
not doubted. But these being lately discharged and discontinued, and I am sure,
not intended to be again set down, either according to the first warrant and
rule, or as they were purged after the 1638. but plainly by vertew of the
Supremacy, and in resemblance to that conjunction of Prelacie and Presbytery,
that was by Law established before the 1638. and consequently, both upon a
wrong founda, tion, and in their most corrupt condition, I can not so much as^
apprehend, what ease to scrupling consciences can be herein designed. I have
indeed heard it sometimes alleged, for the reason of our present withdrawing,
and in that di^^ering from the practice of our Predecessors under the last
Bishops, that the then Presbyteries and Synods did meet by warrant of Law,
which now they want: But this reason, is in its terms so extrinsick to that
which a true Minister of Jesus Christ ought mainly to regard, and in truth so
groundless, the Act 1592. confirming the proper right of these meetings, being
by the Act 1612. (though not totally, yet in so far as it was derogatorie to
the Articles therein set down,) rescinded and made void, that I cannot but
judge both scruple and solution offered, impertinent. If therefore there be
true dealing intended, and any real respect to conscience in this matter, it is
evident, that it is neither by the re-authorizing of abrogat and abjured
corruptions, nor yet by any new devised frame, by vertew of, and depending upon
the Supremacy, that we can be cleared: But the only proposal to any good
purpose that can be made in this behalf, should be of Synods and Presbyteries,
founded upon our Lords warrant, and his Churches privilege; and consequently
to restore them, either as they were first allowed by the Act 1592. or which is
all one, in the condition wherein they were dissolved in the Year 1661. with an
abolition of all inconsistent Acts and practices.

But it may be said, if we be reponed to the same Estate wherein our
Predecessors were, how can we prove disconforme in our practice? It Is
answered, the dissolution and discontinuance of true Presbyteries with this new
erection, first appointed to be authorized by the Archbishops and Bishops, and
then settled upon the foot of the Supremacy, do so evidently difference the
cases, according to what is already more fully declared, that this objection is
of no moment. And if it be urged, that as a restitution repones against a
discontinuance; so, if Presbyteries and Synods be really set up, it is but a
peevish nicety to stick upon the formalitie how the same is done: the return
is easy, viz. that it is not questioned, but a full and fair restitution does
indeed repone; and therefore, if it would please his Majesty to restore the
Church, to its meetings and Privileges which it enjoyed in the Year 1661^ the
pretense of the Supremacie^ for accomplishing the things if not really made the
foundation of the Churches power, contrary to the very nature and being of the
right restored, would prove no long demurre. But as for the restitution
offered, seeing it is not adjusted to our distress, but expressly refers to
a juncture, which was in it self very corrupt, and needed reformation; and
whereunto, if bottomed upon the Supremacy, and not continuing on the old
foundation, the faithful men of these days, had doubtless never joined; it is
but ane empty conceit, no ways reaching the question in hand. From which
ground, it is also evident, that as we have good reason to declare, that we
might have continued in these judicatories, had they not been once raised and
settled again upon a new basis; and that though a Bishop had come and obtruded
himself upon us, we might have sit still, after a free protest given against
his usurpation; so, G. B^ endeavor, in a letter, supposed to be from him,
persuading to this Accommodation, to represent this as a methaphysical nicety,
of no more value, then the empty difference of sitting still, though a Bishop
come in, and of sitting down again when a Bishop is already there; and yet
acknowledging, in the same passage, the case to be different, if the Court and
constitution of the Iudicatorie be not the same, does manifestly bewray the
Doctors gross inadvertencie; and that the more to be regrated, that he is not
affrayed to obtest us, as before God, to answer for our sticking at such a
punctilio, when yet he himself, in a short but untrue supposition of the
samness of the former and present Episcopal courts, insinuates a very obvious
reason, rendering the difference very material and important.

To be plain therefore, seeing the Supremacy, as at present established, has
clearly everted and swallowed up all true Ecclesiastick-government; and the
Presbyteries and Synods now bearing that name, are only its unwarrantable
Conventicles; unless that these prevailing floods of this prerogative be
abated, and the true establishments of the government of the Lords house
discovered; I do not see where the disire of any to be innocent can rest, or
how the Lords faithful servants can be satisfied, and comply with this part of
the overture. I might here add, that seeing there may be in some cases just
reason for withdrawing, as well because of the quality of the members, as the
nature of the constitution, the rectification of the latter can as little in
our case as in any be respected as a full ground of satisfaction: but the
defectivenesse of their Articles will more properly afterward come to be
considered.

And therefore I shall now go to the First, to see what is thereby further
offered: and here we find it proposed, That, if the dissenting brethren will
come to Presbyteries and Synods, they shall not only not be obliged to renounce
their own private opinion, anent Church Government, and swear and subscrive any
thing thereto; but shall have liberty, at there entry to the said meeting, to
declare and enter it in what form they please. If I were inclined to use
sharpness, I might on just ground say, that this Article, certainly to be
understood of entering to sit and act, and not only to protest and testify,
does contain no better Salvo for our exceptions, then what, if admitted, will
equally allow the same access to the Pope's Conclave, or any other the most
unwarrantable and corrupt meeting upon earth; is as evident, as that a
Iesuitick reservation of opinion, and declaration without any effect, or a
protestation contrary to fact, is thereby judged a sufficient exoneration. But
to come to the purpose closely, I affirm that the Synods and Presbiteries,
here invited to, are not truly such, but merely nominal and pretended: being
in effect Courts authorized by Bishops, and subordinat to his Majesty in
matters purely Ecclesiastic, over and about which he himself has no such
power. And for the former part of the assertion, the Acts and other things by
me premised do abundantly clear it. As for the latter, that the King has no
such power in and over the Church; it being uncontroverted in the Presbyterian
persuasion, and the Supremacy, made the ground of the abovementioned Act of
Restitution, being to them a greater cause of offense, then any of these
difficulties in this matter of conjunction with Presbyteries and Synods
intended by the Accommodation; it was the part of the Accommodators, either by
conviction or condescendence, to have removed it. However I may not digress;
only I am assured, if these three things be considered, which I am ready to
demonstrat against whatsoever Opponent; (1.) That this Ecclesiastic power is
the sole prerogative of Jesus Christ, whereof the administration was committed
by our Lord to his Church, when no Magistrate was a Member thereof; and that
upon the Magistrates becoming Christian, there is no ground adduceable whereupon
it could accrease to him: (2.) That all the power of the Magistrate is, under
God, from the People, and in such things over and about which the original
power was to them competent, to which this Church Power can in no sort be
reckoned. (3.) That all the extraordinary interpositions of good Kings and
Emperors, in matters of Religion, did no ways flow from any inherent right or
prerogative they had conversant in these matters; but were the pure product of
necessity, sustained by the righteousness of the work, and deficiency of the
more proper means. These things, I say, being duly considered, I am very
confident, that all the pretensions of the Supremacy, will very quickly
evanish: and therefore it inevitably follows, that, seeing the Kings Supremacy
is a high usurpation against our Lord and Master, all Courts depending thereon,
and acknowledging the same, and partaking therein, what ever opinion a man do
reserve, or whatever declaration be made anent it, must also be rejected.

But here there arises a great noise and clamor, what! are the present
Presbyteries and Synods no Presbyteries and Synods? then are the present
Ministers no Presbyters? But their is no such haste; neither have these things
any further connection, then that the present Ministers are not Presbyters, in
so far as the same denotes a power of ruling committed by Jesus Christ, which
truly I think in ingenuitie they can not deny; specially seeing, that although
they hold themselves to be Ministers by mission from Christ; yet they do
nevertheless acknowledge their power of Ecclesiastic Government and
Jurisdiction to be from the King, on whom they grant that the Ministry, as to
other things, does not in such a manner depend: Whereupon it evidently
follows; that if the power of government, do as well and in the same manner
flow from Jesus Christ, as the power of order (as the Schools speak) does; and
that thereby true Presbyteries and Synods do only subsist; then, these
meetings, which recognosce his Majesty as Supreme for and in the exercise of
the power which they acclaime, can no more be truly such, then he who, by
vertew of his Sovereign's mission, would pretend himself to be a Minister. But
what need of more words; if the present conform Ministers, and there meetings,
have disclained Jesus Christ for their immediate Head, in matrer of Government,
and own no power thereof, but what acknowledges a dependence upon, and
subordination to his Majesty as Supreme; wherewith nevertheless he himself is
not at all vested; and if on the other hand, we do disallow all
Church Government, and medlings and meetings thereof, which do not hold their
commission and warrant from Christ alone, as the Head of the Body; what
concurrence can we make, in on and the same Assembly? Or by what salvo may my
sitting and acting be justified in a meeting, in the power whereof I hold it
unlawful to partake? For my part, since, in the matter of Ecclesiastic
Government, they do not hold the true Head, but have betaken themselves to
another, to whom they do referr, and are accountable for all their power; if
we, who in Conscience do both detest this usurpation, and disclaim all share
in any power, save what our Lord has committed unto us, desire to be excused
from these Assemblies; I think, until they first convince us of our mistake in
these things, they cannot rationally blame us for Separation. And therefore,
what ever may be the effect of an entry, qualified either by declaration or
protestation, in order to the freeing of the party from an apparent
constructive accession, to certain accidental corruptions that may be in a
meeting, to which he is otherwise obliged to join; yet sure I am, in this
case, where the very constitution it self is so unwarrantable and corrupt, that
non can actively partake therein, without sin; this remedy here offered is
altogether insignificant.

The next thing that here occurres, is, that although this reservation of
opinion and declaration permitted, could be a salvo, as to the evils of the
constitution; yet, without doubt, there is a consideration to be had, in such
conjunctions, of the persons also with whom it is to be made. There may be an
Assembly, nay a Presbytery or Synod of evil doers, which we are bound to
hate; and even the Assembly of the wicked who enclosed him, and pierced his
hands and his feet, wanted not a specious name, yea it was the house of his
friends: sure no man will think that a simple protestation may warrant constant
presence in these cases; but rather incline, with Jeremiah, to leave and to
draw from an assembly of treacherous men. What for assemblies the present
Church-meetings are, I can be no more tender, then it is superflous to utter:
only this I will say, that if it be once granted, that such may be the
condition of a meeting, by reason of the quality of its members, that no
declaration can warrant any fellowship therein; I am certain that the
subsumption, viz. that such are the Courts to which we are invited, may be, to
the satisfaction of all unbyassed men, upon these sufficient grounds of
notorious perjury, intrusion, profanitie and insufficiency, unquestionably
made out.

But I proceed to the next Article, bearing, That all Church-affaires shall be
managed, in Presbyteries and Synods, by the free vote of Presbyters, or the
Major part of them. This is indeed the main and principal condescendence: and
it is to this place, that, as well for the satisfaction of such Brethren as
possibly will not so easily, at first, admit of the foregoing reasons, as for a
full answer to all that can be said for this Accommodation, I have reserved to
discourse upon it at more length, and on all fair and probable Suppositions. In
supplement therefore of this Article, and to take it in the most advantageous
sense that the Proposers can desire, I add, that consistently therewith, it
seems the Bishop is to be reduced to a constant Moderator: whence in
prosecution of my declared purpose, waving any further exceptions against the
nullity of the present Presbyteries and Synods, I clearly state the Question
thus. Whether a constant Moderator, or fixed Proeslos, for term of life, in
Church-meetings, be a thing in it self lawful? And how far it is by us
admissible? And what compliance we may have ^or it? And because there are some
papers gone abroad from the Bishop of Glasgow, as is supposed, upon this
subject, and that the current of the speeches at Pasely wereof the same strain;
I conceive, for rendering of the debate more certain, it will not be amiss,
that I bring them to a particular and exact review.

And in the beginning of these Papers, we find it asserted, That Episcopal
Government, managed in conjunction with Presbyters in Presbyteries and Synods,
is not contrary either to the rule of Scripture, or the example of the
primitive Church; but agreeable to both. That this position does hold forth no
more then the lawfulness of an Episcopus Praeses, and that upon negative
grounds, giving the asserter the easier part of defense, is obvious to the
first observation. To have affirmed an obligation to this model, though the
Author's choice had not been convenient: the thing which has been, it is that
which shall be, and an agreeableness to Scripture and antiquity, is for the
time a very colorable pretension, and all that the Author dare adventure to
affirm: But that as much may be said for a Presbyterian paritie, exclusive of
this presidencie; I think our adversaries themselves will not deny: And it is
very evident, that it is the thing they have no inclination to redargue. Which
advantage, lying equally and fairly on our side, and being confirmed by
possession strengthened by an Oath, and to the present conviction of all (mostly
arising from the contrary effects of Episcopacie) sealed with the seal of good
Gospel fruits, one of the great evidences produced by Paul for his Apostelship;
how much it does impugn the late change, and justify the aversion and
noncompliance of all good men therewith; all rational men may discern. But,
seeing our cause is not as theirs, leaning only to negative probalities, and
the power wherewith it is supported, to deal clearly in this matter, though we
do not pretend to a positive, express, and particular Scripture-precept, as
well against the presidencie, as for the parity pleaded; yet, that we have an
equivalent divine warrant, more pregnant then what in other particulars is
acknowledged for such, even by our Opposites: The following heads do plainly
evince.

And first, That Jesus Christ King in Zion, sitting and ruling upon His Throne,
to whom all Power is given, and who is the Head of the Body, when He ascended
on high, sent forth His Apostles to gather, feed, and rule His Church,
promising to be with them to the end of the World; and thereby has appointed a
Government in His house, suitable to these holy ends for which it is designed,
is not more evidently founded upon the Scripture-grounds insinuat, then firm
in its connection and inference.

2. As the Apostles and their Successors were the only perpetual Pastors
ordained by our Lord; (for as for the mission of the Seventy, what ever
allusions after Ages, according to their then model, did draw from it, without
all peradventure, according to is own tenor, it did expire before our Lords
suffering) so they were by him constitute in an exact paritie, as Brethren: and
because of this equality, and the nature of their Ministry, our Lord forbids
among them all distinction of authoritative Superiority, the very name of
Rabbi and Master then abused, and all ambition and affectation of these or any
other elating dignities and titles; but they are only commanded to outstripe
and exceed on another, in that diligence and humility recommended to them in
that common service, whereunto they were destined.

3. According to this command given, so they conversed and behaved in the
Church of God, without the least vestige of imparity, either in power or
presidencie: Nay on the contrary, with a manifest equality, except it be in
some notes of apparent pre-eminence in these, by men esteemed inferior,
expressly, as it seems recorded, to counter-ballance the vanity of ambition of
after Ages, who in favor of others, might imagine a Superiority. And such are
the principal resort made to James, his moderating rather then Peter's in the
meeting at Jerusalem, Paul's resistance to Peter, and the right hand of
fellowship given to him by James, Cephas and John, and the like.

4. The pastors appointed by the Appostles being their successors, both in
their ordinary power and blessing, whatever might be the inequality betwixt
them and the Appostles, either from the immediacy and extent of the Apostles
their mission, their infallible assistance and greater eminency of gifts, or by
reason that the Apostles were the Lords chosen witnesses, and authors of
conversion to most of them whom they ordained; yet, as to the perpetual and
ordinary power given to, and transmitted by them in the Church, it is evident
from Scripture, that, in that, they neither claimed nor exercised either
superiority or presidencie over other Ministers. Hence it is, that as they call
and account them their brethren, partners, fellow laborers, and themselves
fellow-elders with them; so we find, that what in on place Paul ascribes to
the laying on of his own hands, in another he attributes to the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery: And the same Paul, who was not a whit behind the
very chiefest Appostles, receiving a solemn mission from a Presbytery, not
consisting of Fellow-apostles, but of other Prophets and Teachers. Gifts there
fore were indeed diverse and unequal, and imploiments also were various in the
days of the Apostles, according to the then exigence of a growing spreading
Church: but that either among the Apostles themselves, or them and the Pastors
by them ordained, or among the Pastors themselves there was the least imparity,
in respect of that ordinary and standing power continued in the Church, as the
passages mentioned do plainly confirm the negative; so there can no instance
be adduced from Scripture in the contrary.

We know Timothy, Titus, and the Angels of the Churches, are much talked of,
as the first superior Bishops: and to this it is as easily reponed.

1. That there is nothing enjoined or recommended in Paul's Epistles to
Timothy, which is not proper for every Pastor, unless what is evidently
referable to his office of an Evangelist there expressed.

2. The command given to Titus to ordain Elders, was by way of express
commission, and not in the least exclusive of the concurrence of other Elders
where they might be found in the place.

3 That it is in these very Epistles, more then any where else in Scripture,
that both the names of Bishops and Elders are promiscuously used, and the thing
and office thereby signified held forth to be the same.

And lastly, that the known use and elegancie of the singular number for the
plural, with the figurative speech and tenor of the seven Epistles in the
Revelation, do no more allow the Angels, representing the Pastors, then the
Stars signifying the same thing, nay or the Candlesticks the Churches, to be
taken for single persons. But for further clearing of all these and like
objections, I referr the Reader to the many Authors, by whom these things are
more fully handled.

These grounds then being all undoubtedl^ Scriptural, with what confidence can
it be demanded, where does the Scripture hold out a paritie among Ministers? Or
how can it be affirmed, that the Episcopus Praeses contended for, specially
with his necessary presence in Ordination, as we will afterward hear, is not
contrary, but agreeable to the word of God? By all which it appears, that as
our Presbyterian paritie is plainly warranted, both by general Gospel-rules,
and very express instances contained in Scripture; So the apparent lawfulness
of any other form of man's devising, can be no justification thereof.

But it is objected, If this ground be rejected, how will we maintain, or where
will we find an express command or rule for our own model of Kirk-sessions,
Presbyteries, Syonds Provincial and National, with a Commission of the Kirk, in
their several dependencies and subordinations, and the changing of the
moderator in these meetings, excepting that only of the Kirk-sessions, wherein
the Minister does constantly moderat; for without this express Kule, a Bishop
or fixed President may very well consist with that frame, which we conten^ for:
And it is really and actually so at this present in this Church?

In answering this objection, I must begin with its latter part, which is so
directly contradicted by the present constitution, both in its legal
establishment, and known exercise, as I have already proven, that I marvel how
it could escape any person of ordinary understanding. As for the main thing
objected, having from the Scripture asserted the warrant of our parity, its
difficulty is easily satisfied: for seeing that by Divine institution the
Church is erected into one Society, and officers in an equal parity for its
oversight and Government thereto appointed; And seeing that in every
concession, the things natural and proper to what is conceded must be
understood to be therein imported; the liberty and power of common counsel,
together with the subordination of the parts to the whole, do thence
necessarily result. The premises of which argument, being so consistently
composed of Scripture and reason thereon dependent, I need not here enlarge in
any explication. Sure I am, he who duly perpendeth these uncontrovertible
Scripture-truths; That the Church is gathered into one body; that the Apostles
together, the Pastors and Elders together are incharged with its oversight and
rule; that the Spirit of the Prophets is subject unto the Prophets; and that
where two or three are gathered together in the Lords Name, there he is in the
midst of them; It is impossible he should remain doubtful of the Divine warrant
and authority of our meetings. Conform to which truths and principles, we not
only find, in the Acts of the Apostles, the Church governed by common counsel,
but the same Meetings and Councels inspired and directed by that humility,
love and harmony, that no more then a chair man for the time, and no sixed
moderator can therein be discerned. If these grounds were not both solidly and
evidently conclusive of all necessary for me to prove, I might easily, without
either worming or straining (as our moderatists phrase it) adduce and make out
from Scripture precedents more exactly correspondent to our forms: But seeing
the right and Privilege of common Counsel for Government, in order both to the
whole and certain of the parts^ is by Scripture-practi^e obviously held forth;
its extension to all the parts, and their ^ubordination to the whole, does so
naturally and necessarily ^ollow, tha^ I judge it superfluous to engadge my
self further into our adversaries scrupulous quiblings.

Now, as for the Commission of the Kirk, whereof Scripture warrant is also
required, seeing we do not hold it to be an ordinary Church-judicatorie; but
do only regard it as a delegation from the preceding National-assembly elicit
by extraordinary exigences, and precisely accountable to the next ensuing, Its
right is so certainly parallel to that of every Committee, appointed by any
meeting for dispatch, that unless it were alleged, that this power of
commissionating is by Scripture inhibite; it must of necessity be understood to
be founded in the same warrant with the Assemblies, from which it does flow and
receive its con^irmation. I contend not, but our observance in practice might
have had its own failings in this point: but seeing the excess in this matter,
if any was, did probably flow from the mistake of a suppo^sed expediencie; the
evidence of its warrant and right use, by such and error in fact, cannot at all
be impugned.

But the ministers their being constantly moderators in Kirk-sessions, among
the Elders joined with them for Discipline, is that which our adversaries do
urge, as a great advantage for proving the lawfulness of the fixed Moderator in
Presbyteries and Synods, and our inconsequence in denying the same. In the fond
conceit of which argument, it has been, and is so frequently by them inculcat,
that here is a Presbyter, having a fixed presidencie among presbyters, that I
am sure it may ^ustly nauseat or move to laughter any indifferent observer.

To begin therefore with this childish emphasis, taken from the term
Presbyter, and the calling of the minister and parochial-elders, both of them
presbyters; such indeed they are: but seeing the scripture does warrant the
office of our Ruling Elder, and also attributes several other names to
Ministers, agreeable to the main labor, and to these Parochial Elders, only
that of Presbyters or Elders; and yet on the other hand, the classical
Assemblies, principally consisting of Ministers, are commonly called
Presbyteries: If use, for distinction, has appropriat to these
Parochial-elders the name of Elders, rather then that of Presbyters, what folly
is it to think, that a contrary usurpation of names can be of any import; or
wherefore do not our adversaries, if they have such a complaisance for these
conceits, tell us further what a qstrange thing it is to see a Presbytery (for
so a Kirck-session may well be termed) consisting only of one Minister and all
the rest Laiks, as they speak, and withal reflect upon these more pungent
retorsions nearer Home, viz. that in their way, a Bishop pretends to
a-Superiority or presidencie over many Bishops, and a single Presbyter must
have the pre-eminence over his Fellow-presbyters.

But leaving these fopperies, and taking words according to the determination
of custom in such cases, in answer to what is material in the objection, I say
(1.) That where there are two Ministers in a parish, they moderat in the
Session by turns. (2) Where the Session does consist of one Minister, both a
preaing and a ruling Elder, and the other Elders of the Congregation, who are
but his helpers in discipline, his different quality, with the double honor
allowed to him by the Apostle, does abundantly determine the moderatorship in
his favors. (3.) If a Minister, who is the Pastor and teacher of the whole
flock, do preside amongst the Elders of a secondarie order, joined to him for
his assistance; will it therefore follow, that one Minister should fixedly
preside over many, in the same order with himself, and equally concerned in all
the affairs of the meeting? What Logic can knit together such inferences?

Having thus demonstrat from Scripture-pr^cepts and practices, and firm
rational conclusions thence deducted, the command of our parity, with the
warrantableness of our Courts and all their gradations, I am very confident,
that we do thereby fully satisfy all the obligation to bring a clear command
for these judicatories and their subordinations, which our affirming them to be
of unquestionable divine right, and institutions undoubtedly flowing from the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ in his Church, and the only lawful government thereof,
do lay upon us. As for what the author alleges against us, that we do affirm
them to be the very Kingdom of Christ upon Earth, and the abso^utely necessary,
as well as only lawful government of the Christian Church: what ever tumor may
appear in such expressions, over and above the account I have given of the
matter, it is his own devising, on purpose contrived, that he may represent us
as high talkers, above the asserters of other forms; and yet we not only know
that the commenders of Episcopacie, as the only true ancient Apostolic
government of the Church, do speak at as high a rate, to say no more; but that
their acting in its behalf does indeed surpass all other measures, I am
certain will easily be by all acknowledged, who consider how Presbytery is the
only butt against which their malice and persecution is levelled, and that into
this malice, all the zeal they ought to have against popery, profanity,
atheism and irreligion seems to be converted; which stirring activity may also
in this same Author, who, being in his Ministry rather a recluse monastic, is
for its sake become a very busy Prelate, most obviously be instanced.

Now, as by the grounds which I have adduced for our Presbyterian paritie, the
contrary repugnancy to Scripture rules of a fixed presidencie is sufficiently
held out; so I would gladly know, from what shadow of probability the
Scripture agreeableness thereof is by our Author asserted. For my part,
unless it be in the instance of a (...) Diotriphes, I know not where the least
vestige of it is to be found. And therefore I say in the next place, in
opposition to the second point affirmed, viz^ the non-contrariety and
agreeableness of this Episcopus praeses to the example of the primitive
Church, that though, in the second and third Centuries of the Church, this
Prostasia could be more evidently discovered; yet, seeing the better pattern of
the more pure and ancient times do hold out no such thing, but an equal paritie
among the Elders or Overseers (Bishops) of the Church of God, levelled by
humility, and ordered by love and concord; and that this Presidencie did, in
its tendencie and progress, become the rise not only of aspiring Prelacie, but
of the monstrous Papacy, it is evident that it is a mere humane invention,
equally unwarrantable and dangerous. And here I might show how little light we
have, even in the acknowledgment of some of our Adversaries, from History, or
any other pure and credible Record of the Churches constitution in the
Centuries mentioned; and that the more near to the days of the Apostles, and
more uncorrupted any such testimony is found, as that of Clemens and Ireneus,
(for as for Ignatius Epistles, even these of them that are of the best repute,
I am sure no impartial Reader, who considers either the worth of the person, or
the simplicity of the times, or the style suitable to both, will judge them to
be from such an Author) the more they homologat with Scripture in the Synonomie
of Bishop and Presbyter, and the samenesse of the office thereby signified: And
I might also make it appear, how that ^or all the alteration and advance made
toward Prelacie in the succeeding Centuries; yet the Fathers in these times,
chiefly Ierom, did affirm the same truth of the Apostolic times, and the Age
immediately succeeding: But as I am too well persuaded, that pride was the first
and most subtle and active corruption that did invade the Church; so I can
very easily grant that a Protocathedria was thereby very early either
occasioned, or usurped: and therefore omitting to insist, how that partly by
design of the ambitious, partly by mistake against the factious it seems to
have been introduced, I shall rather endeavor, by a few observes, so to
discover the evil of its rise, and its worse tendencies, that in this above
all, all men may perceive the perinciousness of humane inventions, how specious
soever, when superadded to Gospel truth and simplicity.

And first I say, that the alledgeance made for this prostasia, as conducing
much to order and the cure of divisio^s, in so far as it respects its
fixednesse is a vain and empty pretense: for, seeing this fixednesse as such
imports no more then the suspending of the more certain change of an annual
or other termly election, unto that more uncer^ain one of term of life, and
that sometimes this lat^er may notwiths^anding happen to be more frequent then
the fo^mer, it is obvious to any man's calm and serious reflection, that it is
merely to the presidencie, and not at all to this controverted quality in
itself considered, that the advantages commended can be ascribed: And therefore
as it is certain, that, the concern of order being once duly provided for by
a suitable moderation, the more obnoxious the person moderating is to the
suffrage of the Society, the less hazard of an ensuing abuse or usurpation; So
it is very evident, that this superfluous fixedness, importing a certain degree
of exemption, could only in the end prove a foment of pride and gratification
of ambition, as the event it self to plainly verifies: of which if any man do
yet doubt, let him consider Romes Papacy, that under this pretense, fortified
by Ierom's testimony, Cuncti (nempe Apostoli) claves regni caelorum accipiunt,
tamen inter duodecem unus eligitur, ut capite consti^uto schismatis tollatur
occasio, did not only arrogat to it self the Primacie, but to this day does
thereby vail its Tyrrannie. I grant that power is a sovereign antidot against
contentions and divisions: But if we measure it out by our own wisdom, with a
regard only to this exigence, neither respecting the Lords warrant, nor the
sufficiency of gifts and countenance of his blessing, it is very manifest that
this rule may quickly lead us to surmount the Papacy and its implicit faith;
and never suffer us to cease, until, by an absolute subjection, both Truth and
Conscience be swallowed up of ignorance and stupidity. Let us therefore above
all things in the matters of God study his own way: if we neglect this sure and
excellent ordinance of a self-denyed and lowly Gospel ministry, with these
prescriptions of truth, humility and love^ given to us as the remedies against
all disorder, schism and heresy, and indulge to our own devices, where will we
subsist? I need not represent the subtilty and presumption of men's delusions,
specially for promoting that mystery of iniquity that works in
Ecclesiastic aspirings: If our blind probabilities were sufficient to
authorize the means of peace and order; there is no question, carnal reason
would again insinuat, according to the pretensions that raised the Papacy, and
the frequent suggestions of our times in behalf of the Magistrate, that the
proper and assured way to a firm establishment were to resolve either man's
belief, or his obedience into the uncontrollable determinations either of the
Pope, or of the Prince^ But as the disposi^ions of the Sovereign and only wise
God are not to be fathomed, let be regulat by our narrow and weak capacities;
so ought we always to revere these peremtorie and severe restraints, where
with he has bounded the darrings of vain reason, not so much as to think in
these things above what is written; specially in the case in hand, when not
only manifest disappointments, as to the ends pretended, but the worst of
consequences have by a very visible progress openly discovered both the folly
and prejudice of this presidencie under question.

For evincing whereof I observe.2. that as it is not unto this fixed
presidencie as such, but unto the more abounding grace of God, under these
frequent and grievous persecutions wherewith the Church was then exercised,
that the singular order, unity and charity of the primitive times is to be
ascribed; So the gradual advance of this Prostasia, together with the joint and
perpetual declines of true knowledge and piety, and concurring increase of
pride, contention, irreligion and superstition, are very pregnant evidences of
its vanity. I need not note that the first times to which this presidencie can
lay any claim were the purest; its first setting up, as most acknowledge, was
in the second Centurie, in a simple Protocathedria to the Senior Presbyter:
Shortly thereafter it turned to a Prostasia given by election; and then still
ascending, even under the discountenance and persecution of the Heathenish
powers and people, it did notwithstanding, what by wresting the election in
many places from the Presbyters, and what by usurping the power of ordinantion
and censures, advance to a very high degree of Prelacie: as is abundantly
confirmed by what may be gathered from the Records of these times, and
especially by good Cyprian his words to his Presbyters Epist. 6. A primordio
Episcopatus mei, statui nihil sine consilio vestro privata sententia gerere:
whereby as it were in opposition to the then corrupt custom of other Bishops,
he plainly insinuates his contrary resolution. Now what, under this progress
of the Prostasia, still pretending to be a remedy, was the growth of the evils
both of contentions, schisms and heresies (specially in the intervals of the
Churches sufferings, wherewith these several degrees were manifestly attended,
needs not to be enforced by many instances. That of Victor as to
superstition, contention and schism, who for a different observation of Pasch
(a weighty point forsooth) did excommunicat the better half of the Christian
world, may stand for a thousand: and as for Heresies, their catalogues are
almost endless: But though its rise under so great pressures, does very
convincingly argue the strong and subtle Spirit working in its elevation; yet
it was from the time of Constantin's Empire, and the rising of the Sun of
prosperity upon the Church, that it did yet more evidently begin to discover
itself in its proper colors: And from this period indeed it was, that, more
and more exalting and explicating its powers, it ceased not, until through
proud and fervid contentions of the prelates amongst themselves for precedencie
(more dangerous by far then all the petty contests that could arise among
Presbyters) and these still varnished with he pretexts of unity, peace, and
apostolic example, but really animat by pride and ambition, and accompanied
with covetousness, luxury, neglect of truth, abounding of errors, superstition
and irreligion, it at length arrived at the papacy; which, by its tyrannous
infallibility and implicit faith, did in the end indeed bring forth, in the
destroying of true knowledge and conscience, an apparent peace and unity, most
like to that indifferency in the matters of religion, and surrender and
abjection of conscience, which the abettors of our supremacy do, under the
same plausible names and pretenses, so much endeavor to introduce. This being
then the growth, progress and product of this Prostasia and its lying pretense
of remedying and preventing schism (in effect nothing else then the suitable
revelation of that mystery which at first did more latently begin to work
under its less discernable appearances) what judgment is to be made of it, I
leave to every man's ingenuity.

If it be objected, that although the ensuing of Prelacie and Papacy, and all
their evils upon the ancient Episcopacy may give a color to the premised
discourse; yet it is easy in such matters to strain observations; and these
consequences may be only its accidental and not its proper effects. It Is
answered, not to insist upon the natural and gradual connection of the things
represented, more easy to be discerned by impartial reflection, then persuaded
by superfluous arguing, it is very observable, First, that the great, if not
the sole reason, that from the beginning has been or can be alleged for the
^ixed presidencie, viz. the ear of divisions, and prevention of schism, was
that which in the righteous judgment of God, according to the deceivablenesse
of unrighteousness, was still made use of for carrying on the Mystery of
iniquity, until that at length it appeared in its own colors, and discovered
its effects, infinitely more pernicious then the evils which it pretended to
obviat. 2, That in matters Religious, the want of Divine institution, and
consequently of our Lords promise and blessing, together with the actual
following of bad fruits and effects, are a sufficient demonstration, that the
thing questioned is thereof properly productive. I need not observe, that it is
upon this ground that the Popes Primacie and Headship is very justly charged
with all Romes Superstitions and abominations: If of old, I sent them not,
therefore they shall not profit this People, was by the Spirit of the Lord made
a sure and firm conclusion, shall not then the visible accomplishment, I
appointed it not, and it has not profited, but been attended with many
grievous mischiefs, prove an evidence equally convincing?

But it is said, admitting that this was indeed the course of its exaltation in
these times yet the proposal of it being now made with a manifestly contrary
design, and in effect to low and reduce Prelacie; the preceding
representation is of no moment. It Is answered, I grant that this reduction is
indeed given out to be the design of the alteration offered: But seeing it is
in the Supremacy, more then in the Papacy in itself considered, that the
strength and complement of all corruption in Ecclesiastic Government, and the
very end and design of Prelacie itself does lie; and that the present offer of
this Presidencie, is only a Politic draught, ^ending by the engadging of
these who justly reclaim to sit and act in its Courts, to the more compendious
and sure establishment of the same Supremacy, and rendering of its influences
more effectual; it is evident that its project may possibly appear a more
covert, but is in truth rather a more dangerous part of the same mystery. If
then this fixed Praeses, at first set up in the Church, be a thing
unwarrantable and anti-scriptural; that the Episcopus Praeses offered to us
must be much more such, cannot be controverted; in as much as there are several
material differences betwixt the one and the other all aggravating against the
present proposal, as this short comparison of the two does abundantly hold out.
The Episcopus Praeses in ancient times was at least in the beginning chosen by
the Presbytery over which he presided, and consequently was by them
censurable; as also he did only preside over one, and that oftentimes a very
small Classis, the taking of the election from the Presbyters, the exempting
the then Episcopus Praeses from their control, and the superinduction of
Metropolitans and Archbishops being all posterior inventions. whereas the
Praeses poposed to us is to be nominat and appointed by his Majesty; and for
any thing we know by him only deposable or removable: As also the least of them
is to be over many Presbyteries or Classes, whereof any one is by far too large
for a conscientious Gospel oversight, and two of them over several Synods, not
to mention their extrinsick and absurd secularities, clearly incompatible both
with the nature and work of their office. Which differences to be both certain
and material, it were easy for me to make out: But since our rejecting of this
Prostasia, does proceed upon far more solid and comprehensive grounds, I shall
not urge them: Only, that I may a little recreat my Reader, the return made at
Pasely by a worthy Doctor, to that disparitie of the present Praeses his being
nominat by the King, is very observable; and after he had meenly declared the
manners of old elections, and how the People sometime as well as the Presbyters
had an interest therein, and having made his answer, that the Church did then
appoint and choose this Praeses, for want of a Christian Magistrate, with no
better consequence then i^ one should allege, that for the same reason the
Church did then, and the Magistrate might now, ordain Ministers, he proceeded to
prove the lawfulness of his Majesty's appointment and nomination, partly from
the prerogative of universal Patron, competent to him jure coronae, and by Act
of Parliament, and partly because that an inferior Patron by presenting a
Minister to the Kirk of his presentation, does thereby make him a Proestos over
the parochial Elders. Was not this grave and judicious reasoning? But seeing
the right of patronage is in it self a civil right (though indeed a sad
incumberance to the Church) only respecting the benefice, by virtue whereof the
Patron conferreth no Ecclesiastic power, or any thing pertaining to the
office, but, in that regard, referres the person presented entirely to the
tyral of the Church, which alone admitts him to the function, and conveys to
him any Ecclesiastic power thereto competent, I only wish the Doctor that
reflection and sobriety as may hereafter prevent such phlegmatic mistakes.

The next argument against this fixed presidencie, and why we can not consent
unto it, I take from the Oath of God that is upon us; not that I account these
Covenants to be the main, if not the only, ground of Scrupling, as the Bishop
alleges to be by many of us pretended: No, I am more persuaded, that there is
nothing sworn to, or renounced by us, in these engagements, which is not
antecedently either duty or sin, then to be in love with their Arguments, who,
from the determination that may arise from an oath in things within our power,
do thence conclude against Episcopacie as in it self a thing indifferent, and
by our oath only abjured. But seeing Covenant-breakers do now turn
Covenant-interpreters, and it is the authors own undertaking to prove that a
fixed presidencie is not contrary to this our oath, and seeing that the same
oath does indeed superadde a special obligation, as we shall afterward hear, I
shall first show, that this Episcopus preses is by us abjured, and then review
the authors observations in the contrary.

And as to the first, it is not from the Solemn League and Covenant that we do
only or yet principally conclude in this matter^ no he who remembereth what I
said in the beginning concerning our Reformation in the year.1638, and our
renewing of the National Covenant, with the explication thereto subjoined,
whereby, having found Pre^byterian government with an equal paritie, to be the
government appointed by the Lord in his House; and that the same was formerly
established by Oath in this Land; and having then restored it, we bind our
selves constantly to defend and adhere to the true Religion, as then reformed
from the novations and corruptions that had been introduced; whereof the
government of the Church by Bishops, and their constant Moderatorship were
reputed to be a part; and to labor by all lawful means to recover the purity
and liberty of the Gospel as it was professed before the forsaid novations: he,
I say, who remembereth these things, will easily grant, that it is upon this
Oath, that our chief obligation depends, and it is to it that we are to refer
our engagements by the League and Covenant, whereby we are bound to preserve
the reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Discipline,
Worship and Government: so that the second Article of the League, binding to
the extirpation of Popery, Prelacie, etc. And whatsoever shall be found
contrary to ^ound Doctrine and the power of godliness, (whatever respect it
may have to England and Ireland for the future yet) as to Scotland, it must
more forcibly infer an abjuration of all these things already found to be
such; whereupon it most evidently followeth^ that Presbyterian government with
its exact paritie, being then the thing sworn by us to be preserved; and
Episcopacie in all its degrees abjured, as novations contrary to Truth and
Godliness: this fixed Presidencie offered, and our consenting thereto, is
directly contrary to these Oaths and Engagements.

But now, let us consider what the Papers say unto this point. And first we are
told, That notwithstanding the many irregularities and violent ways of
pressing and prosecuting o^ it, yet to them who remain under the conscience of
its obligation, and in that, seem invincibly perswaded^ it is very pertinent,
if true to declare the consistencie of the present government even with that
obligation. It Is answered, these insinuations of irregularity and violence
being only general, without so much as a condescendencie, let be any
verification, I might very justly neglect them; but, being made by a person,
who, after being eye witness to the courses which he reproacheth, did both take
the Covenant himself, and administrat it to others; and now notwithstanding
that all the cavillations and objections of adversaries have been answered
without reply, has under his hand renounced it, I can not pas^e them without
^ome admiration of such inconscionable insolence, of which ^ do hereby defye
the Author to acquit himself by any rational and probable instance^ we ^ave
indeed heard the proud calumnies of prevailing Adversaries but seeing these are
certain truths viz. ^ That this Landbeing in the beginning lawfully engaged in
the National Covenant, did upon the occasion of the ensuing and growing
defections and novations, very justly both renew and explain their
engagements, and also censure such, who, by refusing their assent, did
evidently declare their apostasy. 2. That not only the communion of Saints,
but the very force of that obligement of constant defense and adherence,
contained in the National, did so constrain us to make the League and Covenant,
as the visibly neces^ary mean for that end, and without which conjunction the
prelatick party in England, which had twice from thence perfidiously
attac^qued us, prevailing there, had in all probability overwhelmed us, that
the refusal of this second Covenant, by any who had taken the first, could not
but be construed a breach thereof; and expose them to condign punishment, 3.
That the countenance and confirmation of Authority being demanded, and unjustly
refused, to that, for preservation and maintenance, whereof Government it self
was set up, can not in reason make the deed so done, for want thereof unlawful.
And 4. That the sufferings of recusants in our former times were, either for
the merit or number of the delinquents, very small and inconsiderable, and have
been by the renversings and persecution^ of these la^e times so many degrees
exceeded, that it is ashame for any person of ingenuity, by accusing the past
and owning the present, to show such partiality. These I say, being certain
truths and so fully held out by several writings on our side, it is impossible
but, the same being duly perpended, all the vapor of this smoke must
instantly evanish.

But in the next place comes the Authors kindness and charity to relieve
such, who labor under an apprehended inconsistencie of these their Oaths with
this fixed Presidencie, and in prosecution hereof, he says, That if men would
have the patience to inquire, this our Episcopacie will be found not to be the
same with that abjured; for, that is the government of Bishops absolutely by
themselves and their Delegates, Chancellours, Archdeacons, etc. As it is
expressed in the Article, and was on purpose expressed ^o difference that frame
from other forms of Episcopacie, and particularly from that which is exercised
by Bishops jointly with Presbyters in Presbyteries and Synods, which is now
used in this Church. And here I might again take notice of the grossness of
this mistake, supposing our present Church Government, because forsooth it is
not exercised by Chancellours, Archdeacons and the rest expressed in the second
Article of the Covenant; therefore not to be that which was abjured, but a
distinct from managed by Bishops jointly with Presbyters^ whereas it is evident
as the Sun-light, that our Parliament did not only in preparation to the late
change make void the obligation of our Covenants, and all the Acts and
Authority of former Parliaments, whereby Episcopacie had been abrogate: But
also restore and redintegrat the estate of Bishops, to a more full enjoyment of
Church - power and prerogatives then formerly was granted unto them, yea unto
the sole possession and exercise thereof under his Majesty, above all that
their Predecessors did ever acclaim: As both from the Act of Restitution, and
the consequent practices of our Bishops I have already plainly evinced; that so
it is beyond all controversy, that the same Episcopacy abjured, what ever it
was, was by our late Parliament again restored.

But Secondly admi^ting, that our present frame were in esse such as it is
represented, or at least by the proposal of Accommodation offered: As the
mistake or rather wilful error of this passage, does borrow its color and
pre^ext from the second Article of the Covenant, obliging us to the extirpation
of Popery and Prelacie, that is to say, etc. according to the description
there set down; so, the thing obvious to be observed for clearing thereof is
that in order to our case in Scotland it is not the obligation of this second
Article to extirpate, that we are principally and in the first place to regard;
but it is the positive engagement of the first, binding, as to Scotland, to
preserve, and, as to England and Ireland, to reform, that is in a manner the
key of the whole, in as much as by the Church of Scotland, and to endeavor the
se^lement of the Church of England, the second Article is manifestly subjoined
by way of execution, viz. that for attaining the ends of the first we should
endeavor the extirpation of all things therein, either generally or specially
enumerat, which two Articles, the one to preserve the then constitution of our
Church, with so great contendings lately reformed from this corruption, amongst
others, of the Bishops their constant Moderatiship, and the other, to extirpate
every thing found to be contrary to sound doctrine, and the Power of
Godliness, as Episcopacy in all its degrees had been by our Church declared to
be, does certainly make up an obligation most directly opposite to, and
inconsistent with this Presidencie re-obtruded.

Thirdly, If their luk-warm Conciliators were as mindful to pay their vows to
the most High, as they are bold to devour that which is holy, and after vows to
make inquiry, in place of this impertinent wresting and misapplication of these
obligements in the League and Covenant, which do more properly concern the
at-that-time-unsetled Estate of England and Ireland, then the established
condition of the Church of Scotland, as we shall immediately hear, they would
rather consider their own and our obligations by the National Covenant, and how
in that day of our distress, and wrestlings from under the yoke of Prelacie,
we swore unto the Lord to defend that Reformation whereunto we attained; and
constantly to reject and labor against all these Novations and corruptions,
from which we were then delivered: Under which Head of Novations and
Corruptions, I am assured that every considerat person will so easily perceive
this Presidencie and Moderatorship o^ Bishops to have been abjured, that he
will almost as much wonder at the heedlesse expositions of our Adversaries, put
upon these Covenants, as pity the sin of their perjurious declaring against
them. It is therefore certain, that as, since the Reformation, we had not in
Scotland that species of Prelacie particularly described in the second Article
of the Solemn League, but the same was therein insert, mainly in order to our
neighbor Churches; so the Episcopal Government, at this day restored in
Scotland, is the same, and worse then what we had before, and the Presidencie
now proposed was one of these very corruptions against which we are bound for
ever to preserve this Church at that time therefra reformed.

But the Author says, That the Presbyterians in England do generally take
notice of this distinction, viz. That by the Covenant the Prelacy only therein
described, and not moderat Episcopacie, that is, a form of Synodical Government
conjunst with a fixed Presidencie is abjured. And for proving this assertion,
he cites the two Papers of proposalls to his Majesty by the Presbyterian
Brethen, Anno 1661. Master Baxter in his treatise of Church Government, and
Theophilus Thimorcus, in his vindication of the Covenant not to be against all
manner of Episcopacy, but that Prelacie only therein specified. It is answered;
to measure our main obligation by the Covenant, in order to the Church of
Sco^land by that part of it which was principally intended for the Churches of
England and Ireland, is so gross and dull an inadvertencie, that, I am sure,
nothing, less then a judicial delusion could have made a man of the Authors
knowledge and sobriety to lapse into it. Nay, seeing that he himself does note,
that when that Covenant was framed, there was no Episcopacie at all in being in
Scotland but in England only. Is it not a wonder, that thence concluding that
the extirpation of that frame only could then be meant and intended, his logic
should so pitifully fail him as not to add, and from that Church alone where
it was seated, which would have so clearly restricted the subject of that
Article, that I am certain^ at on glance, he had discovered all his
applications of it unto Scotland as its primarie object to be impertinent. But
where there has appeared no conscience in keeping; why do we expect much sense
in interpreting? And we all know, what kind of person it is of whom Solomon
says, that his eyes are in the ends of the earth. To bring him back therefore
to the purpose, it is the obligation of the Church of Scotland and Members
thereof in order to its self, anent which we do now inquire, and for clearing
thereof it is granted, that by the Solemn League the Church of Scotland being
then established, the preservation of that establishment, with the duty of
extirpation in so far as is necessary thereunto, is only covenanted, which,
though it do sufficiently exclude this fixed Presidencie, as contrary to that
establishment, and also unto sound doctrine and the power of godliness; yet it
is by the National Covenant and its subjoined explication whereby not only the
Episcopal Government which then was amongst us, and is now restored and
advanced, but the Bishops their constant Moderatorship, as a novation and
corruption in this Church, is plainly abjured. By all which it is evident, that
as the League and Covenant, being referred to the National, by which the
establishment in the former sworn to be preserved was first settled, does
mani^estly exclude this Episcopus Praeses; so the obligement in the League to
extirpat the Prelacie therein described, only applicable to the Churches where
it then was, is most improperly made use of for explaining our engagement in
order to our selves in the case controverted,

Now as to the citations of the English Authors adduced, it is certain as to
the present question we are not therein much concerned; they speak of the
obligation of the Covenant in order to England, and how that Article of
extirpation for that Church principally provided is to be understood, the thing
that pertains to us is to consider, how far, either by the League and
Covenant or any other engagement lying upon us, we are bound against all
corruptions to the preservation of the setlement we then enjoyed, which are
subjects quite distinct; and thereby this heap of citations gathered by the
Author is by one blast dissipated. But lest it may appear hard that we should
be bound to such a precise form in Scotland, and England in that same Covenant
left to such a latitude, it is answered, not to reflect upon what might have
been the secret designs of some unsound men in this matter which we neither
were bound nor could distinctly know, this one thing is evident, that for us in
Scotland, who could not expect that England, groaning to be delivered from
Prelacie, should instantly upon our grant of assistance embrace Presbytery in
all its forms, of which they had not full and exact knowledge and no
experience; and withal, seeing we did hold Presbyterian government to be
according to the word of God, and knew the common estimation then made in
England of the C^urches of Scotland, Geneva, the Netherlands, and France as the
best reformed; the obligation provided in the Covenant to endeavor Englands
reformation according to the word of God and the example of the best reformed
Churches, with the Article of extirpation subjoined in its full extent, was
certainly at that time all the assurance we could desire, and upon which we did
very rationally relye^

Neither is the same in the least impugned by that which is alleged out of the
Authors cited; viz. That many grave men of the Assembly of Divines desired that
the word Prelacie might be explained, because it was not all Episcopacy they
were against; and therefore the particular des^^iption was subjoined: as also
some members of Parliament scrupling the meaning of Prelacy, it was resolved
with the consent of the Br^thren in ^cotland, that the Oath was only intended
against Prelacy, as then in being in England? And Mr Coleman administrating it
unto the house of Lords di^ so explain it: Because as it was indeed very
consistent, that in so far as England had then attained, we should ^ave closed
with them in a particular Oath for extirpating the evil discovered: And yet for
a further advance rest upon the more general obligements, so surely and safely
cautioned, until God should give further light; so the common acknowledgment of
both parties, that the then Prelacie was only expressly abjured, and not all
Episcopacie, seeing no species of Episcopacie was on the other hand either by
them reserved, or by us consented to, does nothing contradict why both the
rejecting of all Episcopacie, and setting up of Presbytery might not still be
covenanted unto under the general provisions: And therefore, seeing it is very
agreeable both to Truth and Righteousness, that a Church convinced of evils,
but not so enlightened as to the remedies; may covenante against the evils in
particular, and also to endeavor a full reformation according to the word of
God; and, by virtue of this general obligement, become bound to make a more
exact search, anent the lawfulness or unlawfulness of things, anent which in
the time of the covenanting they were more hesitant, and after discovery to
reject even that which formerly they thought more probable, It is very evident
that all the doubting in England anent moderat Episcopacy, at the time of these
engagements, do nothing impede, why both they and we, in our respective
stations, are not still obliged to reform that Church from all Episcopacie, and
to extirpate it as contrary to the Doctrine, which is according to godliness.
So that Englands latitude, as to this point, is rather apparent then real, and
our obligations in order to both Kindomes are in effect objective the same. I
grant the Authors cited do understand the thing otherwise: but not to tell you
that the proposals mentioned were neither made nor approven by all, nor belike
by the soundest Presbyterians in England; that Mr Baxter is not singular in
this only subject, and that Timorcus who has done very well in his main
subject, might have done better in this particular: one thing I am confident to
affirm, that the ground which all of them lay down, viz. that all manner of
Episcopacy was not by the Covenant particularly abjured, is most fallacious, in
as much as, if it may be demonstrat from the word of God and experience, that
all manner of Episcopacy is repugnant thereto and to the power of godliness,
(as I am sure it may, and it has been by me essayed) its non-abjuration in
special does nothing militat against the import of the other general Article.

As for the other grounds contained in the Author's citations, viz. the
agreeableness of this presidencie to the scripture and primitive times, and
the custom of our Kirk-sessions; they are already answered: and what Mr Baxter
adds anent the Superintendents and Visitors, which we had in Scotland in the
beginning of the reformation, it is as easily removed by the then infancy of our
Church, and extreme penury of Pastors, as his other argument from the
temporary moderators, chosen by Synods for the occasion and to them
accountable, is concludent as to the fixed presidents now under question.

To these Authorities the Author subjoines that, Though we have the names of
Dean, Chapter and Commissarie, yet that none of these under that name exerce
any part of the discipline, nor is this done by any other having delegation
from the Bishops with a total exclusion of the community of Presbyters, which
is a great part of the difference betwixt that model of Prelacie to be extirpat
and this with us. Who would not pity such folly? who knows not that Englands
Prelacie was ever different from any Episcopacie that we had in this Church
since the Reformation, (although by the way I must reminde my Reader how much
by the late restitution it is advanced) but if by the particular obligation to
extirpate, contained in the second Article of the League, we be only bound to
extirpat Englands Prelacie, does it therefore follow, that notwitstanding of
the obligement to preserve Presbytery then settled in Scotland, and in general
to extirpate every thing contrary to sound Doctrine and the Power of
Godliness, and especially by virtue of the abjuration, made by us of our
former Episcopacy in the National Covenant, that yet we are not bound to
dissent from and oppose the late restitution, whereby Presbyterian Govern.
being overturned, the same, yea a worse bond of Episcopacie then what we
abjured, is restored. Really these insinuations are so raw, that I am ashamed
to meddle with them; and yet the Authors fancy (which all that know him, know
to be in him a very over^ruling faculty) being once lesed with this mistake
anent the Article for extirpation, he goes on and tells us, that he will not
deny, that the generality of the people, yea even of Ministers in Scotland,
might have understood that Article as against all Episcopacy. But if he will
credit truth, he may be better informed, viz. that though the generality might
very well, by the whole complexed tenor of that Article, understand all
Episcopacie to be sworn against, yet it is most certain, that they still
understood their principal binding engagement against it to flow from their
abjuration in the year 1638. And their oath, in both the National, and League
and Covenant, to preserve and adhere to Presbyterian paritie then estabished:
and therefore the new discovery here Pretended, as if the Covenant did admit in
our Church a moderat Episcopacie, notwithstanding our obligement to extirpate
prelacy, with all the ridiculous ^atle ensuing, concerning the genuine
consistencie of the words of the Article for extirpation, with such a qualified
and distinctive sense, and also the meaning of many of the composers and
imposers, for a moderate ^piscopacy different from that Prelacie, is but the
continuance of the same delusion.

But now I hope to awaken this Dreamer, who adds, That unless we make it
appeare^ that the Episcopacie now in question with us in Scotland is either
contrary to the word, or to the mi^igated sense of their own Oath, it would
seem more suitable to Chris^ian cha^itie to yield to it, as tolerable at
least, then to continue so inflexibly fast to their first mistakes, etc. And
with ^his I heartily close: and therefore seeing (not to repeat in this place
what I have already proved, viz, that the Episcopacy now among us is not so
much as Christ's, or true Ecclesiastick-government^ but merely his Majesty's
usurpation over the hou^e of God, which all men ought to abhor) I say, tha^
seeing I have in some measure proven, that the Episcopacy in debate is contrary
to the word, and (Whatever may be the impertinent mitigation offered of the
Article to exti^pat no ways proper to our purpose) that yet it is diametrally
opposite to the ^ational Covenant, and our abjuration t^erein contained, and ^he
first Article of the League, as above declared; I hope our Adversaries will
cease to accuse us of want of charity and of inflexibilitie, but rat^er yield
themselves to the conviction of the truth, specially to the obligation of our
National Covenant, which our Author has hitherto very fatally and foolishly
forgotten: and thus I suppose the Bishop, receiving better information of our
grounds, will at least cease from his presumptuous confidence, until ^e find
out for us a more colorable solution.

As to what is added in the Papers of the aversion of some in England against
the Covenant, as being against all Episcopacy, it is evidently a strain of the
former ravery; and therefore, mis-regarding both the objection and solution, I
come to the next passage, wherein the Author, casting off all fear of God,
reverence to the most learned and pious Assemblies that ever sat in Britain,
respect due to as wise and honorable Parliaments as ever these Nations beheld,
the good opinion and charity he ought to have for men and Christians truly
such, and regard to his own credit, being once far engaged in these ways,
proceeds without the least verification to give a character of the Covenant and
its courses, made up of such reproaches of simplicity or cheatry against all
engaged in it, perplexity and vexation of all that faithfully adhere to it, and
insolent mocking at the overthrow of Gods work and desolation of His Sanctuary,
that malice it self could have uttered nothing more false and virulent. The
truth is (says he) that besides many other evils, the iniquity and
unhappiness of such Oaths and Covenants lies much in this, that being commonly
formed by persons, that even amongst th^mselves are not fully of one mind, but
have their different opinions and interests to serve, (and it was so even in
this) they are commonly patched up of so many several Articles and Clauses, and
these of so versatile and ambiguous terms, that they prove most wretched
snares and thickets of briars and thorns to the Consciences of these that are
ingadged in them, and matter of endl^sse contentions about their true s^nse,
etc. Especially in some such alterations, as always may, and often do, even
within a few years, follow after them; for the mo^els and productions of such
devices are not usually long-lived

Thus he, And for justifying the censure which seriousl^ I have without
prejudice premised; I first inquire, why is there here such an insinuation
prefaced of many other evils, whereof there is not one enumerat? Must we
believe the Covenant to eb worse then can be expressed, because the Accuser can
prove nothing? And why is this accusation pretended to be in general of all
such Covenants, when yet it is expressly intended against the League and
Covenant? Is it because the Author would have us to reckon it amongst the worst
of combinations? Or because he has the same regard and faith for all
Covenants, or at least that by such a general he may the better cover the
pointednesse of his calumny only levelled at this.

But taking all to be spoken of our Covenant, it is said, that it was framed by
Persons amongst themselves not fully of one mind, but serving their different
opinions and interests. But, 1. Whatever might have been the unsincerity and
byasse of a few Persons, as there is nothing perfect; yet that the Bodies of
both the Parliaments, Assemblies, and People of these Nations, were acted in
the matter of this League with such unanimity, straightness and zeal for
Religion and Liberty, as can not readily be instanced in any Age or Nation, and
could only be the effect of a Divine presence and assistance, is unto this day
no less the comfort of its faithful Adherers, then the confusion of all its
Adversaries. 2. As the matter it felf was thus carried, so I can appeal to the
remembrances of thousands, that the taking and renewing of our Covenants, both
in this and our neighbor Land was attended with more sincere mournings,
serious repentances, and solid conversions, then almost ^ath been in any
dispensation of the Gospel since the da^es of the Apostles. 3. Admitting that
the Persons and motives influencing this Covenant had been such as is
represented, yet, I am persuaded that, such is the truth, righteousness,
plainness, and consistencie of all its Articles, that considering their
brevity, the mighty parties engaging, and how circumstantiat, with their
universal and most important concern, that which is offered to make its
reproach, is the most visible Argument of the Lords overruling Providence, and
evidence of the Covenants glory.

But it is further alleged, That it is patched up of so many several Articles
and clauses, and these too of so versatile and ambiguous terms, that it proves
a most wretched snare. Certainly, in fair, yea in charitable, dealing, if the
Author had intended either the information of the ignorant, or the conviction
of the obstinat, or had but tendered his own repute, so broad and foul a
challenge should at least have been qualified by a condescendence. It were
easy for me to oppose one general to another; nor do I fear any loss from the
inequality of our credit. But I am so persuaded, both from Conscience, Reason,
and the common sense of all impartial men, of the falsehood of this calumny,
that I am angry that, by this disappointment, he should robe me and our cause
of so probable an advantage. I shall not resume the quiblings of the Oxfoord
Doctors and others: I freely refer my Reader both to their writings and the
answers they have received, yea to the Covenant it self for the best solution.
If I may here guess at the Authors meaning by such circumstances as occur,
the versatile ambiguitie, he would objecte, is mostly in the certainty of the
obligation of Reformation in order to England, (For as to the variety and
generality of the many Articles and clauses that he mentions, within a little,
we shall find him more particular) and as to this uncertainty, I have so fully
evinced the lawfulness of the League in the matter of the extirpation
Covenanted, wherein both parties did clearly agree, and the warrantablenesse of
the general clause of Reformation being referred to such a certain Rule as the
Word of God, and conformable example, that I am confident (whatever might be
men's fraud or failing in the prosecution yet) the Covenant in this part cannot
be accused either of uncertainty or ambiguity, without wounding through its
sides the Scriptures of Truth with the same Darts.

In the next place he tells us, That by reason of this variety and ambiguity,
the Covenant becomes a most wretched snare, a thicket o^ briars and thorns to
Consciences, and a matter of endless^ contention, etc. Good Sir, why so severe?
Sure, whatever ground of complaint others may have in this regard^ you, who
have found a way through these briars and thorns, and are come out of this
thicket with your coat rougher then at your entry, have none at all: And, no
doubt, had all engaged in this Covenant been of a Conscience such as yours, it
had been easy for them, by its serpentine subtlety, and irreligious
indifferency, to have extricat themselves from greater difficulties. But the
truth is, the Author has wickedly broken the Covenant, and to disguise it, he
would have the world believe, that all who remain faithful are caught in the
briars, and detained against their wills. I shall not ask what these snares^
thickets and contentions are, whereof he accuses this engagement: It is below
his dignity to be so put to it. We know that many^ part openly part more
covertly, have dealt very treacherously in this matter; and if thereafter, to
palliat their perjury, they have moved debates anent it, is the Covenant
therewith to be charged? One thing only I must say, that as many of these
disputs have taken their various pretensions not from the Covenant it self, but
from the word of God to which it referres, and which I wish the Author do not
account liable to the same exceptions; so, of all the objections moved by such,
who, in the succeeding alterations of Providence, have thereby endeavored to
excuse their unstedfastnesse, the Author, of all the greatest changeling, has
here given the poorest and meanest account, scarce sufficient to give a color
to his reproach: and this leads me to notice the great pretense of this
complaint, viz, that in the revolutions we have seen the Covenant has proven
so uneasy. I shall not say that, in this, the very Scriptures of Truth may
also be construed an hundred fold more uneasy: But of this I am most assured,
that he, who, for himself and others, pleads for a compliant liberty for all
these so contrary changes that are gone over us, must not only slack the bonds
of the Covenant and the Command of God; but of all honesty and ingenuity among
men: It remains therefore, that he that would be faithful, as well as he that
would live godly, must resolve to suffer persecution; the contradiction of
sinners, and the cross of Christ have always been the great offense of a
foolish world: but who, through uprightness and patience for this trouble, do
attain unto the promised peace shall never be moved.

As for the Authors observe, that the models and productions of such devices
are not usually long-lived; we judge not by such appearances: our establishment
is, that God lives and reigns, and our Lord is risen again and alive for
evermore This was the primitive consolation: and who knows but he may also
make this triumphing, as he has made many the like^ to be but for a moment.

But now, when my Author has run his first carreer against the League and
Covenant, poor man, what is all this to Scotlands principal obligation against
all manner of Episcopacie, viz. the bond of the National Covenant, entered into
with so great unanimity, explained in such evident and certain terms,
confirmed both by treaties and pacifications^ and at last by the full authority
both of King, Parliament and General Assembly? Certainly this is that which
never entered into his thought, his indignation against the League does so
transport him, that there is nothing else which he seems to regard: and
therefore he goes on, and first he insinuats an excuse for some who he says,
in yeeldance to the power that pressed it, and in conformity to the general
opinion of this Church, did take the^ Covenant in the most moderat and least
schismatic sense; sure, this is so suited to the Authors mistakes, that it
must only be his own apology; his head still runs upon the Article for
extirpation. And no doubt his sense thereof, as well for Popery as Prelacie, is
as moderate and little schismatic as may be; sor all know him to be large as
catholic (in the common exception) as Christian. But as for the obligement to
preserve the Reformed Religion of the Church of Scotland, which this debate
mainly respects, I believe he is the first that ever thought it capable of two
senses, let be to make choice of the more moderat.

But next, he says, he cannot clear them of a great sin, that not only framed
such an ingine, but violently imposed it upon all ranks of men, not Ministers
and other public persons only, but the whole body and community o^ the
people, th^reby engaging such droves of poor ignorant persons to they know not
what, and, to speak freely to such a hodge podge of various concernments,
religious and ^i^ill, as Church discipline and Government, the privileges of
Parliament, the liberties of the Subject, and condign punishment of
Malignants; things hard enough for the wisest and learnedest to draw the just
lines of: and therefore certainly, as far from the reach of poor conntrey
peoples understanding, as from the true interest of their souls, and yet to tie
them, by a religious and sacred Oath, either to know all these, or to con^end
for them blindfold without knowing them, Can there be instanced a grea^er
oppression and tyranny over consciences then this? Thus he. A weighty
accusation indeed if well founded. But though the simple reflection who the
framers of the Covenant were, viz. the greatest, wisest, and most Religious
Courts of the two Nations, not led by the nose by a Prelatick influence, which
their sottish Clergy may not contradict; but using all liberty both of reason
and suffrage, may make every one so advertent as to discover the absurdity of
this exception: Yet, because it appears to be the Authors last reserve, I shall
review it particularly; and, not to stand upon the deceitful phrase of framing
ingines which he uses, his first challenge is, that the Covenant was violently
imposed upon all ranks, not only Ministers and public Persons, but upon the
whole body and community of ^he Land. Cer^ainly to take their words according
to their obvious import, a man would think, it was by a few violent and
monstrous Tyrants, who, rising up and prevailing against these Nations, did
cudgel all ranks in them to the taking of this Covenant, whereas the known
truth, that not only the Nations did by their representatives unanimously, but
by themselves, for the far greater part, cheerfully engage therein, does render
the calumny very palpable. It Is true there were a few that did refuse it, but
supposing ^his to have been their single deserving (as for the most part it was
not) yet their suffering was so just and notwithstanding moderat, and their
number so small as I have above observed, that it cannot give any countenance
to the exception.

The next thing objected is, that droves of ignorant persons were engaged to
they knew not what; and, to speak freely, to such a hodge podge of various
concernements religious and civil, etc: who would forbear a ^ree and round
reply to such a confident assertion? He comes for^h in a simulat pity of poor
ignorants, and a great resentment of their being by others abused, and yet I am
bold to affirm, that he himself bewrayes as crasse ignorance, in this passage,
as is to be found in any among the droves he mentions, and (according to the
same proportion) an imposing upon the belief of others superlatively
presumptuous: And for proving of this, I only ask him, is not every soul bound
by the Law of God to maintain his King, his Country, and his Neighbors
rights, prerogatives, and privileges? Who can deny it? But is he therefore
bound to know them all, or to contend for them? Who sees not the ridiculous
vanity, if not blasphemy, of such an empty dilemma. To be clear therefore and
distinct in this matter; to the conviction of the very stiffest Opponent, I say.

1. That an oath, binding simply to particulars of mere fact, does no doubt
require, to the effect it may be sworn in Truth, Righteousness, and
Judgment, that the taker both know the things sworn to, and be persuaded that
they are true and righteous: thus he who ingageth by oath to certain specific
privileges agreed unto, is, no doubt, in conscience first obliged to know both
their nature and quality, else can not satisfy the forementioned command.

2. On the other hand, if an oath do bind not to matters of mere fact, but to a
certain duty, either generally or specially expressed, and in such a manner as
clearly intimates the antecedent rule, whereby it is determined, then this
Oath being thus safely cautioned, and in effect only an accessory engagement,
exciting and intending former obligations, but no ways extending them beyond
their limits, the very notion of the duty in general is sufficient, without any
further knowledge, to fit the person to bind his soul by such an Oath: for
example, he who knows no more then the general notion of righteousness may
no doubt lawfully swear to perform all righteousness, although for the time
he do not so much as know its common astract precepts, let be the particular
concret deeds that may thereon depend: And the reason is, because, in effect,
such an oath does, in the first place, bind to endeavo^r more distinct and full
knowledge, and so can not rationally be thought to suppose it.

3. That in oaths assertorie, which are o^ a mixed nature, as condescending
indeed on cer^ain particulars, but yet only binding to their observance, under
the notion, and in the supposition that they are righteous, although because of
the condescendence it does no doubt prerequire knowledge; yet righteousness
being its determining and regulating object, it allows upon a better
discovery, not only a rectification of the same particulars without perjury,
but also an extension of the Oath to such things, which, being for the time
unknown, do afterward fall within its rule and line: thus, if, upon a
particular occasion, I swear to my neighbor to maintain his rights, as it does
indeed bind, in the first place, to the definite defense of these which
occasioned the Oath, yet so as to admit of an alteration in any thing that
shall be afterward found not to be righteous, and consequently no right; so no
doubt, as to all his supervenient rights, though afterward only coming to my
knowledge, the same Oath does very justly extend its obligation.

4. As the foregoing rules do abundantly explain the matter of this Oath, with
what measure of knowledge it both supposes and imports; so the limitation
and restriction, to the ingagers place and calling, does make it in such sort
accessory to the former duties incumbent to him, that, in effect both as to the
knowledge and performance whereto it binds, it rather intends then ampliats
their predetermined obligation. I might have added, in this place, that every
affirmative Oath, whether particular or general, does undoubtedly, in the first
place and most obviously, bind nega^ive; that is, that the person swearing
shall do nothing contrary to, nor obstruct that whereunto he is positively
bound. But this is a thing in it self so evident, that though it may be of use
in the explication in hand; yet I conceive it sufficient to have observed its
omission.

And further, both for illustration and application, I shall adduce no other
examples then the things objected. And first, passing the mention here made of
things religious and civil, which, no doubt, may be very consistently both
commanded and engaged unto together, the swearing of the people to Church -
discipline and government is instanced. But if Christ has in his Church
appointed both, and if all Christians be bound to maintain them, as they are
thereto called, I am very certain, that to oblige them in their place and
calling thereto by oath cannot be disproven. But it may be said, that by the
Covenant the people became obliged to a particular species of government, of
which, in probability, they could not know all the parts, let be to know their
warrant. It Is answered, the corruptions of Episcopacie having had such an
universally grievous influence upon all ranks, and these, with the opposite
true form of Presbytery, having been so expressly and plainly laid open and
abjured, in the year. 1637. 16^8. And 1639. as the people ought in duty to have
had a competent knowledge in these matters; so it is very assured, that their
knowledge therein was abundantly clear and distinct, as the very considerable
remains of it to this day do evince.

The second instance is made of the privileges of Parliament, liberties of the
subject, and condign punishment of Malignants. But seeing the Kings authority,
to the defense whereof the Covenant does also bind', does undoubtedly include
all the righteous prerogatives of the Crown, which are as far, if not more,
removed from the knowledge of the common people, then the other heads
mentioned, wherefore were they omitted in the condescendence? Is it not because
the duty of allegiance binding unto the same things, and whereunto certainly
all may lawfully swear, is in effect, liable to the same exception? 2. Although
this Oath, in order to privileges and liberties, be not merely indefinit,
binding to righteous privileges and liberties in general, to which no doubt
every on may lawfully swear; but also assertory of such privileges and
liberties, as were at that time by the arbitrarie course of adversaries more
especially drawn in question; yet were these privileges then not only upon the
same occasion generally known, as concerning, in effect, the very being of
Parliaments, and just freedom of men; but in such manner engaged unto, under
the notion of righteous, and what the limitation of the ingagers place and
calling, that it is most manifest, that this Article of the Covenant has both
righteousness, for its formal and regulating object, and also that it neither
supposes nor obliges any man to more knowledge, then either de facto he had
before, or is obliged to have by the antecedent duty of his particular
vocation: So that the import of this part of the Covenant being plainly the
same, with that either of our allegiance to the King, or of every citizen to
the corporation whereof he is a member, viz, that we all maintain and preserve
the prerogatives and rights, which in our station we know or ought to know to
be such, and to be righteously such, the absurdity here endeavored to be
fastened upon the Covenant, as tying either to know simply, or to contend
blindfold, is but an empty pitiful vanity. 3. As to that of the condign
punishment of Malignants, it is abundantly explicable by the same rule: for
the men so termed, having, by their mischief, made themselves but too well
known, and we being tied to the discovery, only as righteous, and in our place
and calling, it is as little possible to tax this or any other the like
obligement in the Covenant of excess for its generality, as an Oath to
perform all righteousness, wherein, no doubt, all these things are included,
and which, without question, all men may lawfully make, albeit they are neither
bound to know nor perform any other deeds, then such as their place and calling
do require of them.

Which grounds adduced, with what might be further her alleged from the mutual
Covenants both of men and nations, wherein they lawfully engage both
offensively and defensively to maintain others rights, without so much as the
necessity of a particular inquiry thereinto for the time, do, without all
peradventure, most convincingly redargue these weak quiblings both of gross
ignorance and calumny. What shall we then say to the folly and bitterness of
these reproaches, w^ereby this Author, upon no better reason then what does
equally militat against all our general obligations either to God or man, is
pleased to asperse the Covenant, as an hodge podge of various concernments
religious and civil? What? Can not these thing lie easily enough together in an
Oath, which yet are all comprehended in the Law of God? Are the Churches true
Government, the righteous privileges of Parliaments and liberties of the
Subject, and the duty of endeavoring in our place and calling that evil do^rs
may be punished, and the rebels purged out of the Land (upon whom, by the law
of God, the hand of all the people is commanded to be) the great concerns both
of Religion and Righteousness, things either impertinent to any, or in
themselves incompatible? Or is it because that our Author has, by confounding
and trampling upon all these things, and betraying at this time the Churches
government unto the supremacy, as formerly under the Usurpers, he little
regarded either the Subjects liberty^ or his Prince his Authority, and is known
to have always his pretended charity as contracted toward zealous godly
protestants, as dilated unto irreligious papists and prelatists, polluted his
own conscience, and rendered it unclean, that therefore even this sacred Oath
is become unclean and nauseating unto him; what can he reply to these things?
Or can he assign us a better reason for his assertion.

He says, It is hard enough for the wisest and learnedest to draw the just
lines of these things, and to give plain definitions of them. But will it
therefore follow, that none but such have any concernment in, or obligation to
them: No, this were in effect an inference no less, nay more absurd, then to
allege that none are bound, or may swear to maintain his Majesty's authority,
but such as can draw the just lines of all his prerogatives; or rather that
none are obliged to defend his person, but such as can draw his picture to the
life. It is therefore certain, that, as all men have undoubtedly an interest
more or less remote in these matters^ so they either really have, or ought to
have, a knowledge proportionable to their engagement thereto, to which an Oath
for confirmation is most properly accessory.

The Author add's that These things are as far from the reach of poor Country
Peoples understan^ing, as from the true interest of their souls. And O how
desirable is it, that this, the one thing necessary, were indeed the special
and main care of all men; but to offer to confine poor Peoples knowledge and
obligations to their souls interest alone, with an aim so palpable to have all
other things abandoned to lust and tyranny, according to the great design of
these adversaries, against which this Covenant was engaged in, savours more of
hypocrisy then true spirituality: And therefore I say. 1. that the true
Discipline and Government of Gods House are in themselves, and have been
experimented to be, of such important influence, as to the promoving the great
work and ends of the Gospel, the great concern of Gods glory, and wherein no
doubt the interest of all souls is involved, that whatever may be in this
pretense of abstraction and self- confinement; yet he must needs be of a very
Gallio - temper that cares for none of these things. 2. Although privileges
and liberties, and the punishment of Malignants have no such direct tendencie;
yet I am not only assured that, in the then juncture of affairs, their defense
was of notable subservience to the preservation and reformation of Religion
principally covenanted; but that of themselves, and as to the main of their
import, they are so much within the reach of the sense, let be the knowledge,
of the meanest of men, that to take them off from their concernment therein,
and engagement thereto, by the insinuation of their souls true interest, will
be judged by all ingenuous persons a very cunning and deceitful impertinencie.

Now from the premises that we have heard, the Author concludes in these terms,
So that to ty them viz. the common people) by a religious and sacred Oath,
either to know all these, or to contend for them blindfold without knowing
them, can there be instanced a greater oppression and tyranny over Conscience
then this? etc. But seeing it is most certain, that the Oath does neither tie
to know all these, nor yet to contend for them blindfold; but, being entered
into from the universal feeling of all ranks of the invasions made and
threatened both against Religion and Liberty, did, according to the nature of
all such assertory and accessory Covenants, only bind every on in his place and
calling, and sutably to that measure of knowledge, which he either had, or
ought to have, of such general and important concerns to stand to their defense
against the common enemy; the ignorance and insolence of this inference does
in deep astonishment only prompt me to say, the Lord rebuke the O Adversary,
The Lord, who has chosen this poor Church, rebuke thee; Is not the small
remnant of the faithful as a brand plucked out of the fire?

But behold how he wipes his mouth; Certainly (says he) they who now govern in
this Church cannot be charged with any thing near or like unto it. No? All
pious, holy, tender souls. But seeing I have removed the calumny, the subject of
the comparison I will not recriminat; yet we must hear a little of the men's
praise, viz. That whatever they require of Intrants, they neither require
subscriptions nor Oaths of Ministe^s already entered, far less of the whole
People. But 1. Seeing there can be no solid distinguishing reason given for this
practice, we must conclude Policy to be the only motive of this pretended
moderation. 2. The Oath, with the Act 1612. prescribed to be taken of Intrants,
is so plainly and truly chargeable with a laxe dubious and insnaring
generality, that, I am certain, all the light and knowledge, to be found in the
most of these who conform to it, will not prevent the Authors being confounded
with his own argument. I shall not tell you that therein they swear to the
Supremacy, an infinite mystery of iniquity; But the point wherein this Oath
is really peccant, in all the foul reproaches, wherewith the Covenant is falsely
loaded, is, that thereby they are bound to defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preheminencies, and Authorities granted and belonging to his
Highness, or united to his Royal Crown: Whereby it is clear that they are not
only obl^ged positive to whatsoever Privileges and Prerogatives granted and
belonging to the King, without the destinction of righteous or unrighteous; but
also without any restriction to their place and callings. Now (not to retort
the Authors impertinencies, as if this Oath did tie all Intrants either to
know all these things, or to contend for them, blindfold without knowing them)
whether this be lawful and righteous, and whether the common People be more
knowing in their own Liberties and their representatives Privileges, or
conforming Ministers in his Majesty's sublime prerogatives and extensive
Jurisdictions, I leave it to every impartial discerner. But 3. What strange
hodge podge indeed do we find in this engagement! all things spiritual,
ecclesiastic, and temporal confounded in the Supremacy, is not enough; but
the poor Intrant must further abjure all foreign Powers and ^urisdictions,
swear to defend all his Majesty's Authorities and Privileges, acknowledge upon
Oath, that he holds the Church and his possession of it (if of the King's
presentation) under God, of his Majesty, doing homage unto the King (and not
unto God) for the same (if at the presentation of another) under God, by the
King, of the Patron thereof: And lastly swear obedience to his Ordinary in all
lawful things, even his Majesty's authority, though just now so fully
recognosced, not excepted. Is not this an odd medly to be hudled up in a
sacred oath? Whereof whether every Article therein be more impertinent for an
Intrant Minister of the Gospel, or in it self more obscure and indistinct,
really I can not define?

But the Author goes on and tells us that It were ingenuously done to take some
notice of any point of moderation, or any thing else commendable even in our
enemies, and not to take any party in the World for the absolute Standart and
unfailing rule of truth and righteousness in all things. And so it were
indeed; but I freely appeal to all ingenuous men, if ever they heard ingenuitie
exhorted to, by two such disingenuous insinuations. As first, to recommend the
moderation of a party, who, after that they themselves had perjuriously broken
their Covenant both to God and their Brethren, did in such manner instigat the
Powers to rigours, exclusions, and persecutions, against all who in conscience
did only refuse to own and countenance their wicked Apostasy, as had almost
ruined a great part of the Kingdom and did at length weary the very Actors.
And next to give out as if we were so implicitly wedded to our party, whereof
the least Argument or vestige has not been made appear, no nor is so much as
alleged, but but as al men do sufficiently know these restraints of want of
power in the Clergie^ and of better considerations in our Rulers, that have
produced the apparent quiet, which is here pretended for moderation; so, we
hope that, by a full manifestation of the truth and righteousness of our way,
we have in such sort commended our selves to every man's conscience in the sig^t
of God, as there to leave this accuser of the brethren convicted and confounded
both ^or his open perjury and craft^ calumny.

But the Author, as it seems, fearing such a reply^ provided a retr^at,
concluding But oh! who would not long for the shadows of the evening, and ^o b^
at rest from all these poor, childish, trifling contest^? I shall not say, that
since he walks so much in darkness, it is little wonder that he long for
shaddes: But of this I am very certain, that if he had labored as seriously
upon his Masters m^ssion, to reconcile souls unto God, as he seems to have
traveled upon his Majesty's commission^ to patch up a sinful Accommodation,
his hope of rest had been both more sweet and more assured; and, in place of
the shadows of ^he evening, he might have promised to himself the l^ght
inaccessible, for his everlasting refreshment. But seeing these very poor,
childish^ trifling contests, whereby he would cuningly decry all the just
oppositions of the faithful to his evil course, are in effect his own devices
against the ^ingdome of our Lord Jesus, the day wherein every man shall receive
his own reward, according to his own labor, shall make his work manifest, when
the fire shall try it: And I heartily wish that the burning thereof may be all
his loss.

After the body of one of these Letters, we have a Postscript that is to say
(for all the longings for rest we just now heard of) another whife: As we know
who once charac^ered the Lords Servants, when with much travel la^ouring in his
work; and herein the Author, complementing wi^h an Apology other Churches
(joining Rome with England as is most supposible) wh^rein Episcopal-government
is otherwi^e exercised, wishes that ^he A^gument ad hominem (as he calls it) by
him used, may be brought to the knowledge of such as know least of it, and need
it most. And one part of his wish, I am sure, I have served by a very candid
representation; If the event misgive he must blame himself, his design is to
allay men's extreme fervor by the consideration that this very form, which to us
is hateful, is to English Presbyterians desirable; and that upon inquiry, the
Reformed Churches abroad will be found ^o be much of the same opinion. But
seeing I have already demonstrat our present form, as established and
exercised, to be not only mere Prelacy, but the very absurd usurpation of the
Supremacy; and have also at large excepted against ^he fixed Presidency of late
proposed, and showed both what the soundest Presbyterians in England do think,
and all of them ought to think anent it; Why does our Author, by such weak
repe^itions, pretend, under the name of ex^reme fervor, to condemn an ave^sion,
which alas is in all to remiss? One thing, I shall only add, that whatever
may be the thoughts of Presbyterians in England^ yet, sure I am that, their
engagements in order to Scotland are the same with ours; and what these do
import is already sufficiently declared. As for the Reformed Ch^rches, I
neither decline nor use their testimonies: We are fixed on surer foundations;
yet of this I am most persuaded, that as abstracted general questions, are but
lame and blind discussions of cases of this nature; so, wherever our case
shall be fully and clearly represented, we shall report the assent of all the
lovers of our Lord Jesus Christ (...) in incorruptness.

But we are told, that per^aps it were not only lawful, but expedient that
these, who now govern in ^his Church, should in some ins^ances use a little
mo^e authori^ie then they do, provided they applied their power ^o advance what
is good, and not at all against the truth, but always for it: And that all
things being so far out of course, the present condition of our Church (B^
reason of the irreligion and profanitie that are gone forth from its Prophets
unto the whole Land) Does require an extraordinary remedy I wish the Author
were as sensible of ^he cause, as he seems to be of the symptoms of the
malady; but to think that the present Church Governors, in the conviction of
all sober observers, the main, if not the only, Authors of this mischief,
should be entrusted with the cure; what more hopeless, or what more
ridiculous? I grant the cautions subjoined. viz, that they applied their power,
always for, and not against the truth, if made effectual, would indeed secure
the event: But seeing they only promise by supposing it, and consequently are
equally doubtful with it, and really such as may recommend the most
unwarrantable and improper mean that can be devised, it is evident that this
empty probability concludes nothing: Let the Pope, or some thing worse, be set
up, in the supposition that he do not apply his power to obstruct, but to
advance what is good, and not against, but for the truth, no question there
would thence arise a consequential expedience and advan^age: But thence to
argue for the lawful^esse of such an appointment, were plainly to ranverse all
reason and righteousness. As it is therefore from our Lords own warrant and
blessing, that we are principally to attend the success of his ordinances; so,
where these cannot be made appear, as in the case of our present
Church Government, and on the other hand, the ensuing of Atheism and profanity
cannot be denied, the conclusion, that ^hey are to be imputed to the nature of
the present establishment, is beyond contradiction.

But our Author says, That ^hese bad fruits ar rather to be imputed to the
schism made by withdrawing from the Government: For there is not a greater
enemy in ^he Wo^ld to the Power of Religion, then the wranglings and bitter
contentions that are raised about the external forms of it. It Is answered,
divisions being in themselves always mutual, yea and separation, in some
cases, commanded and necessary, to conclude against the thing in common, that
which is only peculiar to a particular species, were grossly to confound the
commanded out-coming of the People of God from Babylon, with the most sinful
departing of the worst of Heretics: It is not therefore separation or
withdrawing, in the abstract, but in its complexe causes, conditions and
tendency, that we are to regard: he who, in the fear of God, out of a desire to
keep himself pure, and for a testimony against evildoers, withdraws from
such as walk disorderly, and from men of corrupt minds destitute of the truth,
supposing that gain is godlinesse^ does no less obey the will of God, then he
who through proud and bitter contention flowing from some carnal principle and
design, breaking the unity of the Spirit and bond of peace does wickedly
contemn our Lord's new commandment of love. Now, whether the present Prelates
and their Dependents, who, for perfidious breach of Covenant with God and man,
invading^ and usurping over Gods House, and ejecting and persecuting their
^aithful ^rethren, are justly disowned and discountenanced of all good men, or
such, who, having no encouragement from either the call, promise, or presence
of God, do, in a tender fear not to partake of other men's sins, abstain from
the Assemblies of these evil doers, be from the former grounds more to be
blamed for the present withdrawing let all men judge. But as it is not
possession^ attained by falsehood and violence, that makes a right, and the
injurious expeller, and not ^he expelled, is, certainly, the sinful and
scismatick divider; so, that the strange perfidy^ pride, cruelty, avarice and
profanity of the Prelates, and their abettors and dependers, professing to be
the guids of, yea and having their livelihood and weal^h by Religion, and yet
for the most part not studying so much as to vail their lewdness with a mask
of h^pocrisy, have rendered Religion it self contemptible, except with a few,
who stand at a distance with this horrible thing, is undeniable in its own
evidence.

As for the enmity of contentions anent external forms to the Power of
Religion, if there be really a worth and singular benefit in such forms and
ordinances that our Lord has appointed for subservient means to the great end
of the Gospel, and as visible and certain a prejudice and evil influence in
men's corrupt novations, all-contendings about these matters cannot be implicity
censured as bitter wranglings and enmity to the Power of Religion, without the
just accusation of a luke warm indifferency in the high concerns of the Gospel:
He who judges not the purity and liberty of Gospel ordinances worthy to be
contended for^ will hardl^ persuade a rational man that ever he will strive for
the Faith of the Gospel. But 2. We heartily renounce and disown all wranglings
and bitter contention, it is by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of his
patience, and of our testimony, that we hope to overc^me; if these be accounted
contentious, it is but a small share of the Lords sufferings, compared to these
reproaches of rebellion and sedition, wherewith he^ and his followers have been
slandered. It is rather my regrete, that, in a time of such backsl^ding^ we
have not more saying, from the same reason, with Jeremiah, Woe is us men of
strife, and men of contention to the whole Earth But the peevish Policy of
such, who after that, by perjury, contention and violence, they have imposed
and pressed their own forms and inventions, and, by the same practices, seated
themselves in the possession of what they designed, do in effect retain the
same peremptory rigor, and do only decry contention, that they may mock men
from an^ just opposition to their courses, does not merit any further notice:
He who calmely, and impartially considers this whole matter will easily
perceive, that it is neither contention, separation, nor division, things in
themselves reciprocal^ of a middle signification, that are simply to be
condemned: But it is from pride, perverseness, and other evil mixtures and
designs, that both their evil and scandal do proceed: And on which side these
are to be found^ a small reflection may satisfy every inquirer.

But now, after all the vehemence we have heard, the Author^ on purpose to
amuse where he cannot prevail, Falls a wondering to see wise and good men make
so great reckoning of certain metaph^sical exceptions against some little modes
and formali^ies of difference in the Government, and se^ so little value upon
so great a thing as is the peace of the Church^ '^is answered, The redargution,
implied in the bosom of this exclamation^ does so palpably occur, that I
cannot dissemble the Apos^les obse^vation thereby so obviously suggested, viz.
That evil men and seducers wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived;
sor while in their deceivings they tell us, that not only our reasonings are
bare metaphysical exceptions, but that even the things contended for are mere
words and formalities; how do they themselves appear to be deceived, who press
the^e very ^ord^ and formalities^ more then the weightiest affairs in
Religion? It being without controversy, that if the argument were equally
balanced, it wou^d begin at home, and by surceassing the pursuit of such vain
tris^es, thereby most effectually frustrat the contrary defenses: But the truth
is, whatever the appearances are, neither are we, nor the Author, mistaken upon
the matter: A constant fixed Praeses on his part, were certainly as little
worth all the stir and vexation made about him, as the Bishops their
insignificant Dignities and Ceremonies were a cause inferior to the late wars,
which they did mostly occasion: And it were a folly insufferable for wise men^
so desirous of ease, to set so little value upon so great a thing, as is the
peace of both Church and State, disturbed by the present Episcopacy and this
Presidencie offered: But seeing it is evident, that the thing designed by this
proposal^ is a compliance with the present establishment, not only to the
relaxing of conscience and the bonds of former engagements, but to the
suppression and extirpation of the true Government of Gods House, the
acknowledging of, and submitting unto the Supremacy, more absurdl^ contrary to
the Power and Liberty of the Gospel, then its instrument Prelacy, which we have
expressly and particularly abjured, can the Author reasonably find fault, if he
rencounter in us an opposition commensurat both to the value of the prize, and
the measure of his own instance? If men, for poor perishing interests, do
endeavor at so high a rate to introduce their modes and inventions, for no
other end imaginable^ then that by the contrivance and influence thereof, they
may have the Gospel Ministry and Kingdom of our Lord still in subjection unto
their lusts and pleasures, Should not the lovers of Gods Glory and of their own
salvation, the proper and great ends of all Christ's institutions, more
vigourously resist all these their intended corruptions?

I man not here stand to discuss the specious and flattering pretensions held
out by our Adversaries, as if mere subtilties were by us opposed to the solid
good of the Churches peace: Certainly he, who remembereth how, in the ancient
times of the Church, Satan was very cunning to set the mystery of iniquity on
foot, from the smallest and least suspicious beginnings, and yet thence, by
more sub^ile and metaphysical methods then these which our Author undervalued,
to carry it on to the very revelation of the Man of sin, and withal considers
in our own late experience the mien entry, as Kirk-commissioners and constant
Moderators, with the sudden elevation and corruption, of King James his
Prelates, unless he do very supinely misregard the intimation of all present
circumstances, specially that of an al-swaying Supremacy already regnant, can
neither be ignorant of, nor catched by such devices.

But the Peace of the Church is of great value; Thus they, who have troubled
and overturned the righteous Peace of a well settled Church, are not ashamed to
make their possession, attained by wrong and violence, a plea for their
security in their evil way; and after that, by breaking their Oath and
Covenant, and ranversing the Lords Work and Ministry, they have got what the^
desired, and used force and compulsion against conscientious Nonconformists,
until they are wearied, now they come forth to practice by flatteries a few
Sirens, with charms of peace, canting in Nazianzen's words, (...), to try if
these enticings may be more succesful, and by a strangely comprehensive
spirituality both of truth and error, telling us, that when one says he is for
Bishops, another I am for Presbytery, that we are carnal; as if the Apostles
censure of a divisive respect of persons were equally against the
discrimination of things which the Lord himself has certainly distinguished:
But as, in the competition of peace, the heathens saying, (...), might have
admonished the Author, and seeing that that peace is only precious, which is
founded in, and designed for truth; so when it is merely pretended for
procuring a sinful compliance with an evil course, it is but an empty delusion.
We know whose practice it was to heal the hurt of the Lords People slightly,
saying peace, peace, when there was no peace: To pretend for, nay to pursue
seriously after peace, without regard to Truth, Righteousness, and
Reconciliation with God, is only a precipitant error, and lying vision: But he
who stands in the Counsel of the Lord, and causes his People to hear His
Words, should turn them from their evil way, and from the evil of their
doings: And when the loud and harsh noises of our debates shall be turned into
the sweetersound of united mourning and lamenting after the Lord, then, and not
before, may we look that the Lord will return and cause his face to shine on
us, and restore unto us his favor, the fountain and blessing of all other
blessings: This is the only way, to show our selves real supplicants for peace;
and indeed to remove all the obs^ructions that may disappoint its firm
enjoyment: Nay, this is the mean whereby the sincere seekers of the lord, do,
even in the midst of tribulation, attain to that superexcelling Peace of God,
which surely establishes, and that joy, which no man takes from them.

But the Author still longing for and hastening to outward peace, not that
which the Lord left and gave to his followers, exhorts unto a temper
recep^ive of it, and that is, great meekness and charity; and, no doubt, in
their right application^ these are most beautiful graces: but as they seem here
to be proposed, for the preposterous courting of this worlds peace^ I fear
that they are not only unseasonably recommended, in exclusion of the love of
Truth and zeal of God, incompatible with the Authors evil courses, but, with an
extension of charity to rejoice in iniquity, and meekness toward wickedness
beyond their known and just measures. It is true whatsoever party or opinion we
follow in this matter, the ba^ge, by which we must be known to be ^ollowers of
Jesus Christ, is ^his, that we love on another; Yet ^ must take the l^berty to
say, first, that in this point to confound persons and things, on purpose to
transfer that love and charity we owe the former to the latter, though never
so detestable, is but a silly sophisme. He who rightly estimateth Christian
love will readily acknowledge, that oftentimes the wounds of a friend may be
faithful, when his kisses would prove deceitful Next, that though the Author
would alleviat our present differences, as amounting to no more then opin^ons
and humors; yet I do reall^ conceive some of them to be o that import^ as to
judge a perverse and stated enemy, asserting the Supremacy to the manifest
denial of Christ's Kingdom and Government in His house, not to merit the
privelege of one of his Disciples; nay, that in order to such, David's
profession, Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? And, am not I grieved,
O Lord, with them that rise up against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred; I
count them mine enemies, may rather become our duty. And thence it is, that
although this Law of love be in^eed of Divine right, and therefore would not be
broken by bitter passion and revilings and rooted ha^reds, for things in
dispute betwixt us; Yet, sure I am, it does as certainly admit of the foregoing
exceptions, as the things questioned are to us without doubt, and only drawn in
debate by the perverse disputings of corrupt men: Not that I think that, even
in matters most certain, bit^er passion, revilings, and rooted hatreds or
malice are allowable; nay, this is rather my Authors supposition, and his
insinuation, as if we were indeed guilty of these things, is abundantly
obvious. But as I am truly persuaded, that all ^hese are in every case unworthy
either of truth or a Christian temper; so I am assured, an impartial discerner
will find no less of vain contempt and saucy undervaluiug couched in the
Author's affected smoothness, then there does appear of passion in the most
impotent railing; and therefore, if for the rod of pride found in his mouth, I
have sometime used a rod for his back; I hope both its justice and expedience
will clear me of any injury.

But he goes on, However, are we Christians? Then doubtless the things
wherein we agree, are incomparably greater then these wherein we disagree, and
therefore, in all reason, should be more powerful to unite us then the other to
divide us. Thus I have heard that the Bishop of Glasgow, in answer to a person
expressing his fears of the return of Popery, told him, what then? We shall
still be Christians; a notable use of Christian charity upon the pretext and
possession of the name, to give way and countenance to corruptions manifestly
tending to the subversion of the thing. But as a real agreement in the greater
things of Christianity would certainly prove an infallible mean of
reconciliation to most of our differences, and where it cannot reach the full
cure, should nevertheless still treat and handle with all tenderness; so it
is without controversy, that, on the otherhand, even the same reality, let be
its simulat profession, is so far from persuading to aforbearance or compliance
in case of sin, ingredient in incident contests, that it both admits
dissent, and frequently requires a contrary testimony and necessary
withdrawing as more suitable thereto. But wherefore should I urge such
deceitful generals? must we, of necessity, sin with all Christians, or else
divide from them; or if we unite with them, must we therefore sin and comply
with all their errors and defections? And now, for a just retortion the Aut^or,
I hope, by his question, does imply that we are also Christians: Nay, it is
like, he denies not but some of us are Christ's Ministers; why then are we so
hardly dealt with? Why ^jected, banished, imprisoned, and confined ^or
disagreeing in things far inferior to t^ese, wherein we agree; yea in his own
acceptance, but modes and formalities? How will he excuse this inconsequence
and inequality? Or does he think, that ^he vain pretense of Authority abused
against us^ does preponderat to this his great consid^ration, or that it will
be an Apology for his so active concurrence.

But, after the manner of the conference at Pasly, he is not for debate^ when
it comes to a reply; and therefore here restrains himself with this advice,
that if we love either our own or the Churches Peace, we should most carefully
avoid two things, the bestowing of too great zeal upon small things, and too
much confidence of opinion upon doubtful things. But if his own practice may
have any more credit then his words, it is easy, according to his acceptance
of Peace, both to redargue this his advice of falsehood, and also to exhibit a
more true account of his method: For, as in the small and doub^ful things by
him acknowledged, for such, it is most certain, that, on his side, he has of
late shown a greater zeal and confidence, then ever he did heretofore in all
the^e strange revelutions, and important occasions of testimony, both against
error and profanity, that have hapened in the space of his Ministry; and yet no
man doubts but that he is for his own and the Churches peace; so it is
evident that his want of zeal ^or God, together with his compliance with the
uppermost power for the time, have been his only advantages. But why trifle I
with such a person? If we love either our own or the Churches true peace, let
us first love our Lord Jesus Christ; for He is our peace; His Righteousness,
Ministry and Ordinances for these are the means of it: accounting nothing small
or doubtful which he has appointed in order thereunto, and wherein the great
ends of the glory of God, and salvation of souls, are visibly concerned.
Whether the things in controversy be such or not, I need not again affirm It is
indeed a mad thing to rush on hard and bol^ly in the da^k, and such a pertinent
reflection, in the close of the example, which the Author has given us of it,
attended with so little application, is an evidence beyond all other
confirmation. But he that follows the Lord shall not walk in darkness.

And now the Author, for a conclusion of this Paper, tells us, And we all know
what kind of person it is, of whom Solomon says, that he rages and is
confident. And really if I had but the half of the Authors confidence, I think
I could point out the very man. It Is true a weak monastic spirit long habituat
to an affected abstraction and stoicisme, may render a man less capable of
stronger passions, and consequently, for a time, exempt him from these ruder
eruptions of rage; but whether he rage or laugh there is no rest: and if
appearances hold according to the influences, which his last promotion seems to
have had upon his dormant corruption, it is like, we may very shortly have a
prelatick experiment of both. It is enough for us, that the Lord is our light
and our strength, and none that love his righteous cause shall ever be assamed.

Now follows the second Paper, or Letter, almost of the same strain, and
therefore I shall content my self to review it more succinctly. After the
Author has excused his not adducing of a positive divine warrant for his
moderat Episcopacy, by demanding of us the like for our Church Assemblies and
their subordinations, which I have already fully answered, he brings us in,
objecting, that we are not against a fixed President or Bishop^ or whatever
else he be called, our question is about their power. And to this he answers,
entreating The question may he so stated^ for he trusts that the Bishops
shall not be found desirous, to usurp any undue power, but ready rather to
aba^e of that power which is reasonable, and conform even to primitive
Episcopacy, then that a schism should therefore be continued in this Church.
It is answered, the Author is mistaken, in the very entry, in as-much as we do
not only question the power, but are directly against the pre-eminence of a
fixed Praeses: for seeing the thing is in it self unwarrantable, and has proven
in the Church, a mere fomentation of pride, and, in its tendency, been
inductive of the highest usurpations, as I have showed, and is therefore by us
expressly abjured, how can we in conscience again admit of it? 2. (Not to
examine subtly and strictly the import of the word power) seeing its
fixednesse and its concomitant dignity, that in a great part does advance this
moderatorship, which otherwise would be only an office, unto a superority, and
thereto add an influence of power, is rather a begging of the question; and
therefore though in Civils this fixednesse, with its many other prerogatives
and powers, be, by reason of the subject matter and expediency of humane
affairs, very lawful and allowable; yet in Ecclesiastics, the very same
reason of the different nature of the things, with the constitution of a
Gospel Ministry, and the contradistinction, which our Lord himself has founded
betwixt it and the manner of civil governments, do clearly render this fixed
presidency an undue gravam^n, impinging upon the brotherly parity, and just
liberty of his Ministers. And certainly, if the necessary privileges of the
naked office, viz. that of proposing, directing the consultation^ stating the
question, asking of opinions and votes, and the casting vote, in case of
equality, be of such noment in the conduct of affa^res, that all the liberty of
the Assembly, and unfixedness and accountablenesse of the Chairman, are scarce
sufficient to secure them from abuse; to enforce them by a fixation, contrary
to the Lords appointment of a ministerial parity, is not more unwarrantable
then inconvenient. But 3. As these reasons do militat against the controverted
Presidency in its greatest simplicity; so the Presidency now offered unto us,
for all the abatements pretended, being still that of a Bishop absolutely at
this Majesty's nomination, not accountable to these over whom he presides,
vested with great temporalities^ and, lastly^ wholly dependent upon the beck of
the Supremacy, is, without all question, a thing most anti-scriptural,
unreasonable, and disconform to all pure antiquity. Now, that thus it is^ both
as to the reality of the thing offered^ and the censure I have passed upon it.
I here openly challenge the Author and all his partakers, if they dare
adventure to contradict me: What other construction can therefore be made of
the alleged condescendences, then that in such a mixture they are only empty
foolish pretensions? And what other judgment can be given upon the Authors
offer to abate of his reasonable power, warranted by primitive example, then
that the obligation of reason and pure antiquity are no less false then the
offer made is simulat and elusory.

But seeing the Aut^or, for all the warrants pretended^ does at least
acknowledge himself not to be thereby astricted, but that he can come and go in
their matters at his pleasure; if he do indeed sincerely hate schism, as he
professes, let him also confess the violence done both to our consciences and
persons in such free and arbitrary things, nay, in his Dialect, trifles, and
repent of his late inconsiderat accession.

Passing therefore his deluded belief of the Bishops their not being desirous
to usurp any undue power, but rather to abate contrary to their continual
practice, and the Churches experience, now for the space of 1200 years and
upwards; and evidently repugnant to the manifest conviction of all the
circumstances of our case, I go on to his next supposition, viz. That though
Bishops do stretch their power some what beyond their line, yet, let all the
World judge, whether Ministers are for that engaged to leave their stations,
and withdraw from these meetings for discipline which themselves approve. And
to this the answer is obvious, that neither the sinful thrusting in of Bishops,
nor yet their excessive stretchin^s are the principal causes of our leaving and
withdrawing: When in former times. K. James intro^uced Prelates into this
Church, and they from time to time extended their usurpations, many of the
^ords faithful servants in these days did neit^er desert nor withdraw; but
continuing with much stedfastness, did constantly resist and testify against
all the corruptions, then invading the true Church Government, whereof they
were possessed. But, as the Author does here fallaciously join our leaving of
our stations (Which is false, we having been thence violently expelled) And our
withdrawing from their meetings, groundlesly alleged to be by us approven;
(which we hold to be a necessary duty) So, whoever considers the manner of
the late overturning by summary ejecting of many of us, dissolving all our
Church Assembl^es, establishing a new government, not in, but over, the Church
by the King and his prelates, wherein we never had any place, will easily be
convinced^ that we are not more calumniously accused by these, who would have
their own crime to be our sin of leaving our stations, then clearly justifiable
for withdrawing from these their Courts, which are wholly dependent on the
Supremacy, and very corrupt Assemblies, which we never approved; but have
expressly abjured. It is not therefore (as G. B. apprehends it) only by reason
of the Bishops undue assuming of the Presidency in these meetings; nor yet
because we are by them restrained in, and debarred from, the exercise of our
power in ordination and excommunication (although these be very material
grievances) that we do abstain from their Courts: No; but the plain truth is,
that, over and above the foregoing cause, we hold the very constitution to be
so much altered from that of a true Eccleasiastick Iudicatory, called in our
Lords Name, and acting by his authority, unto meetings appointed merely by the
King, and recognoscing his Supremacy, that we judge our not conveening therein
ought not to be so much as termed a privative withdrawing; but that it is in
effect a negative disowning of them as of Assemblies, wherein we never had
either part or place: which being a ground by himself acknowledged, as I ^ave
above observed, the Doctor's argument, that the Minist^y is a complexe power,
and that as some of us have accepted a liberty to preach, administer the
Sacraments, and exercise discipline congregationally, without liberty to meet
in Presbyteries and ordain; so they may come to ^resbyte^ies, notwithstanding
they should be excluded from the full ex^ercise of all their power; is, by
reason of the nonexistence of the subject, viz. true Presbyteries, utterly cut
off: besides, that it also labors of a manifest inconsequence; in as much as a
Minister's doing, in the first case, all that he is permitted, and only
forbearing where a vis major does impede, is no just ground to infer that
therefore, in the second case, he may come to a meeting^ and there by
surceasing the exercise of his function, and making himself a c^pher, for
strengthening and increasing of the Bishops usurpation, in effect, tacitly
surrender the power that he is bound to maintain: which tacit surrender I do
really judge to be more strongly implied, and of a more sinistruous
consequence, then can be purged by a naked protestation, espe^ially the same
being precontrived and capitulat; Whereby, without doubt, the significancy of
this remedy, mostly commended by the necessity^ and as it were the surprisal of
the exigent not admitting of any other, is greatly diminished and impaired
Notwithstanding of all which, this man, whose manner is to multiply assertions
without reason, tells ^s, in this place, that, When he has streached his
subtilty on the ^enter-^ooks, he can not devise, why we may not join in these
meetings under the abovementioned restraint: and again concludes, that if
after all that he has said, we do still scruple, either we must be darkened,
or he must have owls eyes to see clearly where there is no light.

But it were endless to take notice of all his tatle, and therefore I return
to my Author, who proceeds in his charge against many of us for separating from
the publict worship and whole communion of of the Church, because of some
degree of wrong done them, as they think, in that point of power^ It is
answered, although to render a solid reason of men's practices, specially when
the same are only negative forbearances, whereunto even the forbearers
scrupling and doubting does in a manner and ^or the time oblige, be not my
undertaking; yet, that the accusation here impl^ed is very unjust, both in the
extent and cause of the separation objected, is no hard matter to make out.

And, first, it is certain that the allegiance, that many of us separate from
the public worship and whole communion of the Church, has no better ground,
then that some of us, because of a just detestation of the perjury, intrusion,
profanity, and insufficiency of the Curats, do withdraw from their Ministry,
specially, our true Ministers still remaining, though removed to corners, and
our attendance on the Curats their Ministry being expressly required as a due
acknowledgement of, and compliance with, his Majesty's government Eccleastick
(O strange!) and Civil: now, whether this reason will infer the conclusion made
against us, or on the contrary, does not rather warrant the abstinence,
reproached as sinful separation, to be duty, let the impartial judge. I shall
not tell you, that ^the assuming of the name of the Church, and accusing
discountenancers of Separation, have been the common artifices, by which every
prevailing sect or party have endeavored to render their opposites odious: But
of this I am very assured, that until the Author do prove, that the possession
of Gods house, which the Curats have taken to themselves, and the concurrence
of Authority, wherewith they are supported, does make them and their meetings,
the only Church, his objection of separation is lame and inconcludent. And
therefore, seeing that the broken Ministry, scattered Flocks, and secret
meetings of the Lords faithful people in this Land, are still his true Church,
both suffering and witnessing against the defection and intrusion of
transgressors; and seeing that the forbearance, excepted against, is only the
effect of a just and hesitant aversation against the pretended Ministry,
without either disproving the substance of the Worship, or rejecting and
dividing from others that find a greater liberty, his charge of separation is,
in this its extent, palpably iniquous.

As for the cause assigned for ^ur alleged withdrawing, not from their
Ecclesiastic Courts (for this point is already discus^ed) but from the public
Worship and Church Communion. viz. That it is because of some degree of wrong
done us, as we think, in the point of power; ^oth the known truth of the
matter, and what I have already said, do plainly disprove it: The perjury,
intrusion, profanity and insufficiency mentioned, can not be in this manner
palliate. And I heartly wish, that the Author, who labors so much by his
extenuation to cloak the Apostasy, whereby he and others have rebelled against
God, broken the Covenant and changed the Ordinances, would yet seriously
consider, that God will not thus be mocked. I grant there may be cases, Wherein
we may sufficiently acquit ourselves by a free declaring of our opinion, and a
modest desiring and waiting for a redress, and so continuing in the
performance of our own duty, though others do, or seem to transgress theirs.
But as it were ridiculous, to make this a salvo for all cases, and, in effect,
it does only hold, where our silence at another's transgression by breaking
that command, Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy brother and not suffer sin upon
him, may strengthen the sinners hand, and scandalize others; So, I have already
proven, the insinuation here made of our deserting of our duty, to be such an
absurd calumny, and the compliance required of us such a manifest partaking in
other men's sins, that I wonder at the Author's disingenuity and weakness, in
attacquing us by such generals.

What can be then said to what he subjoines, viz. Otherwise if we think our
selves obliged for every thing that is, or that we judge, faulty in other
persons, or the frame of things in the Church, to relinquish either our
communion with, or our station in it, what will there be but endless swarms of
separation and division in any Church under the sun. Surely this, as to us,
must be a very pertinent and convincing reflection; seing^ in the undervaluing
sense of any Papist, it would as easily redargue all the Protestant Churches of
their separation from Rome. But if in certain clear exigences, either of
testifying against, or not partaking of, other men's sins, there may be a
necessity of a proportional withdrawing, are therefore all measures broken, and
must we be held for relinquishers on every occasion? Or because we are
violently expressed, must we therefore be repute wil^ul deserters? Who would
not pity such dissolute folly? And yet it is all the concludency of the Authors
Argument, whereb^ he would represente us as Patronizers of endless divisions:
But if he mind to deal seriously in this matter, all we desire is, that he
would first lay down his rules, that we may know the latitude of his
comprehension, and then fairly s^bsume against us, and if I do not unanswerably
prove either his excess in the former, or calumny in the latter then let him
glory over us.

In the next place, he again essays to remove the great stick, as he terms
it, the Covenant, and here waving, forsooth, its irregularities, whereof,
notwithstanding their insinuat weight, number and influence, upon such wise and
good men as himself, he neither does adduce, nor can he make out one. And
supposing the Oath still to be binding, and that the present Episcopacy in the
Church is the same that was abjured, he tells us, that the Article against it
does only oblige every man, in his calling and station, to extirpate it; but
not to extirpate themselves out o^ their calling and station, if such an
Episcopacy shall be introduced and continued against their will. It Is answered,
not to repete what I have so often declared, anent the present constitution,
quite different in its establishment^ and many degrees worse then the former,
and our obligation by the Covenant against it, the whole of this objection is
very readily granted: But seeing it is notour^ that the far greater part of us
were at once, by Proclamation cast out both of our places, pulpits, and
parishes, and that our former Church Assemblies, being all at once in the same
manner suppressed, we never had any station in these present meetings
pretending to the succession, this pitiful quibling, as if we had extirpate our
selves, when we was in effect expulsed, i^ but a poor and weak mint at wit^
altogether insufficient to color its obvious impertinency. As to what does
here ensue for proving, that the pre^ent Episcopal-government is not the same
with that which by the Covenant we abjured, and concerning the acceptance that
it would find in England, I am sure I have considered it at that length, and
discussed it upon such evident and certain grounds, as neither the Authors
reason nor his prejudice, his impartiality nor partiality, with all the
patience he wished us, and impatience which he himself often shows, will be
able satisfyingly to remove^ Whether then the things mentioned in this place by
the Author, be indeed truths, as he alleges, or gross errors and mistakes,
as I have evinced, and his discerning in them though the best he hath^ sound,
or on the contrary a palpable delusion^ I willingly leave it to the Readers
ingenuity.

He says, if they be truths^ he is sure, they are pertinent truths, toward
the healing of our sad divisions. ^ut when he shall make as much serious search
after the cause, as he seems to be sensible of the effects, then I am sure he
shall acknowledge them to be not only untruths, but most impertinent. However,
if any list to be contentions, he wishes he could say of this Church^ we have
no such custom. And this wish I confess, is very consequent to both the
Authors opinion and design: For, as we have heard him undervalue the Ordinance
and Oath of God, though most convincingly sealed amongst us by the Lords Power
and presence, unto modes and trifles, to the effect he may gain to a
compliance, where he can not prevail by his simulat condescendencies; so, at
present, supposing them to be as little material, as the length or shortness
of the excrementitious hair, he endeavors to enervat all the just opposition
of the faithful with the reproach of strange contention. But seeing the things
that we contend for do really merit that immovable steadfastness and constant
perseverance, so much commended by our Lords command, and the example of all
his followers, we hope the custom of perfidious time-serving, which the
Prelates have so much practiced in this distracted Church, shall never be able
to counterballance it: And therefore as these men have by their vain, carnal
and violent contentions, at best for their formalities, but^ in effect, for
fulfilling their sin^ul lusts and affections, not only dis-edified^ but
destroyed and subverted the Church of God in this Land, and disobeyed and
disgraced the Prince of Peace, whom they pretend to follow; so let us, as the
fearers of the God of truth, and true lovers of our Lord Jesus, who is the
Truth and also our Peace, considering his example, so much the more endure
contradiction, despise shame and reproach, fight ^he good fight, keep the
faith, and hold fast our integrity, that we may attain unto that Crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give at that day unto
all that love his appearing.

And now remains the Authors one word, which, he is sure is undeniable, and
he thinks very considerable, and it is, that he that cannot join with the
present frame of this Church (And if you please to bring the matter nearer,
with the terms of the present Accommodation) could not have lived in the
Communion of the Christian Church in the time of the first most famous general
Assembly of it, the Conncil of Nice; yea, to go no higher, though safely I
might, (says he) he must as certainly have separated from the whole catholic
Church in the days of the holy Bishop and Martyr Cyprian, upon this very
scruple of the Government, as Novatus did upon another occasion. Whence the
Author does draw his assurance, and whereon it is that he would have us to
bestow our consideration, I wish he had been more explicit: That in the times
to which he referres there was an Episcopacy well advanced in the Church, and
consequently a corruption contracted in its government, and yet by all quietly
comported with, I do not deny; and to this, if it should be replied^ that there
is a hudge disparity betwixt a corruption contracted in lawful government,
still holding the head and substance, by our Lords authority given to His
Church, the worst that can be supposed of these primitive times, and a
Government fundamentally corrupt, deriving all its power from him to whom it
does not belong, and founded in an Antichristian ^upremacy, the certain
character of the present constitution; I am confident, the Author would not be
able to make any satisfying re^urn: But, the true account of the matter is,
that in these ancient times, this Prostasia having crept in, and from small
beginings, and under very specious pretenses, grown up insensibly in the
Church, and the mystery therein secretly working not having openly disclosed it
self, it is little wonder that, though by the more discerning the evil might
be feared, yet never the less, no remedy offering, it was not directly
opposed; whereas, in our days, this latent corruption, with its most
pernicious tendency and bitterfruits, being fully discovered, and thereupon by
us solemnly ejected and abjured, and now on^^ re-obtruded, under the guilding
of some apparent condescendencies, the better to suppress the true Government
of Gods house, which we are bound to preserve, and for establishing the
Sup^emacy, the very consummation of this iniquity. Certainly these things do
import a most manifest difference. I shall not here stand to clear, how that
an Oath, though taken upon a matter antecedently binding, does nevertheless in
such manner superinduce a ^urther obligation, as does not only more strictly
bind to vigilance and circumspection, but also to a measure of zeal against
defection, beyond the opposition to that same material transgression formerly
required: nor need I to put any in mind, how that the sacrificing to the Lord
in the high places, permitted without reproof to Samuel, David, and Solomon,
before the building of the Temple, did afterward make an exception from the
integrity of succeeding Princes. Certainly, to judge that the continuance of an
evil, and a relapse into it are of the same nature, and that at this time we
may have the same compliance with this episcopal Presidency, which once it
found in the Church, under quite different circumstances, were grossly to
confound times, despise warnings, trample upon deliverances, and violate the
Oath of God, nay further, to contradict even the principles of these times
mentioned, and that to that hight, that I am assured, were the same ancient
Christians, boasted of, on li^e, to see the sad effects that have ensued upon
their well-meaning practices, and the patrociny which is thence taken, for the
backsliding and overt^rning of our dayes^ their godly sorrow would work in them
a carfulness, a clearing of themselves, an in^ignation, a fear, a vehement
desire, a zeal, yea, and a revenge above all the detestation that our Author
and his followers do commonly calumniat as fury amongst us. And Cyprian in
place of his particular above cited Con^titut^ etc. opposed to the then
aspiring Prela^y, would become a Presbyterian of the strictest form: and
therefore, though I do not own these accusations of schism and total breach of
communion with the Church, wherein the Author is pleased to state and phrase
the difference of present practice, from that of the ancient Church; But on the
contrary, I have often and plainly declared, that the sin attending the
compliance urged is the plain cause and measure of our withdrawing: Yet that
our abstaining from the present Church-meetings, so widely differing from these
of the ancient Church, and environed with circumstances no less variant, does
not give ground to so much as that seeming opposition in practice, which the
Author objects; But on the contrary, is the very same, which all the faithful
therein would have chosen, upon the like exigence, I am confident, all true and
serious observers will very readily acknowledge; and consequently that this the
Authors one and last word, notwithstanding of the enforcing epithets of
undeniable and very considerable, wherewith he seconds it, is nevertheless
nothing singular from all the rest premised.

Having thus largely digressed in the review of these Papers, and therein
discussed most of the arguments used for this Accommodation; it remains that I
follow forth the second Article, where I left: And though, for the better
reaching of the outmost of our Adversaries pretensions, I have supposed Prelacy
to be thereby reduced to a simple Presidency, and, in this sense, argued
against it; yet since it is certain, that the nomination and election of the
Episcopus Praeses, who when present is to preside, and when absent, does, at
best, only permit a precarious suffection, is not to be committed to the
Presbyteries suffrage, but absolutely reserved to his Majesty; and, next, that
the general of, all Church-affaires, and what may be meant by management,
whether the decision only, when proposed to the Assembly, or both the proposing
and deciding, do seem to require a further explication. I think the Article is
further liable to these exceptions. I shall not here repeat, what I have said
against the unwarrantablenesse and inevitable prejudice of the abridgement of
the Churches just liberty, in the choice of its Moderators, in its several
Assemblies, and his Majesty's usurpation in this point; the thing which I at
present note as defective, and which was also much desiderat, is a clear
explanation, whether the power and liberty of proposing be as well offered in
this Article to the free vote of the meetings, as the power of deciding seems
thereby to be conceded; or whether, according to the scheme of our National
Synod, as now settled by Authority of Parliament, the power of proposing is not
still to be the privilege of the constant moderator^ or rather his Majesty's
prerogative to be exercised by the mere intervention of the fixed Praeses as
his instrument. I shall not criticize, nor ask how the proposal came to be set
down in these terms, That all Church-affaires shall he managed in Presbyteries
and Synods by their free vote, rather then thus, that they shall be managed by
Presbyteries and Synods and their free vote. Only this I may affirm, that the
second member of my doubt is no less probable, and consonant to the tenor and
prescript of the Act mentioned, then evidently elusory of all the other
liberties proposed. But wherefore do I hesitat in these smaller matters^ The
thing here principally to be observed is, that as, by the present
establishment, annexing Church power and jurisdiction, to the Kings Crown and
Prerogative, and thereby subverting all true Church Government, and making the
pretended Presbyteries and Synods only the ^ing and the Prelates their pitiful.
Conventicles, the first Article inviting to Presbyteries and Synods is rendered
vain and void, and all its cautions impertinent; So the Supremacy, now more
then ever prevalent^ is with this second article, and all the offer of liberty
therein held out, plainly inconsistent: for proof whereof, I only desire that
the two may be impartially compared. The Article says, that all
Church-affaires shall be managed in Presbyteries or Synods by their free vote.
And the Act of Supremacy statutes that his Magesty may enact, concerning all
meetings and matters Ecclesiastic, what in his Royal misdome he shall think
fit. How then can these two consist? or in what manner can they be reconciled?
If these Meetings and the power of the Supremacy were both of the same kind,
and did stand in the same line, I know the subordination of Synods and
Presbyteries to General Assemblies might easily explain the difficulty, but
seeing a subordination of this ^ort betwixt these Courts and this high
prerogative, would, in effect, distroy their true being and essence; and, on
the other hand, to imagine that by this Accommodation, there is any derogation
of the Supremacy intended so much as to be connived at, were foolish and
presumtuous. It is clear that the Supremacy, and the liberty here pretended
cannot rationally be composed; if therefore the Accommodators would deal
uprightly in this affair, let them first show us where these Presbyteries and
Synods are, to which they would have us to come, and next cause us to
understand the truth and reality of the just liberty they seem to offer, and
then boast of their condescendencies. But while they suppose things for
uncontroverted grounds, which are warrantably and plainly by us denied, and
then would engage us by a form of specious concessions, wanting al real
foundation, they only discover their own palpable weakness or more
unpardonnable disingenuity.

The third Article bears, If any difference fall out in the diocesian Synods
betwixt any of the members thereof it shall be lawful to appeal to a Provincial
or their Committy. That this Provincial is founded upon, and overswayed by the
Supremacy; and ther^by manifestly disprovable, as neither a true
Ecclesiastick-Court, nor enjoying any competent measure of power and liberty,
is abundantly confirmed by the arguments above adduced against the preceding
articles. The singularites that here occur are, that the constitution of a
Provincial Assem^ly, being a Court not in use amongst us, should have been
expressly declared. 2. That if we may guess at this by Vshers reduction, and
according to the present establishment, it must consist of members viz. the
Bishops and Deans or constant Moderators of the province, both more
unwarran^able as to their office, and corrupt in their practices then the
ordinary constituents of inferior meetings. 3. That this provincial is to have
a Committie which being yet very unlawfully established for a perpetual Court,
can only conduce to the greater strengthening of the Archbishop's primacy, and
the oversway of the subjected Assemblies: But seeing the Bishop, in his last
conference, has passed from this Article, I shall not pursue it any further;
only the gradation here traced of Presbyteries, Synods, and Provincial
Assemblies moves me to enquire, wherefore no mention of National Assemblies, a
Court not only the Supreme in that scale, but so distinctly defined by a
particular Act, viz. Act 4. 1663. in its Members, methods of procedor, and
extent of power, that I cannot judge its omission accidental and undesigned;
nay in effect it is a reserve which does so unquestionably secure the whole
interests and designs of Prelacy, and so evidently redargue all the proposals
made of a trepanning mockery, that as I seriously marvel, how the
Accommodators, knowing of this ultimate resort, so strongly complicated of all
the strength of the Supremacy and Prelacy, did not extend their other
concessions to all things else that could be demurred; so I am no less to
seek, wherefore the Brethren, who treated, did except so little against it. I
need not here exhibit any long description of this Court, which I have several
times above mentioned: The Act is full and plain to the meanest capacity: The
King, in the very entry, assumes to himself not the indiction only (Which was
all that, after long contendings, the more consistent usurpation of former
times did by the Act 1612. ascribe unto him) but the constitution of this
National Synod, whereby having named and appointed the members and the
Archbishop of S. Andrews for President, with an express limitation of the time
and place of their meeting to his Majesty's order, and of the matters to be
treated and determined, concerning Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, to his Royal p^easure, to be signified in write to the President
above named. The ^ing, with the advice of the Estates, confirms the same, as
the lawful constitution of our Church Assemblies, provided that the King or his
Commissioner be always present, and that no Act or O^der be owned as such, but
that which shall be agreed upon by the President and major part of the members,
and not contrary to the Kings prerogative, or law of the Kingdom. And lastly,
that no Act, matter or cause be debated, consulted, and concluded, but what
shall be allowed and confirmed by his Majesty or his Commissioner for the time.
Now, I say, this Act and Constitution still standing and remaining, let any
ingenuous person declare singly, what he thinks all the proposals so long
tinckled upon can signify, or what liberty have the dissenting Presbyterian
brethren, which may not hereby be restrained and rendered ineffectual? And what
abatement is there condescended unto of the exorbitant powers of Prelacy, which
is not here either formally or virtually repaired? And, in a word, what good
can we expect by any Accommodation, which may not by this frame be certainly
frustrat and made void. I have not, in this place, noted the strange and
palpable usurpations of the Supremacy against the Lord, and over his Church,
which this device and project containe^; because, as, in all the parts and
passages of our present establishment, the vestiges of that wickedness are
very conspicuous; so, it is in this Act that they are visible in their highest
exaltation.

From all which it may very easily be gathered that the Bishop's policy, in his
silence on this point, was no less necessary for the carrying on of his
intention, then the reservation of the thing the very colluvies of all
corruption of Church-government^ deriving its influence and perversions unto
all inferior and subordinat Assemblies, does render all the other overtures of
agreement elufory and insignificant.

The fourth Article is, that Intrants being lawfully presented by the Patron
and ^^ly tried by the Presbytery, there shall be a day agreed upon by the
Bishop and Presbytery, for their meeting together for their solemn ordination
and admission, at which there shall be one appointed to preach, and that it
shall be at the parish Church where he is to be admitted, except in the case of
impossibility, or extreme inconveniency; and if any difference fall in touching
that affair, it shall be referable to the provincial Synod, or the Committee, as
any other matter. This is the Article, but there is nothing sound, the very
entry offends; not that I judge that for the single cause of Patronages being
restored, and presentations made requisite for intituling to a ^tipend or
benefice, Intrants (all other things being plain) should stand off and may not
lawfully enter that way; No, though patronages be indeed in themselves a heavy
grievance, and in their exercise, for the most part, partial and sinful, and
upon these grounds, by an express Act in the year 1649. abolished; yet to
Intrants otherwise innocent they are certainly only the greatest injury. But
the thing I except, is, 1. That according to this proposal it seems Ministers
formerly lawfully called and ordained, and now wrongfully outed, shall have no
regresse to the exercise of their Ministry, save by this method, which
certainly in these circumstances can not but render the pressure far more
uneasy. 2. What shall become of Patronages pertaining to Bishops, and of other
Churches which are of their patrimony? Certainly this is a point not so far
without our line, but at least in a conjunction with the many other things that
justly grieve us it may make a part of our regrete.

But I proceed to take notice of the manner of Ordination here discribed, and
passing the trial previously appointed, It is proposed that there shall be a
day agreed upon by the Bishop and P^esbytery for their meeting together, for
the solemn ordination of Intrants: By which it is evident, that it is not the
vote of the plurality, that in this matter, can make a determination; no, the
Bishop and Presbytery must both agree to this appointment, the whole Presbytery
cannot overrule him in it. And here I cannot but observe the cunning slieness
of this draught. The Bishop in all his discourses and treaties has still, in
this point of Ordination, kept himself in the clouds; To assume to himself the
sole power of Ordination or a negative voice and part in it is more then all
his musty alledgeances, from obscure antiquity, and declining purity, for his
fixed presidency, will amount unto; and to descend to posterior Ages of the
Church, would be of a consequence no less dangerous, as to the many
corruptions that then were crept in, then the ascending to the prior times of
scripture light would prove contrary to this prelatick arrogance. On the other
hand, seeing both the humor and design of Episcopacy engage him to be principal
in the action of Ordination, therein to be subject to the determination of the
susfrage of the Presbytery, is nothing agreeable, and can not be digested. And
what variety in his discourses this halting ambiguity has produced, I leave it
to such as have had the opportunity to observe: But now that we have him in
write, it is worth our pains to consider the contrivance.

We have heard, in the second Article, that he is willing that Chnrch-matters
be managed in Presbyteries and Synods by the vote of the plurality, a fair
insinuation that the matter of Ordination shall be in the same manner
transacted: And in this Article he leaves the trial to the Presbytery, consents
that, if possible, the Ordination be at the parish Church, where one shall be
appointed to preach, and, lastly, is content differences falling in be referred
to the Superior Courts; all fair generals. But wherefore no mention who shall
be the actual ordainers, whether the Bishop and whole Presbytery, or the Bishop
alone in behalf and as Mederator of the Presbytery, or the Bishop alone as
indeed something greater (whether as in a superior order, or only in a higher
degree is but a School nicety) then either a Presbyter, or the Presbytery, and
to whose office this part does properly belong? And, as to these things, though
we be left in the dark, yet many palpable indications lead us to feel this last
to be the thing designed, against which, if I might now stand to debate, I
could show this not only to be contrary to Evangelick parity and simplicity and
Apostolic practice, and destitute even of these pretended testimonies of the
next Ages for a fixed prostasia; but that it has been one of the main
impostures of the prelatick Spirit, first injuriously to usurp, and then
mysteriously to involve the matter of Ordination, that the Bishops might have
the dignity to be its proper dispensators and the mystery of iniquity be the
more thereby advanced.

But the point here most remakable is, that apprehending his condescendencies
might render him, as being obnoxious to the plurality of voices, of less power
and influence in this affair, Behold how craftily he goes about to salve his
negative, which he may not, for fear of a discovery, plainly own, and that is,
by making the appointment of the day for ordaining to depend on his and the
Presbyteries joint agreement, wherein if he please to be a dissenter, It is
certain that his not assenting to this circumstance will be of no less
consequence for his purpose, then if he had reserved unto himself an inhibiting
veto, upon the substance of the whole business.

Now, that this power, in what sort soever by him couched and covered, is not
to be allowed, his want of any sufficient warrant for it does abundantly
evince^ And further what the Scripture and Apostolic rule in this affair is,
these few considerations may in this place satisfy.

1. That the power of Ordinantion is certainly annexed to, and dependent upon,
the pastoral charge; for, seeing that the cure committed to the Apostles, and by
them to succeeding Pastors, could not be perpetuat without a succession, the
evident reason of the thing it self, with the import of that command, The
things that thou have heard of me, the same commit thou to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also, do plainly persuade the assertion.

2. As we find in Scripture the Apostles and others upon occasion by themselves
alone ordaining, so wherever a concurrence did offer, we may observe the Act
to be always jointly done and administrat; so we find the twelve jointly
ordaining and laying their hands upon the seven Deacons, without any
prerogative acclaimed by Peter, who yet, if falsehoods may be compared, has
more apparent grounds in Scripture for his Primacy, then can be showed for the
Presidency of any Bishop. Next we have the fraternity of Prophets and Teachers
at Antioch sending forth and imposing hands upou Barnabas and Saul, by a like
equal conjunction.

3. It is said of Paul and Barnabas that they (in a plural union) Did ordain
Elders in every Church

And 4. it is manifest that Paul, by reason of his concurrence with other
Presbyters in the Ordination of Timothy, does attribut the same act
indifferently to his own hands and, to the hands of the Presbytery. Which
Scripture-grounds being joined to the want of any probable reason for this
singularity, and the manifestly woeful and sad consequences of this Episcopal
imparity with the present unquestionable design of bearing down the just
liberty and authority of the Lord's Ministers, in a convenient Subserviency to
men's lusts and wickedness, by the stiff and inflexible retaining of this
privilege, do, I am confident, make out the eccentrick pre-eminence acclaimed
to be not only in it self unlawful, but by our solemn Oaths to maintain
Presbytery, and extirpat every thing that shall be found to be contrary to
sound Doctrine and the power of godliness perpetually abjured. Seeing therefore
that this Article does certainly imply this corruption, as I have above
declared, that it can have no better acceptance from us, then the preceding,
needs no further reasoning. As for the other trifling circumstances, whereby
the principal thing in it, is endeavored to be palliat, they do not merit any
more special inquiry.

The fifth Article is, It is not to be ^oub^ed but the Lord Commissioner will
make good what he offered anent the establishment of Presbyteries and Synods;
and we trust his Grace will procu^e such security to the Brethren for declaring
their judgment, that they may do it without any hazard in counterveening any
law, and that the Bishop shall humbly and earnestly recommend this to his
Grace. This Article made up of uncertain assurances, ridiculous trusts, and the
Bishop's conformable undertaking, is already by me sufficient^y examined, in
the very entry of this discourse; and there told, that what the Commissioner
did undertake anent the establishment of Presbyteries, I did not exactly know;
but if it was that which is reported, viz, that they should be set up as
preceding the 1638. I thought it could contribute not^ing to the removal of
our just exceptions. I shall not here offend the Reader by a vain repetition;
but seeing the grounds formerly laid down are very material, and yet by the most
part little adverted to, it will not be amiss that, after the full and plain
account I have given of these matters, I again run over them; and

1. That according to the principles of truth, Presbyteries are not founded in
any humane establishment, but in the right and Authority which our Lord has
given unto his Church, is our constant persuasion: so that, though the
accessory confirmation and countenance of the powers may be of great use to,
and no less acceptance with the Church, yet it is no part of their original
right.

2. Before the 1638. and even until the Year 1661. Presbyteries were founded
and did continue in this Church, not by virtue of any Act of ^arliament,
whereby they were properly authorized; but upon the basis of that intrinseck
right, which I have already mentioned. Thus having conveened and settled
themselves shortly after the Reformation, they continued their possession
uninterrupted until the Year 1661. It is true, they obtained the confirmation
of King and Parliament in the Year 1592. as also in the Year 1612. many
corruptions introduced, and invasions made by the Prelates upon the rights and
privileges of these Assemblies, were b^ the same Authority, ratified and
approven: but as by the latter Act their being was not totally dissolved; so it
is not unto the former that they do owe their fundamental establishment.

3. All that can be probably gathered from what is promised, is, that possibly
to some such apparent mixture of Episcopacy and Presbytery, now to be formed,
as did result from the intrusion of Prelates upon Presbyteries, before the 1638.
the civil s^nction may be interposed: But since now the case is vastly altered,
and that in effect, at present, there is not so much as any kind of true
Ecclesiastick-government or meeting to be found among the Prelates and their
Dependents; nay, that all we are to expect is some hodge podge device of
Supremacy accommodat to its desires, and directly and absolutely subjected to
its pretended omnipotency, it is clear and certain, that this mistaken project
can aff^rd us no clearing: If any man judge me uncharitable, how glad would I
be to be found really in ^he wrong? But seeing it is evident, that the Supremacy
is rather more and more ascendent, and that there is not the least probability
either of its mitigation, or of the rescission of the Act for Restitution, etc.
Anno 1662. and yet far less the retreating of the Proclamation January 1662.
dissolving Presbyteries, and of their, and their true members reestablishment,
all requisite to give the Lord Commissioner's offer (if any such was made) a
genuine and satisfactory meaning, why should we preserve an illusive charity to
plain and solid ingenuity.

But if any man will still contend, the comparing together of the first and
second part of this Article, I am certain, will prove sufficient to convince
the most inflexible opiniaster. In the first part, It is not doubted, but the
King's Commissioner will make good his offer, viz. to set up Presbyteries as
before 1638 In the second, it is hoped, that he will procure due security to
the Brethren in the free declaration of their judgment. But if true
Presbyteries be rightly restored this security is clearly superfluous; and if
they shall not be restored in that integrity, but by virtue of the Supremacy,
on which they depend, reduced to the figure of the then model, by authorizing
the above mentioned mixture, it is evident, that in place of resolution, we
have only an arbitrary politic alteration, a compliance wherewith no
declaration and protestation can in any wise purge, as I have already fully
proven: And this is indeed one of the reasons, why I termed the Bishops trust
ridiculous. But yet I confess there are other causes that do more provoke me
to this character, the one is, that it should be imagined, that Governors will
give an antecedent license to transgress laws, which nevertheless in all
probability they have not the least intention to repeal; the other is, that the
Bishop should suppose that a testimony, requisite upon the account of duty, may
be either forborne or suspended, for want of an assured immunity; whereas it is
most certain, that wherever faithfulness to God does require our appearance,
though in the things that are least, the fear of man, that brings a snare, is
not to be regarded, much less to be therewith balanced. I acknowledge indeed,
that the faint and pusillanimous dealing of some of the Brethren, who
conferred, in making this their scruple, seems to have drawn from the Bishop
this insinuat sollution, and I should verily have taken it for a scornful
indulgence, if he had not to his hope adjoined the promise of his humble and
earnest intercession. But seeing it is to be by all regreted, and we hope shall
be by the decliners themselves bitterly mourned for, that being in so just and
so good a cause not only called, but in effect openly provoked and bafled to
give an answer whith reasons, to the demand made unto them, they did not so
sanctify the Lord God in their hearts, and with their tongues, as to show a
readiness thereto with meekness and fear, let be to give a testimony for God
in such an important exigence, it is evident that this pitiful caveat with the
promise annexed are at best but the effects of a carnal condescendence unto a
sinful fear. If the Lord call for our confession, who ever heard that that,
which is its special grace, even the obvious apprehension of hazard, should be
its hinderance? Nay, who is man in that case of whom we should be afraid? But
and if the Lord require it not, this is certainly a foolish antidote to a vain
solicitude.

And thus we are arrived at the sixth and last Article, That no Intrant shall
be engaged to any canonical oath, or subscription unto the Bishop; and that his
opinion anent tha^ government shall not prejudge him in this, but it shall be
free for him to declare. And this is truly the only fair condescendence that of
them all has any thing of a just ease; But seeing it is very inadequat to the
main difficulty, and for an apparent liberty of opinion does certainly tend,
according to the late morality of these times, to involve us in many sinful and
inconsistent practices, I shall not further urge it.

And now having finished the examination of these six Articles, and therein,
amongst many other empty pretensions, and inextricable ambiguities,
rencountered a most cunning and viperous invective against the League and
Covenant, consisting of the like number, as if it were a mere politic
complication of doubts and snares, for the more clear redargution of the
Authors presumption and malice, I cannot but desire my Reader, impartially to
consider both, and what, and with what success boht of us have objected, and,
I am confident, that though an al most infinite over proportion of matter for
importance, as well as variety, the greatest diversity of humors, interests,
opinions, nay and almost of Nations, that ever concurred in one treaty, with
the no less disproportion of parts and abilities in us, the two Antagonists,
do every way increase and accumulat the disadvantages on my part; yet it will
appear, that such is the power and virtue of a righteous cause that where in
the attacquing the Covenant the Author has carried back nothing but his own
shame and our scorn, the truth, not I, has, on the other side, dissipated and
routed his Articles with an entire victory, which if he or any man account
vain, or a preposterous triumph, it is only truths confidence, and I do hereby
confirm it with a no less resolute defiance.

Hitherto I have examined this overture of Accommodation, according to its
terms contained in the above-written Articles. As for the exceptions that may
be made against it from its contrivance, tendency, and circumstances, the
inconveniences that would ensue upon it, and other more remote arguments, they
are so easily deduceable from the preceding grounds, that it were superfluous
to prosecute them by any more distinct proposal. That we may therefore, once
for all, review and sum up the manifold and manifest evils of this device,
not more conceited and boasted of by its contrivers, the Servants of men, then
deservedly rejected by all the true Ministers of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Notwithstanding of all the specious pretexts and fair smoothings that have been
adhibite for triming up this Accommodation to an alluring and taking
condescendence; yet, I am persuaded, that who ever seriously ponders what has
been said upon it, will be quickly convinced that the difficulties following do
still remain as invincible impediments to all conscientious men.

First, That a conjunction with and in the present Church meetings, is a
certain acknowledgment of, and participation with the present
Ecclesiastick-government, which in effect is not truly such, but a mere
politic constitution wholly dependent upon, and resolving in the Supremacy,
wherein no faithful Minister can take part,

Secon^ly, That this conjunction does evidently infer a consent and submission
to this Supremacy, as arrant an usurpation upon the Kingdom of Jesus Christ in
and over his Church, as ever did dare the King of ^ings, and Lord of Lords in
any age.

Thirdly, That though this consent could not be objected, yet such is the
present elevation of this all-swaying Prerogative, not intended to be
depressed, that all other conc^ssions, though in themselves satisfying, would
thereby be deprived of any consistent assurance; and rendered wholly elusory.
And really, when I reflect upon these particulars, I cannot forbear to ask,
with what conscience can Ministers rather partake in Church-meetings framed by,
and under the power of the Supremacy, then if the Bishops were therein still to
domineer after the rate of the highest Prelacy? Or what delusion can be more
ridiculous, then that men excepting against meetings, because of the Bishops
usurpation therein, should upon the vacating and reassuming of this power by
the King as Supreme, be thereby entised unto a compliance.

But, Fourthly, as these meetings are founded upon, and absolutely subjected
unto the Supremacy; so the often cited Proclamation, and Act of Res^itution
tell us, that they are authorized and ordered by the Archbishop and Bishop; and
consequently do in such manner derive their Authority from them, that the
Members do only act therein as the Bishops their Delegates, or rather as the
subdelegates of his Majesty's Delegates, a strange accumulation of absurdities,
which, I am certain, this constitution standing, cannot be salved by any
overture whatsomever.

Fifthly, The meetings, whereunto we are invited, do consist of ^uch members
for their perjurious intrusion, and canonical servitude (to say nothing of
their more extrinseck delinquencies of profanity, insufficiency, and
irreligion) as may not only warrant a non-conjunction, but a positive
separation. And certainly if the lower degree of these crimes, in the time of
the former Bi^hops, did even, under that different constitution, offend some of
the Lords faithful servants to an abhorrent with drawing, how much more should
their brimful measures in our days, with the duty of a testimony, which our
Covenant, and men's unparalleled backslidings, do now require, justify our
detestation? It is true G. B. tells us that under this there may be a fear in
us, that we shall not carry things as we would, which he thinks, is very little
suitable to the patience we p^ead for: But really, so long as our will is moved
and directed by the Rules, and in order to the ends, which our Lord has
appointed to these Courts, I see not how this fear can be condemned, as either
ambitious, or disagreeable to our principles.

Sixthly, Notwithstanding of any thing conceded by the Articles, and over and
above all that has been said against an Ep^scopus Praeses, even in the most
moderate acceptance, the ^i^hop as offered to be reduced, is repugnant both to
Scripture, purer antiquity, and our solemn Oaths and Engagements, inconsistent
with he principles of Presbytery, and in effect very little lowed from any of
these powers and hights which he acclaimes, in as much as he is still at the
King's nomination and not subject to either the censure or control of the
meetings, over which he does preside. 2. He retains all his vain and absurd
temporalities. 3. As constant Moderator the power of proposing and the method
of handling and voting any matter controverted, with the care and direction of
the execution of any sentence pronounced, pertains to him solely. 4. For any
thing as yet declared, the Bishop must have at least a more eminent power and
suffrage, in the matter of Ordination and Excommunication: and, in this point,
not only the Articles are most suspitio^sly reserved and obscure, but if we
take notice of the Accomodators their other discourses and writings, we have
little reason to doubt that the power of both is to abide with him, as it was
established by the Act 1612. and observed before 1638. So that, in my opinion,
all the ease offered by the Accommodation may be very quickly calculat; and in a
word amounts to this only, that where now these meetings, do by a precarious
tolerance consult and determine in lesser matters, and in things more weighty,
do rather prepare and ripen to the Bishop's decision, who also ordaines and
censures with very little ceremony, by this Treaty and its Articles, over and
above the wretched salvo of a pactioned and contrariant protestation, this
tolerance is to be changed into a more assured liberty, as to the Bishop, but
every whit as dependent upon the King as Supreme; And the acts of ordination
and excommunication are to be passed and performed, more publicly and with
greater solemnity. Which observation, I must confess, is to me so obvious,
that it has been always attended with no less persuasion, that if the Bishop
did not judge our consciences as peevish and fickle, as he asteemeth the
matters in difference frivolous and empty trifles, he would not have this
risced his own reputation, in all the business and stir he has made about such
a nothing of condescendence. Of which I am the more confirmed, that though the
papers which I have discus^ed were by the Bishop acknowledged to have been
written some years ago, and do all along conclude a conformity to the present
establishment; yet the Bishop very justly, though imprudently, supposing the
case to be still the same, has made much use of them of late without the least
alteration to engage us unto the terms of his new agreement.

Seventhly, This Accommodation utterly disowns and cuts off the Ruling Elder,
an officer not only clearly warranted from Scripture and the nature of the
Churches constitution, and singularly commended by his usefulness; but in some
respect countenanced even by the mixtures we see in his Masters ecclesiastic
commission.

Eighthly, The Terms offered being proposed with this express condition, (
Episcopacy being always preserved) and in effect so fully retaining the
substance of all the corruptions and grievances of that model and frame, by us
very solemnly and often abjured both by the National and the Solemn League and
Covenant, to close and comply therewith were, at least, to desert the Lords
cause, by casting away the word of his patience in this hour of temptation^ and
to give our selves to that detestable indifferency and neutrality, which we
have by Oath so enixly renounced.

Ninthly, The embracing of this pretended coalition, but real suppression of
Presbyterian Government^ would not only be a total surrender of that interest
unto the will of its adversaries; but engage us into snares contests, offenses,
and temptations, that may be better foreseen then they can be numbered, let be
prevented. The Authors propone peace, as the scope of their overture, and yet
they know, nay do expressly provide a liberty for the differences and
protestations, that must necessarily ensue: What a strange method have we here
of composing strife, neither by removing the grounds, nor separating the
parties; but plainly, by joining them in their declared opposition and sworn
contrary endeavors, of the one to mantain, and the other to extirpat, to
exasperate the feuds? And is not this one reflection sufficient to redargue the
insincerity of this whole project, and to inform all men, that it is not
union, but the very extinction of Presbytery that is thereby designed?

I shall not here note, that the Brethren, being once brought in to these
meetings, where there will be infallibly, no less discord then inequality, it
is not to be doubted, but the hatred, envy and jealousies of the stronger
against the weaker would in this juncture, so fertile of occasions, soon
procure the latter to be deposed and ejected. And that by a power, which they
could not so well disowne. But this, I am sure, would in that event fall out so
acceptablie to the patient, that I shall not, at present^ reckon it as an
inconvenience. The evils more to be considered are, that as no conscientious
man can rationally hold out the smallest benefit or use of edification, that
can arise to the Church of Christ by this so heterogenious, distracted, and
unequal association; so, what can be thence expected, except either the
temptation of continual heats, sorrows and offenses, or rather, according to
the present too visible decay, the cooling of zeal, the declining to luke
warmness, the ensnaring of consciences, con^iving at corrupt Acts and
practices, the partaking of other men's sins, and the evil example, stumbling
and grief, that will thereon redound to all the fearers of God and lovers of
his righteous cause. I do not here make mention of the offense of the people,
as some do, who use it as an argument, yea their main one, that this
Accommodation being displeasing by provoking them to withdraw from such as
close with it would defeat its own design. No, if the thing be righteous and
otherwise expedient, to indulge to humors is indeed a vain popularitie: And I
am heartily sorry, that good men, in so good a cause, should have bewrayed so
great weakness, as by insinuating a false charge of humor against the people,
to have not only discovered their own pusillanimitie, but furnished the
adversary with so fair and plausible an advantage. But leaving them, in this
point, to. G. B's correction, and him also to his vain illusion, as if herein
he had overcome a great part of our strength, The offense, that I fear, and
prognostic from a compliance with this Accommodation, is quite of another
nature, viz. that now, in this baksliding time, such a bad and influencing
example may be of dangerous consequence to remove them from their stedfastness.
And how tender of the soul concernment of the Brethren, and fearful of that woe,
which even he who is the blessing of all Nations has denounced against them,
by whom offenses come, every sincere Christ an ought in this point, to be, I
hope all interested will seriou^ly consider.

But now it is full time to conclude. And therefore I say, that ^eeing the
terms of this Accommodation are ambiguous, defective and sin^ul, its design
and tendency most pernicious to the true Government of Gods House, and the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and its whole fabric and frame, to the conviction of
all discerning men, only forged out by necessity and Policy, and smoothed by
delusion and hypocrisy, on purpose to catch a small remnant of the Lords
faithful Ministers, witnesses against the present backslidings and thereby, if
possible, for ever to suppress the restoring of the work of God in the Land, I
judge it ought to be rejected as a vain ensnaring invention: So that, although
the hatchers should be thereby wrathfully irritat, and this cockatrice egg
should break out into a viper; yet better it be crushed for our suffering, then
sinfully eaten to our death and destruction. The reproaches of ungovernable and
unpeacable may indeed be bitter unto ingenuous spirits, let be sincere lovers
of the Prince of peace, and the persecution of men may possibly proceed to
afflict and vex: But seeing that, through Satan and the world their known
enmity against the Lord and all his followers, these things are, in place of
the opprobry, become rather the badge of truth, Only let our conversation be as
becomes the Gospel, and let us stand fast in one spirit with one mind
striving together for the pure ordinances of Gods house once given unto us,
nothing terrefied by our adversaries, which is to them an evident token of
perdition, but to us of salvation and that of God: for unto the fai^hful it is
given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer
for his sake. There is, I confess, one temptation, which does more speciously
insinuate, and that is, the loss of the liberty of the Gospel, which men may
possibly, in their displeasure, abridge or totally take from us: But as this
solicitude is not more praise worthy, when devolved on our Lord and master,
then subtly deceitful, when its application is, spare thy self, So let none
of these things move us, Neither let us reckon our lives dear unto our selves,
so that we may finish our course with joy, and the Ministry, which we have
received of the Lord Jesus. Let therefore truth, simplicity and godly sincerity
be our main study, and faith and entire submission our only establishment,
knowing, and on this resting, that not only his peace here shall be our portion
and the end everlasting life: But that God can as easily of our ashes raise up
Ministers to himself, as of stones Children to Abraham. And that he who has
glorified his name, will glorify it again. AMEN.

FINIS.
The Copy of two LETTERS, Commonly repute to have been written by the Bishop of
DUMBLANE, at least by him communicate to several Friends.
The first Letter.
SIR,
in the late Conference I had with your Friend, the sum of what I said was this.

1. That Episcopal-Government, managed in conjunction with Presbyters in
Presbyteries and Synods, is not contrary either to the rule of Scripture, or
the example of the primitive Church, but most agreeable to both.

2. Yea, it is not contrary to that very Covenant, which is pretended by so
many as the maine, if not the only reason of their scrupling: And for their
sakes it is necessary to add this. For notwithstanding the many irregularities
both in the matter and form of that Covenant, and the illegal and violent
ways of pressing and prosecuting of it, yet to them who remain under the
Conscience of its full force and obligation, and in that seem invincibly
persuaded, it is certainly most pertinent, if it be true, to declare the
consistence of the present Government even with that obligation. And as both
these assertions, I believe upon the exactest (if impartial and impassionat)
inquiry, will be found to be in themselves true; so they are owned by the
generality of the Presbyterians in England; as themselves have published their
opinion in print under this Title, Two Papers of proposals humbly presented to
his Majesty by the Reverend Ministers of the Presbyterian persuasion, Printed
at London Anno 1661. Besides other passages in these Papers to the same
purpose, Page 11, and 12. are these words, And as these are our general ends
and motives, so we are induced to insist upon the form of a Synodical
Government, conjunct with a fixed Presidency or Episcopacy, for these reasons.

1. We have reason to believe that no other terms will be so generally agreed
on, etc.

2. It being agreeable to the Scripture and primitive Government, is likeliest
to be the way of a more universal concord, if ever the Churches on Earth arrive
to such a blessing; However it will be most acceptable to God, and well
informed Consciences..

3. It will promote the practice of Discipline and Godliness without disorder,
and promote order without hindering Discipline and Godliness.

4. And it is not to be silenced (though in some respect we are loath to menton
it) that it will save the Nation from the violation of their solemn vow and
Covenant, without wronging the Church at all, or breaking any other Oath, etc.
And a little after they add, that the Prelacie disclaimed in that Covenant, was
the engrossing o^ the sole Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, and exercising
of the whole Discipline absolutely by Bishops themselves and there Delegates,
Chancellors, Surrogates, and Officials, etc.Excluding wholly the Pastors of
Particular Churches from all share in it. And there is one of prime note
amongst them, who, in a large Treatise of Church Government, does clearly
evince, that this was the mind both of the Parliament of England, and of the
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, as they themselves did expressly declare
it, in the admitting of the Covenant, That they understand it not to be against
all Episcopacy, but only against the particular frame, as it is worded in the
Article it self: For our principal model in England, and the way of managing
of it, whatsoever is amiss (and it can be no wrong to make that supposition
concerning any Church on Earth) or whatsoever they apprehend to be amiss,
though it may be upon mistake, the Brethren that are dissatisfied, had
possiblely better acquitted their duty by free admonitions and significations
of their own sense in all things, then by leaving of their station, which is
the one thing that has made the breach (I fear) very hard to cure, and in
humane appearance near to incureable: But there is much charity due to them, as
following the dictat of their own Conscience; And they owe, and, I hope, pay
the same back again to these that do the same in another way; and whatsoever
may be the readiest and happiest way of reuniting those that are mutually so
minded, the Lord reveal it to them in due time. This one word I shall add, That
this difference should arise to so great a hight, may seem somewhat strange to
a^y man that calmely considers, that there is in this Church no change at all,
neither in the Doctrine nor worship, no nor in the substance of the Discipline
it self: But when it falls on matters easily inflamable, how little a spark,
how great a fire will it kindle?

Because every on has not the Book I have transcribed here Mr Baxter's own
words. Baxt. of Church - Government. 3. P. C. 1. P. 276.

An Episcopacy desirable for the Ref^rmation and Peace of the Churches. A fixed
President durante vita, P. 297. P. 330. But some will say, We are engaged
against all Prelacie by Covenant, and therefore cannot yield to so much as you
do without perjurie. Ans. That this is utterly untrue, I thus demonstrate.

1. When that Covenant was presented to the Assembly with the bare name of
Prelacy joined to Popery, many grave and reverend Divines desired that the
word Prelacie might be explained, because it was not all Episcopacie they were
against, and thereupon the following concatenation in the Parenthesis was given
by way of explication in these words. That is Church - Government by Arch -
Bishops, Bishops, there Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans and Chapters, Arch
- Deans, and all the other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hyerarchie. By which it appears, that it was only the English Hierarchy, or
frame that was covenanted against, and that which was then existent, that
was taken down.

2. When the House of Lords took the Covenant, Mr Thomas Coleman, that gave it
them, did so explain it, and profess that it was not their intent to Covenant
against all Episcopacy, and upon this explication it was taken; and certainly
the Parliament was most capable of giving the due sense of it, because it was
they that did impose it.

3. And it could not be all Episcopacy that was excluded, because, a Parochial
Episcopacy was at the same time used and approved commonly here in England.

4. And in Scotland they had used the help of visiters for the Reformation of
their Churches, committing the care of a Country, or Circuit to some one man,
which was as high a sort of Episcopacy, at least as any I am pleading for.
Besides that they had Moderators in all their Synods, which were temporary
Bishops.

5. Also the chief Divines o^ the late Assembly at Westminster, that
recommended that Covenant to the Nations, have professed there own judgments
for such a moderat Episcopacy as I am here defending, and therefore never
intended the exclusion of this by Covenant.

After he adds, As we have Prelacie to bevvar of, so we have the contrary
extreme to avoid, and the Churches peace (if it may be) to procure; And as we
must not take down the Ministry, least it prepare men for Episcopacie; so
neither must we be against any profitable exercise of the Ministry, or
desirable order amongst them for fear of introducing Prelacy. Thus far
Baxter's own words.

There is another that has write a Treatis^ on purpose, and that zealous and
strict enough, touching the obligation of the League and Covenant under the
name of Theophilus Timorcus. And yet therein it is expressly asserted, that
however, at first, it might appear, that the Parliament had renounced all
Episcopacy, yet upon exacter inquiry, is was evident to the Author, that, that
very scruple was made by some members in Parliament, and resolved (with the
consent of their Brethren in Scotland) that the Covenant was only intended
against Prelacie, as then it was in being in England, leaving a latitude for
Episcopacy, etc.

It would be noted, that when that Covenant was framed, there was no
Episcopacie at all in being in Scotland, but in England only; so that the
extirpation of that frame only could then be meant and intended. Likewise it
would be considered, that though there is in Scotland at present the name of
Dean, and Chapter, and Commissaries, yet that none of t^ose at all do exerce
any part of the Discipline under that name, neither any other as Chancellor or
Surrogat etc. by delegation from Bishops, with a total exclusion of the
community of Presbyters from all power and share in it, which is the great
point of difference betwixt that model and this with us, and imports so much as
to the main of Discipline. I do not deny, that the generality of the People,
yea even of Ministers in Scotland, when they took the Covenant might likewise
understand that Article, as against all Episcopacy whatsoever, even the most
moderat, especially if it should be restored under the express name of Bishops
and Archbishops, never considering how different the nature, and model, and way
o^ exercising it may be, though under the same names, and that the due
regulating of the thing is much more to be regarded, then either the retaining
or altering of the name. But though they did not then consider any such thing,
yet certainly it concerns them now to consider it, when it is represented to
them, that not only the words of the Oath it self do very genuinly consist
with such a qualified and distinctive sense, but that the very Composers or
Impo^ers of it, or a considerable part of them, did so understand and intend
it. And unless they make it appear, that the Episcopacy now in question with
us in Scotland is either contrary to the word, or to that mitigated sense of
their own Oath, it would seem more suitable to Christian charity and
moderation, rather to yield to it as tolerable, at least, then to continue so
inflexibly fast to their first mistakes and excessive zeal, as for love of it
to divide from their Church, and break the bond of peace.

It may likewise be granted, that some learned men in England, who refused to
take the Covenant, did possibly except against that Article of it, as
signifying the total renounciation and abolition of all Episcopacie; And seeing
that was the real event and consequent of it, and they having many other
strong and weighty reasons for refusing it, it is no vvonder that they were
little curious to enquire what past amongst the contrivers of it, and what
distinction or different senses either the words of that Article might admit,
or those contrivers might intend by them. And the truth is, that besides many
other evils, the iniquity and unhappiness of such Oaths and Covenants lies
much in this, that, being commonly framed by persons that, even amongst
themselves, are not ^ully of one mind, but have there different opinions and
interests to serve (and it was so even in this) they are commonly patched up
of so many several Articles and clauses, and those too o^ so versatile and
ambiguous terms, that they prove most vvretched snares, thickets of briars and
thorns to the Consciences of those that are engaged in them, and matter of
endless contentions and disputs amongst them about the true sense and
intendment, and the tie and obligements of those doubtful clauses, especially
in some such alterations and revolutions of affairs as alvvayes may, and often
do, even within fevv Years follovv after them; for the models and productions
of such devices are not usually long Lived. And whatsoever may be said for
their excuse in whole or in part, who, in yeeldance to the power that pressed
it, and the general opinion of this Church at that time, did take that Covenant
in the most moderate and least schismatical sense that the terms can admit;
yet I know not what can be said to clear them of a very great sin, that not
only framed such an engine, but violently imposed it upon all ranks of men,
not Ministers and other public persons only, but the whole body and community
of the People, thereby engaging such droves of poor ignorant persons, to they
know not what, and, to speak freely, to such a hodge podge of various
concernments, Religious and Civil, as Church Discipline and Government, the
Privileges of Parliament and Liberties of Subjects, and condign punishment of
Malignants, things hard enough for the wisest and learnedest to draw the just
lines of, and to give plain definitions and decisions of them, and therefore
certainly as far off from the reach of poor country Peoples understanding, as
from the true interest of their souls; and yet to tie them by a Religious and
sacred Oath either to know all these, or to contend for them blindfold without
knowing them, can there be instanced a greater oppression and tyranny over
Consciences then this? Certainly they that now govern in this Church cannot be
charged with any thing near or like unto it; for whatsoever they require of
intrants to the Ministry, they require neither subscriptions nor Oaths of
Ministers already entered, and far less of the whole body of the People; and
it were ingenuously done to take some notice of any point of moderation, or
whatsoever else is really commendable even in those we account our greatest
enemies, and not to take any part in the World for the absolute Standard and
unfailing rule of truth and righteousness in all things.

But oh who would not long for the shadows of the evening, and to be at rest
from all these poor childish triffling contests.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHatsoever was the occasion of copying out the passages cited in this Paper,
and of adding these few thoughts that then occurred touching that subject, I
would have neither of them understode as intended any way to reflect upon or
judge other Churches where this Government is otherwise exercised; but what is
here said is only argumentum ad hominem, and Particularly adapted to the
Persons, and notions, and scruples we have to do withal in this Church. And
though this is de figned to come to very few hands, yet I wish that what is
here represented were by some better way brought to the notice of such as know
least of it and need it most^ that if it be posfible, their extreme fervor
might be somewhat allayed by this consideration, that this very form of
Government, which is so hateful to them, is by the Presbyterians of the
Neighbor Kingdom accounted a thing, not only tolerable, but desirable: And I
might add, that, upon due enquiry, the reformed Churches abroad will be found
in a great part much of the same opinion; Yea, I am not affrayed to say yet
further, that I think there is good reason to believe, that it were not only
Lawful for these that now govern in this Church but, if prejudice hindered
not, might prove expedient and useful for the good of the Church it self, that
they did use in some instances a little more authority nor they do, and yet
might still be very far off from proud and tyrannical domination, never
applying their power to obstruct what is good, but to advance it, and not at
all against the truth, but always for it, and while they do so, the Atheism
and profanness that abounds cannot reasonably be imputed to the nature of the
Government, as too commonly it is by some, but rather to the schism that is
made by withdrawing and dividing from it: For there is not a greater enemy in
the World to the power of Religion then the wranglings and bitter contentions
that are caused about the external forms of it. (...) as Nazianzen
pathetically begins one of his orations for peace. I confess I have sometime
wondered to see some wise and good men, after all that can be said to them,
make so great reckoning of certain Metaphysical exceptions against foam little
words and formalities of difference in the Government, and set so little a
value upon so great a thing as is the peace of the Church. Oh when shall the
loud and harsh noises of our debates be turned to the sweeter sound of united
prayers for this blessed peace, that we might cry with one heart and voice to
the God of peace, who alone can give it, Pacem te poscimus omnes: and if we be
real supplicants for it, we would bewar of being the disappointers of our own
desires, and of obstructing the blessing we pray for, and therefore would
mainly study a temper receptive of it, and that is great meekness and charity,
and certainly whatsoever party or opinion we follow in this matter, the badge
by which we must be known to be followers of Jesus Christ is this, that we love
one another, and that law unquestionably is of divine right, and therefore
would not be broken by bitter passion and revilings, and rooted hatreds one
against another for things about which the right is in dispute betwixt us; and
however that be, are we Christians? Then doubtless the things wherein we agree
are incomparablely greater then these wherein we disagree, and therefore in all
reason should he more powerful to unite us, then the other to divide us. But to
restrain my self, and stop here, if we love both our own and the Churches
peace, there be two things I conceive we should most carefully avoid, the
bestowing of too great zeal upon small things, and too much fidence of opinion
upon doubtful things: It is a mad thing to rush on hard and boldly in the
dark, and we all know what kind of person it is of whom Solomon says, That he
rages and is confident.

The second Letter.
SIR,
The question betwixt us, is not concerning Bishops governing absolutely by
themselves and their delegates, but concerning Bishops governing in conjunction
with Presbyters in Presbyteries and Synods of which we affirm.

That it is neither contrary to the Scriptures, nor the example of the
primitive Church, but must agreeable to both: If any think otherways, let
them produce their evidences of Scripture and antiquity. If they say, it is not
enough to make such a form lavvful, that it is not contrary to Scripture, but
there ought to be an express command or rule in Scripture to vvarrand it, they
will sure be so just, as to be subject to the same Law themselves. Let them
then produce such an express command or rule for their own model of
Kirk-sessions, Presbyteries, Synods Provincial and National, and a commission
of the Kirk in their several dependences and subordinations for the ordinary
and constant gov^rnm^nt and exercise of discipline in the Church, and the
neces^ary changing of the moderators in these meetings, excepting only that of
the Ki^k-session, wherein the Minister is constanly to moderat; for without
such an express rule as this, a Bishop or fixed Pr^sident may very well consist
with that whole from they contend for; And it is really and actually so at
this present in this Church, and they stand so much the rather obliged to bring
a clear command for these Iudicatories, and their subordinations, because they
affirm them to be of unquestionable divine right, and the very Kingdom of
Christ upon earth, and the only lavv^ul and absolutely necessary Government of
the Christian Church, vvh^reas the asserters of other forms do not usu^lly
speak so big. If they shall say, they are not against a fixed Pr^sident or
Bishop, or call him what you will (for to contest about names, ^specially in
so grave a matter, is trivial and childish) but that the question is about
their povv^r, then we beg that it may be so. Let that be all the question
betwixt us, and then we hope the controversy will be quickly ended; for we
trust we shall be found not at all desireous to usurp or effect any undue
power, but rather to abate of that power which is reasonable and conform
even to primitive Episcopacie, then that a schism should continue in this
Church upon that score. But be it supposed, that Bisbops do stretch their power
somewhat beyond their line, let all the World judge, whether Ministers are for
that engaged to leave their Station and withdraw from those meetings of the
Church, which themselves approve of, for the exercise of Discipline, yea and
(as many of them have done) to separate from the public Worship, and whole
communion of the Church, because of some degree of vvrong done them (as they
think) in that point of power, or weather they had not sufficiently acquitted
themselves, and discharged there Consciences by free declaring of their opinion
concerning that matter, and modestly desiring the redress of it; and patiently
waiting for it, though it be not presently redressed, and continuing in the
performance of their own duty to their power, though others above them, or
about them, do transgress theirs, or seem at least to them to do so; otherwise
if we think our selves obliged for every thing that is, or that we judge
faulty in other persons, or in the frame of things, to relinquish either the
communion of it, or our station in it, what will there be but endless
svvarmes of separations and divisions in any Church under the Sun.

But there is one thing in this business of ours that sticks after all the
rest. The Covenant. As to that, waving all the irregularities of it, though so
many and so great, that in the judgment of diverse, both wise and good men,
they seem to annul the obligation of it, suppose it still to bind all that took
it, and suppose likewise, that the present Episcopacy in this Church is that
same that was abjured in that Covenant; yet the Article relating thereto
obliges each one only to this, to endeavor whithin there calling and station,
if such an Episcopacy shall be introduced and continued against their will. But
the truth is, if men would have the patience to enquire into it, and consider
the thing without p^ejudice and partiality, this our Episcopacy will be found,
not to be the same with that abjured in that Covenant: For that is the
Government of Bishops and Archbishops absolutely by themselves and their
Delegates, Chancellors, Archdeacons, Officials, etc. as it is expressed in the
very words of the Article, and was on purpose so expressed, to difference that
frame from other forms of Episcopacy^ and particularly from that which is
exercised by Bishops jointly with Presbyters in Presbyteries and Synods, and
that is it which is now used in this Church. And that the Presbyterians in
England do generally take notice of this difference, and to that degree, as to
account the one model contrary to the Covenant, and the other, not contrary to
it, b^t very well agreeing with it, is a thing that none can deny, nor any that
uses diligence to enquire can be ignorant of, for it is clear in diverse
treatises extant in print. These things, to my best discerning, are truths; and
if they be indeed so, I am sure are pertinent truths, toward the healing of our
sad divisions; but if any like to be contentious, I wish I could say of this
Church, we have no such custom: But this certainly may be said, that there is
no custom does more disedifie the Churches of God, and less become the
followers of the Prince of peace. I shall only add on word which I am sure is
undeniable, and I think is very considerable, that he that cannot join with
the present frame of this Church, could not have lived in the communion of the
Christian Church in ^he time of the first most famous General Assembly of it,
the Council of Nice, yea (to go no higher up, ^ho^gh safely I might) he must as
certainly have separated from the whole Catholic Church in the days of the
holy Bishop and Martyr Cyprian upon this very scruple of the Government, as
Novatus did upon another occasion.

An APPENDIX In Answer to a Narrative of the Issue of the Treaty anent
Accommodation.
SInce the finishing of these sheets, I have seen a narrative of the last
passage and issue of this Treaty for Accommodation, which again ingageth me to
take my pen. And in this Discourse, the Author (and it is like one of the two,
whom I have already rencountered) premising the Articles that we have heard,
exhibiteth the words, and manner of the Brethrens refusal to close therewith,
and then resumeth the Accommodators their Arguments, concluding with a short
additional reflecction, upon both our Covenants.

And as for the first part, touching the Brethrens refusal and their declining
to give in their reasons, or to debate the matter without an express command, I
do neither contradict nor apologize. Only of this I am assured, that whatever
influence, the manifold transgressions and mighty sins of the present times,
the intractableness of adversaries, or the hopeless self-conceit of the party
with whom they dealt, might have had upon their prudence to keep silence; yet
neither can a cause, so righteous and evident, be there throw justly prejudged,
nor will the duty of a testimony, for God and his Truth in so clear on
exigent, be thereby satisfied.

The Arguments by the Author resumed, are little or nothing different from
these, that I have already discussed, and when I come to re-examine them, I
shall take them rather as they shall fall in then as they lie.

But seeing that both the strain of this Paper, and certain other grounds of
conjecture, do probably in^inuat, that the Accommodators, rather then to fail
of a design so advantageous, may possibly abate their terms, to the most
taking condescendence, and make all the stress of the controversy, to fall
upon the lawfulness or unlawfulness of a fixed Praeses, it will not be amiss,
that for the better defeating of this contrivance, we resume the Question; and
supposing this President to be both eligible and deposible by the very meetings
over which he presides, and vvaving all other singularities, inquire a little
more accuratly into the nature of his office, and wherein its differences from
an ambulatory Moderator do precisely consist.

And first we may observe in general, that although there be nothing more
frequent in the mouths of our Opposits, then in the pursuance of their present
purpose, to undervalue the difference inquired into, unto the almost nothing of
a formaliti^, depending merely upon the diversity of the periods of the two
Moderators their duration; yet in other cases of the like nature, wherein they,
or any persons else, do conceive themselves to be concerned, what co^tra^ie
contendings and reasonings does a little inte^^st elicit? I need not allege
parti^ular ins^ances, he who seriously considers, how that there is no
Court, Society, or Incorporation so mien, whereof the Members, upon the
alteration of their Privilege, either by usurpation among themselves, or by
extrins^ck imposing of others, from a chairman freely elected during
pleasure, unto a Praeses fixed ad vitam, would not complain of a great and
material innovation, will in the matter of Courts institute by God and not by
man, and that in order to things of an everlasting consequence, be easily
satisfied, either of the delusion, or more hurtful design of the former
pretense; so that a man may well conclude that it is because, that neither the
great Autho^, nor the principal ends of these meetings, are duly regarded,
that therefore the Ordinances themselves, are accordingly slighted.

2. I observe, that the Origin and warrant of a Moderator in Church-meetings,
is not from any particular positive Scripture-precept or rule given anent^^;
but being a thing by clear evidence, necessary for the concern of order, and
the right expeding of affairs, its immedi^t rise, comes to be referred to the
common providence of reason, and is only reductive, and in s^ far of divine
institution, as the Courts whereunto the office belongs, are founded upon
that Authority, and do require this moderation, as an expedie^^ needful to the
right management of your business; which ground being in it self manifest, and
such as may be examplified in many other instances^ and also fortified by
apostolic practice, does abundantly make out my assertion, and yet confirm
the institution, with a sufficient impress of Gods appointment. Only it may be
remembered, that wherever this rational necessity takes place in divine
ordinances, as its exigence is the precise measure and warrant of any thing
thereby introduced; so if this limi^ be once ^lighted and transgressed, we not
only tacitly impeach the holy and wise counsel of God, in ordering his own
matters, but in effect cast open a door, to all that the weakness and
wantonness of human invention, and ca^nal reason, shall please therein to
devise: and how displea^ing this is in Gods sight, and of what dangerous
consequence, no serious christian needs to be advertised.

3. I observe, that as there is a vast difference, betwixt the entrusting of a
person with an employment, by a revocable mandat, and the vesting of him with a
ri^ht and power, to exprese the same for term of life; so it is in this, that
^he diversity of the fixed Praeses, and ambulatory Moderator, does mainly
stand. For clearing of which position, it may be considered, that seeing the
distinction of right and dominion, from a precarious use, does mostlie arise
from, and it is valued by the certain continuance of the former, consequent to
the nature of the thing, which in the later, subject to another arbitrarie
interruption, is not to be found; how in the case of this Presidencie,
fixedness, does superinduce a kind of propriety, to which the changeable
Moderator can lay no claim, is very easy to be apprehended. He who by a
permissive benevolence does only enjoy for an uncertain season, may
nevertheless have a very full and plenary use; but that this enjoyment is
obnoxious to another pleasure, whereas that of right, the subject remaining,
can only be terminat by the owners consent or deed, is the great disparitie,
whereby not only these titles are in themselves distinguished, but from which,
the power of a free disposal, peculiar to right, does undoubtedlie flow. Whence
it may be further collected, that as the free civil abuse (so to speak) as well
as the use, is founded in, and warranted by the nature of right, and the
independencie from the will of any other, which it imports; so the fixedness of
any power or office, does certainly in so far, notably capacitat the person
therein stated, to a more free and incontrollable exercise. What difference
Lawyers do make, Inter cum qui jure suo, and illum qui beneficio tantum alieno
jurisdictionem habet, and what a latitude of power, is by them assigned ^o the
former, which unto the second, for this very cause, they make incompetent, is
not for one to dip further into, then may conduce for the illustration of
common reason. Only, as he who is elected to an ordinary office of fixed
Presidencie ad vitam, may well and truly be said, to be jure suo Praeses,
whereas the other, who is thereto chosen by a commission, as it were, during
pleasure, and no longer, does by the same rule alieno tantum beneficio
praesidere; so, that this fixedness, imported by the jus suum, arising from the
investiture of the office, does considerably advance the Episcopus Praeses, and
discriminat him from a Moderator, nominat only during pleasure, and absolutely
depending upon the beneplacitum of his constituents, n^edeth no further
explication.

I have hitherto for avoiding confusion, opposed to the fixed Praeses a
Moderator appointed simply during pleasure, if any man think that this does
not so exactlie quadrat to our custom, where by our moderators were chosen,
f^r a definit space, and that by this certain designation he appears not to
be much different from him that is ordained for time of life. It is answered,
it is not the simple omission, or adjection of a certain space, that is to be
regarded in this matter, a person may be commissionat, not only ind^finitlie,
but also with the expression of a prefixed time, and yet in both cases meerlie
during pleasure, just as in a precarious concession, which though it may be
qualified with the convention of a certain term, yet Lawy^rs say, it is of no
force to restrain the granters revocation; but the true point of the
difference, does plainly stand in this, that the office of presidency once
being declared to be fixed, and so made a right of its own nature, not
oth^rwise terminable, then with the Praeses his life, as his continuance
therein, is from the nature of his right, and cannot be understood to flow
merely from the electors their free pleasure, like to the case of a trust
committed by simple mandat; so he is no more obnoxious to their revocation,
then any other person, having a grant from a community of an ordinary superior
office during his life, can be turned out of it, at the granters arbitrament;
whereas, on the other hand, there being no such constant office established,
the person called simply to officiat, whether indefinitly or for a set time,
attaineth to no right, but the same remains entirely with the meeting
electing, and he is absolutely subjected to their determination. By which also
it further appears, and may conduce for the better uptaking of this
distinction, that as in this second case, the right abides with the
presbytery, and the naked exercise of moderation, is entrusted to the person
thereto appointed; so in the former, the erecting of this presidency, unto an
ordinary fixed office, is without question a manifest derogation from, and
abridgment of, the Presbyteries antecedent privilege, so that in sum, it may
be certainly and evidently concluded, that as the erecting of a superior
office, by a perpetual constitution, and thereby retrinching the constituents
their original power, and making to the person therewith invested, a proper
right, notwithstanding that the actual nomination and election of persons to
that office, may still remain with them, does clearly and exceedingly diff^r,
from a commission given by way of mandat (though for the exercise of the same
employment,) whether indefinitly, or for a certain space, neither diminishing
the mandators their inherent power, nor granting to the person commissionat,
any certain right; so the offices of the constant Pro^stos, and the
Presbyterian Moderator, are by the same methods and rules, as remotely
distinguished.

If it be further objected, That I seem to forget, that even the fixed,
Praeses, is not accountable, but may be removed upon his delinquency, and that
ad vitam, which does much impare the difference here assigned, I shall not, in
answering, divert my Reader to the doubt, whether this Praeses may be removed
from his presidency upon peculiar and lesser faults, not inferring a remove
from his ministry, or whether, according to the perpetual custom in this case,
these deprivations are not to be divided, which certainly contributeth much to
the Praeses his establishment. But seeing the common and notore dis^inction of
an appointment ad vitam or culpam, or only, durante beneplacito, does
sufficiently insinuat the solution, it is obvious, that though an ordinary
office given ad vitam, may according to the evident rules of right and reason
(which do in no case permit the same to be absolute, or exempt it from all
control) be takan away, upon a just ground of forfeiture, duly, tried and
proven; yet the disparity of a commission, given merely ad beneplacitum, and
revocable at pleasure, without so much as the necessity of alleging a reason,
is abundantly manifest, and plainly establishes the di^tinction now in
agitation; and in a word, to be removeable from a trust ad libitum, and
deposible from a right only, pro culpa, are so sensibly different, that the
objection does not deserve any further answer. Only, that the influence thereof
upon practice, or upon the right or wrong management of affairs, may be the
better apprehended, it would be considered, that almost in every trust and
employment, let be in this which we treat of, there are, below that excess of
malversation, which can be charged and proven to be a fault to conclude a
removel, a great many inferior degrees of mal-administration, which though by
reason of their quality, they do not amount to a just cause of rejection, yet
may nevertheless be of singular pr^judice, and just as a free election does
deliberat upon proper and improper, so may these smaller transgressions, very
rationally require a charge, without meriting deposition. Whence it easily
follows, that beside the diminution of the Presbyteries power and privilege,
this fixed Proestos, does also impose upon them, an inconvenient restriction of
their just liberty of change, which in many cases may prove singularly
prejudicial.

4. I observe, That as the fixed Praeses is constitute, not by an arbitrary
mandat, but by a proper right, resulting from the erection of the office, in
the manner that I have described; so the office it self, consisting in a
priority of direction and conduct, it certainly thereunto adds a peculiar
dignity. I say the office consisting in a priority of direction; for that there
are subservient offices, such as that of a Clark or Recorder, which may be
fixed, and enjoined by a proper right, and have also the general esteem of
praise worthy employments, and yet do not entitle to any eminency, is
sufficiently explained, and its difficulty removed out of my way, by the
simple proposal. But the thing here rema^ked, and wherein the difference of the
Proestos and Presbyerian Moderator is further apparent, is, that the former
has by virtue of his right of presidencie a concomitant special honor above
his Brethren, which cannot be denied to him, without a gross s^lecisme in
prelatick h^rauldrie. The temporary Moderator is indeed attended by an agreeable
respect; but as he is vested with no proper right to the place, wherein he
simply officiats, by the Assemblies free nomination, and as its instrument and
mouth, which during pleasure, it chooses for the more orderly management of
its affairs; so the estimation and honor that accompanies the employment, is
of no higher degree, and equally transient; whereas the fixed Praeses, being
rather set up to be a head for Governing the assembly and its actions, must of
necessity on this account, be adorned with a more high and permanent dignity.

But it may be objected, that it is an easy matter to represent the
controverted Praeses in as diminishing characters, and by saying, that he
simply officiats, at least enters unto the office by the free vote of the
meeting, and as its mouth, and not its head, by them thereto elected for time
of life, to resolve all the difference of the two, and this eminency of
respect appropriat to the fixed, unto the bare specialitie of the distinct
period set to his continuance, and no doubt words are easily turned; but as it
must be acknowledged, that these things, viz. for one to be set, though by a
free suffrage, in a place formed and erected in an ordinary office, with its
known special powers and privileges, and to pos^ess by the right thence
resulting; and to be entrusted with the same employment, but only by the way of
a free and revocable mandat and commmission, absolutely depending at the
constituents pleasure, are widely distant; so, particular distinguishing
qualities of the Proestos, in his proper right and power, his exemption from an
arbitrary removal, and his more advanced dignity, are thereby notably
declared. And therefore, seeing he does enjoy his place jure suo, (as Lawyers
speak) and does not precariouslie hang ^or the continuance of its exercise,
upon the Presbyteries free and simple goodwil, as our changeable Moderators do,
he cannot in this respect be said to be only an instrument for order, dignified
with no higher esteem, but is in ^ffect by virtue of his right, and the power
thereto pertaining, rendered the chief and head, and accompanied with a
peculiar honor inseparable from such a Superiority.

If it be further alleged, that even in our own custom, the Moderator once
elected did always continue out his course, and that it is not so easy to
give one instance of this arbitrary putting off, here so much spoken of; I
shall not answer, that his time b^ing short, and not ad vitam, there could
scarce be any necessity for making of such changes: But the truth is, the not
making thereof is so far from impugning, that it much commends the differences
by me explained; for if the quality of the office, as by us used, the certain
time thereto appointed, and the Presbyteries reserve of an absolute control,
have been of that efficacy, as even to prevent the occasions of exercising
this la^t p^iviledge, no doubt it is more concludent in our behalf, then if the
Pres^yteries had made many removes. It is not therefore, as I said before, the
electing and desig^i^g for a c^rtain space, and a not altering observance, that
do signify any thing in this affair; no, but as the Presbyteries retaining of
the absolut power over their Moderator, is both their privilege by the Lords
appointment; and also the great check of all abuses, incident through his
weakness or malice; so it is the setting up of a Praeses over them, with a
power appertaining to him, as his proper right during life, and not committed
to him by a revocable mandat, that not only elevats the Episcopus Praeses to
his distinguishing Superiority and Dignity, but in effect, contains the seminal
cause of most of the evils that have thereon ensued.

Now from these things thus explained, the differences of the fixed Praeses
from our Moderator, appear mani^estly to be. 1. That the former imports an
ordinary settled office, including a proper right, and power to the person
thereto appointed; whereas the later does only imply a bare exercise, wholly
dependent upon the Presbyteries pleasure. 2. That the setting up of the first,
does derogat from the Presbyteries right, by transferring it upon him; whereas
after the nomination of the second, the Presbyteries right remains still
entire, and neither is, nor can be impaired by the intrusting of a particular
Member with its mere actual exercise. 3. The fixed Praeses deprives the
Presbytery of a great measure of their liberty, he being exempted from their
arbitrarie control and power of changing; whereas our Moderator is altogether
obnoxious to their determination. 4. The fixed Praeses is created by a deed
convoying a right; whereas our Moderator is made by simple mandat, imparting
nothing, save a precarious trust. 5. I^ an allusion may add light, the Praeses
is set up as it were to be Head; whereas the Moderator is in a manner only
appointed to be the Mouth of the meeting. 6. The Praeses his right and power
and Superiority, do necessarily attribute unto him a special eminency of
dignity; whereas our Moderator, his naked ministerial exercise, cannot pretend
to any higher respect. And 7. The Praeses from the nature of his right,
continues ad vitam or ad culpam; whereas the Moderator, having no right, has
no other as^urance or lace, then the Presbyteries beneplacitum.

These differences then (though among themselves rather formally then really
di^tinct) holding out the proper characteris^icks of the Proestos contended
for, as indeed they are, and must necessarily be admitted by all, before I fall
to disprove him by further reasoning, it will not be amiss, that for the better
clearing of what singular moment these his signal advantages, above our
Moderator, may be in the matters wherein they are conversant, I shortly note
the several parts of the office. And 1. It is the Moderators part, to propose
matters to be considered. 2. To direct consultations. 3. To moderate debates.
4. To interrogat opinions. 5. To ask the votes. 6. To determine in the case of
equality, by his casting suffrage. 7. To appoint extraordinary dyets: Which
being all certain beyond controve^sie, I only wish that the true value of their
influence, may be as gravely pondered in the present question for guarding
against any exorbitant power, whereby in these spiritual Courts and matters,
they have often, been and may be still very dangerously abused and depraved, as
we see men in their worldly concerns seriously attent to the things not only
of the like, but of a far inferior consequence.

Havin^ thus delineat the proprieties of this Episcopus Praeses, as I suppose
with a satisfying perspicuity, what clearing it may give to the main inquiry,
concerning the lawfulness or unlawfulness of this place and office, falls next
under consideration.

And in answer thereto, I distinctly affirm, that the place and office of a
fixed Praeses, or constant Moderator, is unwarrantable, and positivelie
unlawful. Which assertion, seeing it imports the plain contradiction of my
Author's first consideration, viz. that there is no command in scripture, for
changing of Moderators in meetings of Presbyteries, nor no precept, nor rule of
Scripture, contrary to the office of a Bishop, as a fixed President in Synods,
the confut^tion thereof, will be the best confirmation of my position.

Only I must premise, that seeing the Author proposes the two Members of his
consideration, as if in effect coincident, and that, if there be a precept in
Scripture, contrary to the office of a Bishop as a fixed Praeses, the
necessity of a change of Mederators, does from the acknowledged exigence of
order neces^arily ensue, his insinuat demand of a precept in Scripture for
changing of Moderators, as well as of a rule, contrary to the office of a fixed
President, is captiously superfluous. Holding me therefore to that part, that
there are precepts and ^ules in Sc^ipture, contrary to the office of a Bishop,
as a fixed President, the grounds that in my former Discourse I have thence
adduced, to prove the absolute and lowly paritie, commanded by our Lord to his
Apostles, and all ^ucceeding Ministers, if they do stand firm, do undoubtedlie
evince it: For s^eing that our Author does in his third consideration, use it
as a main Argument, That there is no particular command for an absolute parity
of Presbyters, adding, If it be, let it be produced, and it will end the
controversy, It is as evident from his concession, as from the unquestionable
opposition of an exact paritie, and the majority of this office of Presidencie,
that by the establishing of the first, the second is subverted. Now that our
Lord has commanded an absolute paritie of Presbyters, If I make it appear
from the original precepts, given to the Apostles, without controversy not
only the Antecessors of all succeeding Presbyters, in their ordinary
ministry, but the persons to whom, as representing the perpetual ministry,
ordained by Christ in his Church, the Rules and directions thereto proper were
delivered, I hope the transfer^ing of the command, from the Apostles to
succeeding Presbyters, will be of no difficulty. Let us then in this search
after the Lords will in this matter, humbly and meekly consider what he himself
has therein delivered. And as, for my own part, I am very far removed from the
temptations of interest, that commonly do sway and oversway in it; so I am
confident, that all men equally removed from the passions and prejudices thence
arising, will in this divine light, find a most assured determination.

Our Lord then having upon several occasions, particularly that reasoning
(...), which of them should be greatest, and the suite of a Proedria, or a
prerogative-seat presented by Zebedees two Sons, and their Mother, dehorted the
twelve from all affectation of more emi^ent authority or dignity among
themselves, not only by reducing them to the (...), and innocent simplicity of
children, and proponing to them the example of his own lovvliness and
humility, both in his personal deportment, and in the manner of his
administration, but also by removing the very subject it self, and warning
them, that they ought to be so ^ar from looking after any Superiority of Rule
or Authority, one over another, that the greatness of the greatest, was to be
Servant of all, and industry and humility, their praise and exaltation. He
tells them further, that as he alone was their Master, so all they were
Bre^hren; and accordingly we find them all equally commissionat to the work of
the mini^^rie, Math. 2^. 19. alike vested with the power of Discipline, John.
20. 23. and in this paritie acting, officiating and associating others to
themselves, in several undenaible instances. These things being evident in the
Gospel records, verily when I reflect upon them, I cannot but marvel, what it
is, that can here be desiderat. The Disciples contend who shall be greatest,
and our Lords answer is, If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last
of all: and that the least among them, the same should be great: By which, as
it is clearly intimat, that the greatness which they aspired unto, was none
other then a primacy or presidency of one above his fellows; so it is manifest,
that our Lord does not in his return so much condemn their ambition, as by a
total remove of all greatness, the subject of the competition, and converting
their contest for grandeur, into an emulation of lowliness and diligence,
fairly confute it. I grant, that according to their more rude and carnal
apprehension of our Lords Kingdom, the time of this debate, it is very likely,
that it was incited and managed by agreeable passions and phansies; but yet
seeing he does not plai^ly direct his return, to undeceive them of that
delusion, but rather carries his command further, to inform their judgments,
and form there mind, by an instruction suited to the true work and station
wherein he was to leave them; that, even in that they were to look after no
stated Primacy or Majority, but consequently to re^ (...)

But here our Author reclaimeth, and in his fourth consideration says, That
this parity cannot be concluded from our Savior's command, It shall not be so
with you, nor any other of his holy injunctions of moderation, humility
meekness; for that would destroy all Church Government, and all Superiority of
Pastors, over other Elders and Deacons, and over their People; If all imparitie
of Rule in Ecclesiastic Persons, were inconsistent with these great Laws of
our holy profession, the Apostles themselves, would have been the first most
signal transgressors. It is answered; If from the Text, It shall not be so with
you, I were contending for an absolute paritie, in all respects, among all
Church Officers and Members, in as much as thereby all their distinction, with
the whole oversight of Pastors, should be taken away, without doubt the
objection would be unanswerably concludent; but seeing the divisions of
Church Officers in extraordinary and ordinary, and of the ordinary, in
Pastors, Elders and Deacons, with the imparity thence resulting, is not so much
as by us questioned, the laxeness of such arguing does merit a more severe
censure, then at present I am inclined to use. It is therefore to be
considered, that as the several powers, offices and gifts, by our Lord
institute in, and given unto his Church, with their beautiful order and
subordination, are by us very cheerfully acknowledged, and no constructive
imparitie, that may be thence in^inferred, in the least doubted; so neither is
the same a proper imparity, a thing only incident to Officers of the same kind;
Nor (if it were) is it the imparitie at present under debate, which being an
imparitie of place, or other the like privilege, attribute to one, exclusive
of others of the same order, is the only subject of the controversy: Which
standing thus in plain terms, whether or not our Lord, by appointing his
Apostles, and their successors the Ministers of the Gospel, in the same
equality of power, as Brethren, and quelling all there competitions about the
majority and pre^erence, by reducing them to the low degree of Servants,
without any distinction, except what may arise from a greater measure of
humility and diligence, has thereby discharged all imparitie of power and
presidencie among them: I am confident, that not only the simple proposal does
conclude the affirmative, but render the absurdity here objected against it
widely impe^t^n^nt.

I say then, for a distinct answer. 1. That the paritie by us pleaded, is not
indeed to be concluded from any of our Lords holy injunctions of Moderation,
humility and meekness; to insinuat the tontrarie to be our assertion, is not
only a plain calumny, seeing all men know, that the highest as well as the
lowest of men, constitute in lavvful degrees, are liable to these sacred
inst^uctions, but also a desingenuous artifice, to make it be thought, that we
take the command, it shall not be so among you, for a mere precept of that
kind, and thereby surrender one of our main arguments; in as much, as it is
rather from the intimation it contains of the Apostles their future condition,
then from any precept of humility that may be thence inferred, that it
strongly concludes my position.

2. Although the command, It shall not be so among you, does not prohibit the
different orders and degrees of Church Officers, whether extraordinary or
ordinary of our Lords appointment, which both manifest reason, and the genuine
import of the antithesis do plainly evince; yet that all that superior
eminency and coactive authority, whereby the Princes, and great ones of the
earth, are properly from others distinguished, is here removed from Church
administrations, and Lordly Prelacie, with all its privileges and dignities,
thereby discharged, is obvious to the meanest capacity.

3. As these words, It shall not be so among you, do in the first place clear
the nature and manner of ecclesiastic, in opposition to secular rule; So it is
from the ensuring ampliation, but whosoever will be great among you, let him be
your Minister etc. that consistentlie with the former declaration, the paritie
by us pleaded, of of^icers in the same order, and all imparitie whatsoever
among Church Officers, resulting merely from a greater eminency of place and
dignity, is utterly excluded. I say, resulting merely from a greater eminency
etc. For that Apostles and Evangelists, in respect of their extraordinary
qualities and employments, and Pastors and ruling Elders, in respect of their
different charges, are stated in a kind of imparitie, is not at all
controverted; but the question being plainly concerning the lawfulness of an
imparitie not from any special power, trust or gift given by our Lord, but from
an higher place and dignity, having no other foundation, then a greater
measure, and larger interest in the Government con^erred by man, upon the
person therewith vested, I affirm, that not only among officers of the same
kind and order, but among all Church Officers whatsoever, this is an imparitie
of rule, in ecclesiastic persons, as little countenanced by the superiority of
Pastors over ^ther Elders and deacons, and the whole s^ock, or by the Apostles
their practice, as our Lords discourse and command to the twelve, upon the suit
of the brothers, does certainly condemn that Proedrie whereunto they pretended.

As for our Authors anticipation, viz. that to say the Apostles were
extraordinary persons, would upon the supposition of their imparity in the
point of rule, say nothing, but that they were extraordinary transgressors, it
is like many other his mistakes, wherein the glances of an i^consi^erat
fancy, do very visiliet preoccupy his judgment; for seeing the imparitie
which our Lord does condemn and we do disown, is an i^paritie consi^^ing in
the inequality of place and dignity, in one and the same order, and not that
imparitie, which arises from an extraordinary office, power or gift of our
Lords ordaining, it is evident that the imparitie of the Apostles,
extraordinary officers. compared with ordinary Presbyters, does not in the
least contradict; and that the Author, by imagining the answer, of their being
extraordinary persons, to import no more then that they were extraordinary
transgressors, does only show his extraordinary inadvertence. And really when
I consider, that notwithstanding the different orders of offices, which Christ
has ordained in the Church, he has nevertheless most expressly stated his
Apostles, and in their persons all succeeding Pastors, in an exact equality,
and clearly discharged all pretensions, to any sort of majoritie, or preference
among them, and that even our adversaries themselves, do not maintai^ their
Episcopus Praeses, by any claim of succession to these superior officers, at
first by our Lord institute, I do not only wonder, to find my Author in this
objection so foolishly and rawly confounding the imparitie of place and
pre-eminence, in one and the same order, by us from Gods word rejected, with
the imparitie of orders by the Lord established, but am fully of the opinion,
that the more eminent degree of a fixed President is yet more unreasonable,
then the distin and order of superior prelates, although in the seeming
acknowledgment of our very adversaries, destitute of all satisfying pretenses.

For as much then as our Lord, had very clearly and positively commanded the
paritie of his Apostles, and in them, of all his Ministers, by declaring them
to be Brethren, in direct opposition to that pharisaick pride, which might have
tempted them to the like affectation, and further, does adduce his own bles^ed
example, that by the consideration of his Ministerial lowliness, in the manner
both of his administration and conversation, compared with the infinite
excellency of his person, power and dignity, he might the more effectually
obviat all imaginable temptations, and utterly ruin the very thoughts of any
inequality of a stated superiority amongst them; let us with all fear, and
reverence, acknowledge his holy wisdom and appointment, and constantly disown
and rej^ct the vanity of all contrary inventions, specially, seeing it is most
certain, that however men may endeavor by specious pretex^s to obscure the
prohibition, and to palliat this corruption, yet its wicked, pernicious and
abominable effects and consequences, have rendered it, to all the sincere
lovers of our Lord Jesus, palpably odious.

That which does next occur, is two objections in the Authors second and
seventh consideration. The one, That the fixed presidency of Bishops in Synods,
has as much warrant as the fixed moderating of a Presbyter, in a Kirk-session
of ruling Elders; The other, That it can as little be quarreled, for want of an
express command in Scripture, as Kirk-sessions, Presbyteries, Synods and
National assemblies, and their Commissions, which with their several
subordination, are nevertheless by us pretended to be of divine institution.
But having in the former Treatise, by showing the Scriptural, and most rational
disparitie of the first case, and the undeniable grounds of divine right and
institution for the second, fully answered all that is here excepted, I will
not now detain my Reader, by any superfluous repetition or addition.

The fi^t thing asserted by the Author, is, that if the thing it self be
lawful, the appropriating of the name of Bishop, to the superior Presbyter,
cannot make it unlawful, though these two names be indifferently used in the
scripture, Thus the Author loves to quible. We say, that not only these two
names, are indifferently used in Scripture, but that they are used as
signifying one and the same thing, without the least insinuation of a more
proper application, either of the one or the other, to any thing distinct; and
thence do strongly infer, that aftertimes did very unwarrantably and
contrary to Scripture-grounds, divide both the things and names: And this our
Author, does very lightly turn over, as if all the question anent a divine
warrant for the identity or distinction of Bishops and Presbyter were only a
plea of words; and whether the names of Bishop and Presbyter, in Scripture
commonly and promiscouslie used, might lawfully afterward be severally
appropriat, without the least notice taken, that in Sc^ipture the use of the
words is no more common, then the thing the same; and that therefore the
separation afterward made, was a mere human invention. But he adds for a
reason, that the names are in the same manner used in some primitive writers,
who in other passages do clearly own the different degree of Bishops over
Presbyters, and were themselves of that degree. What then? A man may indeed
hence conclude, that in the times succeeding the purest, with the distinction
introduced of a superior Bishop over a Presbyter, the names, beside their
common use, became to be usurped to peculiar significations; but seeing this
manner of writing, observed in these primitive writters, does no ways hold in
sacred write, whence we ought to search for our warrant, and wherein there is
no passage which does in the least favor the diff^rent degree of Bishops over
presbyters, what can be gathered from these indig^sted reflectious, save this,
that the primitive times soon varied from the primitive simplicity, and
consequently swerved from the primitive purity. Seeing then, that all the
weakness of this argument, is from the Author his own mistake, to take notice
of his attempt, to bafle the reasoni^g from this Topic, as too vveak and
unvvorthy of any serious persons insisti^g upon it, were in effect, to be
ridiculously serious in his follies.

But he proceeds to tell us in his sixth assertion, That it is yet more strange
to be offended, with the solemn way of blessing, or consecrating Bishops, to
that presidency with the imposition of hands; as if a grave and solemn
admission, to a high and holy employment, were apt to unhallovv it, and being
in appearance so proper an instrument, of making it the better, should yet
effectually make it the worse. How the Author com^s to term it strange, yea
more strange, that we should be offended with a practice, which yet, for all his
suprisal, by reason of our offense, he himself dar not distinctly avow, might
be to us really so, were it not that our experience of his methods, does
abundantly satisfy us, that all the arts of insinuation are familiar unto him.
The thing he here points at, is without doubt to justify the peculiar
ordination of his Bishop, or Episcopus Praeses, knowing, that a distinct
ordination, does certainly require and infer, things altogether
incononsistent with his description o^ his Episcopus Praeses, he therefore
endeavors to smooth it over, as if all considerable in the case, were only a
more solemn way of blessing, or consecrating of Bishops to their Presidencie.
But not to stand with him upon the matter of words, the things that we are
indeed offended at, are. 1. That where in his Episcopal consecration, both the
words, manner and whole form of a special ordination are most exactlie used,
yet he would have us to believe, that all transacted by this performance, is
only a more solemn benediction; if any man inquire the Difference; that more
solemn lawful action, if capable of a solemn benediction, is known and obvious;
whereas, although Ordination be accompanied with benediction, yet both the
notation of the word, and reason it self do plainly intimat, that it is not
formally a benediction, but that its principal act, as it is performed by men,
is a Ministerial conserring in the name, person^ and Authority of Jesus Christ,
of a special Church-office, and consequently, that it supposes as well the
office it self, as the manner of its conveyance, to depend upon our Lords
institution, and warrant: Whereby it is evident, that either this place of
presidencie, being only a humane contrivance, upon the pretense of order of a
superior eminency, for the better conduct of common administ^ation, cannot at
all bear or admit of it, or that under the proposal of this presidencie, it is
in effect, not only a higher degree, but a higher order o^ Church Officers,
that is intended to be introduced: Which how pernicious it has proven, and may
yet again prove to the Ghurch of Christ, both the proud usurpations of
Prelacie, and the hights of Papacy, do sufficiently testify.

But the second thing that offends us is, that admitting the thing were really
performed by way of a solemn blessing, in the manner represe^ted; yet seeing
this presidency, being repugnant to our Lords command, is not an holy, but an
unhallowed employment, any form of benediction, that can be thereto used, is
not only de^^itute of any promise, but a profanation of the holiness of God,
which he jealously loves. We do not therefore condemn this conservation, as if
we judged, that a grave and solemn admission, to a high and holy employment,
were apt to unhallow it; no, this alledgeance does too groslie and
caloumniouslie beg the question. But seeing it is certain, that the Author will
as soon prove gain to be godliness, as he will rationally persuade that this
high employment is holy, it is evident, that his grave and solemn admission, is
as little apt to hallow it, or to be a proper instrument of making it better,
as the consecration of the high places was of old, when they were commanded to
be destroyed, in it self allowable, or unto the Lord acceptable.

The next thing we meet with is, That the degree or power of Bishops, beyond
other Presbyters, is certainly, not to be so fitly measured by any other rule,
as by the received practice of the primitive Church, and canons of the most
ancient Councels. Very right; why should not their origin and warrant, and the
measure and rule of their power go together? But seeing we have found this
primitive practice, to be dislonant from, and contrary to the truth and
simplicity of the Gospel, the first and chief rule, the Author must pardon us,
in this matter, to disown both his rule and measures, and to hold us to this
only unerring canon; yet seeing he has been pleased in his deep ingenuity to
acquaint us with that, wherein we account our selves but little concerned, it
will not be amiss, that for our warning we take particular notice of the
discovery: He adds then, That by the forementioned practice and canons, it
will undoubtedly be found that they had not only some such particular power (as
what, I know not) but exortem and eminen^em potestatem, as Hierom speaks: A man
might hitherto have thought, that if not all, yet the main thing acclaimed by
the Author to his Episcopus Praeses, was a power of constant Moderation in
Church meetings: But here, lest (as I apprehend) he should frustrat his solemn
conse^ration, or rather the special ordination, which he has just now
asserted, he deals a great deal more plainly, and tells us, not only in general
of such a measure of power, as may be gathered from primitive practice, and
ancient canons, which certainly may be as large, as the most favorable
conjecture, from any probable pretense of either of these within the first
three or four centuries of the declination of the primeve purity, pleases to
form it; but that by these same rules, beside a certain particular power,
which he does not specify, they should have potestatem exortem and eminentem,
and this no doubt, in a congruous enough construction of the frequent
hyperbolies used by the fathers on this subject, may arise as high as either
ambition or interest shall please to to scrue it. This being then the ambiguous
and laxe comprehension of the Author's measures, what has been the sincerity
of this Treaty, or what might have been the issue of an assenting close to
it, I suppose it may be obvious to every man's reason. For my own part, as I
look upon this superior Episcopacie, from the very first deg^ee of its
ascending, to have been in all the steps of its progress, the continual decline
o^ pure ch^istianitie, and advance of the Antichristian papacy; and as I am
convinced from clear Scripture light, and undeniable experience, that all the
pret^nces made ^or it, and its power and privileges, either from the
practices, graces, virtues or sufferings of those Centuries, wherein it had its
first rise and grouth, are only the involutions of that strange mystery,
whereby it most secretly and subtillie proceeded to its most prodigious
ma^ifestation, in the revelation of the Man of sin; so I am persuaded in the
same evidence, that the accommodating of faithful men with it, under
whatsomever pretext whithin this land, shall quickly, either prove the
readvancing of its pride, domination and wickedness, or else the greater
establishment of the supremacy, to the as in^allible prejudice and ruin of
the power and purity of Religion, the Devils grand design in all these
unwarranted contrivances.

But the Author adds for a salvo to these just fears, that the foregoing
passage may suggest, that if the Spirit of our meek and lowly master, did more
possess the minds both of Bishops and Presbyters, there would certainly be
little or no dispute, but the sweet contest of striving who should yield most,
and give most honor the one to the other. Thus we find him always a high
pretender to Gospel rules, when they seem to make for his advantage: If he once
attain to the possession of what either his fancy or interest do recommend to
him, then, according to the strain of the former letters, how full is he of the
high elogies of peace, and of earnest longings after it; how hateful and odious
is contention and hatred, nay, it is the main antichristian character; and in
the same manner now that he is for Episcopacie and its eminency, how sweetly
would he seem to commend the spirit of our meek and lowly Master. But seeing it
is without all controversy, that if this spirit were indeed prevalent, not only
our disputs and contests about their matters would cease, but the very subject
o^ them, being at best a vain invention pretending to order, would be totally
removed, my hearty vvish and desire is, that the Author would rather endeavor
to vvitness his sincerity, by a through and absolute conformity, then by such
partial applications.

The 9 and last consideration, which the Author offers, is anent the great and
known moderation of all the late Reformers, the present reformed Churches, and
of the presbyterian breth^en in England concerning the episcopacy now in
question. But having before answered this abundantly, I am not so much swayed
with such alledgeances as here to make repetitions. Only he says, It is
wonderful, that we should affect so exorbitant an hight of Zeal, and fervor in
this point, so far beyond what can be found in any of these we have named, or
any other society or party of men in the whole Christian world, either of our
own former times. It Is answered, the zeal of God is so rare a thing, in this
evil and hipocritical generation, and it and the worlds wonder do so often
trist, that I am only sorry, that we have not provoked the Author and all men
to more of it; and that our reproach for Christ, and consequently the matter of
our rejoicing, should amount to no more in midst of such backslidings and
perver^ness, then to the just and slender charge of a singular aff^cted f^rvor.
But yet the author says, that this is an excess not to be found in the whole
Christian world beside. And if he cannot condescend on any instance, clothed
with our circum^^ances, and exactly parallel to our case, is it not as
manifest, that the generality of this boast, is a mere empty inconcludent
flourish. If he love to plead with such arguments, let him produce me any one
of all these Churches, Societies or Parties which he musters up, that after
having experimented the evil and bitter fruits of episcopacy, and searched
after its origin and warrant, unto a clear conviction of its want of divine
institution, and full discovery of the delusion of its rise, and the wickedness
of its tendencie, did in a manner unanimouslly, both by law, canon and oath
abrogat and reform from it: and when by the politic influence of Court
designs and State projects, and the practices of the Devil and his
instruments, the same episcopacy was restored seven times worse then of before,
and so with a most plenary confirmation of all these grievances, formerly
objected against it, did in the most pure and conspicuous zeal of God, that
ever acted in any Nation, reject this corrupt plant, and bind themselves to
maintain the true Ordinance of God, introduced in its place, and extirpat every
thing thereto opposite, by a most solemn Covenant; and in consequence thereof,
enjoy the Gospel in very observable power and plenty, until that by as gross
perjury and violence, as ever the Sun beheld, this Covenant is again condemned,
the Lords work and Ordinance subsubverted, and this old Episcopacy, not only
with a sevenfold, but with a seventie and sevenfold increase of all its
corruptions and wickednesses re-esstablished; and lastly the Supremacy, the
complement of all Ecclesiastical usurpations, with an explication broader then
all the pretensions of the Papacy, is superadded. For the better securing of
all which abominations, after full proof made of all that abused authority and
power could do against a faithful nonconforming remnant, policy at length does
instruct to propose an Accommodation, upon terms, seemingly indeed
condescending, but really corroborative of the present establishment, and most
visibly suppressive of any relics of dissent, or opposition, which possibly
might revive against it. Now let the Author, I say, produce us an instance of
any Church or Society, thus circumstantiat, and if not only, the faithful
remnant therein, but the generality of all the serious fearers of God, and true
lovers of our Lord Jesus, shall not give their suffrage on our side, nay the
case being thus proposed, as in truth it stands, if even these, to whom he
appeals, do not clearly declare for us, then let us bear the scorn of
singularity, and what worse he shall please to cast upon us forever.

But lest the Author imagine, that what I have here represented, with an
especial regard to the strengthening of the Lords People in this Land, to whom
none of these things are hidden or unknown, does rather proceed from an
apprehension of a cross verdict upon the simple question of the fixed
Presidencie, from the Persons and Churches to whom he referres, I grant, that
amongst the Reformers, and in those Churches mentioned, there may be found good
men, who, not being led by the concernment of their own condition unto a more
near and strict examination of the thing, and rather comparing its appearing
moderation with the exorbitancies of Prelacy, then reducing matters to their
first institution, have written of it more indulgently and respectfully: But as
it has not been the experimented and trying ca^e of any Christian Church, as
it has been of ours, and as the Authors that seem to favor it, do all of
them agree, that it is not of divine institution, but do unanimously recomend
it upon that account; so I am confident, that if the examples of the same
Reformers and Churches, in occurrences of less importance, may found a probable
conjecture, it may very fairly thence be concluded, that if they had been, or
were now stated in the same circumstances with us, they would as far exceed us
in this faint and languishing zeal, whereof we are accused, as by the Author we
are now construed to exceed them. With what truth, reason or civility then the
Author is pleased, according to the dull affectations of his oraculous wit, to
tell the World, that there is no reason can be given of this our zeal, unless
that word of the Roman Philosopher, Superstitio est error insanus, it is no
hard matter to judge: But if he account it superstition for us, after our most
convincing experiences of the woeful evils of his episcopacie, and no inferior
persuasion, that the way of Presbytery is of divine appointment, in this
matter to adhere constantly to Scripture rules, and Covenant engagements, we
freely confess with the Apostle Paul, that after the way, which he calls
supestition, so we fear the God of our Fathers, and love our Lord Jesus
Christ; believing all things that are written, and having hope also toward
God, who in the midst of the years can, and may revive his work. In which
profession, though the Author do judge us to be beside our selves, yet we are
ascertained, that not only all the faithful, that have any conscience in these
things, but also all ingenuous men, will answer for us, that Sir, we are not
mad, but speak forth the words of truth and soberness.

It remains, that I consider the Author's additional reflection upon our two
Covenants. And as to what he prefaces, of his having sufficiently cleared, that
the Article of the League touching prelacie, as it is there specified, does not
at all concern the Episcopacy in que^^ion, I b^leeve I have as ^ufficien^ly
cl^ared, both the Authors impertinency in this restriction, and also the
unquestionable concern of both our covenants, from other heads, in the
episcopacy controverted. But here he insinuats, that of late he is informed,
That we now fly to the other Article of the Covenant, engaging us to maintain
the Discipline and Government of the Church of Scotland, as it was then in
being, and hereupon he wishes, that we would impartially consider, wether the
present Episcopacy be inconsistent with that Discipline and Government, or if
it will not rather be found to be corrobora^^ve and perfective of it, as apt to
keep it in more union, and so to make it stronger, and more lasting then it
formerly proved, or likely would be, if it were again restored. It is answered.
It is not here objected, that by swearing to maintain the then established
Discipline and Government, we did not virtually renounce, and abjure the
present controverted Episcopacie; no, both the Reformation that had then so
recently preceeded, and the Reformation that has since so directly overturned
it, do make this point too evident to be denied by the Author, or any
pret^nding to common sense. But the sum of what is here proposed is, that we
were not well advised in that our Oath, as having thereby excluded a special
mean for the preservation of that which we mostly intended. In return
whereunto, I need not say, that every inconsideration is not an just exception
to make void an Oath; the Authors own inconsideration in this very allegiance
is too manifest, to reduce us to that strait. He says in effect, That the
present Episcopacy is not inconsistent with Presbyterian Government. And is it
not a lamentable thing, that their Churches and Nations should have been so long
in so fatal a distraction, merely for want of such a happy discovery; nay
that the very vexed Bishops, should not for their own peace, have been so wise,
as still to bear with and maintain a thing nothing repugnant to their
pretensions? But to be a little more serious, I say true
Presbyterian-government does not admit, amongst the Lords Ministers, of any
stated imparity, either in power, prerogative or presidency, one, or all of
which is the very form of the controver^ed Episcopacie; therefore they are
(what all men hitherto constantly deemed them to be) utterly inconsistent. But
the Author says, That Episcopacy by preserving union, is perfective of
Presbytery. And I grant that any lawful mean preserving Union, is indeed
perfective of this, as of all other Government: But seeing that Episcopacie is
not only not at all a mean subservient to Presbytery or its Union, what ever
it may be to Government, or its Union in general, but is also in it self
unwarrantable and unlawful, and in effect as to Union, never found to be
otherwise more conducible then Presbytery, but either by the destroying, or
tyrannous suppressing of truth and the love thereof, by which the right side of
all contentions are maintained, I can scarce refrain from censuring the Authors
fore going observe, as pitifully groundless. It is true, our Presbytery did
not retain union as it was desired; but what then? If our corruptions and sins
do either frustrat the efficacy, or avert the blessing of the best of means,
is therefore the mean it self to be condemned? Or if where the Lord has left
no choice, a mean shall be devised by man more promising in appearance, as to
that wherein the mean ordained has not, through our fault, been so succesful,
and withal, if this invention shall be in^allibly attended with far m^re
pernicious consequences, ought we either in conscience, or prudence, to shufle
out the former, to make place for the later? Certainly as these things do
exactly quadrat to the case of our accidental differences here objected, so the
changing of the Lords ordinance for a humane device, upon such a pretense, is
liker to Ieroboam's policy, who for the establishment and quiet of his
Kingdom, set up his Calves in liew of the Lords Sanctuary, then that paritie
and straightness of heavenly wisdom, which the Lord requires. I might here
add, that the want of the Lords blessing, and the parties their greater power,
and, for the most part, insolent pride, being duly cousidered, the Oligarchik
model of the Author's Episcopoacie, seems to be far more obnoxious to the
objected divisions, then the lowly and equal Presbytery, that our Lord has
institute: And that de facto, there is nothing in that state whereunto we can
refer their prevention, except unto the overawe either o^ the papal
Tirannie, or of a more absurd Supremacy, which we see every where to be the
ultimat progress of these vain delusions: But having formerly met with almost
the same alledgeancee, I proceed.

The Author ads, And again they would consider, that if the substance be
salved in the present model, their obligation is abundantly preserved. It Is
Ans. Seeing the thing to be principally attended, both in the interpretation
and observation of an Oath, is that which was chiefly intended in the ^raming
and taking of it, and which is indeed the substance of the Oath, although of
its subject abstractly considered it may be only a circumstance, the
^istinction as here applied appears to be more captious then pertinent. Now
that the thing chiefly intended in that article, to preserve the Discipline
and Government of the Church of Scotland, as then in being, was to preserve
Presbytery from the reinvasion of all these corruptious, from which it had
been before so lately vindicat and reformed; and that of these corruptious,
the controverted presidencie or constant Moderatorship was one, and that the
very first, is so certain and notour, that I cannot but marvel at the Authors
so perverse disputings in the contrary. But he says, If no chip nor
circumstance of the then Presbyterian government might be altered even to the
better, then is the next part of the Article anent uniformity, according to the
word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches, illusorie, and a
perfect cheat, in as much as though the same rule should in order to uniformity
call for an alteration, yet there could be no receeding from the then frame of
the Church of Scotland.

Thus the Author according to his accustomed deceit, when he would persuade to
an alteration, notwithstanding that he and his associats, do manifestly intend
and prosecut it with all the might and craft that they can adhibit, yet for to
delude us to a compliance, s^icketh not, by insinuating the things in
controversy to be but chips and circumstances, flatly to contradict and
condemn the violence of their own practices. But, seeing that I have already
proven from clear Scripture and undeniable reason, that this constant
presidency, in steed of being a chip or circumstance, is in effect repugnant to
that paritie which our Lorth has commanded, and wherein true Presbytery is
essentially founded, and therefore was by us ejected, and the discipline and
Government, sworn to be preserved in the Covenant, established in its place,
it is evident that all here excepted by the Author is but a mere cavillation. In
answer whereunto, it may well be affirmed, that it ^aires with the Covenant as
with the Truth it self; no such redargution of all calumnies objected as by its
own evidence. The article questioned, binds in the first place to the
preservation of the reformed Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline and Government against the common enemy; wherein, it is
certain, that as the truth in all the heads discovered by divine light, and
after much wrestling recovered from men's corruptions, was directly and plainly
engaged unto; so such extrinseck and lesser circumstances, as are in their own
nature variable, and only determinable by a prudence regulat by the General
Scripture-rules of order and edification, and were not at that time either
questioned or reformed, are not in this obliton of our Oath o^hervvise
comprehended, or thereby rendered unalterable.

In the next place, the Article obli^ges to the endeavor of reformation in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland in the same points, according to the word of
God, and the example of the best reformed Churches: Which qualification
adjected, al^hough through the deceitfulness of men, it has given the
principal occasion both to perversions and calumnies, yet I am assured, that as
in it self it is most sound and rational; so it may testify on our part a most
fair and ingenuous candor: in as much, as although the Englishes did first seek
to us, and willingly and freely engaged with us, to the maintenance of the
reformation whereunto we had then attained; yet in the confidence of the truth
wherein it was bottomed, and that it might appear to the world, how little we
were either addicted to any thing as our own, or inclined to abuse and impose
upon their distress, we agreed to Covenant to the endeavors of their
reformation, not precisely according to our example, though we vere fully
persuaded of its divine vvarrant, but according to the unerring rule of the
word of God: (to which we were always, and are still ready to submit all our
ingagments and persuasions) and the example of the best reformed Churches, the
best arbiter of all exterior indifferences.

Now after this cause, follows the obligation to Uniformity in these term^s,
And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms, to the
nearest conjunction and uniformity, etc. Which being the part of our Oath,
whereon our Author does at present trifle, I shall not trouble my Reader to
rectify his misrepresentation, as if it were the common work of uniformity,
and not Englands particular Reformation, that were referred to the Word of God:
But seeing by the obvious tenor of the whole Article, the preservation of the
reformed Religion in Scotland, and the Reformation of England and Ireland,
according to the Word of God, are premised as midses conducing, and tendencies
certainly concentring in this conjunction wished for, I am confident, every
ingenuous man must acknowledge both the consistency of our Oath, and the
vanity of our adversaries sophistry. And therefore it is answered.

1. That suppose, the intended uniformity and conjunction did require an
alteration; yet seeing the disconformity of either part, makes place for it,
and even perfection it self and imperfection, by reason of their disconformity,
are capable of such a design, the necessity of an alteration to be made on
both parts cannot be thence inferred. So that the Author's conclusion, from the
unalterableness of Scotlands frame, that the Article of uniformity is
illusorie, and in plain terms a perfect cheat, is pitifully claudicant, and
unworthy of both his judgment and gravity.

2. Although that the things Covenanted to be preserved in Scotland, as being
very acuratly tried and convincingly found to be agreeable to the word of God,
are in effect both from their vvarrant, and our Oath unalterable; yet, seeing
that by reason of our sublunary state, there are several external circumstances
attending the worship, as well as the discipline and Government of the Church,
neither positively determined by the word of God, nor comprehended in this our
Oath for preservation; that in these, there is a latitude on all parts left to
the improvement of providence, and gratification of charity, for the more
easy and happy obtaining of the uniformitie Covenanted, is in itself evident,
and the very subject and intendment of this last clause, as to any thing which
may be thereby imported over and above what the preceding parts of the article
do contain. But,

3. The palpabl^ fallacy of the Author's objection, is, that he falsely
supposes, not only that the word of God may in order to uniformitie call for
an alteration in Scotlands frame covenanted to be preserved, but that even the
swearers of this oath did thereto refer, as not being fully ascertained and
ultimatly determined as to the congruitie of that very establishment which in
the same article they swear to mantain: whereas, it is manifest from the tenor
of the article and all other circumstances, that as we in Scotland were
assuredly persuaded, that the things whereunto we had attained, and which we
swear to preserve, were according to the word of God, and England also by
concurring with us in the same engagement did thereunto assent; so it was in
the same common persuasion, that we engadged to endeavor Englands reformation
according to the same rule, and did, in the holding and not altering of these
obligations with a just accommodation of undetermined circumstances, jointly
vow and hope for the above mentioned uniformitie.

4. As the certain conformity of Scotlands then reformation to the word of
God, does directly contradict the Authors supposition, and the alterableness of
the then constitution of Government in so far as we are sworn to preserve it,
is very consistent with the vowed uniformitie whereby the Authors argument is
utterly ruined; so we do constantly acknowledge the same word of God to be the
supreme and unerring rule, whereunto we heartily submit; and therefore, if the
Author can show that this rule, either upon the account of uniformity or any
other, does require an alteration of that Government whereunto we are bound, it
is in vain to redargue us from pretended inconsistencies in the words and
contexture of our Oath, seeing this is a direct and plain method by which we
are most vvilling to be tried.

The Author adds, that if no hoof or hair of the Scottish model can be
altered, though both Scripture, the example of the best reformed Churches, and
the vowed uniformity should require it, then ought it in stead of according to
the word of God, etc. to be rather according to the present form of the
Church of Scotland. But 1. Waving the fraud and scorn of the Author's hoofes
and hairs, whereof it is certain, that his fixed Presidency, unless so far as
it is an excrementitious superfluity, can be called none, why does the Author
cavil? If the Scripture and the example of the best Reformed Churches, do
require an alteration of our model, let him show it, and there is an end. 2.
I have already given a clear account, wherefore the ingagment in the Covenant
to Reformation in England did refer to the word of God etc. rather then to
any particular example. 3. If upon the matter, Englands covenanted Reformation
in Discipline and Government according to the Word of God, etc. do in effect
resolve in an exact conformity to our then constitution, does it therefore
follow, that this part of our Oath is either a cheat or an abuse? God forbid;
the Rule is too sacred to give ground to such a consequence: And certainly the
Author's second thoughts will correct his rashness.

But the Author subjoines, that how this understanding of the Rule of Englands
Reformation according to the Word of God, as certainly introductive of the
then Scottish model, would have past with our English Brethren, and
particularly with these present at the framing of that Covenant, may easily be
imagined. It is answered 1. The question here mainly agitat, is, neither how
the Englishes understood the ingagment of the Covenant in order to their own
Reformation, nor yet what may be its real import, but plainly what we stand
bound to by virtue of that article, obliging us to preserve the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government; and that thereby we are obliged to disown and reject the Authors
Episcopacy and fixed Presidency, from which our Government was at that time
expressly reformed, is that which I am persuaded he himself dare not seriously
deny. 2. Whatever meaning interest, passion or prejudice may possibly devise,
yet that the words, according to the Word of God, etc. are in themselves most
plain, safe and sound cannot be controverted. But 3. That under this very form
of words both England did give, and Scotland did obtain a sufficient as^urance
for the setting up of Presbyterian Government in England as it was at that time
established in Scotland, is no hard matter to explain; in as much, as not only
the Word of God, the declared Rule, does thereto strictly and antecedentlie
tie, as has been made out; but whoever herevvith considered the knowledge the
Englishes had of our then constitution, the affectionat sympathy they had
testified, both in our labor and victory whereby it was attained, their
frequent and significant insinuations in publict, in private, in print and in
speeches to this purpose, their express engaging to the preservation of our
frame, their brotherly covenanting and concurring with us for the cause of
God, and many other circumstances, will without hesitation conclude, that we
had as pregnant grounds of persvvasion of there being like minded with us in
this matter, as could be demanded or expected by ingenuous men, from a nation
at that time so unsettled and discomposed. And therefore, seeing there was
nothing for several years preceding, more clearlie and distinctlie held forth
by us, then that we judged the form of Government then in being among us, to be
the only Church Government agreeable to the word of God, I think we may well
take the Author's suggestion, as if the Englishes would never have passed this
sense and meaning of the words, according to the word of God, to be only a
cunning hint, to color a confidence which cannot be avowed. It is true, that
in process of time, the love of truth and zeal of God did much abate, and error
abound in that Nation; whence to many who desired a suitable license, the just
severitie of Presbytery became uneasy and odious: but as that does nothing
convel the former arguments by me adduced, so it is no less true, that the
sounder and better part of England, not carried away by the present defection,
do still own Presbyterian Government as by us asserted, to be the only
Government that our Lord has appointed in his Church.

But our Author tells us, yea, it is not unknown how careful one of the
English Commissioners was to have that clause inserted, according to the word
of God, and how secure he thought himself and his Country by that expression
from the inroade of Scottish Presbytery upon them notvvithstanding that former
Article premised in favors of it. Well, admit this to be a truth, what then?^
If one of them was a deceaver, and deceaved and yet manifestly taken in his own
craftiness, what is either the work or the Covenant the worse? If confident
errors or treacheries be sufficient to consute the truth the Author needed not
have called this witness to his assistance; but seeing it is most certain that
whoever that person was, and whatever might have been his peculiar opinion, and
communication or correspondence with the author in it, neither was there any
such thing openly declared or treated, nor has it the least foundation in the
words under debate; but on the contrary is by them as manifestly confured, as
the Author now is, to what he formerly professed most repugnant: the thing is
scarce worthy this my reflection; and yet behold the conclusion, that the
Author draws from it.

Thus, says he, were the Contrivers of that Covenant bussied in patching it
up, to outwit one another by words and clauses, how inco^herent and discordant
soever, to salve their different interests and opinions, and to make it strong
in odium tertii, how vveake soever it might prove to discerning men, by
disagreeing and jarring with it self, and a very Babel, by the divided and
confused language of its Architects. And thus our Author having abandoned all
Conscience of the Oath of God, does also cast off all shame, and in his envy
stands not openly to contradict and blaspheme. If he had premised any thing
to give so much as a color to this incoherence, discordance and confusion
objected; somewhat in excuse of such conclusion might be indulged to his
passion and interest: But when nothing has been alleged, except a blind
conjecture of some persons their different apprehensions of the soundest and
plainest form of words, contrary to the undeniable evidence of the truth it
sel^, and from which inconvenience the most pure light of divine revelation
has not been exempted, upon their grounds to infer an accusation against the
holy Covenant in the terms we have heard, can only be the effect of a most
wicked indignation and apostatick malice. Lord bow down thine ear and hear,
open Lord thine eyes, and see, and hear the words of this man, who has set
himself to reproach thy truth and wo^k, which thou have manifestly owned; and
save I beseech thee thy People out of the hands of these evil men, that all
the Churches may know, that thou art the holy Lo^d God of truth, who searches
the reins and heart. And therefore in return to this contempt and scorn, I
shall only here briefly add to what I have in the former Discourse observed to
this purpose. 1. That all the forged ambiguities and inconsistencies, that
either the deceit of Hypocrites, or perverseness of open adversaries, have
hith^^to labored to fix upon the words and frame of this Oath, are not only
the fate of truth, but according to its proper virtue, by the serious
consideration thereof in its own light, most readily and satisfyingly salved.
2. As the Covenant was attended by a most signal power, and presence from on
high; so its sincere prosecution, was constantly blessed with a very beautiful
concord; and whoever divided from its genuine meaning and purpose, did quickly
also abandon the reverence and regard thereof, which he once professed. 3. That
not only the forsakers of the Covenant do relinquish it without repentance, and
for the most part, by the irritation of their own guilt and shame, are
exasperate to irrational railing and rage: but if the revilings and
persecutions of the ungodly World, be the badge of truth, the Covenant has
from the beginning been thereby very notably confirmed; and all its true
followers may herein rejoice and be exceeding glade, as being by the Lord
pronounced blessed. 4. That as the beauty and glory of the work of God, were
very visibly promoted both by the Covenant and its contrivers, and confusion
formerly, and calamity and wasting consumption now, the certain and manifest
effects of men's svverving and backsliding from it: and as in that furious
storm that broke off and destroyed the branches, the root of the Kingdom was
by this bond made sure, until the time of our restitution wherein it made the
first and most airly appearance; so the remembrance of these things, may yet be
ground of hope, that the Lord will arise and have mercy upon Zion, and in place
of the Babel-confusions wherewith these Masters of confusion and rebuilders of
Babylon do upbraid us, cause his work appear unto his Servants and his glory
unto their Children.

In the last place, the Author says, He hears that some take the Romish
Hierarchy in the National Covenant, for the same with our present Episcopacy;
and that by virtue of the Gloss of Glasgow which yet, he says, does grossly
corrupt the Text: For the Romish Hierarchy is the Romish Hierarchy, and no
other; nor has any man, or assembly of men, even such as have most of the
spirit in them, power to bind a sense upon the words, so different from, and
opposite to their clear and genuine signification. I cannot here in the close
insist on all the impertinencies hudled up in these few lines, though by the
Romish hierarchy abjured in the National Covenant, there is no doubt meaned,
not only Romes proper hierarchy, usurping and pretending to a domination over
us: but also, all such like corruption in Ecclesiastic government, whether in
its rise, growth or consummation, under which it is manifest, that the
controverted Episcopacy as being the first workings of that mystery, must
necessarily be comprehended. Yet it was not by this clause alone of this
Covenant, that this Episcopacy was conceived to be abjured amongst us; in as
much, as the argument that may be gathered from it for this abjuration, is both
cumulative and concludent above exception, viz. that albeit, that it does
principally relate to heads of doctrine, and the maintenance of the truth
therein contrary to the errors of popery, yet it does also extend itself
against all manner of Superstition and corruption: and therefore does not only
reject the Popes worldly monarchy and wicked Hierarchy, whereby, without
question, all the degrees, occasions and tendencies, either of worldly
domination, or undue Elation of Christ's Ministers over his flock, or among
themselves are disclaimed; but thereby we do expressly join our selves to the
Church of Scotland as then reformed in doctrine, faith, religion and
discipline, promising and swearing by the great name of the Lord our God, that
we shall continue in the obedience of the doctrine and Discipline of this Kirk,
and shall defend the same according to our vocation and power all the days of
our lives. Under which heads, especially that of Discipline, according to the
usual phrase of these times, as it is without controversy, that the Government
then in being was contained; so if we consider, that the taking and
subscribing of this Covenant in the year 1581. and 1590. was designedly
enjoined by the general Assembly for the confirmation of Presbiterian
Government then completly perfected, and unanimously agreed to in the year
1581. and universally settled and established in the year 1590: it is not
possible, that in this matter any shadovv of scruple should remain.

I might here add for a further evidence, that when within a few years
thereafrer, King James and his Court-faction took upon them to innovat that
form, by the introduction of Kirk-commissioners, and constant Moderators or
fixed presidents; the faith^ul who opposed these courses did, as it appears by
their writings and public protestations yet extant, very freely testify
against them, as perjurious defections and breaches of the oath of God: which
is an undeniable proof of the sense wherein it was taken. But the plain and
obvious account of this oath, which I have already exhibit, is more then
sufficient, to vindicat the consonancy and soundness of that interpretation
made by the forementioned Assembly, against the author's identick and
ridiculous reasoning, to wit, that therefore the Romish hierarchy in that Oath
cannot contain the present episcopacy, because forsooth, the Romish hierarchy
is the Romish hierarchy, And no less ignorant and lascivient confidence,
whereby he goes about, not only impudently to decry a most certain and clear
explication as gross and shameful, but impertinently to defy or mock the
Spirit of the Lord, and all thereby conducted. I might in this place moreover
subjoine, that admitting, for the Author's more full redargution, that the
Assembly had lap^ed in their exposition; yet seeing it was materially agreeable
to truth, and we are thereunto bound by our sacred oath, not so much assertorie
of the justness of the explanation, as positive, renouncing the thing therein
contained; this error in the manner, could not by any rule dissolve the force
of our oath, but the certainty and lawfulness of our abjuration by this oath,
both of Prelacy and Episcopacy, and all their aspyring degrees, has been
already by me so largely and evidently declared, that any addition were
altogether superfluous.

As for what the Author tells us in the last place, that the Presbyterian
brethren in former times did not think themselves by that Covenant oblidged to
Separate from the Synods wherein Bishops presided, as their practices do
evidence. I am persuaded I have so abundantly cleared the difference of their
case from ours, and thereby reconciled their and our practices in a most
agreeable consistency, that the very simple noticing of this reflection may
almost be accounted an excess. I might here add that if Presbyterian
government were offered to be truly restored upon its own proper^ foundation,
and no thing imposed beside this constant President, both eligible and
deposible by the Courts, wherein he moderats; the practice of vvithdravving
would be liable to more probable exceptions but seeing the very lowest
condescendence that probably can be conjectured, is immensly distant from this
hypothesis; and the exigence of a te^timony flowing from our present
unrepented backslidings, with the far more probable ensuing of evil then
good, upon a conjunction with the persons, and in the other circumstances
obvious in our present condition, do according to these grounds and rules
declared in my first Discourse, still persuade to a humble, tender, prudent
and witnessing separation, I do here put a period to these debates.

FINIS.

