Mr. George Keith's REASONS FOR Renouncing Quakerism, And Entering into
COMMUNION WITH THE Church of England. WITH Other Remarkable Occurrences that
will be Acceptable to all Orthodox Christians, of every Persuasion.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1700.

Mr. George Keith 's REASONS FOR Renouncing Quakerism, etc.
BY virtue of an Evangelical Precept, it is an incumbent Duty on every Convert
to endeavor the strengthening of his Brethren in the Faith of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and to Reduce all those that by any indirect Offices, or for want of
regular Instructions have wandered out of the strait ways of Peace, Truth and
Holiness, into the crooked Mazes of Sin, Schism and Heresy, to the hazard of
their eternal Interests. How much I have concerned my self in the Discharge of
this Duty, is legible to all that have either had the Justice or Curiosity to
inform themselves about it; for as soon as it pleased God to open the Eyes of
my Understanding, and show me the Error of my own ways, I industriously set my
self upon the good Work of Reclaiming others, and have cause to bless his holy
Name, that I have not altogether labored in vain, but have been an Instrument
in the Hand of God, to convince some of the necessity they were under of
^enouncing their Errors and Delusions, and return^^g to the Lord their God in
Truth and Sincerity. In this attempt it is notoriously known also, what
Injuries, Contempts, Slanders, and ill* Usages I have encountered both beyond
Sea and in England from the Quakers, with whom I have inoffensively associated
above Thirty Years: And that for no other Reason, but that I endeavored by all
the fair, candid, and honest ways imaginable, to convince them that they lived
in many gross Errors and Heresies; and that they ought to make some
compensation for the Evils and Errors they were guilty of, by a speedy return
to the Truth as it is in Jesus, and by an unfeigned Repentance for all the
Evils they had been guilty of, in seducing so many well-meaning Souls into
Principles and Practices, that border upon Death and Destruction.

It would be altogether needless in this Discourse to enumerate the several
steps I made in order to the Conviction and Conversion of the Quakers, and to
show all the Arts their Chiefs employed to frustrate my good Intentions, and to
keep up their own Reputations with their Party, since I have already published
the whole Proceedings ^n Four Narratives, to which they have as yet made no
satisfactory Answer, and therefore shall only now, having totally renounced all
their Errors* deserted their Meetings, and by Imposition of Holy Hands entered
upon the Ministry in the Church of England, answer some Objections and
Calumnies that the Quakers have made upon my Change, and show the Reasons for
which I left them: In both which I hope to acquit my self with so much Justice,
though I have no hope to stop the Mouths of those clamorous Persons, that are
become my Enemies for telling them the Truth; yet to satisfy all that are
honestly and soberly inquisitive into the Motives and Reasons, that caused me
to leave the Society of the Quakers, and embrace the Doctrine and Discipline of
the Church of England.

The first quarrel that of late they seemed to have against me, was, that in
exposing their Principles in public Audiences, and in my Printed Narratives I
had dealt unjustly; and this false Report they have been exceedingly
industrious to divulge, not only to possess them of their own Way, but any
others they could influence into an ill Opinion of me, for falsely quoting their
Authors; and thereupon, without any kind of Proof, call me Liar, False and
Treacherous Man, Deceitful and Malicious, all which Names return upon
themselves, since I have printed a Certificate in my third Narrative, under the
Hands of some eminent and judicious Ministers of the Church of England, whom I
procured to hear and examine all my Quotations, that fully vindicates my
Innocence in that particular: which being well considered, I have reason to
expect a more favorable Censure in relation to their other Calumny, viz.

That the ground of my Contests with the Quakers, was out of mere Prejudice and
Revenge arising from their ill treatment of me, and not out of Zeal and Love to
the Truth of Christianity; whereas nothing could be suggested more False and
Scandalous; for the only motive that I had to oppose the spreading Gangrene of
their vile Errors, which have already leavened many Thousands in these Nations,
and if not prevented will corrupt many more, was purely out of Zeal for the
Cause of God and his true Religion, and not out of any private Pique I had with
any of them; of which, as I have given no Evidence, so my Conscience bears
witness to my Innocence. Seeing then my Charges are just against them, as is
proved in all my Narratives; and their Clamours and Accusations against me are
wholly false and scandalous, the Crime will be laid at their own Door in
calling Names, and I shall bear their Revilings with greater Patience, since
it is universally known, that this is the way they commonly treat all Persons
how Innocent and well-deserving so ever, that touch them in the tender part,
and oppose their Errors; so that the Proverb may be fitly applied to them, That
their Tongue is no Slander.

But the great Argument that they make of my Insincerity, is, my having been
formerly so long among them, and yet never till of late pretended to know that
they held such gross Errors as I now accuse them of. That I have been a Quaker
long, I acknowledge, and am of Opinion, that none are sorry that I was so once,
but they that are angry that I did not continue so always, let them make what
Reflections they please upon my Weakness, and want of Consideration, in
continuing among a Society of People, whose Principles* I was so much a
stranger to. I confess my Weakness, and am ashamed to think that I have been so
long deceived by them; but yet this is no impeachment of my Sincerity, unless
knowing them Guilty, I had connived at it, flattered them in it, or d^fended
their Errors contrary to my Conviction; or against the Light of my own
Conscience had encouraged them to Perseverance. But in this I am no way
culpable; for though I know some of them were Ignorant and Unsound, I did not
dissemble with them, or cloak the matter; but upon all occasions checked and
reproved them, as will ere long be shown in several Instances. Yet I was wholly
unsensible that either George Whitehead, William Penn, and many other of their
chief^st Teachers had been guilty of these Errors, having read but few of their
Books, and them but slightly too; and when I found any thing that I disliked, a
blind Affection swayed me to an overcharitable Judgment, and I imputed lesser
Faults rather to their Inadvertency than their deliberate Judgment, until they
sided with my Adversaries in Pensilvania, and then it grew to Rupture, and I
withstood them to their Faces.

Another Objection that they raise against me, is That the things which I now
call Vile Errors, and Heresies in them, I had formerly Defended, and declared,
that in so doing I had a Divine Sense and Acceptance; to which I answer, First,
by utterly denying that ever I defended them in those Vile Errors which oppose
the four great Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion, which I have
since charged them with, or, indeed, any other Article of the Christian Faith
properly so called, or distinguished. Those things wherein I defended them,
were only stating the Matter fairly, between them and their Opponents in
several Cases, wherein I thought them unduly charged; partly in the undue Use
and Application of places of Scripture, to prove certain Truths, and partly in
too much aggravating and widening through my too great Heat and preposterous
Zeal, and being too Biggotly affected, though ignorantly to that Party who call
all others Sects and Sectaries, and themselves the Church, yet are certainly
more Biggoted into a Sect, and more implicitly led by Sect-Masters, than any
People in Christendom that I know of. And lastly, I have acknowledged, and
lamented my Sinful Ignorance and Rashness, in my former opposing any Divine
Institution, or reflecting in my Books upon any particular Persons, or
Religious Societies. And to argue a little with my Adversaries, who object,
That I have formerly defended the Quakers Principles, I would fain know what
Principles they mean? Whether they relate to the Fundamentals of Religion; if
so, let them name them, that I may give the World Satisfaction by confessing my
Fault, or justify my self where I am falsely accused.

And if through Humane Infirmity, Weakness, or Ignorance, (for humanum est
Errari, Labi, Decipi) I have misunderstood any thing, which by a more diligent
Examination and Application to the Holy Scriptures I have discoverd afterward
to be a misapprehension; this will be no proof of my Insincerity, or that I am
an Apostate, gone from all Divine Sense and Tenderness, lost my good Condition,
without any inward Feeling; for these are the lovely Epithets they bestow upon
me.

But are not these Qaakers uncharitable Men? Can a mistake in some things
render a Man Universally mistaken in all things? Because some are beguiled with
Shows and Shadows of Reason* Is there therefore no such thing as true and sound
Reason in the World? Because St. Paul once thought he ought to do many things
against the Name of Jesus, must his Conversion, be called an Argument of his
Insincerity? Must he be thought an unsound Christian, because he was once a
Jew, and continue a Persecutor, and a Blind leader of the Blind, for fear of
being called an Apostate from the Principles which he imbibed in the days of
Ignorance? Away with these ridiculous Notions, which are but the Evasions,
Quiblings, and Shiftings of the Party, which by muddying the Water, hope to
escape undetected. Why will they not be tried by their own Rule, and allow that
Liberty to others, that they exercise among themselves? Have not some of the
most Eminent among them been egregiously deceived, and taken their Fanciful
Imaginations for Divine Lights? Their Consciences will tell them, what
particular Persons of great Note among them I could name, that have been
scandalously mistaken by their own Confession* and took things upon Trust for
Divine Breathings, that upon better Examination proved to be Infamovs Delusions.

Did not some of the most celebrated Quakers, nay, even their Preachers, follow
the Blasphemous, Enthusiastic Delusions and Waking Dreams of James Naylor, and
John Perrot? Was it not one of their great Preachers, Samuel Cater by Name, now
living, that lead James Naylor's Horse by the Bridle, when he Rid Triumphantly
into Bristol. Was that a Divine Sense in George Fox, who said his Marriage with
Widow Fell, was a Figure of the Church coming out of the Wilderness, and that
the Figure might be complete, those that credited that Deceit, concluded her to
be with Child, though she was past Sixty Years of Age, and therefore accounted
it Miraculous. Other considerable Instances might be given of their
extravagantly Wild, and Frenetick Delusions, than I thank God can be charged
upon me; for, notwithstanding all the Mistakes and Errors I lay under, yet as
to the main, I bless God, I was preserved. But what a sad and scandalous
Inference does this way of Arguing cast upon themselves, who generally in their
Books, Father all their Vilest Errors and Heresies upon the Spirit of Truth,
according to the Notion they have of the Spirit dwelling in them* by which
means they Hedge up their way, and Baricado up themselves against all
discoveries and acknowledgments of their Errors; because they think they are
guided by the Spirit; and are sure they possess the Spirit, because they think
so, otherwise by their own arguing they must be Apostates. When a Man turns
from Error to Truth, must he be called an Apostate? When a Man through humane
Infirmity, slides into Mistaken Notions, without denying or opposing any
Article of the Christian Faith, can this be called Apostasy? Surely, in the
Judgment of any sober and unprejudiced Party it cannot; and therefore their
censuring me, is unchristian as well as uncharitable, since I have only
renounced the Errors, I was tainted with whilst I lived and conversed among
them; as for their Herisies I was never, I bless God, corrupten with them.

As Idle, Impertinent, and Vain, is their arguing, that 'twas very unlikely,
that living thirty years among them, I could be Ignorant of their Principles:
Which is a Fallacy in Terms* for as they are a Body of People, how could I, or
any Body else, know their Principles, when it is known to all the World they
have none, and are professed Enemies to All Creeds, and Confessions of Faith
owned by all their Members, without which it is impossible (without a Miracle)
to know what their Principles are; for to this day never any Confession of
Faith has been universally received by them; but some are of one Opinion, some
of others, and what is affirmed to Day for Truth, is denied to Morrow: A
Weathercock is not more variable in its Motion, than the Quakers are dexterous
in shifting their Opinions, through all the parts of the Compass. They are now
more enraged against me than ever, and call me the Epitome and very common
place of all their Preceding Adversaries, with other vile and abusive Names,
which is but acting like themselves, and spewing out the Venom of their Hearts
against me; from the Infection of which I pray God preserve me and all
Christian People; and that if it please God, he may give them a Sense of their
great Sin of uncharitableness toward me, and true Repentance and forgiveness
of it, who hate me, and count me their Enemy, for endeavoring to do them good,
and seeking sincerely to reduce them from their Errors to the Truth; the
Success of which my sincere Labor, I commit to Almighty God, with whom I leave
my Righteous Cause, and in whose Mercy I trust through Jesus Christ, that he
will preserve me in Soul and Body, from being a Sacrifice to their Fury and
Rage. I know their way of Extolling themselves, as the only People of God,
discoverers of Truth, vilifying all others as unfound and mistaken, that have
no such high Pretenses, whilst it is a crying Sin, that so many false Teachers
should be suffered, that speak Lies in the name of the Lord, pretending the
same immediate Message and Authority that the true Prophets had, when they can
give no Proof of it; but many undeniable Proofs can be given to the contrary,
as particularly their Antichristian Errors published in their Books, wherein
they Lie for Conscience sake, and Entitle their Errors and Blasphemies to the
holy Spirit of God.

The last Objection that they raise against ^e, and is assigned as a Reason for
refusing to dispute with me at Turners's-Hall, is, That none of the Quakers
that are at Unity with them do acknowledge, or regard me. Now, to confute their
Allegation, and to prove it all of a Piece with the rest of their Suggestions,
I am obliged to acquaint the Reader, That as an Evidence of my owning the Chapter
of England to be a Branch of the True Catholic Church of Christ, I did with
great Inward Peace and Satisfaction, I bless God, Receive the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, by the Ministry of Dr. Bedford, at his Church in Buttolph-Lane,
London, with others of that Congregation, the first Lords Day in the Month of
February, 1699, and since again, at the same place, by the same Person, the
first Lords Day in March, 1699; and to let the Quakers know, that my Example
has influenced others, the same day Robert Bridgman, and Margaret Everard, and
some other of my Friends, which formerly were Quakers, and in great Repute
among that People, whom God in Mercy has lately enlightened to see their former
Error, and Renounce it, did receive the Lord's Supper in Huntington, and have
declared, That they received it with great inward Peace and Satisfaction. In a
Letter since of a later date, I am imform'd, That Ten of my Friends in
Huntington, Godmanchester, and thereabouts, who were formerly Quakers, and of
good Reputation, do all now go to Church there; and that Margaret Everard has
had her youngest Son, and three Daughters baptized lately. By Letters from
Bedford, I have an Account, that some that had been Quakers, both in that Town
and Country, are gone off from the Quakers, and go to Church, particularly W.
Ma^her and his Wife* Also at Reading, diverse who were formerly Quakers, and
were so Educated, have gone to Church, and were Baptized, and that others have
brought their Children to be Baptized. Here in London, diverse of both Sexes,
who were Educated under the Profession of Quakers, have been lately Baptized,
and go to Church, one of whom is my youngest Daughter, my Elder having been
Baptized above a year ago. So that to my certain Knowledge, above forty Persons
within a few Months past, are come off from Quakerism, and brought to the
Church, which gives a good ground to hope, that many more will follow: Which
God in his great Mercy grant, and prosper my Sincere, though mean Endeavors and
Labors, and other his Servants, whom he has made Instrumental in this Work,
and for the Success he has been pleased to give us therein, All Glory, Honor,
and Praise be given to his most Holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

And whereas my Adversaries, George Whitehead, and other Quaking Preachers,
have given it as a Reason why they would not meet me at Turner's-Hall* was,
because they know none who had been in Unity with them since I came into
England, who did own me, or were in danger to be brought off from them; that
Objection to their own Knowledge and full Conviction, is now quite removed; for
both Robert Bridgman, and M. Everard, besides: diverse others that might be
named, were not only, in Unity with them since my Arrival in* England, but in
great Repute among them: Robert Bridgman having not only been a Member of their
Men's Meeting in London; but one that was en^rusted with receiving and
distributing the Money* Collected for their Poor in the City of London.
Margaret Everard has for many years, till very lately, been received, and well
owned, as a Speaker among them, both in City and Country. And it, is most
certain, That the Quakers refusing to meet* and dispute with me in Defense of
their own Principles at Turner's-Hall, has been a great Means to let many of
those formerly in Unity with them, see their Sandy Foundation, and the badness
of their Cause; and will yet be a further Means to give many others the like
Discovery, who are dissatisfied with their not appearing, either to vindicate
their Books, and Authors, or to acknowledge the great Errors contained in them,
and to Retract them. They are, indeed, brought to a very Pinching Dilemma; for
if they dare not appear to answer the change of Error, Heresy, and even
Blasphemy, that is brought against them, but invent frivolous Discourses to
excuse themselves, the People will soon perceive their Cause is bad, that
stands in need of such weak Props to support it. One Pretense for their
nonappearance was, That they might not offend that Authority that had indulged
them with Liberty of Conscience, and in the mean time make little other use of
it, than to Rail against that Religion and Church whereof the King himself, and
the best of his Subjects are Members, and to call me and my Friends for owning
that Church, and coming into Communion with it, and Relinquishing the Errors
condemned by it, Apostates, and Runagado's.

For his Insinuating, that it is Envy increasing in me, that has led me into a
disturbance of Mind, which in its Course resembles the returns of a delirious
Affliction, and that has caused me to give them so much Disquiet; I think it
not worth an Answer, and therefore shall leave it as an Instance of their
Scornful, Proud, and Haughty, as well Uncharitable, and Unchristian Tempers.
They reckon me their Enemy, because I tell them the Truth, and labor to Rescue
them out of the Snares of Satan: But since God has been pleased to prosper this
Work in my Hand, both in America and England, none of their malicious
Insinuations shall be able to stop my Progress in this Duty, to contend
earnestly for the Faith of Christ which was once delivered to the Saints, and
which the Quakers labor to Destroy.

Having thus answered their Objections; and being now by Imposition of Holy
Hands, Ordained a Minister of the Church of England, that I may not be thought
to desert the Quakers out of any Personal Disgust, or for Worldly Interest; but
purely out of the Dissatisfaction of my Conscience, because they had forsaken
God, and Renounced the Principles of Christian Religion: And that I durst not
on the Peril of my Eternal Salvation, associate longer with them, lest being
tainted with their Erors, I should be obnoxious to their Punishment: I shall in
the next place give you some of my Reasons, that engaged me to Abandon
Quakerism, and to embrace Christianity, according to the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church, of England.

And the first Reason I assign for leaving Quakerism, is because they are at
such great Uncertainties in what they profess, that no Man can have any
assurance where to bottom, or whether that which they own to day, will be
allowed to be Truth to Morrow. They are constant in nothing but in
Contradiction, and it is Reason enough for them to Disbelieve any Position, and
with all their Force and Powers to oppose it, if it had not the honor of their
Invention, and became Current by the Stamp of their own Authority; and if it
were not for their Habits, they would be all taken for Mahometans, by refusing
to believe, or act like Christians. All other Religious Societies have their
Confessions of Faith, under some Appellation or other, by which Men may know
what they believe; but the Quakers are such Lattitudinarians, that if a
Stranger should ask what they were, he could receive no other Answer, than that
they are what other Men are not; but such as in Humor, Gesture, Garb, Mein^,
and Pedantick, Canting Nonsense, are Antipodes to all the World; of which
nothing is a greater instance, than carrying dead Men to their Graves with
their Heads foremost: And if enquiry should be made what Faith they profess, it
must be answered, that no Body knows, nor themselves neither; and their
Meeting Houses might be Dedicated to the unknown God.

A second Reason is, That if their Principles may be collected out of the Books
they publish, they are too Erroneous, Heretical and Blasphemous for any good
Christian to comply with; some of which I shall recite in this Discourse, and
refer you in the Margin to such Places in my Narratives where the Quotations
are proved beyond contradiction. Now the first thing I shall charge the Quakers
with, is, That the Scriptures, according the Dictate of their greatest
Teachers, are not the Word of God. This Notion is so common among all their
Authors, and so frequent in the Mouths of their Proselites, that it is almost
lost labor to prove it upon them. One of their famed Authors is so angry with
his Opponent, for affirming that the Scriptures are the Word of God, that he
charges him with Blasphemy Nar. 4 p. 22.
for Asserting it, and by consequence makes the Church of England, and all
other Protestant Churches to be guilty of that direful Imputation. Nor is this
Doctrine of theirs a strife about Words; but the Foundation of their Deism, and
a handle for the Overthrowing Christianity; and therefore the Quakers have very
lately Reprinted William Penn's Discourse concerning the General Rule of Faith
and Practice, who brings Fourteen Arguments to prove that the Scriptures are
not the General Rule of Faith and Practice; in Three of which Arguments he
accuses them of Imperfection, Uncertainty and Obscurity: And this is a most
dangerous Heresy; for by this Principle they are not obliged to believe one
entire Doctrine in the Apostles Creed, as indeed I could easily prove they do
not. George Fox does not only deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God Nar. 4.
p. 24.
, but gives them contemptible Names, as Ink and Paper, Dust, and Serpent Meat.
But that the Scriptures are the Word of God is clear from abundant of Places in
the Scriptures. Our Gospel came unto you, said Paul to the Thessalonians, not
in Word only; by Word here is meant Doctrine. Isai. 28.13. The word of the Lord
was made unto them Precept upon Precept, Line upon Line; here the Precepts and
written Lines of the Prophets are called the Word of the Lord; and John 15.25.
it is called the written Word, which was a short Sentence written in one of the
Psalms. And when Paul bid Timothy preach the Word, it cannot be justly thought
that he would have him only preach the Inward Word, but by the Word he meant
the Doctrine of the Gospel; and all that the Quakers say against this received
Truth, is but mere trifling, and humouring their Spirit of Contradiction.

The next stroke the Quakers make toward the Destruction of Christianity, is,
against the Divinity of Christ, and to this purpose William Penn in a
Controversy between himself and some Presbyterian Ministers in Ireland, where
the Question was, whither he that suffered Death without the Gates of Jerusalem
was not, and is, properly the Son of God, William Penn in his Book called a
Serious Apology, p. 146. says, That the Outward Person which suffered was
properly the Son of God, we utterly deny. With the like Confidence G.W.
assaults the Humanity of Christ, in pos(...)tively denying that Christ
consisted of Flesh and Bones, in those words: I distinguish, says he, between
consisting and having, Christ had Flesh and Bones but did not consist of them:
as a Man has a Coat or Garment, but does not consist of it; and that outward
Person that suffered at Jerusalem was Christ by a Metoning of the the thing
containing for the thing contained. But all Sound and Orthodox Christians say,
according to the Scriptures, that Christ is both God and Man, having his
Godhead and Manhood so united as to constitute one Christ, which is a
miraculous and extraordinary Union, that no other Creatures neither Angels nor
Men are dignified with! And though Christ as Man was the Son of God,
miraculously conceived and born in time; and also as God, was by a Generation
from all Eternity, yet he is but one Son of God, and because of the personal
Union of the Godhead with his Manhood, both as God and Man, is properly the Son
of God. The Excuse the Quakers make, that Christ did not merely consist of
Flesh, Blood and Bones, signifies nothing; for none ever affirmed any such
thing: Whatsoever has Parts consists of those Parts, Incompleatly of one or
more Parts, Completely of them all. The Foundation of the Quakers great Error
on this Head, lies here, That because Christ was before the Body was,
therefore that Body is no part of him, which is easily answered thus: Christ
was before that Body was, but he was not completely and in all respects, fitted
to be the Anointed Savior of the World, until the Word was made Flesh, that
is, till the Word did take our Flesh and whole Nature into a personal Union
with him, which was necessary to the complete Performance of his Mediatory
Offices, of King, Priest and Prophet, and especially of his Priestly Office.

The next thing I charge as abominable Blasphemy upon the Quakers, especially
G.F. and.G.W is for affirming, That Christ's coming in the Flesh, and his
Suffering without us in the Flesh, and his outward Flesh and Blood was a
Figure, and but a Figure of Christ of what he suffered in us, and his Blood
shed in us. Thus as the Quakers reason why they cast off outward Baptism and
the Lords Supper, is, because the Substance is revealed in them, whereof they
were Figures; so for the same Reason they think Christ's Death at Jerusalem is
not to be minded nor Preached, because it was but a Figure of Christ's
Suffering in them, and therefore the use and remembrance of it cease; and if
this is not horrid Blasphemy, certainly there is no such thing in the World.
This was generally their manner of Preaching and Writing at their first
appearance; to tell People that Christ was Begotten in them, Born in them,
Crucified Dead and Buried, Risen and Ascended into Heaven within them, and that
every one, in order to eternal Salvation, must learn to know Christ thus
Begotten and Born in them, etc. and this inward Conception and Birth of Christ
they made the greatest Mystery and Reality, whereof Christ as born in the Flesh
was the Figure, and a facile Representation (to use William Penn's Phrase) of
what is to be transacted in us, and thus they represented the Work of
Regeneration to be a greater Mystery than God manifested in the Flesh, viz. in
that Body of Flesh that was born at Bethlehem. By this high sublime Doctrine,
which many admired because they did not understand it, they gave forth to be
given by immediate Revelation from Heaven, which was a plain Cheat and a horrid
Lie, for the whole was nothing but what George Fox had gleaned from some old
Ranters and Familists, who had it long before him. They also mightily magnified
themselves, and Railed against all others as Dark, Ignorant, Sots, Deceivers
and Antichrists, that would not receive this newfangled Notion, which they
learned from Ranters and Familists. And tho while I was with them. I was not
altogether Ignorant that they used such Phrases of Speech; yet I thought they
understood it only by way of Allegory and Methaphor, as Origin, Austin, and
other Greek and Latin Fathers did, and which I my self have partly used in some
of my former Books, only by way of Allegory and Metaphor; but when after all
their Shifting, Doubling and Prevaricating, I found they intended this Doctrine
should be understood among their Proselites, as indeed it is, according to the
literal Interpretation, I did my utmost to oppose the growth of it, and drew
the Envy of their Preachers upon my self.

And since I have taken the liberty to charge them with Blasphemy upon this
Head, give me leave to incert a Blasphemous Letter in this brief Discourse, for
the satisfaction of the Readers that cannot compass it in a larger Volume. The
Letter was written by John Audland, a Preacher among the Quakers, to George
Fox, and the Original was showed at the Third Nar 4. p. 67.
meeting at Turners-Hall, whereof the following is a true Copy, Spelt and
Pointed according to the Original.

Dear and Presious one in wheme my life is bound up and my strenth in thee
stands, by thy Breathings I am nourished and Refreshed: and by thee my strenth
is Renewed: Blessed art thou for evermore: and blessed are all they that enjoy
thee: Life and strenth comes from thee holy one: and thou art the blessed of
the Lord for ever more, dear dear reach unto me that I may be strenthened, to
stand in the mighty power and dread of the Lord, for the farvisle is very
great, my travel and burden was never so as now since I saw thee: but daily
do I find thy presence with me, which does exceedingly preserve me; for I
cannot reane but in thy presence and power: pray for me that I may stand in thy
dread for evermore: dear my dear Brother John Came has been exceedingly sick
and he is very weak I can say little of his Recovery as yet his wife is with
him she is dear and preciously kept; their dear love is to thee, chreach
through all thy mighty power to him this bearer can declare to thee of the work
this way: Jo: Wilkinson and Jo: Storey is hear, their love is dearly to thee:
dear heart there is one thing that lies upon me: I shall lay it before thee:
as touching my coming into Wiltshire: I was there at Justice Stoks house: and
his Familey is all pretty loving and convinced: and he is a sober wise Man and
there is honesty in him which will stand: and there is a pretey people that
way: it has laid upon me exceedingly these three days of thy being at that
place: I know not such another place in all the Country* for thee: dear: I was
much wounded to know that thou was in such a rude place and suffers so amongst
them: and this was I moved to lay before thee: and great is my desire that it
may be so: the place is about 20 Miles from Brestol in Wiltshire one Mile from
Chipenam a markete town Justice: Stoks house Jo Came told me that the Justice
he was with was a very loveing and pretey man: this bearer was there he can
declare to thee more: but oh that thou wear but at that place I mention: it is
free and suitable for Friends coming to thee: it lies much upon me: and if thou
find Moveings strike over thither I shall say no more of it: the work is great
hear away pray for us all that in thy power we may abide for ever more: I am
thine begoten and nurished by thee and in thy power am I preserved glory unto
thee holy one so Ever:

John Audland.


When this Letter was read the Audience was struck with admiration, and
generally signified their great Abhorrence of the Blasphemy and Idolatry that
was contained in it to George Fox: And I question not but it will have the same
effect upon every good Christian Reader. The Quakers, who are an Infallible
People in every thing but speaking Sense and writing English, and never
acknowledge themselves guilty of any Fault, excused Audland's Letter, by saying
these words were not intended to George Fox, but to Christ or the Life in
George Fox, which some think is a greater offense than the other. The like
excuse George Fox made for a Woman Quaker, that in a Quakers Meeting called
George Fox the Holy One of Israel: And the same Apology was made for those
Quakers that sung Hosanna to James Naylor at his Procession into Bristol. But
these Shifts and Quiblings does not hinder the Practices from being abominable
Idolatry, for they are the same excuses that the Heathens give for Worshipping
of Idols, because it was not the Idol but the Divine Power that was in it,
which they Worshipped.

I charge George Whitehead and William Penn, who are two of the Leaders of the
Quakers that cause them to Err, with downwright Heresy, in denying Christ to
be God coequal with the Father Nar. 1. p. 14, 15, 17.
, and for affirming, That if Christ was Cocreator with the Father, then there
were two Gods. Also for denying the Existence of a Christ without us, after
their Socratical way of Writing; in these words. What Scripture Proof is there
that Christ subsisteth outwardly Bodily, without us at God's Right Hand? and
where is God's Right Hand, is it visible or invisible, within us or without us
only? and is Christ a Savior, as an outward bodily Existence or Person without
us, distinct from God, and on that consideration to be worshipped as God, Yea
or Nay? This way of Talking and Writing is the peculiar knack of the Quakers,
who have more Shifts and Subterfuges to cloak their Heresies than any of the
Ignation Tribe. In writing about Justification by the Blood of Christ, the same
Authors, contrary to the express words of Scripture, say, That it is a
Confusion, a Labyrinth and Uncertainty, to be directed to Christ for
Justification and Salvation, both as he suffered at Jerusalem, and as he Rose
again and is Ascended into Heaven above the Clouds and Firmaments; and to fill
up the Measure of their just Condemnation, Solomon Eccles has published it in
Print Nar. 1. p. 27.
, That the Blood of Christ, in respect of Justification, is of no more efficacy
than the Blood of another Saint; and certainly if ever Comparisons were Odious,
this Quakeristical Absurdity is intolerable. All their Writings are stuffed
with such inexplicable and unintelligible Phrases, and wild Notions, that they
seem rather intended to puzzle and distract than inlighten a Reader; and
notwithstanding all their fallacious Pretenses of being an innocent, plain,
simple People, that are most affected with Scripture Language; yet they are as
far from it as Light from Darkness, for in truth no Society of Men that are
called Christians, no not the Church of Rome it self, have so much deviated
from Scripture Language, and Scripture Doctrine and Sense, as the Quakers have
done* And as the Spirit of Pride and vain Glory does always abound in worthless
Minds, as empty Vessels and shallow Brooks are known to yield the loudest
sound, so the Quakers are always filling the World with their own
Commendations, as if there were no good, wise, nor virtuous Men upon Earth, but
what were enclosed within the narrow confines of a Quaking Conventicle, whereas
in truth the readiest way to know them rightly, is read them in the reverse of
the Characters they give themselves.

The Quakers also say, that we are not Justified by the Blood of Christ
outwardly shed, which is a piece of Divinity more fit for Bedlam than any sober
Society of People, Nar. 1. p. 33.
but as if this was not sufficient to Stigmatize them, with the approbius Name
of Obstinate, or Blind Heretics, they are pleased* to add also, That we are
not Sanctified by that Blood* of Christ that was shed without the Gates of
Jerusalem, but by an inward Blood, whose Power and Virtue is unknown to any but
the Quakers; and if these are not bold Strokes against the whole Doctrine of
the Bible, and the Declarations and Confessions of the whole Christian World,
you may add to these another of their Tennets, and that is, Nar. 1. p. 34.
That the Body that dies never rises again, which is expressly opposite, and
contradictory, to many places of Scripture, that especially in Acts the 26th,
That Christ should suffer, and should be the first that should be raised from
the Dead. In all parts of the World where the Quakers have spread themselves,
there is a Universal Neglect among them, of Preaching Christ Crucified, and
concerning Faith in him; Preaching only the Light within, and Christ within:
And when I began to preach up the Fundamental Principles of the Christian
Religion among them, they stood up against me, and charged me with preaching up
new Doctrines, and one appealed to the Monthly Meeting, whether they ever heard
of such Doctrines preached in the Quakers Meetings, directing them to Faith in
a Christ without them. I Reverence Divine Providence, that I became a Quakers;
but if I had known they had had such Errors among them, I would as soon have
put my Head into the Fire, as have associated with them*

They were so assiduous in maintaining their own Erroneous Principles, that
they did all they could to prevent me from opposing them, by reporting that I
was a False Teacher, and accused me for setting up three Heterodox Principles.
Nar. 1. p. 38. and 39.
The first was, That Christ's Body rose out of the Grave, and they affirmed, it
never did, and dared me to give an Instance, that one English Quaker was of my
Opinion.

The Second Accusation was, that I had said, That it was lawful to pray to
Jesus Christ Crucified. And in this also challenged me to name one Quaker that
I ever heard pray to Christ, and when the 1 Cor. 1.2. was read. To all that
call upon the Lord Jesus Christ, both their Lord and ours. The Quakers
answered, That Paul was as Dark, and as Ignorant as George Keith is; adding,
for our part we know better.

The third piece of False Doctrine they accused me of, was, for saying, That
the best Saints had need to come always to God by the Mediator, the Man Christ
Jesus. This they inveighed against as a gross Error, and said, they would come
to God without him; this sort of Doctrine is to be found in William Shewen's
Book, a Quaker in great esteem among them.

For these things they Excommunicated me first, and afterward presented me by
a Grand Jury, at Philadelphia in Pensilvania, and they would have found me
guilty of Death, (though I was wholly Innocent of endeavoring to change the
Government, which they accused me of) if the Government had not been taken out
of their Hands, and I discharged from that false and malicious Accusation by
Governor Fletcher.

George Whitehead, and William Penn, Nar. 1. p. 38. and 40.
by Allegorizing Plain and Positive Texts of Scripture, have endeavored to
overthrow the Belief of Christ's Birth, his Death, Resurrection, Ascension, and
coming to Judgment, and by this Artifice, has left us no Scripture to prove
that the Death of Christ was any benefit to us; and as to Christ's coming to
Judgment, Whitehead says in an Answer to R. Gordon, that he might look till his
Eyes dropped out, before he should see, Christ appear again outwardly in a Bodily
Existence. After this having read over my Books, they drew up ten Articles
against me, charging me with false Doctrine in ten Particulars* and John
Humphrey says in his first Letter, that he perceives by those Articles, That my
Faith relished too much of Carnality, a carnal Body of Christ in Heaven, a
carnal Election and Reprobation, a carnal Justification and Adoption, a carnal
Day of Judgment and Resurrection beyond the Grave. I am grieved, says he, to
hear some say, they did expect to be justified by that Blood of Christ that was
shed at Jerusalem. Is not this to be carnally Minded? William Baily, who was a
great Preacher among the Quakers, and whose Books Nar. 3. p. 3.4.
they have Reprinted, says, That the Apostle Preached Christ the word nigh in
the Heart, and in the Mouth, and that the Ingrafted Word, is able to save the
Soul. He did not preach a Visible Christ with Flesh and Bones, as some others
do. So he taught them to pray, Our Father, not to look at his Person, and to
pray to him as a Person without them, but within them.

Where we may observe, that if they were not to pray to him as a Person without
them, by the same Reason they are not to believe in him as a Person without
them; but Christ not only considered as the Word, who is Omnipresent, and in
all Men and Things, but as made Flesh, and having taken the true Nature of Man
into a Personal Union therewith, and replenishing the same with the fullness of
the Godhead, and with all fullness of Grace and Truth, is the Object of the
Christian Worship, together with the Father, and the holy Spirit, dwelling and
residing in him.

But of all this Antichristian Quaking Crew, none have discovered more
Indignity and Hatred to the Blessed Jesus Christ, than William Shown, in a
Book, called, A small Treatise concerning evil Thoughts, p. 37. being about to
conclude a Paragraph, he says, Not to Jesus the Son of Abraham, David, and
Mary, Saint, or Angel, but to God the Father, all Worship, Honor and Glory is
to be given. A Mohammedan would have expressed greater Reverence to Christ than
this Quaker has done; but what can be expected from such People as deny the
Lord that bought them, and count the Blood of Jesus as unprofitable to Mankind.
And whether these are not sufficient Reasons for leaving People of such
Principles, I leave the World to judge.

William Smith, a great Man among them when he was alive, in his Primmer,
Printed at London, 1668, Asks this Question, p. 8. Child, but how may I know
which are the True, and which are the False Teachers, seeing Words may be the
same? and makes Child's the Father thus instruct the Child: Why, they that are
false Preach Christ without, and bid People believe in him as he is in Heaven
above; but they that are true Ministers, they Preach Christ within, and direct
People to wait to feel him in themselves; and so to believe in him as he makes
himself manifest in them. And having given this as an infallible Sign of a
Quaker, he makes the Child ask; but must I not try all things by the
Scriptures? and the Father answers, Nay, for the Scriptures were given forth by
the Spirit, and it is the Spirit that tries whether the things be true or
false, good or evil.

Here is another piece of the Old Serpents Subtilty; for since the Spirit must
try all things, they laying a claim to the Spirit, have invested themselves
with a pretense, to make their own Sentiments of greater Authority than the
Sacred Scriptures: Which is another good Reason for leaving them that deny the
Word of God to be the Test of Christian Doctrines; and though we are commanded
to Search the Scriptures, discharge us from doing it.

Through the Pride of their Hearts the Quakers pretend to Infallibility, and a
sinless Perfection in this Life Nar. 4. p. 1, 2.
, vilifying all those that deny them this Prerogative, as under the Curse, in
another Spirit than Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles were in, that gave forth
the Scripture. And George Whitehead affirms* Those that Ministers that want
Infallibity have not the Spirit of Christ, but are out of the Truth, and their
Ministry is deceiful. And this they as confidently and proudly affirm as the
Pope himself.

But it is denied by all Oxthodox Christians, as repugnant to the Doctrine of
the New Testament, who yet grant that all the Faithful are infallibly led into
all Truths necessary to Salvation, by the infallible Spirit in the use of the
Holy Scriptures, which contain the infallible Truths of the Gospel. But as this
Doctrine of the Quakers is contradictory to Scripture, which brands all with
the Infamous Character of Liars that pretend to it, so it is seldom claimed,
but by those that are farthest from it, as is manifest among the Quakers; who
though they pretend to be guided by an infallible Spirit, it is apparent that
many of them are under great Delusions and Errors concerning the great Truths
of the Evangelical Dispensation, as has been proved by the foregoing Instances.

Again, as to their pretense to Sinless perfection, he that makes a Scrutiny
into their Morals, will scarce find them such a Church as is without Spot or
Wrinkle, but are as far from that Perfection which they boast to have attained
to, as any other sort of People that pretend to any exactitude in their
Conversation; and as to their Principles it is certain that George Fox their
Quondam Metropolitan, Edward Buroughs, Francis Hougil, Richard Hubberthorn,
and some of their greatest Saints, lived in great Ignorance, Error and
Unbelief, in diverse great Fundamentals of the Christian Faith, and in great
uncharitableness toward such as differed from them. The same humor of
Self-conceit that began with this People, still continues among them, and G.W.
laughs at the Church of England, who are always from Seven Years of Age to
Seventy, Praying, Lord have mercy upon us miserable Sinners. Is not this a
plain Evidence of the intolerable Pride that reigns among the Quakers
concerning their Sinless perfection, who despise not only the Church of
England, but all other Christian Churches throughout the World, who pray for
Forgiveness of Sins, though when Christ taught his Disciples to pray for their
Daily-bread, he enjoined them also to pray for the Forgiveness of their Sins.
Must not the Diseased come to the Physician till they are cured, and those that
feel the Burden of Sin pray to be Eased? How arrogantly does George Whitehead
charge the Church of England, for Confessing and not Forsaking their Sins. How
can he more prove his Charge against them, than against his own Society, or
himself. Many in the Church of England, and among other Protestants, may
compare with the best of Quakers for Holiness of Life, and far exceed them in
many Virtues, especially in Sobriety and Humility. But pray tell me, you
Self-conceited Quakers, are not they better employed who confess their Sins,
and yet through humane Frailty find they Relapse into some Sins than such proud
Pharisees as you are, that neither Confess nor forsake your Sins, but employ
your Selves in Railing against them that do. They that Confess their Sins show
a Desire, and pray for ability to forsake them, whilst those that say they have
no Sin, deceive themselves into such a Security, as is the ready Road to
Damnation.

The next great Article of Faith which they deny, and Fight against is, the
Resurrection of the Body; but because the denying this in plain terms, they
think would make them be despised, among all the various Professors of
Christianity, William Penn being urged to Answer the Proofs that were brought
from the 1 Cor. 15. says in his Rejoinder, That let the whole Chapter be
considered, and we shall find no such thing as to imply a Bodily Resurrection,
but a change from Earthly Mindedness, to a renewed State to God, through the
Operation of the Spirit. Which shows us how they deceive the unwary Readers;
who would make them believe they own the Resurrection of the Body according to
the Scripture, and yet mean nothing thereby but Regeneration, or the New Birth
in time, before the Death of the mortal Body. And seeing this is the
Resurrection they own, and no other, according to the Scriptures cited by
George Whitehead, one of them being Matthew 22.30, 31, 32. in the Resurrection
they neither Marry, nor give in Marriage; might not one ask them, whether they
don't commit a heinous Crime, who Marry, and continue in a Married State, after
they have attained to this Resurrection? And whether their Quondam Brother
Thomas Case, did not act more Agreeably to his Principles, who turned away his
Wife after he reckoned he was come to the Resurrection; and whom I heard say,
all Marriage was of the Devil; and many know that it was his Principle; but
whether he did not supply that Defect by a more fashionable method, Quere.

The Quakers also deny the last Judgment, as is plain from George Whitehead in
his Light and Life, ^. 40.41. who there contending with W.B. about Christ's
outward coming in his Glorified Body to Judge the Quick and the Dead, answered
to the ^everal Scriptures that W.B. brought for Christ's outward coming at the
end of the World, and carries them all to his Inward coming already fulfilled;
and whereas it is said in the 1 Thessalonians. 4.5. That we which are alive, and remain
unto the coming of the Lord: He asks the Question after his way of Eluding
positive Proofs, Whether they did live and remain to a personal coming of
Christ in the Clouds, Yea or Nay? Or whether it can be reasonably thought to be
a Coming that is not yet, nor that they ^ived and remained unto? Which is so
gross and absurd an Insinuation, that it renders St. Paul to have spoken an
Untruth, even by Divine Inspiration, when the Apostle said, This we say unto
you by the Word of Lord, but they according to their common way of Shifting and
Excusing themselves, say, these were but Queries, though the impor^ance of those
Queries imply a positive Denial, and so will be taken in the sense of all
Mankind that read them; for it is evident in several pla^es in his printed
Books, besides what is here al^edged, that he does deny that Christ would come
to Judge the World in natural and passible Flesh, and not only so, but that he
would not come in the same substance of that Body he had on Earth, which was a
mortal and passible Body, of the same Nature with ours; for he makes it most
absurd; that an Earthly Body, and an Heavenly Body, can be the same Substance,
and so denies Christ's being now in Heaven without us, in that Body which rose
from the Grave, or his coming without us from Heaven in that Body to Judgment;
for there is no place of Scripture of the many that are justly brought by
Orthodox Christians, to prove Christ's coming without us, in his glorified Body
to Judge the World at the great Day of Judgment; but some of their Teachers
have turned altogether to his inward Coming, which they say they Witness
already fullfilled in them, and they look for no other coming.

To which give me leave to add, That they deny the Use of Baptism, and the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; which be pleased to take in their own words, in
a Book called, Some Principles of the Elect People of God, in scorn called
Quakers p. 75.

The Baptism, say they, that we own, is the Baptism of Christ with the Holy
Ghost and with Fire, but we deny all other; for there is but one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all. They that would have one Baptism
outward and another inward, would have two Baptisms, when the Scripture says
the Baptism is but one, and whosoever has the Baptism outward are the same
they are before, but the Baptism of Christ makes a new Creature. -- And now I
see the other to be but a formal Imitation, the Invention of Man, and a mere
Delusion.

And speaking of the Lord's Supper they say, It is but feeding upon the Husk
and Shell which, is Carnal; for the Bread which the World breaks is Carnal and
^atural, and only feeds the outward Carnal Body, and goes into the Belly, and
so passes out into the Dunghill; and so likewise the Cup which they drink, and
so the Communion and Fellowship of the World passes away; but this is no
Nourishment of the Soul, but still the Soul lies in Death, and here is no
Communion but Natural, Outward and Carnal, of several Minds, and Hearts full of
Filthiness and Uncleanness, which Is the Table of Devils, eating and drinking
their own Damnation, not discerning the Lord's Body, which is Spiritual, and
cannot be discerned by the Natural Man.

William Penn in his Reasons against Railing, p. 108. affirms, That
Circumcision is as much in force as Water Baptism, and the Paschal Lamb as
Bread and Wine, they were both Shadows, and both Elementary and Perishable. And
we can testify from the same Spirit by which Paul renounced Circumcision, that
they are to be rejected, as not now required; neither have they since the false
Church espoused and exalted them, ever been taken up afresh by God's Command,
or in the leading of his eternal Spirit; and the Lord will appear to gather his
People out of them, but never to establish or keep People in them.

What a sad and fearful Delusion are the Quakers under, who call the
Institutions of our Blessed Savior, and which are expressly enjoined to be
continued to the end of the World, by such hard Names; which is but spitting
their Venom in the Face of the Institutor. Some of the Quakers when they heard
me defend the Sacraments, said, George, since thou art for Outward Baptism and
the Supper, why do not practice it? To which I answered, because I had no
lawful Call to Baptize others, and as to my self I was satisfied with the
Baptism I received in my Infancy, being born of Christian Parents; for I
believe that Baptism being a Seal of God's Covenant of Grace, does as truly
belong to the Infant Children of Believers under the New Testament, as
Circumcision did to Infant Children of Believers under the Old Testament.

Next as concerning the Lord's Supper, after it pleased God to convince me that
it was and is an Institution of Christ, and let me see my Sin and Error in
rejecting it; for which I have been humbled before God, sincerely and heartily
asking him forgiveness, and which I hope God for his Blessed Son's sake has
given me: I had for a considerable time some Hesitations about the Lawful and
Due Administrator, and being clearly satisfied in all my Scruples in that
particular, I delaid receiving it for the sake of others, lest my forwardness
should give them Offense, in thinking I did it without such a religious
Consideration and Preparation, as was requisite before Receiving those Holy
Mysteries. That through Mercy being also much removed, I became uneasy to
delay that longer which I was convinced was my indispensable Duty, and declared
I would receive it at the first opportunity, and accordingly did receive it as
has been before related: And heartily wish, that all others who are under the
same Delusions and Prejudices, in which I too long continued, would follow my
Example, and be made partakers of the same inward Peace and Satisfaction, which
through Mercy I enjoy in the Communion of the Church of England.

To conclude: Another Reason why I deserted the Quakers, was, because I am
able, through Mercy, to prove, That they do not believe One Article of the
Apostle's Creed, in the true Sense of Scripture, and all Orthodox Christians in
the whole World; and that all their Teachers pretenses to Infallibility, and
extraordinary Prophetical Inspirations, are all Artifice and Delusion; which
joined to the Errors, Heresies and Blasphemy already mentioned, will
sufficiently justify my leaving them.

Now what remains in this short account of my Change, is to give you the
Reasons, why among all the Pretenders to the best reformed Church, I have at
last entered into Communion with the Church of England, in which I shall use
all the Brevity imaginable. Now as nothing so much concerned me as the
Salvation of my Soul, and in order to that the choice of my Religion, so I
exerted all my Care in examining things conducing to it, that I might be able
to give account to others, and have satisfaction in my self, that my Religion
was not the Effect of Chance, but espoused upon a deliberate and well-advised
Choice, which I take to be the regular Method toward a Settlement. Men may
indeed be Confident, but can never be Certain without Knowledge, a diligent
Examination of the* Things proposed to their Consideration: And this made me
more in love with the Church of England, that does not require a blind
Obedience; but is contented her Doctrines should be examined by the clearest
Light, in which I could largely expatiate in her Commendation, and the Reproof
of others that withhold the means of Instruction from their Members, and boast
of an absolute Infallibility which they have no pretense to; but I hasten to
the Reasons that obliged me to close with the Church of England.

And the first was, because in Purity of Doctrine and Discipline the comes
nearest to the Pattern of Primitive Christianity. ^ She retains the Three
Creeds, and does not reject the first General Councils, and administers the
Sacraments according to the Divine Prescription. All her Children pray in a
Tongue they understand, and only to God through Jesus Christ* This Church
presses Men to Piety, Loyalty, Humility and Charity, and earnestly desires the
Salvation of Mankind. She Preaches up the Excellency of Good Works, but places
her hope in the Mercy of God and the Mercy of his Son, and every one that lives
up to the Principles of this Religion are Safe and Happy.

Secondly, Because in the main Articles of Faith the whole Church is of one
mind, and have as much Unity in Faith among them, as they had in the first
Churches planted by the Apostles themselves: And their Differences are in
lesser and secondary things, which have no relation to the Primitive Doctrines
of Christian Religion: Which who ever opposes they disown him, and look upon as
in a Faction against the Church; which is not thereby broken, nor the Unity of
its Faith destroyed: For though some Men have preached strange Doctrines, and
drawn Disciples after them, (which is no more than they did in Apostles days)
yet they have not prevailed against this Church, nor overturned its Faith: And
if some looser Part of the People have been carried away, yet the Body of the
Church, like an unmovable Rock, still persists in as great Unity as was
anciently in any of the Apostolical Churches, and that is abundantly sufficient
to invite us to Conformity with it, and Perseverance in it.

Thirdly, Another Reason that induced me to embrace the Religion professed in
the Church of England, was, Because she maintains the Scriptures to be the Word
of God, the Rule of Faith, the Judge of Controversies, and the Guide of Humane
Life; so that if we consult our Reasons, use our Eyes, and mind our Rule, we
cannot miscarry. To this Rule St. Paul sends Timothy for Instruction, and
commands him to give attendance to Reading, viz. the Holy Scriptures, which he
had known from a Child, and which were able to make him wise to Salvation
through Faith which is in Christ Jesus: They being given by Inspiration of God,
that even a Man of God (like the ancient Prophets) might be perfected, and
thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, for every part of his Employment. St.
Paul directs him to these Holy Writings, as a means to preserve him in the
Christian Belief, ver. 14. But continue thou in the things which thou have
le^^ned, and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them, and
that from a Child thou have learned the Holy Scriptures, etc. What we have
learned from them, we are assured of, we know from whom they come, and are
certain we are taught of God when we read these holy Books: But cannot be
assured of any other Tradition or pretended Revelation of the Spirit, and
therefore ought to continue steadfast in our adherence to the Scriptures, and
both to suspect those who would draw us from this hold, and stick to those
Guides who bid us stick to this, and prove all things by it; for it is evident
that they have no mind to deceive us; but do, in effect, bid us believe God and
follow his Directions, and rely upon his Authority: Who cannot mislead us; and
will not suffer us to be misled, if we continue in the things which we have
learned out of the Holy Scriptures.

For taking them to be our Rule, we shall neither admit any thing which is
contrary to that Rule; nor shall we take any thing to be an essential part of
the Christian Faith which is not there delivered unto us, For it is not
consistent with the Notions we have of God's Infinite Goodness and Wisdom, to
believe he would give us a Rule which is defective in necessary things. No, he
has abundantly provided here for our Instruction, in all such Matters: And as
we ought to refuse that which contradicts any part of these holy Books, so we
ought not to think it necessary that we should entertain any thing which they
do not teach us: And teach us plainly and evidently; for in all necessary
things they are very clear and perspicuous, else they could not be a Rule unto
us, but we must seek for some other* The Apostles Creed, for instance (which
the Ancients call the immovable Rule of Faith, a short Summary of Christian
Faith, beyond which, as they speak* we ought not to seek for Faith) together
with the Nice Creed and Athanasius's, which expound the Apostles, Ought
thoroughly to be received and believed; for that they may be proved by most
certain Warrants of Holy Scriptures. But whatsoever is not read therein, nor
may be proved thereby, is not to required of any Man, that it should be
believed a^ an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite or necessary to
Salvation.

This is the Doctrine of the Church of England in its Sixth and Eighth
Articles, unto which let us strictly keep, if we would not be carried to and
fro uncertainly, with the Blasts of vain Doctrines, which have no certain
Warrant in the Holy Scriptures, and therefore are not to be Received; or are
contrary to them, and therefore are to be Rejected. Here we must fix, and
believe that here we are safe: For the Scriptures want nothing to complete us
in Christian Wisdom; which they do not wrap up in Obscurity, but, as far as is
needful, give us a clear understanding of the Doctrines of Faith. And make us
understand withal, if we please to consider them, that having laid our*
Foundation well, in a firm Belief of those great and necessary things, which
out of the Scriptures are summed up in the Creeds before named; we need not
trouble our selves about other Matters, which are not so evident; but make it
our whole Business in this World, to raise the solid Superstructure of a Holy
Life, upon the Foundation of Faith in Christ.

The last Reason I shall mention at this time, is, That this Church has not
suited her Doctrines to advance any secular Interests; but her Religion is
Heavenly in its Principle, and Pure in its Aim, disdaining to stoop to mean
Arts for Wealth and Worldly Dignities. Religion was designed as the greatest
Blessing to Mankind, and the Author of the Christian was a great Lover of
humane Race; in conformity to whose blessed Example this Holy Church cancels
none of our Obligations to God or Man, but teaches the absolute Necessity of
Contrition, and Repentance, and Mortification of our Lusts, to Obey our
Superiors, to Love God and our Neighbors, to follow Justice, Mercy and
Peaceableness: To be Charitable to the Poor, and to do to all Men as we would
they should do by us: To use no Craft or Equivocations, but to be Sincere in
all our Actions and Professions; to live in Kindness, Civility, and under the
firmest Obligation to a true and lasting Friendship. And if any of the Quakers
think fit to oppose these Doctrines, they may promise themselves an Answer.

FINIS.

