A MODERATE AND Safe Expedient To remove Jealousies and Fears, of any danger,
or prejudice to this State, by the ROMAN CATHOLICS of this Kingdom,

And to mitigate the censure of too much severity toward them.

With a great advantage of Honor and Profit to this State and Nation.

Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1646.

A moderate and safe Expedient, etc.
IF it please the Parliament to take the condition of the Roman Catholics into
serious consideration, they may, perhaps, find cause to give them liberty of
conscience in England; or as much toleration, at least, as people of that
profession have in Holland (which is little less then a liberty of conscience)
although that State might perhaps find more reason, then the State of England
has, to be jealous of such persons: but by experience, the Hollanders find
that way to succeed well with them. Nevertheless, in case the Parliament shall
not think fit to do so, they may be pleased to give to so many of them as will
accept thereof, free and public leave to transplant themselves, families, and
estates, into Mariland, a Province in America, above 3000 miles distant from
England, upon these ensuing considerations, both of the reasons for their
departure, and of such encouragements as are requisite to enduce those of that
profession here, voluntarily to transplant themselves thither.

to this State (according to the Policy and Religion of the present government)
it were better they should willingly banish themselves from hence, then that
they should continue here obnoxious to it; and so the intention of the laws
made against them (for and in respect of their Religion) may be with less
imputation of severity fulfilled. For certainly the chief (if not only) end of
those laws was to free this Kingdom, as much as might be, of such persons,
and not to enrich the King, much less to satisfy any thirst of blood, no
more, then of any other penal laws made against any subjects that are
Protestants.

Roman Catholics, is not to keep them here under the heavy burden of the
penal Laws made against them for their Religion; but either to let them enjoy
here the rights, and liberties of other freeborn subjects; or else to give them
leave to go into another country, where they may enjoy them.

agreeing with good policy, For conformity to the Church of England (which at
any time exempts them from the penalty of the said laws) and banishment, have
both one effect, as to the prime end of those Laws, to wit, the decrease of
Roman Catholics in England, and it was not their being Roman Catholics, but
their being so in England, which caused the said laws, wherefore, ablata
causa t^llitur effectus, in this case, may be a just plea for them, and their
persons, and estates, (without which they can subsist no where) have too near a
relation to one another to be voluntarily parted, so as to deny this, is (in
effect) to deny them leave to go, and to force them away, without their
estates, might make them have animum revertendi: which affection, in desperate
and discontented persons, might perhaps be of ill consequence to England.
Moreover to give them leave to go, and to deny them leave to dispose of their
estates, might bring a dishonorable imputation on this State, in making the
World believe, that the laws here against Recusants were made, or at least
wise now made use of, for lucre only, and not for advancing the Gospel. And the
Honorable Houses of Parliament may be pleased in this case of voluntary
banishment, to allow the said Roman Catholics as much favor as the Spaniards
did the Moors, in theirs, which was compulsive; who, notwithstanding, had free
leave to dispose of their estates in Spain, before their departure from
thence. If the Parliament shall not think fit to let them dispose of all their
estates, especially such as have born arms against them; then it may be
required, that upon the sale, a competent proportion, of the value, be paid to
the use of the State. And, no doubt, many good bargains will, by this means, be
afforded to Protestant Purchasers, together with an unquestionable title, from
the true owners.

Mariland, is better, then that they should go into any Foreign Princes
Dominions; because it will not be for the honor, nor perhaps for the safety of
England, to permit another Princes Territories to be supplied with people, by
any considerable number of the Natives of this Kingdom: Whereas the planting
of the said Roman Catholics in Mariland (which has a dependence on the Crown of
England) Will conduce much to the honor and profit of this State and Nation,
by enlarging the Dominions thereof, by increase of trade and shipping, by vent
of our native commodities, by importation of others, and, consequently, by
improvement of customs; for they cannot subsist in Mariland, without yearly
supplies of many necessaries from England, and, at so remote a distance, no
danger from them to this Kingdom can rationally be feared: and they will
certainly rather stay still in England, in any condition, then go into any
other of the Kings dominions where they cannot have the liberty of their
conscience, or be in any hazard of restraint thereof, either in present or
future, for that were; but to exchange the place, and an enlargement of their
miseries.

Mariland, but all just protection from this State: and that they may freely
enjoy there the benefit and privileges of that government, which is appointed
for that Province by his Majesty's Charter to the Lord Baltemore, a Roman
Catholic (it being in the nature of a County Palatine depending on the Crown
of England, and invested, together with the land, in the said Lord Baltemore
and his heirs by patent in the 8th year of this Kings reign) that upon
confidence thereof they may transplant themselves thither: For otherwise they
will not dare to adventure upon such a design, for fear that when, with much
hazard, toil, and expense they shall have disposed of themselves tha^ way, and
perhaps made themselves incapable of subsisting any where else; they may,
through want of such assurances, be utterly ruined: and they had need to be
very well secured of these encouragements, to help them to overcome many other
difficulties and incommodities which attend a new Plantation.

Roman Catholics here, for their Religion. And may remove as well diverse
obstacles in future Treaties, with some of those States, which perhaps have
heretofore arisen between this and them, in contemplation of the said Roman
Catholics; as all Designs which any such State may have upon them, for the
disturbance of the peace of this Kingdom, while they remain under heavy
burdens here: And this favor showed unto them, will certainly oblige the said
Roman Catholics in a strong bond of fidelity, to their Native Country.

viz. Their decrease in this Kingdom, more speedily brought to effect* which
has been long, but with small success, endeavored.

Objections Answered touching MARILAND.
Mariland, or any Country where they may have free liberty of their Religion,
would take away all hopes of their conformity to the Church of England.

England, although they be as different from the Doctrine of the Protestant
Church, established by Law, in this Kingdom, as that of the Roman Catholics
is: And this Reason of State appears also in the nature of most of those
Laws, for they express great doubts and jealousies of the said Roman
Catholics affection to, and dependence on a Foreign power, and tend
therefore most of them, to disinable them by confining, disarming, etc) from
plotting or doing any mischief to the King or State, and to secure their
allegiance to the King by oaths, etc. and the penalties of diverse of them are
abjuration of the Realm, which puts them out of the way of conformity to the
Church of England. Moreover, conversion in matter of Religion, if it be
forced, should give little satisfaction to a wise State of the fidelity of such
Convertites, for those who for worldly respects will break their Faith with
God, doubtless will do it, upon a fit occasion, much sooner with men; and for
voluntary conversions such Laws could be of no use, wherefore certainly the
safety of King and Kingdom was the sole aim and end of them.



Virginia, when, upon that condition, they have bin offered their lives, even
at the place of Execution, and they may, with more ground, have a scruple of
conscience to let any of the said Roman Catholiqiues to go from hence into
France (which few or none certainly can have in contemplation of Religion
only, and this Parliament has given Passes to diverse of them for that purpose)
hat being more properly the Kings Dominions then is all that great part of
North America, (wherein Mariland is included) unto which the Crown of England
lays claim, upon the Title of discovery only, except such part thereof as is
actually seated and possessed by some of his Subjects, and therefore in the
Preamble of the Lord Baltemores Patent of Mariland, the enlargement of the
Kings Dominions is recited as a motive of the Grant, which inferres that it
could not so properly be esteemed his Dominions before, as when, by virtue of
such a grant, it should be planted by some of his Subjects, And if it be all
the Kings Dominions notwiahstanding; then why have not such scrupelous persons
a scruple, to suffer the Indians (who are undoubted Idolators) as they do, to
live there, which if they cannot conveniently prevent (as without question they
cannot, unless it be by granting such a License) they may as well suffer those
whom they esteem Idolators, as those whom they and all other Christians
whatsoever repute and know to be so, to inhabit and possess that Country.
Moreover they may also (as well as in this) have a scruple to treat or make, or
continue a League, or to Trade with any Forraigners of that Religion, because
in their oppinions they are Idolators, or to permit the public Ministers of
any such Foreign Prince or State to have the free exercise of their Religion,
while they are in England, and may fear giving scandal to others by such
tollerations or connivences: All which nevertheless we see done, even in these
times, and allowed of, as well by the Parliament as the King, upon ^eason of
state, for the good and safety of this Realm. So may this License be also
thought by such persons, a good expedient for the same purpose. And if any (of
the weaker sort) should be scandalized at it, the scandal would be, acceptum
not datum, and therefore not to be regarded by a wise and judicious Prince or
State.

England of that profession of Religion.

Elizabeth's time, and conformity or alienation to a Protestant deprives the
King of this Revenue, if there were no Crimes at all committed in England, the
King would loose many Fines, and confiscations, whereby his Revenue would also
be impaired (Which in the other, as well as in this branch of it, is but casual)
and yet, without question the King and State would both desire it: the same
reason holds in this, considering what opinion is had here of the Recusants,
where fore it cannot, with good manners, be doubted that his Majesty will, in
this business, prefer his own benefit, before that which the State shall
conceive to be convenient for his safety and the puqlique good.



England is not so great, as that the departure of them all from hence would
make any sencible diminution of people in it, and their profession in Religion
would make them the less missed here. If the number were great, then
consequently (according to the Maxims of this State) they were the more
dangerous, and there would be the more reason, by this means, to lessen it:
And if it be but small (as indeed it is) then their absence from hence would
little prejudice the Kingdom in the decrease of people, nor will such a
License occasion the transportation of much wealth out of England, for they
shall not need to carry any considerable sums of money with them, nor is it
desired that they should have leave so to do, but only useful things for a
Plantation, as Provisions for Clothing* and Building, and Planting Tools,
etc. which will advantage this Kingdom by increase of Trade, and vent of its
native Commodities, and transfer the rest of their Estates, by Bills of
Exchange, into Banks beyond Sea, which tends also to the advantage of the
Trade of England, for more stock by this means will be employed in it.

Virginea and New England, where many English Protestants are planted, Mariland
being Situated between them both, because it may be suspected that the said
Roman Catholics will bring in the Spaniards or some other Foreign Enemy to
suppress the Protestants in those parts, or perhaps grow strong enough to do
it of themselves, or that in time (having the Government of that Province of
Mariland in their hands) they may and will shake off any dependence on the
Crown of England.

New England are at least 500 miles, and that of Virginea 100 miles distant
from Mariland, and it will be a long time before Planters can be at leisure to
think of any such design, and there is little cause to doubt, that any people,
as long as they may live peaceably under their own Government, without
oppression either in Spiritualls or Temporalls, will desire to bring in any
Forraigners to domineere over them, which misery they would undoutedly fall
into, If any considerable Foreign Prince or State (who are only in this case
to be feared) had the possession of the English Collonies in Virginea or New
England, But the number of English Protestants already in Virginea and New
England, together with the poverty of those parts, makes it very improbable
that any Foreign Prince or State will be tempted to undergo the charge and
hazard of such a remote design, it being well known that the Spanish Colonies
in the West Indies are farther distant then Europe is from thence; If any
danger were to be suspected, in that way, from the said Recusants, the like
suspicion of bringing in a Foreign Enemy into England, may (as indeed it has
often been) be had of them, while they are here, for the difference of
situation may balance the difference of the power, between this Kingdom and
those parts, for the accomplishing of such a design, and certainly (of the
two) it were much better to throw that hazard (if it were any) upon Virginea
and New England, then to have it continue here; Much less cause is there to
fear that they should grow strong enough of themselves to suppress the
Protestants in those parts: For there are already atleast three times as many
protestants there, as there are Roman Catholics in all England, And the
Protestants in Virginea and New England are like to increase much faster, by
new supplies of people yearly from England, etc. Then are the Roman
Catholics in Mariland, Moreover although they should, (which God forbid, and
which the English Protestants in those parts will in all probability be still
able to preven^) shake off any dependence on the Crown of England* yet, first
England would, by this means, be freed of so many suspected persons now in it:
Secondly it would loose little by it: And lastly, even in that case, it were
notwithstanding more for the Honor of the English Nation, that English men,
although Roman Catholics, and although not dependant on the Crown of
England, should possess that Country then Forraigners, who, otherwise, are
like to do it: for the Swedes and Dutch have two several Plantations already
in New England, and upon the Confines of Mariland, (between the English
Colonies in New England and Mariland) and do incroach every day more and more
upon that continent, where there is much more Land then all the Kings
Protestant Subjects in all his Dominions, (were they there) would be able to
possess: But the assurance of protection from the Crown and State of England,
upon all just occasions, either of danger from A Foreign Enemy, or of wrongs
which may be done unto them by his Majesty's Protestant Subjects in those
parts, and the benefit of Trade with England for year^ly supplies, without
which they will not be able to subsist, will be strong ties, if there were no
other, to bind them to continue their dependence on it.

Moreover the Mouth of the Bay of Cheseapeacke, being but narrow, and at which
all ships that come to Mariland must enter, is within the precincts and power
of the Colony of Virginea* and the Planters of Virginea, will by the access of
so many Neighbors be much advantaged, because their Cattle and many other
commodities, which they abound in, and have no vent for, and which this new
Colony will stand in need of, will, by this means, yield them good rates,
which now are of little value to them, wherefore certainly they will fear no
prejudice, but will be glad of such a market for improvement of their estates:
though perhaps some petty Merchants here* traders to Virgins, may conceive it
prejudicial to them, and therefore may make religion, and other vain pretenses
of danger to Virginea, or this state, the cloak of their avarice, to hinder
this design; whereas, in truth, it can be nothing else, but fear of increase
of the Commodities, they deal in, and consequently of an abatement of the
prices, that may incline them to oppose it.

FINJS.

