A DISCOURSE OF THE GLORY To which God has called BELIEVERS By JESUS CHRIST.

Delivered in some Sermons out of the 1 Pet. 5 Chap. 10 Ver.

Together with an annexed Letter.

Both, by that Eminent and Worthy Minister of the Gospel, Mr. JONATHAN MITCHIL,
late Pastor to the Church at CAMBRIDGE in NEW ENGLAND.

Romans 8.30. Whom he called, them he also Justified; and whom he Justified, them
he also Glorified.

1 John 3. ver. 3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself,
as he is pure.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Ponder at the Peacock in the Poultry, Anno Dom.
1677.

TO THE READER
THe ensuing Treatise being transmitted to me by a friend from New England,
with a desire of its Publication; I did in order thereunto seriously peruse it;
and finding (as far as I am able to judge) an excellent discourse, spiritually
and powerfully managed and improved, and thereby most likely to redound to the
edification of every Reader, (all Divine Truth having an influence and efficacy
into Conversion and Sanctificaton when God shall command a blessing by it upon
the Soul;) but above all, more peculiarly suited to the support and consolation
of the Saints in this their wayfaring and afflictive pilgrimage: I have been
thereby induced to recommend it to such into whose hands it shall come, being
fully persuaded that its own worth will speak for it self with such a
conviction upon the minds of all whose senses are exercised in and about things
of another world, and who have any experience of Christ, in them the hope of
Glory: as that they will neither think their time or pains mispended in its
Perusal.

The subject matter of these Sermons, (for so they were, as being delivered to
a popular Auditory in the course of the Authors Ministry,) does relate to that
Glory to come, unto which God has called his chosen after their sufferings
here, during their absence from the Lord.

To add any thing about it beyond what the Reader will find in the Book it
self, as it is above my ability; so if it were not, I should account it beneath
that modesty which I desire to observe in all things.

All I shall therefore say, is this; that whatever is usually spoken of this
Glory, either as it is objective, or formal the Reader will find much
discoursed about, both to his satisfaction if he come unto the perusal of it
with a pious humble heart; and withal desiring, to be edified by Spiritual
Soul-searching Doctrine: But if any shall expect those curious speculations
which may be met with in the discourses of the Schoolmen upon this subject;
some of which are perhaps temerarious, to be sure at best un-intelligible to
vulgar capacities, they will be disappointted; For our Authors design being
rather to profit others, then to beget an opinion of his own abilities, (though
they were very great) he has avoided all such matter and manner of handling of
it, other then what he had learned from the Scriptures, and chose to insist
mainly on that which may be helpful to form up the Soul to a meetness for that
Inheritance amongst the Saints in light, than merely to object to mind the high
Idaea's of that future state, when perhaps the heart may be wholly a stranger
to the very first fruits of that Communion with God in Jesus Christ by Faith
and Holiness; out of which, as from its root does spring the hope of this Glory
to come: Yet also is there enough said, (considering it was delivered in an
Auditory of plain, humble growing Christians,) to mix pleasure with advantage;
As that, which besides sound Doctrine, and incorruptness in speech, has also
the ornament of variety of truths handed out in a copiousness of expression,
and confirmed, illustrated, and urged from most pertinent Texts of Scripture,
and strongly fastened as nails and goads by a workman that needed not be ashamed
in his service to the Church under the great Master of the Assemblies.

To be sure the called ones to the hope of this Glory, will find that full
account given of what is their own Inheritance in that future state, as may be
very conducing to sweeten to them the sorrows, temptations and afflictions of
the present, and to mantain themselves under a fixed expectation of Gods
promise of Eternal Life made to them in Christ before the World began, without
which we can neither live holily, nor die comfortably; Death is only sweetened
to us as we can look upon it, our privilege is an outlet from sin and misery,
and an inlet to Glory both in Holiness and Happiness; And then indeed do We
begin to live, when by believing We have everlasting life, John 3. ult. -- And
when the tastes of it now, and the hopes of its consummation hereafter are
improved in our Christian course, as a means and motive to take heed to walk
worthy of it, by mortifying our sins, and purifying our selves, even as he is
pure, 1 John 3.3. and to strengthen our selves thereby to a patient enduring
the troubles of this present time, especially those sufferings which are for
Righteousness sake, which in the Apostles Arithmetic are reckoned not Worthy
to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed; And withal, to engage us
to be steadfast and immovable, always abounding in, yea faithfully finishing of
the Work God has given us to do, as knowing that our labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord.

Which ends and purposes as the Glory to come in the Contemplation of it, is of
Wonderful Use to effect and perfect them; So the management of this by the
Author, as it is singularly adapted to an acquaintance with the Nature,
Properties, Adjuncts, Enjoyments and Consolations of that state; So also it is
powerfully improved to the moving the heart and affections, to endeavoring a
making it sure to our selves, partly by ministering close matter of search that
We be not deceived in our hopes, partly by instruction how to live up to them,
so as to give all diligence, to be found of Christ without spot, and blameless:
So that, together with a full information of the Truth it self, there is
carried in with it what may make it (if the holy one teach us to profit) most
effectual to receive it in the love and power of it; which is, and ought to be
the great design of delivering over to others any thing of moment, especially
divine truths.

And further, I cannot but hope that God may sanctify it to some sinners, who
have as yet no interest in Grace, and so no right to Glory, (whilst they
continue such,) if they shall to the reading of them subjoin prayer to God,
that he would by his spirit ingraft them into their minds to the saving of the
Soul. For while on the one side they view how great the future portion of Gods
now poor despised ones is and will be, it will naturally lead them to compare
the present difficulties of Religion, and the ways of holiness in this World,
with the exceeding great glory that shall be revealed in the day of the
manifestation of the Sons of God; when all they that follow holinss shall see
God, not only by the light of Faith as now, but in the light of glory shall see
him apprehensively as he is, though not comprehensively or adequately; so see
him as to be like him, to be satisfied in him, and blessed with him, and in the
Communion of the Lord Jesus, and his holy Angels and Saints, and then also
obtain an eternal freedom from the remains of sin and suffering: And this
consideration may also lead them on the other side to compare the pleasures of
sin, that are but for a season, with the everlasting sad wages of it, which is
death; and that in the loss of God blessed for ever; separation from the
Communion with Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and not only in the loss of God
which is unspeakable, but also in those just and holy punishments from the hand
of God, which it is righteous with him to recompense to them that are workers
of Iniquity, and who by despising the glory of Grace now, because of some
inconveniences it is clothed with, (though they are so only to depraved
minds, and such whose hearts are set upon the world, and the lusts of it) do
judge themselves unworthy to find Grace in Glory hereafter; which
considerations sanctified, may promote very far their turning to God, and that
they may have this saving efficacy on such Souls shall be my prayer to God for
them, into whose hands they may come.

But further, which shall draw this Epistle to a close. I am well satisfied, if
they find not that acceptance here they may deserve; yet the revival of these
Sermons in Print, to the eye and memory of them that were Ear-witnesses of them
from his own mouth, will be an acceptable service to them; who have known from
the beginning his manner of life, which was blameless, grave, and exemplary,
and in special his ministry to the finishing of his course, wherein he was a
burning and a shining light: among whom, though being dead he yet speaks, and
his name is a precious ointment, and his praise amongst all the Churches in
that wilderness, as being a man of singular learning profound judgment, a
master in that Israel, a Scribe indeed, instructed for the Kingdom of God, of
whom it may be said (as once was of another) that He was one, not only that had
a treasure, but was himself a treasure to the Church of God while he lived. How
himself lived in the power of the truth he preched, may be seen by the annexed
letter to this treatise which was penned upon occasion of a dear friend of his,
begging his assistance about his Soul concerns, which every Reader sensible of
spiritual things will judge, answered with an excellent spirit, the spirit of
God, and drawn out of his own experiences, and this, when but newly entering
upon his minstry, as he lived holy, so he dyed in peace, and admiring Gods
Grace his last dying words (almost) being these, Lord thou call me away to
thee, I know not why, if I look to my self, but at thy bidding I come; although
he needs not this recommendation, having received his reward, and so is above
it, yet we that survive need it, whose business it is to follow the faith and
holiness of such, especially when we behold the end of their conversation, and
not only so, but it is in order to the publishing of other things of his, if
this find acceptance; which that it may, and a good success, is the Prayer of

Reader, Thy Servant in the Gospel, JOHN COLLINS.
June 29 1667.
Of the Perfection of Glorification hereafter in Heaven. SERMON I.
1 Pet. 5.10. But the God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal
glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, settle you.


FRom this Verse to the end of the Chapter, is the conclusion of this Epistle,
written by the Apostle to the suffering Saints of those times, that were, and
were yet like to be under great sufferings and trials. Chap. 1.6. and 4.13, 17.
and 5.9. In this 10 th. Verse, we have the Apostles farewell, wish, or prayer
for those suffering Saints he writes unto. Men, especially good men, in their
farewell words and wishes, defire to speak much in a little room; But the God,
or, now the God of all Grace, etc. ( Dutch Version, and so the English in other
like conclusive prayers, renders the same Greek particle [now.] Heb. 13.20.
Romans 16.25. Jude 24.) Here, 1. The things he desires and prays for, sor they
are great and weighty, [make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you.] 2.
He takes hold of, and prays to God under such titles and considerations, as
are sweet grounds of faith; for that he prays for, and most comfortable and
suitable for suffering Christians to feed upon, viz. 1. From his rich and
all-sufficient grace, [The God of all grace.]

2. From the great effect and fruit of that grace, viz. his calling the
faithful unto glory by Christ Jesus, or the glory he has called them to (which
is the only thing we shall at present take up, to insist upon from these
words*) this Glory is here set forth and described.

1. From the peculiar property and duration of it, viz. Eternity, it is eternal
(or everlasting) Glory. No such thing, (no honor or splendour, or welfare that
is eternal) is to be found in this World. 2. From the nature of it; [His Glory]
that heavenly Glory which he lives in* and communicates the similitude and
liken^ss of it in measure unto his, Joh. 17.22. That that is laid up with him
in Heaven and stands in the enjoyment of him, so as he is both the singular
Author, and (as I may say) the matter of it.

3. The Causes of it: The Principal, God, (included in that, [His Glory] and
also in the first Clause of the Verse. The grace of God in and by Christ Jesus,
Christ the Mediator. Subordinate, viz. the work (or Grace) of effectual
calling. 4. The subject of it, viz. those that are called, i. e. effectually
called: Whether [us] or as some Copies read it, [you] (Beza) that makes no
difference as to the sense. He speaks of those that are, (or are reputed to be)
effectually called; those are they that shall be brought to this Glory.
Vocation is the way to Glorification, that is the strait Gate that leads into
life eternal.

5. The order wherein we are brought unto it, (or the antecedent of the actual
possession of it,) viz. after we have suffered a while, [for if we read it us
in the first Clause, then so the words must properly run: Now the God of all
Grace who has called us, after we have suffered a while, unto his eternal
Glory by Christ Jesus. I see no reason why the person should be changed from us
to ye: nor is [after suffered a while] to be referred to the following, but the
foregoing Clause.] The way to Heaven lies through sufferings, Act. 14.12. But
it is, but suffering a while, compared with eternity; or suffering a little,
(as the Word may be rendered) compared with the weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

Doct. Eternal Glory in the World to come, is that which the faithful (the
effectually called) shall be brought unto (or obtain) by Christ Jesus, (or by
the Grace of God through Christ Jesus.) after that they have suffered a while
in this world.

This Eternal Glory is the prize of the High-calling o^ God, Phil. 3.14. i. e.
the Prize, the Crown, the Glory which they are called to run for, and to obtain
possession of at the end of the race. The perfection of everlasting Glory, is
that which the Calling of a Christian (the work of Vocation) aims at, tends
to, and issues in, Romans 8.30. and 9.23, 24. Vocation is the first open work of
(Grace upon an Elect person, and Glorification is the last, so 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. 1 Thessalonians. 5.9* We are upon the last great benefit that Believers have by Christ,
(as we see in the Text, it is by Christ Jesus) setting forth the Blessed Estate
as such, viz. Glorification. We have spoken of the Incoation of it, which is in
this life. It follows, to consider of the Perfection, or Consummation of it,
which shall be hereafter in Heaven.

And this is the Subject now before us from this Text, which plainly speaks of
future Glory; for it speaks of that shall be actually possessed and enjoyed
after we have suffered a while here. There is a Glory now upon the faithful in
their sufferings, 1 Pet. 4.14. But this Text speaks of that perfect fullness of
Glory for ever, that shall be enjoyed after all their sufferings are ended.
That it is so, (or the truth of the Doctrine) is evident in the Text, and in
multitude of other Scriptures; Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. and 5.1. Luke 18.29,
30. 1 Pet. 1.4. It is that God has promised and appointed, Jam. 1.12. and 2.5.
Luke 12.32. Christ has purchased, Hebr. 9.12, 15. prayed for, Joh. 17.24. and
possessed as our forerunner, Joh. 14.2, 3. Hebr. 6.20. and that all the Saints
have expected, and lived and died in the certain hope of, Hebr. 11.10, 16, 26.
and 13.14. Romans 5.2. 2 Timothy 4.8, 18. Philip. 3.20, 21. Col. 1.5. 2 These. 1.5,
7. Ps. 73.24. Nothing more evident and frequent in the Scripture than this. As
it is a matter of Faith not seen at present, but believed and hoped for, so God
has given us abundant ground for Faith, or testimony concerning it in his Word.

Q. But the principal question before us, is, What this Glohy is that the
faithful shall enjoy in the world to come?

A. We cannot fully tell you what it is, 1 Cor. 2.9. if not the good and great
mysteries of the Gosp^l, then much less the Glory of Heaven, which is the
up-shot of all those mysteries, and whereof the best Saints do see but some
glimmerings here. But what the Scripture has plainly recorded, we may gather
up, and thence draw a little map or general view of that Glory that is prepared
for us in another world, such as may suit and reach useful practical ends, (to
stir us up to seek after it, to esteem it above all the world, and make us
account it the only great matter and necessity to get to Heaven, and may help
the Saints to rejoice in their portion, and comfort them over all their sorrows
in this life, etc.) though not to satisfy or feed a curiosity of roving
speculation.

A sober apprehension of Heavens Glory, is sufficient for us while we are in
the way to it; an exact comprehension of all particulars will be had time
enough when we come thither. But when Earth is full of trouble, and evil round
about us, it is not unsuitable to hear of Heaven, and to be looking into that,
2 Cor. 4.16, 18. we shall not faint as long as we look upward, Act. 7.54, 55.
We are ready to look on the right hand and on the left, but to be looking up
steadfastly into Heaven, is the best posture in evil times. We need bitter
things here to drive us off from the Earth; but our hearts had need be
relishing and tasting the sweetness of Heaven, to draw them up thither. When
Peter wrote to the Saints under great and manifold trials and afflictions, in a
time when Judgment must begin at the house of God, and many amazements and
terrors were ready to seize on poor Christians, both men and women, 1. Pet.
3.6, 14. Now he discourses much of Heaven, and of the Glory there. He begins
with it 1 Pet. 1.4, 5, etc. and ends with it in the Text. A discourse on such a
subject, is not unsuitable at such a season. Now therefore for a short view of
that eternal Glory that is the portion of the faithful in the world to come,
(or of the Glory of the Saints in Heaven) it may be set forth and considered,
1. In a Positive; 2. In a Comparative, or Argumentative way, from such
Comparisons and Considerations as may argue the greatness and goodness of this
Glory. 1. In a Positive way, so we may take this description of it.

The Glory of the faithful in the life to come, wherein the benefit of
Glorification is consummate, it is the perfect blessedness of the Saints,
whereby in their souls after death, and in soul and body after Judgment, (or
after the Resurrection,) being fully freed from all evil both of sin and
sorrow, they shall be filled with holiness and comfort, and all good, in the
full fruition of God, (or complete communion with God Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost,) all together in the highest Heavens for evermore. The sum of it
stands in, 1. The Matter or Ess^nce of it; which consists, 1. In perfect
freedom from all evil. 2. Perfect enjoyment of all good.
2. The continuance or duration of it, that it is eternal, or for evermore. 3
The degrees of it; that it is enjoyed, 1. In soul after death. 2. In soul and
body, at, and after the last Judgment.


1. This Glory of the Saints in the world to come contains in it, 1. Perfect
freedom from all evil. They are in part freed here, (some beginning of
deliverance from sin and misery here,) but there perfectly; every rag and
remnant, every spot of sin, and wrinkle of misery, shall be there utterly taken
away and abolished, Ephesians. 5.27.

1. From sin, the worst of evils; there will b^ perfect freedom and deliverance
from sin, not only guilt and reigning power, but from the being of it. Those
prayers then will be fully answered, Hos. 14.2. Psalm. 39.8. and that design of
Christ fully accomplished, 1 Job. 3.5. Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 2.24. Hebr. 12.23.
therefore free from the moral imperfection of sin, perfectly sanctified. You
shall then be freed from sin, both 1. In the habit; the disposition of sin will
be ^hen abolished, the roots, and ^eeds, and principles of it plucked up; no
more inclination or proneness to the least evil, or indisposedness to good: you
shall never complain of (or be troubled with,) a body of death more, Romans 7.24.

Perfect blessedness will take away that wretchedness. 2. In the act of it,
from the greatest to the least; no act of sin shall ever be done in Heaven,
which is a place of perfect holiness; when once there, you shall never have
vain thought more, never swerve from the rule of holiness either in thought,
word, or deed; not a sinful omission or defect of loving, delighting in,
praising, glorifying God, of acting your faculties and affections upon God,
shall then be found with you: Oh what an Heaven of happiness is there in this
alone one particular, to be freed from sin! Sin is the heaviest burden of the
Saints here, and that that makes their lives bitter to them, that they cannot
live without sinning against God: Let all the world smile on them, this makes
them go up and down with heavy hearts. If the Lord should say to any gracious
heart here, Ask what I shall give thee; thou would say, Lord, that I might be
rid of sin; thou would rather have this, than Crowns and Kingdoms. Why this
desire shall be fully granted then. These corruptions that have dogged thee up
and down the world and often prevailed, shall never trouble thee more. The sins
thou have been groaning under all thy life long, since any spark of spiritual
life was put into thee, once on Canaan shore, thou shall see those Egyptians no
more for ever. No pride, no passion; no sloathfulness, no carnal mindedness, no
fleshliness no coldness, deadness of heart and affections, no uneven walking,
no grieving of the Spirit of God, or of the spirits of Fellow-Brethren, no
unholy action or conversation, shall ever be heard of more. There in that
Canaan above, the Lord will give you rest from all your Enemies, and from those
especially, Hebr. 4.9, 10. Those Canaanites that have been so long thorns in
your sides, you shall see an end of them, (that then will be perfectly
fulfilled, Zech. 14.21.) and triumph over all; behold that fully done, Micah
7.19. and then sing, as Exodus 15.1, 4. (All the works of the Devil, all the
train of that Hellish band has he utterly destroyed, v. 5, 6.)

2. From sorrow or misery, all manner of afflictive evils (sin and misery go
together, as the body and the shadow; when the former is abolished, the latter
also shall altogether cease) As viz. 1. Satan's temptations tending either to
sin or discomfort, to defile or disquiet us. Once in Heaven, you shall never
have temptation more. That evil one shall never cast in a bad thought, or
tempting inticement, or a troublesome fear and discouragement, or vexing
disquietment: He shall never fling a fiery dart at thee more, none of his
messengers shall ever buffet thee any more. Here he cannot destroy a Saint; but
there he shall not so much as disquiet: For Satan's walk and rend'vouz is on
the earth, Job. 1.7. But he never came in Heaven since he was a Devil, nor ever
shall come there; the highest room where he comes in, is the Air, ( Epes. 2.2.
this Elemental world) but never mounts so high as the third Heaven. He is cast
down into Hell, and shall never come in Heaven, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. While the
Saints tread on the earth where that Serpent Crawles, he may bite (nible at)
their heel: But when once they are with their head in Heaven in their state of
Exaltation, there they are quite out of his reach; though both Christ and
Christians in their Humiliation-time here on earth, were liable to be tempted
and troubled by the Devil. Then the Saints shall fully triumph over this
Hellish Pharaoh, (the Devil, him and all his host or train) when he shall be
cast into the Sea and deep of that full torment that is prepared for the Devil
and his Angels; into which he shall be actually cast after the last Judgment.
Now is his Tempting, but then shall be his Tormenting time, Mat. 8.29. His
tempting time and his ranging about for that purpose (1 Pet. 5.8.) will be then
at an end: Satan is said to be shut up and bound during the prosperous and
flourishing times of the Church in this world, Revel. 20.23. But much more
fully and absolutely shall he be bound from molesting the Saints of their
triumphant state in Heaven: then shall he and all his Accomplices be in torment,
Revel. 20.10. While the Saints reign in Peace for ever. Oh the sad Annoyance
that even Gods dear children have from that Beelzebub here, Zech. 3.1. but they
shall be fully forced from that hereafter.

2. Injuries and molestations from evil and wicked men, there will be none of
them in Heaven, neither (as Job 3.17, 18. true of the Grave but much more of
the state of the Saints happiness of the life to come.) No wicked man, no
Injurious Adversary, no Papistical or Atheistical hater of God and his people
shall ever come within Heaven doors, (none but Saints shall be there alone
together) much less be able to trouble or molest there. Then shall the promise
be fully acomplished, 2 Samuel 7.10. Whatsoever Corner of the earth you retire or
remove into and plant in, you see the children of wickedness can follow you
thither and afflict you: The Saints shall never be planted in a place that is
absolutely their own till they come to Heaven. Oh, get a Patent for that, take
up a Lot, and build and plant there in Heaven, and then you shall have a place
of your own (what you send thither aforehand, your Hope, your Treasure, etc. is
safe; and when your persons are there once) none shall ever molest you more; no
fear of invasion, no enemies to annoy of one nature or other, no Pirates by
Sea, nor Parties by Land, no Sword nor weapon of destruction there, no going
into Captivity, no Garments rolled in blood, no sound of the Trumpet or Alarm
of War. It may be when you came into this Wilderness, you thought that this
would be a place of your own, and that none would ever trouble themselves to
come into this Corner to trouble you. But alas New England is but Earth and not
Heaven: No place on Earth is exempted from molestation by the Devil and his
Instruments, but Heaven is that, and that alone, and that fully; there the
Children of wickedness and the Sons of violence shall not afflict you any more
as before time; then will those prayers be fully and completely answered,
(which the poor children of God have often need to power out before him) Psalm.
140.1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, and 17.4. the Saints may then triumph over all wicked
Adversaries, as Psalm. 9.6, 7. Also the troubles that arise from the mixtures of
the Wicked among the Godly (as here there is a mixture of bad with good, and
much trouble thence arises,) will there be ended; there is no Mesech nor Tent
of Keder to be complained of, as Psalm. 120.5, 6. nor as Psalm. 57.4. nor yet
false Brethren (unfaithful, unsound, Heteredox, or Hypocritical persons that
are secret adversaries to Truth and Piety) as 2 Cor. 11.26. Psalm. 55.12, 13.
You shall have no discouraging company in Heaven that will clog, and thwart and
hinder you in that that is good, none to oppose either Truth or Piety; but all
to join with one accord in the serving and Glorifying of God.

3. Divisions, differences and dissentions among the Godly, which the state of
Imperfection on earth is lyably to, and lamentably cumbred with, and trouble
and disquietment multiplied thereby, but no such thing in Heaven; there is but
one mind, and one mouth in Heaven, as there is but one truth, not so much as a
dissering apprehension among all the thousands and millions of Saints there.
There we shall fully attain what is exhorted to, 1 Cor. 1.10. and prayed for,
Romans 15.5, 6, 7. There that goodly sight is to be seen in perfection, Psalm.
133.1. The state of perfection there implies and infers this, Hebr. 12.23. The
Saints while children may wrangle, and contend, and differ; but when grown up
to their adult age, and to a perfect man, they will have more grace than so,
Ephesians. 4.13, 14. That ignorance, weakness and darkness whereby we are often here
mistaken and miss the truth, and cannot see the same truth by the same light,
(our knowing in part, whence we may be mistaken in part, ignorant in part,)
will then be done away, and hence perfect union in the truth, which is but one,
1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12. Si non amplius in his terris te visurns sum, (said old
Grineus writing to Chytraeus apud Milch. Adam. page 879.) ibi tamen
conveniemus, ubi Luthero cum Luingleo optime jam convenit. Paul and Barnahas,
Hooper and Ridley, Luther and Zuinglius are there fully reconciled, and shall
never differ or contend more. Heaven is full both of peace and truth, even of
that peace that is knit in the bonds of truth and holiness. The griefs and
distractions that result from dissentions among the Godly here, are there all
swallowed up in perfect peace. And so all the difficulties and weary travails,
and oppositions that Christ's Kingdom now conflicts with, and must be carried
on through, are there ended: Man's corruptions, Satan's temptations, weakness on
every hand, cumbers even Gods work with difficulty and obstruction here; but no
such thing there: the Militant state of Christ's Kingdom is then ended, and it
passes into a state of victory and rest.

4. Bodily ailes, sicknesses, pains, weakness, deformities, infirmities of what
kind soever, you shall be freed from all these in the life to come, Philip.
3.21. Do you think the body of Christ now glorified knows any pain, or grief,
or weakness, as when on earth? no more shall the bodies of the Saints in
Heaven; but be in perfect health, in your beauty, strength and Glory for ever,
1 Cor. 15.42, 43. The Resurrection (to that life to come) will cure the oldest
pain, aile, ache, disease, lameness, that could not be cured here; those ailes
that you carry to your Graves with you, you shall not bring them out of your
Graves again; you shall rise again, but they shall be buried, and lost and laid
aside for ever; nor shall the body be so troublesome as now, need so much ado
about it, and so many shores and props of meat, drink, sleep, clothing, etc.
You are groaning now under many bodily ailes and evils; but then comes a day of
Redemption of the body, as well as soul, actual perfect Redemption of it from
all evil, Romans 8.23.

5. All other afflictions from the hand of God: all the remnants of the Curse
that Christ leaves upon us in this world for our chastisement and correction,
Rev. 21 4. if it shall be so comparatively, ( i. e. compared with the troubles
of former times,) in the more glorious times of the Church Militant, much more
will it be so absolutely in the glorified estate of the Church-Triumphant.
While sin is with us, (as here,) there will be sorrow but the abolition of sin
will abolish sorrow too perfectly: No sin, and no sorrow neither in Heaven: All
tears shall be wiped away; i. e. all afflictions or troubles that are the cause
of tears, shall be quite taken away: No more of those tears that arise from the
various trials of this weary life, wants, straits, losses, crosses, in Name,
Estate, Relations, Employments; the briars, thorns and thistles that grow in
every corner of the field of this world, Ezekiel. 26.24. There will need no rod in
Heaven, not a frown, nor a blow, nor a stroke of correcting anger there: As
there is nothing but wrath in Hell, so there will be nothing but love in
Heaven: Here on earth there is a mixture of both, yea even to Gods own people
while they have sin in them, and are full of faults, though Children, their
Father cannot but be angry with them now and then* and they need a rod ever and
anon, Psalm. 89.32, 33. but in Heaven, as no sin, so no anger, no not for
chastening there^ the Lord will never knit his brows, nor chide or strike,
never hide his face (there be here Soul-afflictive spiritual Agonies from a
sense of Gods anger, and doubts of his love, those also shall cease) but they
shall live under the smiles of his face, and light of his countenance without
interruption. But thus in that, as to fredom from all evil, as 2 Cor. 5.4. so
sin is swallowed up of grace and holiness; the remainders of sin and sorrow
that hang about us in this state of Imperfection, are utterly swallowed up and
abolished by that perfect holiness, and perfect happiness that there is, and
continues for ever.

2. Perfect enjoyment of all good. It is not a mere negative happiness that the
Saints in Heaven partake of, viz. a not being miserable, an absence of evil;
but also the positive presence and enjoyment of all good, Psalm. 16.11. Joy is
from the presence of good, and full joy from the satisfying fullness of all
good. Under this Head may be comprised those great and glorious things that
make up, and complete the positive happiness of the Saints in Heaven, and were
pointed to in the description: As, viz. 1. Full fruition or enjoyment of God;
perfect, glorious and full communion with God, the God of Glory, God Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. This is the main, and the essence of the Happiness of
Heaven. It is not a carnal or sensual thing, (standing in bodily, carnal
pleasures and delights, as Pagans and Mahometans teach, and sensual Spirits
dream) but spiritual, divine and celestial, standing in the enjoyment of God,
and communion with him. This we have some little taste of here, but being there
in perfection, it makes up perfect blessedness: for man's blessedness lies in
fruition of God the chief Good, whom he was made for, and in whom is that
infinite fullness of all good, that is able to satisfy and make happy the soul
of man, and to be the endless joy thereof. It is not Creatures, Crowns,
Kingdoms, not a Created world, or heap of worlds, but Jehovah himself that you
shall enjoy in Heaven. The infinite increated Good, who is greater, better and
sweeter than ten thousand worlds, God blessed for evermore: It Is he that is the
All of the Saints there, 1 Cor. 15.126. You shall not only have an Interest in
him, relation to him, (that you have here) but actually enjoy him; and not only
some beginning or taste of that enjoyment, but enjoy him in the fullest, most
immediate, and most perfect manner that finite Creatures are capable of. It is
called the seeing (the beatifical vision) of God, Mat. 5.8. a seeing him face
to face, 1 Cor. 13.12. Not that the Saints see God ( i. e. the Divine Essence)
with bodily eyes, (though Christ, who is God as well as Man, they shall so see,
Job 19.26.) nor yet with the eye and faculty of the understanding (being
finite) can they have a full, adequate, comprehensive sight or knowledge of the
Infinite God as he is in himself: But as fully, gloriously, clearly and
immediately as a Glorified soul is capable of, and unspeakably beyond and above
what is attained here, and unto full satisfaction shall they see his Glory, and
enjoy the pourings out of his love and goodness; for seeing is often used for
enjoying in Scripture.

The particular manner and way of this vision and fruition of God, how can we
in this Tabernacle and twilight discern or describe? we speak but as Children
of these things, 1 Cor. 13.11. But in general; we know in Communion there is a
mutual acting: As here our acting (the acting of our souls) upon God, and Gods
letting out himself (communicating himself) to us; and it is by these two
faculties that our souls (for it is a Soul-communion that we here speak of) act
upon an object, viz. the understanding and the will, in which the affections
are included, for they are but the actings and outgoings of the will; so in
the acting of those two upon God, and in Gods letting out himself unto those,
viz. into our understandings and our hearts, (or wills and affections) lies
this communion; and in the highest and plenary degree of both those, according
to the capacity of each Saint. Hence this full and glorious communion with God
in Heaven contains, 1. A clear vision or sight of the Glory of God by the
understanding: not only an habitual knowledge but an actual looking, beholding
( Mat. 18.10.) and gazing upon the face of God; i. e God in the full
manifestation and discovery of himself in his Essence, Attributes, Subsista^c^,
Works, in the mystery of Christ Jesus, of his Word, Gospel, Scriptures,
Providence, Truths; all that is knowable, all that God has, does, or shall
communicate and make known to his Saints. You shall then see all, (and there
are obj^cts that shall ravish all beholders for ever;) now you have some dark
glimmerings of things, (1 Cor. 13.12. that natural darkness being not yet
dispelled, Ephesians. 4.18.) but then clearly as at Noonday, as those who see face
to face. God also shining into the understanding, letting in the Heavenly light
of Glory thereinto, and so communicating to the soul a beatifical vision of
himself, i. e. of the whole discovery or Revelation of himself, which he has
made in Works or Scriptures here, (the meaning and Glory of all which they
shall then see and understand) or shall further make, and give forth to the
Saints in Heaven.

2. A fruition of the goodness of God by the will, the will and affections; or
a taking in, closing with, and drinking down the sweet of the love and goodness
of God, which the Lord will let out unto the soul, and fill it with, to its
everlasting joy, delight and fullest satisfaction, Psalm. 16.11. and 36.8. The
love and goodness of God, being poured forth and communicated in the sweet and
lively sense of it, (as will then be fully and perpetually, which we have but a
little taste of here, Romans 5.5.) will be as a River of pleasure, which the soul
will be drinking of to all Eternity. Hence all the liking and delightful
affections, (love, joy, desire, delight) will be acting to the highest upon
God, and filled full with him, and hence ravished always with his love, and
enlarged to praise, bless and glorify him, and sing forth Hallelujahs for ever.

SERMON II.
MOreover there will be a special communion with each person of the sacred
Trinity, God Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, according to their several special
operations for us, and manifestations of themselves to us.

1. The face of the Fathers love will be seen in its Glory and sweetness, in
electing, choosing, giving his Son, transacting with him, Justifying, Adopting,
etc. and to see him against whom we had sinned, smiling on us with complacence
and delight, taking us into his bosom, and loving us with the same love
wherewi^h he loves his own Son, how ravishing will that be? You shall then be
in the Fathers house, Joh. 14.2. and under the pourings out of the Fathers
love, Joh. 16.27, 28. and 14.21, 23. and 17.21, 23, 24.

Going to Heaven, is called (or explained by) going to the Father, Joh. 14.2, -
6. It is the Journy's end, and the last and highest rest of the souls of the
Saints, and of all their desires, hopes, prayers, breathings (as Joh. 14.8.) to
behold the Fathers Face ( Mat. 18.10.) and to have a full sight and enjoyment
of his Love and Communion. From this we were cut off by sin, by our fall from
God as Creator, and hence separated from his presence, and never since sin came
in, could the Father have to do with us in an immediate way. And while sin
hangs upon the Saints, they have more dark and doubtful, and distant thoughts
of the Fathers Love: We can more readily see the Love of Christ who is the next
to us, and converses immediately with sinners: But now after that the effect of
Christ's Redemption and Mediation shall be finished; and their full Restoration
into the Bosom of the Fathers Love accomplished, by him who is the way thither,
Joh. 14.6. and sin utterly abolished, and the Saints perfectly restored to the
Image of God and made like their Heavenly Father: And so Christ shall deliver
up his Kindom; i. e. the present militant and mediate administration of his
Kingdom, and present it in its complete, perfect and unchangeable state, as the
Effect and final Issue of that Negotiation, which he has exercis^d in the time
of this World, 1 Cor. 15.24, - 28. Then will God the Father (with the Son and
Spirit) more immediately (in an unspeakable manner) Communicate himself to the
Saints, and bare the face of his Love; take them into his more Immediate
presence, fill them with his goodness, and be all in all to them. And then
shall the Saints see and ascend unto the Fountain-love of the Father, the
original of the whole Mystery of Christ, and of all the grace and salvation by
him, the Wellhead of all gracious Dispensations and Communications, in a
fuller manner then now they can. They shall everlastingly be drinking down, and
Bathing themselves in those Rivers of Love that have been running down from
Everlasting, and from the wellspring of Election have issued forth in the
whole Dispensation of Christ: From the Father they were given to Christ, Joh.
17.6. To him they shall then be presented, Heb. 2.13. Jude 24. and by Christ
brought into the nearest Union and Communion with him that possible can be,
Joh. 17.21, - 22, - 26. The Scripture speaks much of the Fathers Love, 2 Cor.
13.13. 1 John 16.27. Romans 8.39.

And that (often) antecedent to the sending of Christ, and all benefits by him
as the original and fountain thereof, Joh. 3.16. 1 John 4.8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 3.3,
- 6. Tit. 3.4, - 6. This will then be seen and enjoyed in the fullest manner
and measure, according to the capacity of glorified Saints. God the Father will
be letting forth, and pouring out his love into the souls of the Saints,
(shedding it abroad in greater measures than now, Romans 5.5.) and they drinking
down the sweetness thereof for evermore, beholding and tasting what manner of
love that is, which here they can see and conceive but a little of, 1 John 3.1,
2. and as Ephesians. 3.18, 19. They also making returns of love unto him, and
sweetest ebullitions thereof, loving God then actually with all the heart,
soul, strength and mind, as is commanded. This loving communion with God the
Father (or communion with him in love) shall the Saints enjoy in Heaven in the
fullest manner for evermore.

2. The Son of God who is incarnate, the Lord Jesus Christ who is Man as well
as God, his face shall be seen, and his company enjoyed by the Saints in
Heaven, in a peculiar and most immediate manner; you shall see the man Christ
with bodily eyes, as Job 19.27. you shall ascend to him then, and be with him,
enjoy his immediate company and communion, see him face to face, Job 19.25, 26,
27. Philip. 1.23. 2 Cor. 5.8. 1 These. 4.17. 1 John 3.2. You shall hear him
speak to you, and discourse of the great things of God, each word of whose lips
will be more sweet than ten thousands of Gold and Silver; you shall behold him
pouring forth himself and his love, yea the love of God to you, and the
discoveries and communications of his grace and goodness, through, the lips and
expressions of a man; you shall then have full communion with the man Christ
Jesus, that everlasting Mediator between God and Man. Why the company of a good
man, a loving friend, a gracious Saint here, that breaths much of Christ, how
sweet is it? What then is the company of Christ himself, who is full of grace
and truth, and that with the fullness of an head to derive like Grace, and so
now like Glory to all his members? For as he is the meritorious and dispensing
cause, so also the exemplary cause, as of all Grace here, so of Glory
hereafter, as Joh. 1.16. so you shall have Glory for Glory, Glory in your
measure like unto his Glory; the Glory that he shines with in Heaven, you must
share in it, and have; you shall have the same Glory for kind and nature,
though for measure and degree not equal, but he will still have the
pre-eminence, Joh. 17.22. Romans 8.29. 1 John 3.2. you shall live in the same
Heaven with him, Joh. 14.3. partake of the same love of the Father, Joh. 17.23.
drink of the same pleasures, live the same life of holiness and happiness,
reign with him in the same Kingdom, Romans 8.17. Rev. 3.21. Be thrown into the
same Ocean of Joy (though Vessels of different quantity will take in different
measures, and so difference in degrees between the Saints themselves, much more
between the Saints and Christ.) Yea, probably the Saints in Heaven may have
Communion with Christ in the Acts of Grace, as here in this life they have
Communion with him in the habits of Grace; i. e. that the same Actings, the
same Contemplations, Tastes, Apprehensions, Ebullitions of heart, the same
springing of Love, Joy, Delight and sweet Affection, that the man Christ has,
shall run through Heaven and be in their measure communicated to all the Saints
there: For Glory properly stands in, and results from the lively Acting of
Grace; and therefore Communion in Glory, may import Communion in the Acts of
Grace, etc. But however, to be sure, they shall be like him, 1 John 3.2. And
bear his Glorious Heavenly Image there, 1 Cor. 15.48, 49. Like him in Soul,
Pure, Heavenly, Holy, enlarged in Love to God, and to his Glory as he is, and
like him in body too, Phil. 3.21. And enjoy his Blessed Converse and Company.

What the particular Employment and manner of Converse of the man Christ, with
and among the Saints in Heaven will be, we cannot now tell you, you shall know
it when you come there; to be sure it will be most Holy, excellent and
Glorious, and full of mutual joy and delight; I may suggest this meditation.
Look what Christ did in Converse with his Disciples after his Resurrection,
when he was then entered into a Glorified estate, he then opened to them the
Scriptures, so as their hearts burnt within them, Luke 24.27, 32, 44, 45. And
spoke of things of the Kingdom of God, Act. 13. Then indeed but in order to the
carrying on of the Kingdom of Grace, and in such a measure as suited that end.
But why may we not think that he will then in Heaven in such a manner and
measure, as suites the Kingdom of Glory, expound the Scriptures, lay open the
depths of the Book of God, and the Mysteries of Divinity, those fully and
clearly that were here known but in a little part, and other points that were
not known at all, the wonders of Law and Gospel, of the Word and Works of God,
the depths and knowledge of Wisdom: But especially the depths of Love and Grace
(the things that tend to the praise of the Glory of Gods Grace; the great end
of all his dealings with his people, Ephesians. 1.6.) those will he open and lay
forth in a glorious manner: And oh the burnings and flames, and sparkling
Impressions of Seraphical Affections that all the Saints about him will then be
filled with. Never such a Preacher, and never such Hearers for Attention and
Affection (no Sleeping, no Dullness, no Weariness) as there will be. In a word,
Ordinances then shall cease, but the quintessence and extract of all Ordinances
shall be then enjoyed (that power and Glory of God, that beauty of the Lord be
seen in the Sanctuary of Heaven, that here were but glimpses through Glasses)
Mat. 26.29. Glorious and sweet Communion do the Saints here enjoy with Christ
at a Sacrament, in that Ordinance of the Lords Supper: But in Heaven (in the
Kingdom of his Father) he will (as I may say) celebrate that Sacrament, i. e.
give them the quintessence, comfort and Communion of it in another manner; in
new, fresh and immediate Communications of his Grace and sweetness. There shall
not be now need of any outward Elements, Bread or Wine; but the Inward part,
the Spiritual Communion; they shall have it new and fresh (in a more lively and
better, fuller manner then here) whence they shall be as men full of new Wine,
filled with the Springs of Heavenly Affection and Consolation. Wine is often used
to express Joy, Gladness, Comfort, Psalm. 104.15. The Communion between Christ
and the Saints in the Celestial Life, will complete, perfect, and far
transcend that that is but in a weak and mean degree, begun in Ordinances here.
Consider also that the Union and Communion between Christ and the faithful,
being set forth by that of the Conjugal relation in Scripture, our present
state is but an Espousal, the Consummation of the Marriage is at the day of
Judgment; thence follows the full enjoyment each of other in Heaven, when
Christ has carried his Spouse home to his Fathers house, Ineffable, Mutual
Delight, Communion, Communication of Secrets and Hearts each to other, Joy and
Contentment will thence ensue. Then will those words be most fully verified,
Isa. 62.4, 5. and 54.4, 5, 8. Zeph. 3.17. Then will the Book of Canticles (that
Book of Loves between Christ and his Church) be understood and fully practiced:
But thus in Heaven you shall have Immediate and full Communion with the Lord
Jesus. You hear of him now, but you shall see him then, and be ever with him;
there was flocking to see him, when on earth in his Humiliation, Luke 19.3, 4.
And the Spiritually minded then saw Glory in him, Joh. 14. But what will it be
then to see him in Heaven in his Glorified estate? And not only to see him as a
stranger, as a Glorious person: But to see and enjoy him as thy Friend, as thy
Brother, Savior, Husband, Cant. 5.16. One who sometimes powered out his
Heart-blood for thee, and will now power out his Heart-love to thee for
evermore.

3. The Saints shall have full Communion with the Holy Ghost, they shall have
the Everlasting fullness and presence of the Spirit, and so have a fullness of
Gifts and Graces, of Holiness and Comfort for evermore. The Saints have
somewhat of the Communion of the Holy Ghost now, 2 Cor. 13.14. But they shall
have it in perfection then. We have but the first fruits of the Spirit, but an
earnest penny now, Romans 8.23. 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Therefore there is an
Harvest, the whole sum, a fullness of the Spirit that shall be imparted then.
And as the Holy Spirit is a Spirit of Grace and Comfort now, by whose Presence
and Assistance we are upheld in both, so will he be then; only in such a way,
manner and measure as suits a state of Perfection; then he will rest upon you
as a Spirit of Glory, so has he done in a great degree on some Martyrs here, 1
Pet. 4.14. but there, in Perfection on all the Saints.

Hence the Saints in Heaven having the fullness of the Spirit, shall be
replenished with all those Excellencies and endowments that are the Effects and
fruits of the presence and special operation of the Spirit, filled with all the
fullness of God. As 1. With singular Divine Gifts of knowledge, wisdom,
enlargement of understanding (as 1 King. 4.29.) and utterance, (For there will
be use of utterance in Heaven, in Glorious Conference and Converse of the
Saints.) Here are Gifts given for the Kingdom of Grace by the Spirit, 1 Cor.
12.4, 8, 11. But there are Gifts suiting the Kingdom of Glory. 2. With all
Graces of Holiness or Sanctification; those now brought to perfection, and kept
up in act and exercise. Sanctification of the Spirit (2 These. 2.13.) will then
be perfect (of which further afterward concerning the Glory of the Soul) and
there will be the constant un-interrupted Presence and Assistance of the Spirit
to actuate every Grace, to keep it up in its full exercise: The heart ever
enlarged for God, ever fixed and tuned to sing his Praise, as Psalm. 57.7, 8.
Thy Glory (Heart and Tongue) shall be ever awake, thy Harp ever in Tune then,
the Spirit of Grace everlastingly filling and quickening thy Heart, and holding
thee up in Heavenly, Spiritual activity and enlargement. 3. With abundant
Comfort and Consolation. The Holy Ghost will then fully do that work of a
Comforter, and dwell in all the Saints as such, ( Joh. 14.16.) in his Choicest
and most Glorious Comforting Operations. That in Romans 5.5. will then be fully
done: Then perfect Assurance and sense of the Love of God, without all mixture
of doubt, or fear, or darkness; full Assurance shall be wanting to never a
Saint in Heaven; the meanest shall see the Love of God more clearly than the
strongest did here: That great question, will then be out of question forever.
The light of Gods Countenance shall be then lifted up, and shine upon your
souls as a Sun that never sets, nor is overcast with clouds. The knowledge and
sense of that one thing, [that the Infinite God loves thee with an everlasting
love] which is more worth than ten thousand, thousand worlds, shall live in thy
heart, and be the Life and Joy of thy Soul; and fill thee with peace that
passes all understanding. The joy of the Holy Ghost (that is a manifest and
eminent part of our Communion with the Holy Ghost) shall then be at its full
height, which now we have but some tastes and drops of, Romans 14.17. That that
Christ has been so long aiming and driving at, will then be attained, Joh.
15.11. and 16.24. Their Joy is the Element the Saints in Heaven live in, (they
breath in no other Air but that) the Ocean they swim in: It is that they enter
and go into, Mat. 25.21, 23. Joy at once expresses Heaven, and Heavenly Glory:
It is a Mass or Heap of Joy, a Region of Joy, an Air and Element of Joy (the
Joy of the Lord God, the Joy of the Holy Ghost) into which they are brought,
and where they breath and live, and swim in the fullness thereof for ever, Psalm.
16.11.

2. A second thing considerable in the positive Happiness of the Saints in
Heaven, is their inherent personal (subjective, the former particular points
chiefly to their obj^ctive Glory, though they go together; and therefore both
there and here somewhat of both) Glory, or perfection both of Soul and Body.
This partly makes them capable of that foresaid full enjoyment of God, and
partly results from it. For our present frail, weak and distempered faculties
are not capable of that Glory and Glorious Communion, 1 Cor. 15.50. and 2.9.
they must therefore be raised up to an higher state of Perf^ction in order
thereunto. And the enjoyment of that Communion with God continually reflects
unspeakable Glory and Happiness, inherent Excellencies upon the whole man. But
hence the person of each Saint is Glorified (filled with Glorious Excellency
and Perfection both of Soul and Body:) All that be there are Glorified Persons,
Romans 8.17, 18, 30. Col^ss. 3.4. Glorious or Glorified they are both in their
Souls and Bodies i. e. considering them as they shall be after the Resurrection
and last Judgment. Consider therefore a little. 1. Of the Glory of the Soul. 2.
Of the Body of a Saint.

1. The Glory, Felicity and Perfection of the Soul of a Glorified Saint. The
Soul is lifted up to its full Perf^ction, Hebr. 12.23. endowed with all those
Excellencies and Perfections that are proper to it, especially the perfect
Restoration of the Image of God, and all the good and Excellency that resulteth
thence, made like unto the Soul of Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.2.

The most proper and principal subject of Heavens Glory, is the Soul. Hence
it is called the Salvation of our Souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. that is, the great Vessel
that holds the Riches of Glory that are powered in there, Romans 9.23. The Soul
of man is capable of more Glory and good, than is in all this whole lower world
put together, all the Pleasures and Treasures of it cannot fill one Soul: (no
not as its now on earth in its narrow capacity; for it shall be far larger when
in its Glorified enlarged capacity in Heaven.) But then it shall be filled full
as it can hold: All the Excellency that a Created Soul is capable of, shall
then be put upon it; and all the good and Glory its capable of holding, poured
into it. Consider it in those two faculties of the Soul, Understanding and
Will. 1. The Understanding shall be. 1. Strengthened and enlarged, enabled to
see much and far; raised and heightened to great quickness and deep
Comprehensions of Understanding, Isa. 11.2, 3. So when the spirit of Glory
shall rest on the Saints in Heaven, (the Members of Christ) it shall make them
of quick and large Understandings; yea quick to discern and conceive of
Spiritual objects, and things which here we are dull and slow in. Some men here
on earth (in this dark lumpish house of Clay) have been of accute
understandings, quick apprehensions, and vast Parts and Abilities; what then
shall Saints in Heaven be. Solomon had a large Understanding, that held as many
Notions and Conceptions, as there are Sands on the Seashore, 1 King. 4.29.

And yet (says one, viz. Dr. Goodwin on Romans 8.18. page 56.) the Soul of the
least Child ( i. e. that was a Child here, for vide Aquinas in supplement. Q
81. and Bolton of Heaven, page 129.) in Heaven, that went out of the World
happily, when but newly come forth of his Mothers Womb, exceeds all the
knowledge that Solomon had on earth. Adam before the Fall had a large and ready
Understanding, as his so soon naming the Creatures according to their natures
shows: But Heaven restores the Saints to Adam's Primitive Perfection, and unto
more then so. All those Defects, Wounds and Weaknesses in man's nature, and so
in his Understanding, that came in by sin, as fruits or punishments thereof,
(or that import a miserable afflictive) Imperfection, or that unfit for the
fruition of the appointed Glory; these are all removed from the Glorified
Saint. 2. Furnished, yea filled and satisfied with all useful, desirable, and
Beatifical knowledge. The Glorified Saint shall be abundantly stored and
furnished with Knowledge, of the Works of God, and the admirable rays and
beams of Gods wisdom that shine therein (in the frame of his Works of Creation,
and natures of his Creatures, which men now gather up something of from Arts and
Sciences. True Learning will then, Vide Bolton of Heaven, page 141, 142.
and there come to, and be in its Perfection. The clear certain knowledge of
all useful Truth will abound in that Heavenly Academy; for this will be for the
Glory and Honor of God, that he may have the Glory of his Works, and of his
Wisdom therein, that it may not be lost and buried, as it would be, (most of
it) if never further seen into, and minded than it is here, Psalm. 104.24.36.
And it is a part of the perfection and excellency of the Rational Creature, an
attaining of his end, who was made to behold the wisdom of God in the World,
Job. 36.24, 25. And it was an Excellency he gave to Solomon, when he would be
kind to him; therefore he will not deny it to his Saints in Heaven. And our
present defect and darkness in this knowledge, is a fruit of the fall,
therefore shall then be removed.

2. Of the Word of God, and of all the deep Mysteries of Religion, the meaning
of the Holy Scriptures, and of the hardest places therein; the solution of the
most knotty, questions in Divinity, the Explication of the most Glorious and
ravishing Mysteries of God and Christ, of Creation, Providence, Redemption and
Application, etc. shall then be fully known and understood. This is evident*
for knowledge, especially in spiritual things, (matters of God and of Religion)
shall then come to its full perfection, 1 Cor. 13.9, 12. And the beatifical
vision compriseth this, Mat. 5.8. i. e. they shall see (with the understanding,
as well as enjoy with the whole Soul) God in all those discoveries and
manifestations of himself that Creature is capable of, and consequently in all
truths concerning himself (all those Divine Truths) that make up that
discovery. Yea, (I add) the mind shall be filled and satisfied with the
knowledge and contemplation of those Glorious Truths and Objects, unto
ravishing Joy and Contentment. Here the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor
the ear with hearing* Eccles. 1.8. but then it shall, though of so vast a
concavity, (as we see here, the mind of man is a vast thing, it can take in,
and swallow down Heaps of Knowledge, and yet is greedy after more; it can grasp
that World in its conception, etc. Much more large will this Vessel be, when
widened to its Glorified capacity, yet) it shall be filled and satisfied, Psalm.
17.15. There is that to be seen and known in God that suffices, Joh. 14.8
(there is enough to suffice an infinite, therefore more than enough for a
finite understanding.) I^^sight of what was to be seen in Solomon and Solomon's
Court, and hearing of his wisdom, was so ravishing and satisfying to the Queen
of Sheba, 1 King. 10.3.8 What then will the fight of the Face and Glory of God
in Heaven be. The eye of a man's body is but a small thing, and the apple of it
smaller, yet by the help of the Sun it is able to take in, and behold half the
world, the whole Hemisphere at once. How much more vast and large will the view
and vision, and prospect of the eye of the understanding be, (what vast
objects, delights and Glories will it take in) when it has the light of the
Glory of God in Heaven shining about it, yea into it, Psalm. 36.8.9. It will
take in great and wonderful discoveries of God, and even see his face, i. e.
have a wonderful Glorious view and vision of him, and of all those clear
manifestations of himself, which he shall then communicate; but how large
soever, it shall be filled unto full satisfaction, Psalm. 17.15.

2. The Will, Heart and Affections shall also be.

1. Enlarged, or completely fitted, framed* disposed and sanctified to take in
that Glory, or that Glorious Communion with God that is to be had in Heaven.
The spirit will be perfect ( Hebr. 12.23.) in this respect, i. e. per^^ctly
sanctified, filled full of holiness, and so everlastingly fitted and enlarged
for that holy work of Glorifying God, that is the work of Heaven; always in
tune for that, never out of frame, as you often are here. The Image of God upon
the Soul, shall then be perfectly restored, as that part of it which stands in
knowledge, Colos. 3.10. so also that of holiness and righteousness, Epes. 4.24.
which is seated chiefly in the will and affections: your Souls shall be top
full of Holiness. You that now long and cry out for Grace and Holiness, for an
heart to love God, to fear him, to delight in him, to be enlarged for him, you
shall then have your desire to the full; never feel a weakness or impotency, or
straitness of heart Godward more: never find your hearts at your left hand, but
always dextrous in Holy works, and enlarged for it; then may each Saint say to
another, as 2 Cor. 6.11. and to God de praesenti, as Psalm. 119.32. I will run,
etc. For thou do enlarge my heart. And especially the affection and Grace of
Love, that shall be enlarged and flourish there: Love to God and to his Saints,
the perfume of that will fill Heaven. Heaven is the place of Love, that is, the
head-grace there always acting, never failing, 1 Cor. 13.8.13. Those
affections that bring pain with them, as tormenting fear and grief, 1 Jo^.
4.14.) and those Actings that imply Imperfection in them; or a state of
Imperfection accompanying them as prophecy, and that inferior imperfect way
and manner of knowledge that we have here, and those actings of faith and hope
that are proper to this life, (in contra-distinction to the fight and presence
of the good believed and hoped for; though the Grace of faith and hope it self,
or dependence on God in Christ shall continue in Heaven) those I say shall
cease, but Love is always comfortable, Philip. 2.1. and the full acting of
Love, implies perfection, 1 John 4.18. (the more intensely and strongly Love
acts and carries the Soul to God, the more perfect we are, (the strongest acts
of faith are under our greatest Imperfections, wants and miseries, when the
good of the promise is wanting, Heb. 11.1.) And Love is most directly the
spirit of Holiness, and of actual sweet joyful Communion with God) and
therefore Love shall eminently continue and flourish in Heaven, and be always
in fullest act and exercise. 2. Filled and satisfied with good, the heart of
man is a large Vessel, the desires have a vast reach, even after infinite good:
This whole World cannot satisfy one heart; but then it shall be filled (that
word full verified, Isa. 55.2) Brimful of Comfort and Contentment in the
fruition of God who is goodness it self, infinitely good; enough to satisfy
the endless reaches of the heart of man. You shall then have as much as you
would have, when the will, the desire is opened to the widest, it shall be
filled, Psalm. 81.10. And whereas Love seeks nearest Union and fullest
Communion with the Beloved: If thy Soul love God, it would be drawn as near him
as may be, Cant. 1.4. Why, Love shall be satisfied in this respect; the Soul
shall be as near God as it would be, and have him as near as it would have,
ever loving him, and ever loved of him, delighting in him, and delighted in by
him; lying in the arms and bosom of his Love: Christ and all the faithful, his
Spouse will then give their Loves ( Cant. 7.12. each to other, ever opening and
exchanging hearts. And so Joy will then be full, Psalm. 16.11. All the liking
affections (whereby the will goes out unto,. embraces and enjoyes good) shall
then be fully satisfied, as Psalm. 107 9. Jerem. 31.25. Psalm. 36.8. And for the
Soul of man to be closing with and satiated, actually satisfied in God the
chief and infinite good, this is Happiness: this is the fruition that is
beatifical.

2. Consider the Glory of the Body, viz. when that shall come to its Glorified
estate, as it shall do at, and after its Resurrection. It shall then be
Glorified as well as the Soul., being made like the Glorious Body of Christ,
Philip. 3.21. 1 Cor. What that is, was in some glimpse of it seen in Christ's
Transfiguration, Mat. 17.2. that was a little glimpse and specimen of the
future visible Glory of Christ, and so of the Saints that shall be like him, So
Mat. 13.43. Consider but those passages (to avoid curiosity here) in 1 Cor.
15.42, 43, 44. It shall be the self same Body for substance, but endowed with
new and Glorious qualities, viz.

1. Incorruption and Immortality, it is sown ( i. e. as here buried) in
Corruption: It is raised in Incorruption, so v. 53, 54. The Saints Bodies shall
not be liable to any Corruption, hurt or decay, by sickness, pain, old age or
death, but clothed with Immortality: All principle and power of dying being
swallowed up, 2. Cor. 15.4. To live for ever without liableness to death. No
fear of dying then, when once in that other happy World. The King of Terrors
never sets foot there, Luke 20.36: Adam might possibly have lived and not dyed,
but these shall live and cannot die. And as not exposed to death, so not to any
other hurt or aile, inward decay, or outward violence: What abundance of Hurts
and Ailes, Maimes, Accidents; as also Inward Diseases now? How many Tools are
at work to knock down this Clay-tabernacle? but then it shall be so strongly
built, as to be Impregnable by the assaults of Corruption.

2. Glory Splendour and Beauty, v. 43. The Body is now a vile thing ( Philip.
3.21.) when under earthly Adams Image, especially in its decaying state, under
Sickness, Sores, Maimes, Rheums, Wrinkles, etc. It is a sorry, poor,
ill-looking, deformed, pale noisome thing: But then the Bodies of the Saints
shall be Glorious, Beautiful, Goodly, Amiable and Shining as the Sun: (whereof
that of the shining of Moses his face, and of Christ in his Transfiguration,
was but a little glimpse.) And far above that of Adam in innocence, when
neither shame nor deformity was yet known.

3. Strength and Power, v. 43. Now the Body is a weak, frail, feeble thing,
often unable to perform its needful operations, soon wearied, tired with
action, and at last sinking under its own frailty to the Grave: But then
Strong, Vigorous, Lively, Healthy; freed from all defects and infirmities above
weariness and weakness: And so from the Imperfection and weakness of Infancy,
or decrepit Age. All the Saints, even such as die Children, (as Divines most
probably conclude) shall rise again in full strength and stature, such as the
flower and vigor of years did, or would have given; as such as Adam at his
Creation was made in ( Vid. Aquin. Suppl. Quaest. 81. Bolton of Heaven, page
129. Bucan. Lot. Com. page 422.]

4. Spiritualness v. 44. Not that the Body shall be then turned into a Spirit,
or lose the nature of a true Body. But 1. The Body shall then live as Spirits
and Angels do, without Meat, Drink, Sleep, and such like External, Elementary,
Bodily supports as we need in this Animal-life, being then sustained by the
All-preserving, All-quickning Spirit of God, without the help of such means,
Mat. 22.30.

2. The Body shall be perfectly conformable, obedient and subservient to the
operations of the Spirit, or Soul, (as also to the guidance of the Holy Spirit
of God) The ready instrument of the Soul aptly employed in spiritual work. As
when the Spirit, or Soul serves the Carnal: So when the flesh (the Body)
readily serves the Spirit, it may well be termed Spiritual. Now in this Life,
the Soul is taken up in serving the Body; the greatest part of our time,
Labor, Strength, Study, is spent in the providing Meat and Clothing, and
Comforts for the Body, and feeding that, Eccles. 6.7. But then the Body (not
needing those things) shall be wholly serviceable to the Soul. The Body shall
be no more such a Troublesome, Cumbersome thing as now it is, needing so much
tendance and ado about it, and often interrupting Spiritual work thereby. But
then it shall be a more Spiritual and Heavenly peace, always free and ready
for Soul work, for Spiritual Heavenly employment. Your Contemplations, Studies,
Sweet Affections and Communion with God never broken off and interrupted by
Eating and Drinking, by Dressing and Undressing, etc. as here they are.

3. Activity, Agility, Lightness Nimbleness and speed in motion, may also be
employed in this Spiritualness of the Body: Not dull, slow, heavy-moulded as
now: but in Agility and Activity more like to Spirits. Hence, easily made to
ascend to meet the Lord in the Air, 1 These. 4.17. and afterward to go up with
him to the third Heaven: And able, no doubt, in a very little time, (though not
properly in an instant) to move through those vast spaces and distances of
those Heavenly Mansions, and from one quarter of the Celestial World to
another.

3. The Glorious Company of Saints and Angels is another Additional part of
Heavens Glory. The fruition of God is the main Essence of it. But this is an
Accessional Adjunct, or Concomitant that is full of Comfort: Yea, it is a
necessary Concomitant, for God will be enjoyed by his people in a Communion
forever, not in a single separate way, but in Conjunction and Society, Mat.
8.11. and that Communion will be an help to their enjoyment of God, a way and
means of their Communion with God. When we speak of our Immediate Communion
with God in Heaven, we are not to understand it absolutely, that there shall be
no mediums between us and the transcendant Majesty of God; for there will be
the Humane nature of Christ, and the Communion of Saints, who in a Coel^stial
way and manner, will be helpful and useful one to another, to convey much of
God to one another: But Immediate compared with what we have here, and so as
these inferior instituted means and helps, and Glasses that we have here shall
he laid aside. But the Communion of Saints will then be in its Perfection and
fullest Excellency in the Church triumphant. And Love, Holiness and
Communicativeness, which is the life of Communion, then will flourish, 1 Cor.
13.8. You must there enjoy Christ your Head, not alone, but in fellowship with
all his Mystical Body. Hence I said in the Description [All together] they
shall have fruition of God All together, in the Highest Heaven for evermore,
Heb. 11.22, 23. We now come and are joined to that body by Mystical Relation,
but then by way of actual Communion.

Consider here. 1. There will be only true and Blessed Saints together in
Heaven, no mixture of unsound ones, or secret enemies; there the Communion will
be absolutely pure, such as is not to be expected, nor no rule allows us to
expect or insist upon in the Church on earth; for here there will be a mixture
of Corn and Chafe, Wheat and Tears, Sheep and Goats, good and bad Fish while
the World stands: But then a perfect separation of Goats from the Sheep, and
the Latter alone go into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 25.34, 46.

2. There will (after the last day) be all the Saints together, all the Vessels
of Glory gathered together* the whole Congregation of the Righteous, ( Psalm.
1.5.) the whole general Assembly of the first born: All the faithful seed of
Abraham, which are as the Stars in Heaven, and as the Sand on the Seashore
(all that ever were, are or shall be of the Elect and saved blessed number) and
this adds much to the Glory of it. We know numerous and great Assemblies here
on earth, are very solemn and affecting. The very faces of many Saints
together, are quickening each to other, ( Psalm. 42.4. for a multitude to go and
be together in the house of God, is no small thing) But what an Assembly will
then be, what an Heart-ravishing Congregation, when all the Millions of
Glorified Saints shall meet together, all their faces shining with the Image of
God, to praise and Glorify God, and joining in the same Hallelujah, Revel.
19.1, 2, 3.

3. There shall be a knowledge one of another; the Saints in Heaven shall know
one another. Society without acquaintance, is not comfortable, this shall not
be wanting in that place of Bliss. Yea, Vid. Bucan Loc. com. page, 444.
you shall know not only those that were of your acquaintance here; but all the
faithful, even strangers whom you never knew before; you shall be able to say,
(as Mr. Bolton speaks,) this is Abraham, Jacob, David, Paul, this was Luther,
Calvin, Bradford, etc. As may be gathered from the Apostles knowing Moses and
Elias, whom they had never seen before, in that glimpse of Heaven at Christ's
Transfiguration. And from Adams knowing Eve, and whence she was at first sight,
(without any humane information) of which Argument Luther Discoursed the
Evening before his death, and thence conclud^d the thing in hand, viz. That we
shall know one another in the life to come [ Melch. Adam. in vita Lutheri, page
154.] and all Comfortable knowledge will be then vouchsafed, but this is one
part of it. Yea, if it should ask time to come acquainted with every one, to be
sure there will be time enough there, remembering also the quickness and
accuteness of understanding, memory, etc. But a Superior and more immediate
way of this knowledge there may well be supposed.

4. There will be most sweet, Holy and comfortable Converse of the Saints
together. Though we cannot tell you the particular manner and order of it now,
(it will excel in order, as well as otherwise.) Yet to be sure it will be
Precious and Glorious, and full of sweetness and Comfort: And there will be
full time, season and opportunity for it at large. Moses and Elias were talking
together with Christ in that little representation of Heaven, Mat. 17.3. There
will not want orderly Conference and Discourse, and speaking one to another
among that Heavenly company. There you may hear of all the wonderful things
that God has done for his Church in this World; yea, and for each particular
person. The story's of the Experiences of the Saints, (many of which are now
lost and forgotten) the Lords admirable variegate Dispensations; the
embroidered work of Providence, when the whole piece shall be made up and
finished, the curious needle work thereof (the Coat of many Colors that God
has made for his Church, and for all his Beloved ones in the varieties of his
dealings with them.) It will then be spre^d abroad, declared, viewed, related,
discoursed of at large! Luther in his Comment on Genes. 5. Fol. 76. Considering
how shortly Moses passes over the story of those Honorable Fathers before the
Flood; why that (says he) is reserved for another World, the last day, there
will be talk for Heaven; then you shall see those Sages shining in Majesty and
Glory, and then you shall hear of them, and from them what they did, and what
God did (by, or for, or with them or others) in their times, the particular
stories thereof: You shall then hear what Seth did, Enosh did, what Cainan did,
Jared, Enoch, Methuselah, did, and suffered too; the stories of which times
shall live and be revived in Heaven, to the Glory of God, and joyful delight of
the Saints; having also before that been represented at the great day of
Judgment: the like you may see of other persons and times: For God will not
lose any of his works, nor the Glory of them, Psalm. 104.31. both of Creation
and Providence. But consider how sweet is the Communion, Company and Converse
of Gracious Saints here on earth: How do your hearts burn in Godly Conference
(as Luke 24.32.) when you can get in; though much ado to get into it here for
worldly matters and unsavory hearts. But those that are Savory and Spiritual,
and Breath much of Christ and Grace in their Speeches, what Life and Sweetness
do you find therein; it may be you smell of their Company a good while after,
your hearts are somewhat the more Savory for it. But what then will the
Converse and Company of the Saints in Heaven be, when there shall be no sin, no
defect either in Sp^ak^r or H^arers, no impertinencies in their speeches, ^o
unsavoriness, every one full of God, full of wisdom and holiness, etc. You will
truly say, it is good being here, when you have not M^ses and Elias only, but
Christ withal the thousands of his Saints about you, as Mat. 17.4. It is a
phrase often used of dying Saints in Scripture, that they were gathered to
their people, Genes. 25.8. and 35.29. and 49.33. Numb. 20.24. Deutr. 32.50.
there in the other world, in Heaven is the great Congregation (gathering
together, or Assembling of the people of God: there they meet, and come
togeth^r, and shall be together forever. We think Death takes, and rends, and
carries men away from their people, from their Friends, Relations, Brethren:
But the Saints by Death are more properly gathered to there people: (so the
Scripture speaks, respecting not this inconsiderable, but the other world.) As
the removal of the Travailer from the Inn s^parates him indeed from the people
( i. e. strangers) at the Inn, but gathers him to his own people at home: So
Death carries the Saints from a Foreign Co^^^ry to their home, and from
strangers (in comparison) to their own people; to ^^ose that are wholly, and
only (without mixture their own people, Heb. 12.23. You must die, and go to
H^aven, if you will come to the great meeting and Congregation of the people of
God; there is the Center, the Country, the City where you shall find them all,
there they shall all meet, and live together forever.

And hence by the way, mind one help to know whether you be like to go to
Heaven or no, (men for Heaven,) viz. Are you for the Company, and Communion,
and inseparable fellowship of the people of God, the Saints and faithful in
Christ; is your delight in them, ( Psalm. 16.3.) your love to them, (1 John
3.14., 18.) would you have your lot among them: And if there be any person or
people that have more of Gods Image upon them, Grace and Presence, in, and with
them, than others, those you are most endeared to? Do your hearts cleave to the
people of God, and to their Holy Communion, and Fellowship, and Interest,
desiring to be one of them, to stand and fall, to rejoice and mourn, to live
and die with them? Verily you must be gathered to the people of God now, if you
will be gathered to them then; (for all that Communion, both with God and his
people, that is perfected in Heaven, is begun on Earth) you must be their
Companions now, ( Psalm. 119.63.) If you will have their company then: You must
be of them, and for them, and take your lot among them now, and desire to walk
in Holy Fellowship with them in all the Ordinances of God, if you will be so
then. Yea, though they be under suffering and affliction, and contempt in the
World; you must not let that pull you away, or make you stand off from them,
Heb. 11.25, 26. As with Christ, so with his people, (for they go together) you
must suffer with them, if you will reign with them; you must take your lot
among them now, (whether of peace or trouble) if you will have a lot among them
in Heavenly Glory. In the story of the Arrian Persecutions, there is a passage
of one who was but a Youth, (a Boy) who when a Company of Holy Martyrs were to
be put into a Ship and burned together, Clark 's Martyrolog page 99.
he hastened after to be among them, to whom a Seducer said; Why hastest thou
(my pretty Child) unto Death? let them go they are Mad; take my Couns^l, and
thou shall not only have life, but great advancement in the Kings Court. To
whom the Lad answered, you shall not get me from the Fellowship of th^se Holy
men who bred me up, with whom I lived in the fear of God, and with whom I
desire to die, and with whom I trust I shall obtain the Glory to come. And so
being all put into the Ship, they were burned together. Oh, be with the people
of God, and cleave to them one arth, (yea willing at Gods call in any regular
way to suffer with them in a suffering condition. Think not, nay desire not to
stand when the people of God fall) if you would be with them in Heaven. If you
Espouse or prefer another Interest (the Interest of Estate, that you love your
Estates better than you love the people of God, or their welfare, or of ease,
or of quiet, or worldly Greatness) before the Interest of the people of God,
and you will stand at a distance from them for the sake of such things: If
something else be more predominant in you then the love of God, and of his
people, (and those two go together, 1 John 4.20. and 5.1. Mat. 25.40, 45.)
surely you are not principled for Heaven; nor can have any good evidence of
your going thither. To be for God and for his people, should be our All on
Earth, (our whole desire and design) 2 Cor. 5.13. as that shall be our All in
Heaven; to enjoy Communion with God in the sweet Communion and Fe^lowship of
his Saints; that is Heaven, and that is the desire and aim of every Gracious
Saint on Earth.

Of our Communion with Angels in Heaven, I shall not speak particularly: What
it is, and the manner of it will be known when you come there. But as by
Christ, we are brought into a Fellowship and Communion with the Holy Elect
Angels, H^b. 12.22. (who should else have been forever in Fellowship with
D^vils, Mat. 25.41.) so that Commu^^on will th^^ be p^^f^ct^d and know^ fully
as it is h^r^ initi^l, imperf^ct and but little known. As the Saints when
Glorified, shall in their quali^i^s and manner of ^^^ing, be more like unto the
A^gel^, M^^. 22.30. So will ^h^^ then he c^p^ble of mo^^ Communion with t^^m
th^n now. If there be joy among the Ang^l^ when a sinn^r enters; into the
Kingdom of ^r^c^ by Repentance, Luke 15.10. what joy w^ll then be when all the
Saints shall come in the Kingdom of Glory. The Angels M^nister to the Saints by
the way ^o Heaven: Hebr. 1.14. and conduct them thither when they die, Luke
16.22. with what mutual joy will they all then be entertained there. It will
th^n be known what good Offic^s the Holy Angels have done for the Saints here,
both for particular persons and Churches, and places, in their Ministering ^o
and for them; Greenhill on Ezekiel. 1.5. page 88.
how they have o^posed countermin^d th^^r (...), both D^vils and wicked men;
what not able services those Courtiers and Cur^iers of Heaven have been sent
from Heaven upon by the Lord Jesus Christ on the behalf of his people; into
Courts of Princes, and other great motions of the wheels of Divine Providence,
Dan. 10.13.20. Ezekiel. 1.5. How they have Guarded, Defended, Succored in many
dangers, being faithful to their Charge and Trust, Psalm. 91.11, 12. and 34.7.
They now do us good turns, and we know it not. But surely all shall be known
then, as well as t^^se p^rfect instances that are set down in Scripture: But
all to the Glory of God and Christ, by whom they were employed. And to the
further Joy and Comfort of the Faithful in the sense of Love of God, who h^th
so inclined and employed the Glorious Ang^ls to do for them. And then will
Saints and Angels in one Triumphant Society, admirably join in Praising and
Glorifying God for all his wonderful Works; and in special for the M^st^ri^s of
Christ and Marvels of his Red^mption, (which the Angels are eminently delight^d
with, 1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 3.10.) as ^uk. 2.13.14. Oh that ever worms of Dust
(sinful man) should be lift up to the place and state of Angels; yea, in some
respects higher, in regard of their nearer Relation to Christ their Head, who
as 1 Pet. 3.22. (fellow Citizens and fellow Courtiers with them in the Heavenly
place, which was properly their own Habitation, Jud. 6. Mat. 22.30. Luke 2 15.)
to partake with them in the Beatifical Vision, Mat. 18.10. and to bear a part
with them in the praises of God.

Use, A word of Encouragement and Establishment to the people of God, and that
in the midst of troubles here in this World: They need heartning on while here
below under Temptations and Tribulations, why a sight and thought of Heaven and
of the Rest and Recompense there is enough to do it, Hebr. 11.25, 26. Even when
the Interest of Piety and of the truly Pious is laid low in the World and
despised among men, and they that are for Heaven in earnest, are counted a
company of Foolish, Humoursom, Mad Fanatical people; why if that be to be
foolish (to be for Heaven in good earnest, and sixed in the way thither, i. e.
in the way of the Rule, not to be turned out of the way by the smiles or frowns
of all the World) if that be folly, be more foolish still, as 2 Samuel 6.22.
Heaven is the best choice when all is done, and it is the truest wisdom to
choose that, and not to stick at all the Tribulations that ley in the way. The
Psalmist begun to think he had made an ill bargain when he was chastened all
the day long, and the wicked prospered on earth, etc. But having God for his
Portion Psalm. 17, 24.73. And keeping with God in the way of Faith and
Obedience, that is the way to Heaven; fear not all this World, nor all the
Tribulations thereof, Luke 12.32. Consider 1. All that Satan or the World can
do, cannot reach to Heaven where your Portion and Treasure lies, Mat. 6.20.
They work but upon the earth, the troubles about you here are but earthly
troubles: But your business is in Heaven, your hope is laid up in Heaven,
Colos. 1.5. your trade is for Heaven if Christians indeed, and that cannot be
obstructed by any imbargoes on Earth. 2. If God will bring you to Heaven, then
he will not let you miscarry, or be lost in the midway: If he have called you
to Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, then all the Sufferings in the mean while
shall not interrupt it, Romans 8.30. (nothing can break that Chain) v. 31, 35,
39. nothing in all this World can, or shall cut you off from Heaven and Glory,
or from the Everlasting Love and Fellowship of God to be enjoyed there. If that
be indeed the choice of your Souls, (that you refuse all this World and choice
Heaven, choose the Fruition of God in Christ for your Portion) if you make
Moses's chooce Heb. 11.24, 26. and Paul's choice, 2 Cor. 4.18. (and that choice
the Lord propounds to every one, Mark. 10.21.) why then Heaven you shall have,
and God ingages it, and has appointed you to it, Heb. 11.16. why then he will
not lose you b^ the way in the Crowd of Worldly Tempta^^on^ or troubles* but
will keep you, and carry you through by his own power, 1. Pet. 1.5. ^3. Instead
of hindering all things, and espe^ially the oppositions and troubles of the
Truth, shall but help you on toward Heaven, and further your Glory there, 2
Cor. 4.17. Sanct^fied Tribulations and Suffering for Christ's sake, or in
obedience to his will; they help to greaten your Crown and Reward in Heaven,
Mat. 5.11, 12. they help you with an Evidence for Heaven, Romans 8.17. 2 Timothy
2.11, 12. 2 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5.

And they help to quicken and drive you on in the way to Heaven, to make faster
speed thither, being Sanctified unto the exercise of Grace, and to awake Faith,
Prayer, Weanedness from the World, esteem of Heaven, more Converse there, etc.
Heb. 11.9, 10, 13 14, 16. Oh what can hurt the people of God whose faces are
toward Heaven, (looking, seeking, pressing after that) and their back upon
Earth and Mammon: The World comes to scourge and lash, when they seek to weary
and ^^fl^ct them, and make them as miserable on earth as may be; why they do
but drive them the nearer and faster into Heaven. Oh then let none none of
those things move you, but hold on steadfastly in the way to Heaven, the way of
Faith and Holiness, the way of regular walking with God and cleaving to him and
to his Truth, his Name, his Interest and his People. In the way of well doing,
commit your selves to him, and be not Biassed from it by any thing in all this
World: Let nothing on the earth (this vile miserable earth) hinder or divert
you ^^om an Heavenly choice, or from an Heav^nly course; remembering the Cloud
of Wi^nesses before you, and especially the great Example of Christ Jesus, Heb.
12.1, 2.

SERMON III.
THe Glory of the place, where Saints shall be together and enjoy the
Beatifical presence of God, viz. the Highest Heaven, the third Heaven, 2 Cor.
12.2. The Heaven of Heavens, 1 King. 8.27. Deuteronomy. 10.14. That Glorious stately
Region above the Starry Heavens, made and fitted to be the Everlasting
habitation of the Blessed; whether Christ ascended, and where now he is in his
Humane Nature ( Ephesians. 4.10. Mark. 16.19. Act. 3.21.) where God does manifest
and communicate himself and his Glory in the fullest and highest manner, and
therefore called the Habitation and the Throne of God, 1 King. 8.30, 39, 40.
Isa. 63.15. and 66.1. Psalm. 11.4. and 33.13, 14. Mat. 5.34. And where all the
Saints shall be and dwell with Christ forevermore, Joh. 14.2, 3. and 17.24. 2
Cor. 5 1. Mat. 25.34. Touching this place (the third Heaven) and the Nature and
Glory of it; I shall not enter into a particular and distinct Discourse, (we
have sometimes had more opportunity for that, in considering the Works of
Creation.) But take two or three familier Considerations that may set for ththe
Glory of this place, the High^st Heaven. 1. It is the Excellency, top and
Summity, the Crown and Glory of the whole World: As it is the highest in place,
so in Nature and Excellency the Chief and Choicest part of the whole Creation:
As Canaan, the Type of it was called the Glory of all the Lands, Ezekiel. 20.6. So
is this Heaven the Glory of the whole Creation, the Fairest, Best and Goodliest
piece therein. That may be one reason of that Name, the Heaven of Heavens: As
Song of Songs, i. e. the best, most excellent Song, so this is the most
Excellent Heaven; all other Heavens, and so all other parts of the World are
far inferior to it. It is the choicest place in the whole Creation; the best
Room God has in this stately House that he has built. Now the Lord lets you
sit without among the Servants in the outer Rooms, in the Kitchen (the Smoking
Kitchen) of the World, this Earth I mean: But then (when grown to full Age, and
fully Married to his Son,) he will entertain you in the best Room he has (the
Fairest that ever he built) his own dwelling Room and Presence Chamber of
Heaven. This lower World, (Earth and Air, and Starry Heaven) they are but as
the Outhouses and Hovels that are set up more incuriously: But this Heaven is
the dwelling house and place of the Great King. And hence it is the immediate
Workmanship of God himself, Heb. 11.10. Men build other Cities (and we know
they are full of Splendour and Beauty;) but God built this, 2 Cor. 5.1. It is a
City (a place of the confluence of all that Nature and Art could heap together,
so Cities are among men) and a City of Gods building; whose Artificer and
Builder is God, the word is: As if God showed his Art, what an Artist, what an
Artificer, a Master Builder he is in making this Heaven: Of all his Works this
is the most Artificial and Masterpiece. Now we see this lower World is stately
Fabric, a Beautiful frame, especially as it would have been if not defiled by
sin, Psalm. 104.24. and 8.3. and 19.4, 5. What then is that higher story of the
third Heaven, which excells in Excellency, Splendour, Glory and Magnificence, as
much as it does in Height; the the Spaciousness and Local Situation of it,
speaks and notifies its Transcendant Excellency. It Is stately height [the
highest Heaven:] As the Earth the lowest, so the Heaven the highest Region, it
is above (the highest of all) in place* (far above all these visible Heavens,
Ephesians. 4.10. and yet they are of a vast height) and as far above all in
Excellency of Nature and in Glory, Deuteronomy. 4.39. Josh. 2.11. Earthly things are
low things, and therefore placed here below down in the Valley: But that is
above, on high, Ephesians. 4.8. Heb. 1.3. Cant. 8.18. It is the highest place of
all, ( Luke 2.14. and 19.38.) there is none above it, and truly you can aspire
no higher than what is there, so its spaciousness and vast largeness; the Earth
(though 21600. Miles in compass) is but as a point, i. e. of no considerable
bigness (of no sensible quantity) compared with this second, lower, Starry
Heaven; what is it then to that Heaven of Heavens, which is the highest and
utmost Rim and Circumference of the whole Universe, containing within the
Bowels or Concave of it, this whole lower World: And so of greater compass than
the largest of these visible Heavens. And we may probably suppose, that its own
height and wideness (I mean from the Pavement to the Roof of it) holds
proportion with its Compass or Circumference, so that it is every way of
Transcendant vastness and largeness. A Beggar lives in a narrow little Cottage,
but a Prince in a spacious Palace. That place that God erected for his own
dwelling place (the Habitation of his Glory) is suitable to so great a Majesty,
as 2 Chronicles, 2.5, 9. Yet is God not contained in it, (2 Chronicles. 6.18.) but
containing it by his power, and filling it all with his Beatifical presence and
Glory. And as Joh. 14.2. there (in that spacious Region) are Mansions and
Rooms, and Lots and Dwellings for all the thousands of the Glorified ones. You
shall be no way straightened when you come there (no Tribe of Israel complain
there of the straitness of their Lot.) But may say as Psalm. 118.5. the way to
it is strait, but the Kingdom it self is great and large.

2. It is a place that was never defiled by sin, as all this lower World has
been, which has marred it, spoiled the Beauty, and Gloss, and Hangings, and
Comfort of it, and infected the very Walls of the house, etc. And turned it
into a place of Briars and Thorns, of Troubles and Sorrows, and a Valley of the
shadow of Death: But Heaven is a Holy, a most Holy place, where never stain or
spot of sin came. It Is Primitive Luster, Beauty, Sweetness and Comfort was
never marred thereby: And hence a place only of Joy and pleasure, (not of
sensual and Carnal, but of true genuine Spiritual Pleasures) Psalm. 16.11.
Heaven is called Gods Heavenly Habitation, Deuteronomy. 26.15. 2 Chronicles. 30.27. Isai.
57.15. Hence the inmost part of the Tabernacle and Temple, which was a Type of
this Heaven, was called the Holy of Holies, or the most Holy place, Heb. 9.8,
12, 24. It being by the Lords everlasting appointment and choice, set apart to
be the place of his most Special, Gracious, Glorious and Holy presence, where
only Holy work shall be done, (Prasing, Blessing, Glorifying God) only Holy
persons shall come, and only the Holy God be seen and enjoyed: It is chosen to
be the dwelling place of perfect Holiness, so perfect as is exclusive of the
least sin. And hence the very being in this place (in Heaven) and the sight of
it, will be a continual means (as it was with the Tabernacle and Temple of old,
whilst instituted Holiness was upon it) to raise and keep up the heart in holy
affections to God. And there will be every thing that may further, nothing to
hinder Holiness, neither sin nor devil ever entered Heaven; or shall enter
there. It is absolutely undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.4. And hence none of that
Confusion, Disorder or Discomfort that results from sin and temptation, and
makes this Earth a miserable place; Heaven is an Holy and so an Happy place.

3. It is a place subject to no Change; of a Constant incorruptible nature, 1
Pet. 1.4. Inconstancy is the name of this lower World, being made up of
inconstant (incorruptible) natures: The Materials, Principles and Composition
of it, so framed and ordered as to be a stage of mutation, of continual
Generation and Corruption, of perpetual Alteration; mixed bodies resolveable
into their jarring principles the Elements; and the Elements th^mse^ves capable
of being blended, disordered and dissolved, and thrown into an heap of
Confusion, their Forms striving and conflict^ng on the common stage of the
first matter, and moving, dis-resting each other, the more Passive Element is a
prey to the more Active: And hence this whole lower World is capable of final
dissolution and d^solation, and being turned into a dismal Chaos-like condition
(a fit place for Hell) the last day. But the third Heaven never changed since
it came out of nothing, what it was at once, and at first, that it always is,
and will be: It Is principles never stood asunder, nor can be sundered; it is
not resolvable into any pre-existant or seperable principles; hence incapable
of dissolution or corruption, or of any essential Change. As it came immediately
out of nothing, and was at once perfected by the power of God, so unless he
should by the same power annihilate it, (which he will never do) It must
continue, and continue in that perfection forever. Hence it is a kin to the
nature of Immortal Substances and Spirits, and a fit and suitable Habitation
for them. An everlasting unchangable Habitation for Immortal and Everlasting
Inhabitants, 2 Cor. 5.1. Hebr. 13.14. Luke 16.9. Hence also a fit place to lay
up and enjoy an everlasting Portion in, Mat. 9.19, 20. there are causes of
Corruption and Destruction (natural or violent, Intrinsecal or Extrins^cal) to
every thing on Earth. But it is not so in Heaven; there is no moth and rust,
(no internal natural Causes of decay) no Moth to fret the Garments of Glory; no
rottenness or Worm that b^falls or breeds in the Timber of that Heavenly House;
nor yet any Thief (Devil or wicked man, no violent external Cause) that can dig
through (as the word is) the Walls of that house, the third Heaven, or the
Pavement or Floor thereof. It is of Impregnable Strength and Solidity; there
are no Chinks, Clefts, Gaps, or Crevises in the Walls of it (for solidity or
firmness, transparency (and) may stand together, Job 37.18.) it is impenetrable
by the force of Created Nature. God keeps the door of Heaven in his own hands;
he only opens it for Angel or Saint to come out or in, no Created force can
break or dig through it: He alone can rend or cleave the H^avens, Isa. 64.1.
Mark. 1.10. This lower World was made but to be a Stage for men to act their
parts on for a few Ages, and then taken down: Hence it stands but on Crazy
shows it may and will e're long fall on heaps: It is like a Te^t or Tabernacle
that stands on stakes thrust into the ground. But the third Heaven stands on
strong unmoved foundations, Heb. 11.10. Being made and fitted, built by God to
be the everlasting settled Rest and dwelling of the Blessed, Psalm. 73.18. Isa.
22.23. Oh let this point take off our minds from, and raise them above the
Earth, and shame us for our Earthly-mindedness. The Saints are men for a better
Country, (even an Heavenly) for a better place, Heb. 11.16. a place of rest
(immutable rest and peace) instead of a place of change and motion. A place of
Holiness instead of a place of sin. A place of Glory and Beauty and Caelestial
Excellency, instead of these dregs of nature that we have here on Earth. You
are now but in the outhouses, the Barn, the Hovel where the Swine and Beasts
come, as well as the Children: But then in your Fathers house, the Palace it
self; the best Room God has in all the Creation, Heb. 11.16. Better, yea and
bigger too. Will you be crowded into a Nook (a Corner) of the earth for your
Portion, (which will one day prove no better than a Nook of Hell) when you
might have a lot in those Spacious Mansions above: What a point, a Punctillio
is the Earth if you had it all? The Saints have greater portions, a lot above
greater than it all, which should make them of great Spirits, able to despise
this little inconsiderable lower World. Oh foolish and low-spirited Sons of
men, that are scuffling and contending for and about this point of the Earth
(the Earth beneath) like to mere Ants and Pismires crawling on this dust, and
neglect the great and high things of Heaven, as far beyond these things, as the
Heavens are higher than the Earth; that make so much ado about a little place
to stand in under the shed and Hovel of this lower World; that will e're long
fall about their Ears, and are mindless of the vast concernments of Everlasting
Habitations. If there were no Heaven, (no better things there) we might mind
the Earth only, and set up our stand there: But if there be a Fathers house, an
Inheritance undefiled, etc. then men are not come to themselves, they are under
Spiritual madness that content themselves with Earth and the Husks thereof* and
seek not a Lot and Portion in Heaven, and in the good things thereof. Indeed it
is not the place alone, but the Company (the Fellowship of God and all the
Saints, that makes Heaven so happy a place) there; the place and its Divine
Commodities are inseparable.

Thus of the matter and substance of the Glory of the Saints in the life to
come. Now follows --

2. The Duration or Continuance of it, viz. That it is Eternal or Everl^sting.
It is Eternal Glory in the Text, so 2 Cor 5.1. Heb. ^.15. Mat. 24.46. Psalm.
16.11. Eternal i. e. It shall be and continue without interruption, and without
End.

1. Without Interruption. It shall at no time be discontinued, broken off,
interrupted, intermitted, but a permanent Glory, always fresh and green,
without fading or declining, 1 Pet. 1.4. not suffering any winter or fall of
Lease, but in a perpetual Spring. Here our Communion with God and enjoyment is
marvellously interrupted and broken. By that time you are well in, you are put
out again: By that time your Harp is well in Tune, and begins to sound well,
you are fain to lay it aside: Wordly occasions, Bodily necessities take you
off, and interrupt your talk with God, and with his Word, and with your own
Hearts. By that time the heart be well warmed at an Ordinance on a Sabbath, and
you begin to see its good being here, and to taste and take in the sweetness of
Communion with God, the Ordinance, the Sabbath is at an end; you can be but a
while together in Godly Conference, for a turn and away; you must part and
break off necessarily. But when in Heaven, no Interruption, no breaking off, a
full spring-tyde without any Ebb. Yea there is there no Interruption of the Act
of Grace, and comfort of it, and feeling thereof, not only the state and the
habit abides the same, (so it does here, when actual Communion, and the sweet
lively feeling, Heavenly Actings and Ebullitions of Grace are Intermitted, yet
the habit and spirit thereof abides still.) But the Glorious Heavenly, ^weet,
pleasant Acts of Grace are perpetual, Psalm. 16.11. Pleasure is from the
pleasant actual fruition of good; and so Heavenly, pleasures from the actual
enjoyment of G^d, and of his Beatifical presence, and gracious actings upon
him; and those Pleasures there are for evermore: What is here tasted in an
Ordinance ( Psalm. 36.8. and 65.4.) is there perpetual, and that in fullness; so,
Mat. 18.10. the Beatifical Vision, (or Communion, or Fruition, those are but
the same thing in diverse words) is never interrupted. Heaven is a day without
night, a Summer without a Winter, a Flood without an Ebb, a Morning without
Clouds, a blissful Communion with God without Interruption. Variety of exercise
there may be in Heaven, and variety of truths, and Acts, and Contemplations the
Saints may be busied about (for they cannot take in all at once) but all
serving to continue and carry on their fruition of God, and the Bliss and Glory
thereof.

2. Without End. The Happiness and Glory of the Saints in Heaven, shall never,
never have an end, but continue to all eternity, as long as Heaven is Heaven,
as long as God is God. This implies that,

1. It shall never be lost by, or taken away from any Saint in Heaven, nor
shall he ever fall from it, or be removed from it, bereaved of it, once in
Heaven, and ever there; once put on that Crown of Glory, it shall never fall
from thy Head. Adam was in a good condition in Paradise once; but he lost it,
fell from it, and so he was driven out of Paradise; being in that honor, he
continued not as Ps. 49. and hence we may say as Lam. 5.16. But no danger of
that there: All that are carried to Heaven, are there set in an immutable
estate by Christ Jesus. Some have been for a falling away on Earth: But none
ever so much as dreamed of a falling away in Heaven. Neither Devil nor sin yet
came thither to rob them of that Glory, Mat. 6.20.

Hence this Heavenly Glory will be properly your own, never to pass away from
you, Luke 16.12. Nor

2. Shall it ever expire or come to an end, either by the Cessation of the
Saints Being, or of their Glory. No change or alteration shall ever put an end
to it: But it shall continue forever and ever, World without end. This is the
Crown of that Crown of Glory that it is Eternal, Everlasting, never to be lost,
never come to an end. This damps and imbitters all Earthly Joys and Comforts
that they are but Temporary, you must leave them, or they you; they are but a
fashion that passes away. But this unspeakably sweetness Heavens Joys, that
they shall continue for ever; it shall always be thus. No danger or
possibility of losing or ending this Happiness. This [Ever] is the stinging
torment of the damned in Hell, and it is the the ravishing Joy of the Glorified
in Heaven.

The length of time that we have or hope to have in any thing, adds unspeakably
to the sweetness and Comfort of it, Luke 12.19. The Worldling feigns to himself
a kind of Eternity in his Possessions and Enjoyments, else he could not look at
himself so happy as he does, Psalm. 39.11. That was David's Contentment, 2 Samuel
7.18, 19. Oh then how Joyful is that Joy, how Heavenly that Heaven, how
Glorious is that Glory that has this ingredient, to be in truth (not in fancy
or dream) Eternal: Not for many years only, but for ever, for more thousands
and millions of years, than their be Grass-piles on the Earth, or Sands on the
Seashore. To make some use of this last particular, the Eternity of Heavenly
Glory.

Use 1. Hence see how infinitely Heaven's Glory weighs down, out-bids and
outmatches all this present World, both the good things, and the evil things
thereof.

1. All the good of the Earth (of this World) is but Temporal; all this world
can give us no Eternal good things. The Earth has riches, but no Eternal
Riches; Pleasures, but no Eternal Pleasures, Heb. 11.25, 26 Honor and
Greatness, but no Eternal Honor, Psalm. 49.12 It is a poor Glory that this
world has, not worth the name of Glory; it is but a paint, a fashion that
passes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. though called Glory by sensual Worldlings, Genes
31.1. These momentary fading things, what are they to Eternal Glory? Oh foolish
and unwise are they that fell Heaven for Earth, Eternal Glory for present
contentments: That will rather leave Treasures in Heaven, than leave and
forsake those things, Mark 10.21, 22. the greatest Possessions here are not
great, (no great matter, a trifle, a nothing, a shadow) compared with Treasure
in Heaven, Luke 16.10, 11, 12.

2. The evil things, the Sufferings, Troubles, Tribulations of the World, that
lie in the way to Heaven; and that the World does or can bring upon the
faithful, they are small matters compared with the Glory that they are passing
to, Romans 8.18. for these Sufferings are but for a little while, but that Glory
that follows is Eternal, 1 Pet. 5.10. so 2 Cor. 4.17. who would stick at a few
moments trouble and travel, to go unto Eternal Rest and Glory. If God call you
to travel for Heaven through a few paces of troublesome and dirty way, through
a few days of trouble and trial ( Revel. 2.10.) Is it not a shame to boggle at
this, or to think it an hard bargain; or to be diverted and turned out of the
straight way to Heaven by such things, as 2 Pet. 1.11. The Scriptures have told
us beforehand of Sufferings and Trials, and therefore it should be no strange
thing to meet with them.) But it has also told us, and set before us the Glory
that shall follow, this should swallow up the other, and make us endure them
easily, Hebr. 12.2. and 11.26.

2. Hence it is, that that is worth looking and seeking after, bending all our
desires and endeavors to obtain, viz. the Happiness and Glory of Heaven; for
it is Eternal, and 2 Cor. 4.18. Eternal things should be the things we look at
and after, as our scope (as the word is) our aim, mark and design. To lay out
our selves about Temporal things, and make them our maine business is a great
folly, Prove. 23.5. Psalm. 39.6. Men are busy about this and that, (about many
things) but there is but one great business, ( Luke 10.41, 42.) to provide for
Eternity; to get and make sure of that good part that shall last for ever, and
never be taken away from us. And

3. With what study, earnestness, care and seriousness, with what intention of
mind, what Ardency of affection should we look after Heaven. For Eternal Glory
and Salvation is a great matter, a great object, we had not need be slight or
negligent about such a thing, about a business of Eternal Concernment. It is
said of Zerxes, that Elegant Painter, when asked why he spent so much time and
labor about what he did, (when others turned off their work apace) that he
answered, Ego propter Etermitatem pingo. Caussin Poly. Hist. Symb. pa. 627.
I paint for Eternity; that that should stand and continue in after times. We
in a more proper and full sense may say we act for Eternity; and therefore we
had need be more intense and exact, when as we pray for Eternity, (ask Eternal
life of God,) hear for Eternity; follow God for Eternity; come to Christ Jesus
for Eternal and Everlasting Life. How Serious, Hearty, Affectionate, Fervent,
Intense should those Prayers, Duties, Comings be? Why that is that we are
seeking after, (if in earnest) to lay hold on Eternal Life. (1 Timothy 6.12, 19.)
Oh with what fear and trembling, care and diligence, should we pursue that
business? Come not slightly to Christ, in a negligent careless manner, or with
a piece of thy Heart when thou come for Eternal Life, etc.

The Salvation Christ holds forth, and calls to attend unto, and come and
follow him for, is Great Salvation; for it is Eternal Salvation. Oh be not
negligent about that Hebr. 2.3. and 5.9. how humbly obedient unto him. Oh with
what an humble Heartiness, Affection, Seriousness, Thankfulness, whole heart
should a poor sinner come and look to Christ, embrace and cling to him, hang on
him for deliverance from Eternal Death, and for the gift of Eternal Life. (how
precious is that Grace, Romans 5.21.) for Romans 6.23.

SERMON IV.
3. IT follows to consider of the degrees of this future Glory as it is
enjoyed. 1. In Soul after Death, 2. Both in Soul and Body, at and after the
Resurrection and last Judgment. In the former state, the Saints have a more
incomplete (though sweet and excellent) in the latter a more complete, full and
perfect enjoyment of this Glory.

I shall not speak of the different degrees of Glory in Heaven, comparing one
Saint with another: Though that seems to be a truth, that as we see there are
diss^ring degrees of Grace and Holiness here, (and God distributes more eminent
Gifts and Graces to one than to another, not withstanding that the Imputation
of Righteousness in Justification be equal to all,) so there will be in Glory
hereafter. When God shall Crown his own Graces in his Saints: Every one shall
not have such a Crown as Paul, to whom the Fruits of his Ministry will then add
to his Crown and rejoicing, 1 These. 2.19. nor be set next to Christ as some
shall be, Mat. 20.23. there will not want order in the Heavenly Mansions, nor
variety mixed with Identity, wherein the Lord delights, viz. Calvin Instit.
lib. 3. cap. 25. Sect. 10. and in Mat. 13.43. and 20.1, - 16. Bucan. Loc. com.
page 446. Leigh's Body Divinity page 872. But only somewhat of the Glory of the
Saints in those two ^^ates, the state of the Soul in its separation from the
Body after their reunion, which all the Saints that die do pass through. Here

1. Consider the Glory and Happiness enjoyed by the Soul in its separate state
after death, from thence to the Resurrection.

2. The Accession (or increase, or more complete fullness) of Glory that
follows upon the reunion of the Soul and Body, at and after the Resurrecion.

1. The Souls of the Faithful do after death immediately pass into Glory, even
that Glory that we have before spoken of: The substance whereof they do enjoy
in as perfect a degree (or in as full a measure) as the Soul in its separate
state is capable of, (though there is a further degree and fullness of Glory
reserved for the whole man upon reunion of the Soul and Body, of which
afterward) the Soul of a Saint is presently Glorified after death, though the
Body be not. It presently enters into peace ( Isa. 57.2.) Rest and Consolation,
Luke 16.22, 25, Into Blessedness and Glory, Revel. 14.13. from henceforth, from
this time, from the time of their death, and so on forward they are in
blessedness and rest, no fear of passing through pains of Purgatory for a
time, as Papists had taught before the Light of the Gospel broke forth. The
Souls of the Saints departed, do enjoy that Heavenly Glory that we have spoken
of. For

1. They are at Death immediately made perfect in Grace and Holiness, Heb.
12.23. perfectly freed from all sin, and endued with all heavenly perfection of
mind and will; of which what it is we spoke before. Death puts an end to the
death of sin in the Saint, he rests from the Labor and Burden thereof; and he
is clothed with perfect Holiness, fit for that place of Heaven and Heavenly
presence of God which he is passing into.

2. They enjoy the Beatifical vision and Glorious presence and Fellowship of
God and Christ, Philip. 1.23. No sooner departed, and the union of the Soul and
Body dissolved by death, but he in his Soul is with Christ, 2 Cor. 5 6, 8. as
soon as absent from the body, (and that is the Soul departed, that is absent
from the Body, and while absent in its separate estate: If Paul be absent from
the Body, it is in his Soul, which is there, and often in Scripture called man)
he is present with the Lord. When Stephen falls asleep by death, the Lord Jesus
receives his Spirit or Soul, Act. 7.59. so Psalm. 49.15. Eccles. 12.7.

3. The Soul departed, enjoyes in some way and some degree, the Company and
Communion of other Souls and Spirits of the Blessed, Heb. 12.23. The Soul of
Lazarus is with Abraham, and so with all the Saints, the Children of Abraham
that are departed this Life, Luke 16.22. Mat. 8.11, The Souls or Spirits of
Isaac and Jacob are gathered to their people, Genes. 35.29. and 49.33.

4. It is carried up by the Angels into the third Heaven, there to be with
Christ until his second coming, Luke 16.22. with Mat. 8 11. Luke 23.43. i. e.
in his Soul, for his Body was detained here on the Earth, and thrown into the
Grave: By Paradise is meant the third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. with ver. 4. so 2
Cor. 5.1, 2. When the Soul goes out of the Tabernacle of this frail Body, it
enters into the Heavenly house that is Eternal: It is not Harbour-less when
turned out of all house and Harbor in this lower World. The Soul of a Saint
being departed out of the Body is with Christ, Philip. 1.23. and Christ is in
Heaven, and there continues till his second coming, 1 Pet. 3.22. Act. 3.12.

Hence the Soul of a Saint, of the Saint departed, has the knowledge and
actual active fruition of its own Blessedness [is comforted and rejoiced
therein, and actually drinking in those Pleasu^es and Joys that are in the
presence of God, Luke 16.25. Psalm. 16.11. with 2 Cor. 5.8. compared with which,
its state on Earth, was but a state of absence from him, v. 6.] and has an
assurance of an Happy reunion with the Body, and of all that fullness of Glory
that the whole person shall enjoy at the Resurrection, for which it waits and
longs, Romans 8.23. till it be accomplished it is waited for, Psalm. 16.9. Rev.
6.9, 10, 11. According to most Interpreters ( vid. Parens, Dutch Diodate in
Loc. Calvin opusc. page 460. Bucan Loc. Com. page 447.) in that Text is held
forth that the Souls of the Saints departed, being at present clothed with
Robes of Glory, do long for their consummate felicity in the full Redemption of
the Church, etc. which shall be at the last Judgment. A truth in it self,
whether the proper intendment of that place or no ( vid. Brightman in L^c.) 2 Timothy 4.8. All the Saints as on Earth, so in Heaven do love and long for (not
with any disqu^eting Impatience, but with an Holy Expectation) the appearing of
Christ, when they shall also appear with him in Glory. But as there is an
expectation of the future Glory of the Body, the whole Person, so there is a
present enjoyment of Glory and Blessedness by the Soul: while the Body is a
vile and loathsome Carcass, buried under the Clods, fed on by the Worms, and
turned to dust* the Soul is Shining, and Triumphing in Glory, Swimming in
fullness of Joy in the presence of Christ, and among the Spirits of the Just,
Hearing and Seeing (after its intellectual way) those things in Paradise that
cannot now be uttered. What some of the Saints and Prophets in Scripture have
tasted of in raptures and Ecstasies, and Paul in 2 Cor. 12.1. - 4. for a little
(see Mr. Norton's Orthodox Evang. page 339.341. wherein the Soul abstracted
from use of bodily helps and Organs, had a more immediate visional
Contemplation of Objects presented) that and more then that, does the Soul
departed enjoy (even a perpetual Vision of God and fruition of the Joys of
Heaven without the Body) from Death to the Resurrection. That conceit that some
have had of the Souls sleeping (or being in an unsensible unactive condition,
without the exercise of understanding, memory or affections) till the
Resurrection; is fond and foolish, and contrary to the plain Testimonies of
Scripture before cited (which hold forth an actual enjoyment of Glory and
Glorious Communion with God immediately after Death) as Well as to the nature of
the Soul: And was long since largely confuted by Calvin in his Psychopanychia
Opuse. page 449.476. one of the first things he wrote.

1. How kind is God to his people, that he will not put them off so long as the
Resurrection before they enter into this Glory; though the Body cannot
(according to appointed order) come at it before, yet the Soul shall have
possession presently. When Death must send the Body to the Grave, Heb. 9.27.
then he will take the Soul into Heaven and have its company there.

2. This may sweeten Death to the Faithful, and make them cheerfully yield up
their Spirits into the hand of God, who stands ready to receive them. There is
a present object of Glory before them, a Joy immediately to be enjoyed, set
before them, which may make them cheerfully pass into it through the dark entry
of Death. Though there be a Land and Grave of darkness for the Body (which yet
is sweetened by the Burial of Christ) yet an Inheritance of the Saints ^n light,
which the Soul shall presently pass into; this is that that over-ballances
Death and absence from the Body, leaving the World, even the presence of the
Lord* being with Christ which is best of all. This should make us willing to
leave the Body, 2 Cor. 5.8. leave the old Crazy Rotten-house of the Body, to go
into the new building, and into the bosom of Christ into Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1, -
4. And this is presently to be enjoyed, you shall presently be with Christ when
you leave this Body; things remote affect not so much; but this is near and
just before you; as Christ comforted them with that [this day] Luke 23.43. The
day of your dying, is the day of your living in Paradise, in Glory: The day of
your falling into the Earth, (as to the Body) is the day of your ascending and
being taken up to Heaven, Luke 9.51. Going to the Grave and going to Heaven,
they go together to the Faithtful (inseparably together) and there is more
Comfort in the latter, than discomfort in the former: No sooner dissolved, but
you are in the Angels Arms to be carried into Christ's Bosom, even before you
can be upon Friends Shoulders to be carried to the Grave. The same step whereby
you leave the World, you go to the Father, as Joh. 16.28. You no sooner depart
hence, but you are with Christ, Philip. 1.23. are gathered to him, (and that
Blessed company and people that are with him, Genes. 35.29. Oh how should this
lift up all the Saints above the feat of that that can but kill the Body, but
pull out the Pins of this old house and dissolve that, that is the furthest
that all created power can go, Luke 2.4. Mat. 10.28.) But Death and all the
Instruments of Death, are so far from killing the Soul, that it lets that but
out of Prison, and sends it unto Life Eternal.

2. Now consider what further Glory shall be added to the Saints (for the full
completing and Consummation of their Glory and Happiness) at and after the
Resurrection upon the reunion of the Soul and Body. It is a more incomplete,
Bucan. 10^. Com. page 447. Parens in Revel. 6 Calv. Opu. page 469.467.
or (as some call it) an Inchoate enjoyment of Heavenly Glory, that the Saints
have in their separate estate of their Souls. But at the Resurrection of the
Body and reunion thereof to the Soul, they shall have the complete fullness and
Consummation of their Glory. This compleatness of Glory (and so the Accession
or addition to what they had before) at and after the Resurrection, we may take
up in several particulars.

1. They shall then have full Conquest and victory over Death, and full
deliverance from the Curse. The last enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death;
and that is not fully destroyed and swallowed up till the Resurrection, 1 Cor.
15.26, 54, 56, 57. Though the Soul dye not, yet Death hangs and abides upon the
Body, and so upon the person, and continues to make up a separation between
those two, Soul and Body, (which had it not been for sin, should never have
been parted) until it be raised, and shake off its dust, and the reunion
effected hence; the Curse is not fully, finally and totally abolished to the
Saints till the Resurrection: For Death is a fruit of the Curse. While the Body
is turned into, and abides in its dust, there is somewhat of its Ancient Curse
remaining, Genes. 3.19. It has some hold of them while the Grave holds the
Body: But when that is rased, and has shaken off its dust and Corruption, and
this Corruptible put on Immortality; now here is complete deliverance from the
Curse, and every Rag and Remnant of it: For Christ at his Resurrection had a
complete Victory over the Curse, it can hold him under no longer; so has the
Saint. Here is now a Redemption of the Body, and so of the whole man from the
Curse, and from all Enemies; even the last of them, which is Death, Romans 8.23.
There is the Redemption of the Soul before ( i. e. simply in it self
considered, though Relatively, as it stands in relation to the Body, and
naturally desires Reunion with it, so it may be said not to be fully Redeemed;
that is, the person is not fully Redeemed while any part of it lies under the
Curse.) But now is the Redemption of the Body from Death and Vileness, and so
now the whole man, the person is completely Redeemed (delivered, set free) from
the whole Curse. Hence it is called the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. Hence
when Christ tells us of a full Life that he will give us, he tells us of the
Resurrection, Joh. 6.40, 54. He has not finished his quickening work (his work
of giving life) till then.

2. The Body shall then be Glorified; there will be the accession of the Glory
of the Body, which was not before. That part of each Saint till now (till the
Resurrection) was not Glorified, but lay in the dust and among the Worms in
vileness and debasement: But now the Body shall not only be raised up and live,
and so be freed from death, (as before) but also be carried and adorned with
Glory, Honor, Beauty and Excellency unspeakable; be made a Glorious Body,
Phil. 3.21. An impassible Beautiful, Agile, Strong, Spiritual Body, 1 Cor.
15.42, 43, 44. Of this Glory of the Body; what it is, we spoke something before
(touching the Personal perfection of a Glorified Saint) I only mention it now,
as part of the Additional and Complete Glory that acrew's to the Saints at and
after the Resurrection, which was not before. And this will increase the Joy of
the Soul, (the Glory of the Body will be an addition to the Joy of the Soul)
and so the Happiness and Glory of the Soul considered extensively ( i. e. in
its relation to, Vid. Aquin. Suppl. Qu. 93. Art. 1. Mr. Nort. Orthod. Evang.
page 352, 453.
and participation with the Body, rejoicing in its Joy, etc.) will be greater
after the Resurrection than it was before, though considered intensively, and
intrinsically ( viz. as to the Essential Happiness of the Soul, that consists
in its vision and fruition of God) so it is the same before and after the
Resurrection. The Adjunctive additional Glory, or Joy of the Soul will be
increased, through the Essence of the Happiness of the same.

3. Hence the person (the whole person consisting of Soul and Body) of each
Saint shall then be Glorified, or after an Happy Joyful meeting of those two
old friends, Soul and Body; there will be an enjoyment of complete Happiness in
and by the whole mar. It was but a piece of a Saint that was Glorified before,
(but a part, though indeed the principal part, the Soul) but now the whole, the
entire person (for neither the Soul alone, nor the Body alone, is the person,
but the entire whole made up of both) that is now Glorified. And look as the
condition of a part is attributed, or belongs to an integral whole, as if a Leg
or an Arm be hurt or wounded, we say the man is hurt or wounded: so the person
may be truly said to be inglorious (not Glorified) while an Essential part (the
Body) is so: Though the Soul be Glorified (and so the man in regard of that
part) yet properly the person is not till both Soul and Body be, so Joh. 7.39.
not Glorified because his Manhood was not. So Mat. 22.31, 32. Abraham properly
( i. e. the person of Abraham) does not enjoy God and the good of the Covenant,
(Eternal Life) unless his Body be raised: Indeed the Soul of Abraham might, but
not Abraham properly; for Abraham is a person consisting of Soul and Body. It
is properly but the Soul of such a man that is Glorified before the
Resurrection: But now the man, the person is the whole entire man consisting in
Soul and Body. And Hence 1. There will be an Happy and Joyful meeting or
reunion of the Soul and Body, this reunion will be mutually Joyful, and the
Joy of the whole. For the Soul of man was naturally made to subsist in a Body;
hence it is incomplete and imperfect without it, (it has not its perfect and
complete manner of subsisting in its separate estate) hence it desires and
longs after reunion with the Body, and by reunion it receives, though not
any Essential, yet an Integral perfection. And as the parting of these two old
friends, was sorrowful, and contrary to nature, or to natural inclination,
(though swallowed up and over-ballanced by that greater good, the presence of
Christ, Phil. 1 23. yet in it self sorrowful, and unpleasant unto nature) so
their meeting again will be wonderful joyful; they meeting in a condition of
Joy and Bliss. When the Soul is in Glory it now wants but one thing to make its
Joy complete, viz. To have the Body with it in the same Glory: This is now
attained, and now it is come to its full rest. 2. There is now henceforth (from
the Resurrection and so on to all Eternity) an actual plenary enjoyment of
Glory and Happiness by the whole man in both the parts of Soul and Body. That
Glory that was before but in a part, is now diffused into the whole: And the
Soul acts more perfectly in a Glorified Body, (because more naturally) then it
did in its separate estate. Aquinas ubi supra.
Indeed now on Earth, the Body is a clog to the Soul; and hence the separate
Soul has a fuller and freer enjoyment of Happiness than it can have here: But
the Glorified Body being made a Spiritual Body, i. e. perfectly subject and
conformable to the Spirit and Noble operations of the Soul: It will be an help,
not an hinderance, and so an advantage and encouragement to the Soul, and to
the whole man in taking in those pleasures that are above. As the Souls (or the
Saints) state of subsisting will be more perfect and complete when reunited,
so will its operation be: The Saint will then with bodily eyes behold the man
Christ (this is more then he did before) with infinite contentation; that Job
put an Emphasis upon, that with those eyes he should see God, Job 19.25, 26,
27. with Bodily Ears hear, and Tongue utter forth the Praises of God: With and
through Bodily senses act upon, and take in the Glory of Heavenly objects,
Christ and the Saints, etc. this is a great Addition to what was before. 4.
There shall then be a manifestation of the Glory of the Saints unto the whole
World: This is an eminent and remarkable accession of Glory that shall be to
the Saints at the Resurrection and last Judgment: And when the Scriptures
extol the Glory that shall be then, it has special respect unto this. The
Glory that the Saints have on Earth, and also that which they have now in
Heaven in their Souls, it is a secret and hidden thing from the World, (they go
up and down the World now under a mean outside, and look like other men, and
they do to visible appearance as others do, and their Bodies are carried to the
Graves as others, and turned to the dust: And whither their Souls go is not
known; their Happiness is an unseen thing by any other eye but that of Faith.)
But then it shall be revealed and made manifest to the wonderful Glory of God,
and to their singular comfort and advancement, Romans 8.18. Now the Saints have
only concealed Glory, (hidden under a cloud of sufferings, under the Image of
the Earthly Adam, which go to the Grave with them) but then revealed not only
to them in a word and promise, but in, and upon them in real and visible
accomplishment, 1 John 3.1, 2. Colos. 3.3, 4. Neither Christ nor Christians do
now appear to a blind World as they be, but then they shall; then their Glory
shall be made manifest unto all. So 2 These. 1.10. Vid. Dutch Annot. Consider a
little here. 1. To whom. 2. Of what this manifestation shall then be.

1. The Glory of the Saints shall at the last day be manifest to all the World,
to Men, Angels, Devils, in the most public open manner, as Christ's proceedings
with them, his owning, acknowledging, acquitting of them shall be public; so
as all men shall see and know that these men are Happy men, Beloved of God, the
Brethren of Christ, Vessels of Glory and Partakers of the Kingdom. In special.
1. They shall then be manifested one to another. We hope well now of the good
state of the dying Saints, Friends, Relations; but then we shall be fully
certain when we shall meet them in the Congregation of the Righteous, and at
the right hand of Christ at the great day, and see them finding Mercy of the
Lord at that day, as 2 Timothy 1.18. when the Parents shall meet the Children, and
the Friend his Friends, Brethren and gracious Acquaintance there among the
sheep at Christ's Right hand. This happily may be known by the Souls departed
before in Heaven: But most fully and openly then, which is the time when every
one has his public and open Judgment to be seen of all, though he had his
personal, private and particular Judgment before. But besides, they shall not
only know each others state in General, but in Particular, hear of, and behold
the Graces, and Gracious Actings of the Faithful (their Brethren in Christ) and
all the Gracious dealings of God with them, the whole progress of his Love from
first to last, laid open then, in that Revelation-day, the day of Judgment, 1
Cor. 4.5. this will endear them each to other. 2. To all the wicked and
Reprobates, both Men and Devils: To those that have despised, opposed,
Reproached, Scorned, Persecuted, Insulted over them here. As it was said of
Christ when Judged, Abused and Despitefully used, Mat. 26.64. So it may be said
of Christians hereafter, shall the wicked, yea those same persons that here
abused them, see them arrayed in Robes of Glory, and sitting on Thrones as
their Judges, sitting on the Throne with Christ, Revel 3.21. For as Christ
shall appear, so shall the Saints also appear with him in Glory, Colos. 3.4.
The Saints shall Judge wicked Men and Devils, and surely they shall see, and
know, and behold them sit as their Judges, 1 Cor. 6, 2, 3. so Luke 13.18. They
that here counted them madmen, Fanatical, Frantic, Conceited, Humoursom,
Foolish Creatures shall then see that they made the wisest choice, etc. They
did not so much despise them now, as they shall admire them then, 2 These. 1.10.

2. Of what there will be a manifestation, or what in special will then be
manifested (of and concerning the Saints, and their Glory) to all the World,
viz.

1. Their Graces and good Works, the service they have done for God, both in
doing and suffering, Eccles. 12.14. The good works of the Godly, as well as the
evil Works of the wicked, shall then be laid open, 1 Cor. 4.5. i. e. Every good
man for what is good, so 1 Pet. 1.7. A tried Faith that has held out through
many trials, shall then be held up before the World and Commended (Praised,
Honored) by the Lord Jesus, which will not be so much the Commendation of
themselves, as of his own Grace and work in them: For all is of him, their good
works, the acts and the fruits of their Graces; even such as themselves can
hardly tell how to own: He will own them, and speak of them before all the
World, Mat. 25.35. - 40. though they be poor things in themselves, and as from
them; yet as they are the fruit of his Spirit and Grace in them, the stamp of
his own Image; the effects of sincere love to him: The poor but childish
actings of his children here, the things he has made Gracious Promises to, and
so he will make much of them, and put an honor upon them before the World,
Mat. 10.32. Luke 12.8. Revel. 3.5. The Lord Jesus will confess, acknowledge and
own every one of them before all the World, and will confess all they have done
for him: He will say, these are they that have continued with me in my
Temptations, ( Luke 22.28.) that have preferred a good Conscience before all
Riches and Honors; that renounced the World to follow me fully, that forsook
all for me, and loved not their Lives to the Death: These are my Brethren,
Sisters, Friends, Mother, that have done the will of my Father, Mat. 12.49, 50.
He will not be ashamed of us then, if we be not ashamed of him now.

2. Their Crown of Happiness and Glory, which the Lord has laid up for them,
and will then actually and fully put upon them, 2 Timothy 4 8. a Crown of
Righteousness, i. e. which the Righteous and Faithful God, according to his
Gracious Promises made to his own Grace in us, and the appointment declared to
all that run for the Prize of the Heavenly Calling, will bestow on the
Righteous. It is the Saints Coronation-day, and that must needs be a day of
great Glory to them, when they shall be openly Crowned before the World: They
are now Heirs and have Title, etc. to the Kingdom, but that is their
Coronation-day: He that was before a Prince, or lawful King, yet at the
Solemnity of Coronation, appears in eminent Splendour, and has eminent Honor
put upon him: Such a day, is the day of Judgment to the Saints; they are now
Princes and Kings unto God by Title, etc. But then they shall be brought forth
and Crowned before all the World, Actually installed into their Kingdom, and
into the fullness of the Glory thereof, Mat. 25.34.

So it is the Saints Marriage-day, the Consummation of their Marriage with
Christ after the Espousalls here; wherein therefore they shall be brought forth
in Robes of Glory, befitting the Spouse of the King of Kings, and that in the
fight of all the World. The Glory that God has put upon his own Children, and
Christ upon his Spouse and Fellow-heirs, shall then be manifested and openly
revealed. Hence

3. This Love of God and Christ to them in all this, in all his wonderful works
of Grace, (of wisdom power and goodness) in all he has done in and for them,
in Electing, Calling, Justifying, Adopting, Sanctifying, preserving and
keeping, and carrying on by his power to Salvation, and now fully Glorifying:
The whole Chain and Circle of his Love, all the wonders of Mercy and Grace
wherein he has abounded toward his Saints, shall then be revealed and
discovered, 1 John 3.1, 2. 2 These. 1.10. The Glory of the Saints shall be so
revealed, as may Glorify God and make him admirable in all he has done in and
for them, ver. 11, 12. As God will then reveal; set forth and show abroad his
wrath and Justice on the Vessels of wrath, Romans 2.5. and 9.22. So he will
reveal his Love, Grace and Mercy, toward the Vessels of Mercy in that day of
Revelation. The whole Mystery of Grace will be then unfolded in the Glory of
it, and to the Glory and Praise of God, which as it is the last end of all Gods
Dispensations toward the Elect, Ephesians. 1.2. So that end shall then be attained.
We may say as Colos. 1.26, 27. Christ (the whole mystery of Christ) shall then
appear in his full Glory; and Grace is the sum and top of the whole mystery of
Christ. And this will be to the singular Comfort and Joy of the Saints, as well
as to the Glory of God; the benefit of the complete and final pardon of all
their sins, and this opened in its Glory, what refreshment and joy will it be,
Act. 3.19. the like may be said of all the rest.

4. The Superiority of the Saints over (above) the wicked, and being preferred
before them, and in a Condition infinitely better and more Happy then they,
Psalm. 49.14. They (the upright) shall be the better men, and better on it then
in a more Happy and Honorable Condition, exalted far above them, while they
seemed to be the underlings of the world, under Poverty and Persecution) and
this shall plainly appear and be seen in the morning of the Resurrection. Then
will that plainly appear that the Elder shall serve the Younger Genesis 25.23. The
Esau's of the World, the great Doers and Busslers and mighty Hunters therein,
shall come behind the younger Brother; the despicable, the more unlikely the
Jacob's; the plain men that dwell in Tents, the pious and Godly, though never
so poor and mean and despicable in the World, whose outside promises not so
much. Here in this World, men and things are often mis-placed, Servants on
Horseback, ( Ham and Canaan Servants of Servants; so the wicked are of
servile, busy, ignoble Spirits and Conditions; yet of him, of such often are the
Nimrods, the mighty Hunters in the Earth. And Princes (the Children of the King
of Kings, the Heirs of Heaven) walking as Servants upon the Earth, Eccles.
10.7* 6. But then all things shall be set to rights and put in their places,
then these Princes shall be on Thrones of Glory, Luk 22.30. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. And
the wicked (how high soever they have been here) below at the Ba^, filled with
shame and horror. Piety and Godliness shall then be honored and advanced
however it is despised now: And the poor if Pious, shall have the Crown, Jam.
2.5, and 1.12. that will then appear, Prove. 28.6. Yea, and then the righteous
Cause of the Lords people shall be judged, owned and maintained, which will
tend to their Glory who have often been condemned unjustly in this World, as
Christ himself was. That Judgment Seat of Christ Jesus has been often appealed
to by Martyrs and Sufferers, and he will then receive those Appeals, and judge
them righteously; and that openly to the confusion of all the unrighteous
Judgments that have passed here in the time of this World. Devils shall then
receive their doom and punishment for all their wicked molestations of the
Saints and oppositions of Christ's Kingdom in one way or other; and all enemies
destroyed and brought down under the feet, not only of Christ, but of his
Church also. And this final and total subduing of enemies, and exalting of the
Church shall be seen and known openly and beheld. And this manifestation of the
Sons of God, is that which the whole Creation and all the works of Providence
are in Travel for, Romans 8.19. - 22, 23. The Glory of the Sons of God is formed
and prepared in the womb of Providence now; but that is the Birthday of the
manifestation of it, then the mystery of God is finished, and the work of God
upon, and in his Saints is brought forth in its full beauty and perfection.

Thus of the Manifestation of the Saints Glory at the last day. Add we another
consideration, showing the Compleatness and Consummation of their Glory then.

5. At the last day the whole number of the Saints will be completed, and the
Mystical Body of Christ entirely filled up, and then will God completely and
most Gloriously communicate himself to the whole at once. Christ will then
represent his Kingdom and Body complete and entire, every way come to its full
growth and consistency ( Ephesians. 4.13.) as it shall abide forever; and in that
complete Estate, he with the Father and the Spirit will Communicate himself
thereto, in the most perfect and Glorious manner, as Heb. 11.40. So the Saints
that are now in Heaven, shall not be made perfect without their fellows, and
till the remnant of their Brethren (as Rev. 6.11.) have run through their
militant course, and be come in; there is yet a further perfection they shall
have, when they are all come together: When the Body Mystical is entire and
full, then it has its fullest Beauty, Comfort and Glory: For every member
adds something* and there is in some sort a defect, while any one is wanting:
For the Joy and Glory of every member of the Body, is the Joy and Glory of the
whole, and every one serves to complete the Communion and Comfort of the whole.
And when the Lord has all his Children about him, (none are mi^sing) Christ
all his Members with him; the Mansions of Heaven filled up with all the Vessels
of Glory set in order in their places, (as it shall be after the day of
Judgment, and so ^o all Eternity) with what ineffable delight will the Lord
open to them all the Treasures and Riches of his Glory; and what wonderful
ravishing matter of Praising and Glorfying God, and what complete comfort
therein, which must needs raise up the Joy and Glory of the Saints unto the
greatest height and highest possible perfection.

Use, Of this plenary complete Glory, that the Saints are to have at the last
day, and not till then.

1. Be not stumbled or troubled and offended at the clouds of darkness; the
mean outside and seeming ingloriousness and obscurity that is upon the people
of God, and upon the work of God in the World at the present: For the time of
the manifestation of the Sons of God, and of the discovery of their Glory, and
of the finishing of Gods work referring to them, is not yet come. Marvel not to
see the Saints go up and down under mean and outward misery, to see them poor
and low, sick and crazy, and dying, and Bodies turned to dust, as well to see
them sweating under many affl^ctions and sorrows, lying among the pots, black
with the soot of many troubles: Why now their Glory must be hid from the World,
and it must not yet appear what men of quality they are; they must pass
Incognito, and go in some disguise through the World; though the Sons of God
and Princes of Heaven; they must not appear in that state at present: But this
present hiding will set off their appearance, and manifestation with greater
Luster another day: to see them on Thrones, whom you have sometimes seen in
vile raiment, whom you would hardly deigne to look upon, will be the greater
wonder and Glory t^ him who lifts the poor out of the dust, and the needy from
off the dunghill. It may be they are despised now; but you shall one day see
them in so much honor, as you will wish you had honored them, (as the pious
do, Psalm. 15.4. how poor soever, does he fear the Lord, honor him highly? if
you will not, Christ will honor him one day before men and Angels: But he will be
ashamed of you, if you be ashamed of him, or of his Members and people now)
Jam. 2.5, 6. And stumble not at Gods work because it is now wrapped in Clouds; why
it is not yet come to its Issue, it is but a doing. Children and fools (they
say) must not look on things half done; we are so foolish we cannot see into
the beauty of Gods work while it is but half done, not made up and finished.
When the Mystery of God shall be finished ( Rev. 10.7.) and all Providence
come to their Issues, the whole story wrought up; then when God shall bring
forth his embroidered curious work complete and finished, then it will and
shall appear Beautiful and Glorious before all the World; the black pieces, the
darker lines and colors illustrating the other when set together, which looked
upon alone show unhandsome. When all the confusions that are in the World shall
Issue in goodly order, and every thread, every stitch appear to have been drawn
by Art, (which now seem to go in and out, this way and that way, and we can
make nothing of them; as if a Child should look upon a Curious Needle-woman at
work on some piece, he would see little in it) how will God be admired, as
Psalm. 139.14, 15.16. so it is with all that work that is formed in the womb of
Providence, in the time of this World, which in that great Revelation-day (the
day of Judgment) that Birthday of the manifested Glory of the Sons of God and
of the work of God shall appear to have been most curiously wrought as with
Needle Work, though now it is obscure and secret to us. Oh the praises God will
have then!

Use. 2. Hence see that our Eyes and Hearts should be upon that day, that last
and great day, the day of Redemption and Glory, of Resurrection and Judgment
that is to come. That is the great day, ( Jud. 6.) this (the time of this
World) is but a little day in comparison, this is man's day (1 Cor. 4.3. But
that is the day of God, the day of the Lord, 2 Pet. 3.12. 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Thessalonians.
5.2. Paul's eye and heart was upon that day, 2 Timothy 1.12, 18. and 4.8. We are
all for this day, this present time and present things, alas they are not to be
mentioned to that day, Romans 8.18. Oh make sure of being well on it at the last
day; owned and confessed, and saved at that day, and you are well enough. There
is a time to come, lay a good foundation for that, 1 Timothy 6.19. so carry it in
this day as you may be owned in that: Now own Christ and own his people, and be
not ashamed of the Chain of their Sufferings if you would find mercy at the
day. Remember these Scriptures, 2 Timothy 1.16, 18. Mat. 25.34, to 40. Mat.
10.32.33. Luk 9.26. Mark. 8.38. Is there any word or any truth of Christ, any
rule of his, any part of his mind which you are ashamed on, because the times
do not favor it, because men frown upon it; Oh tremble at that, lest the Lord
Jesus be ashamed to own thee at that day.

Oh labor to have such thoughts of things, and such affections toward them as
you will have at that day: How will you think of sin then? Of duty then? Of
Cleaving to Christ, and to his people then? Of Zeal for the Glory of God then?
Of diligence in seeking God in Prayer and Meditation then? Will you not then
wish you had made more wrestling and weeping instead of sleeping and wording
Prayer? That you had hearkened diligently to Christ, etc. Oh now do as you would
wish to have done then.

SERMON V.
2. IT follows now a little to Consider, and set forth the Glory of the Saints
in Heaven (this Eternal Glory that is reserved for the faithful in the World to
come) in a Comparative way by the Comparisons and Considerations, as may
evidence to us the greatness and goodness (the transcendant excellency) of this
Glory. This way the Apostle lead us to, in Romans 8.18 by comparing with other
things which now seem great to us (as great afflictions, and so other great
things in this World) which yet are nothing to it, we may see the exceeding
greatness thereof. There be sundry obvious Comparisons from the less to the
greater, and some other Argumentative Considerations, (I shall put both
together) which may familiarly show and Realize to us the greatness and
excellency of this Glory.

Comp. 1. Consider what great things God gives out of his Common bounty, even
to wicked men in this World: What then will he give out of his special and
everlasting love to his own Children and Friends in Heaven? Worldly and wicked
men which are his Slaves, yea enemies and appointed to destruction; yet in the
present time of patience and bounty, the Lord cuts out to many of them great
things, such things as the World accounts very great, and as are great in
themselves, though compared with Heavenly things, are very little; Riches,
Wealth, Thousands and Ten Thousands of Gold and Silver, Sumptuous Buildings,
Houses full of all Good Things, Lands and Livings, etc. Yea, sometimes Crowns
and Kingdoms, Scepters and Dominions of vast extent, the Splendour whereof (even
of that Glory that sometimes worldly men are arrayed with) even dazles the eyes
of beholders. Sometimes men of the World do glitter and glister with Glory, an
earthly Glory and Splendour, such as strikes an awe and admiration into
beholders, Psalm. 49, 16. Dan. 2.31, 37, 38. and 5.18, 19. why if such be the
Glory of the earth given to the earthly and wicked men: What will be the true
Glory of Heaven that God will bestow upon the Vessels of Glory there. Luther
sometimes called the Turkish Empire (that vast Empire, containing so many
swelling Titles and large Dominions) a Bone or Crum which God threw to that
great Dog the Turk. Such vast Empires and Kingdoms God has sometimes given
unto the worst and basest of men. Dan. 4.17. How vicious and vile have the
Turkish Sultans, and many other Heathnish Princes been; so Antiochus the
illustrious, a vile person, Dan. 11.21. Why if God have such Crumbs to throw to
the Dogs of the house, what is the whole Loaf that he reserves for his
Children! If this great King of Heaven do keep his Prisoners so well during the
few days of their Respit and Reprieve from Execution; (as look upon the brave
accommodations and great Poss^^sions, etc. of the men of the World, they are
but as the fair Room of a Prison, where eminent Malefactors are kept and well
tended till they be brought forth to Execution, Joh. 21.7, 12, 30.) What will
he do for his Children and Heirs who shall be with him in his own Palace for
ever, Psalm. 17.14, 15. Some men of the World which have their Portion in this
Life, have a great Portion here, even their Belly full, as much as heart can
wish; as much of sensitive worldly good as they can possibly take in, all
manner of abundance of earthly delicates, and this out of God his Treasure,
because it is hid and laid up in the several storehouses of this lower World,
(Earth, Air and Sea) and brought forth by, the workings of his Providence and
bestowed upon them: So that these things are given out of Gods Treasury by his
common bounty to the men of the World. And if you speak of what Earth can
afford, they are great things that are most given to them: But David has a
greater perfection than all this, Ps. 171.5. But thus look upon the consolation
that many wicked men have here ( Luk 16.25. and 6.24.) which must needs be a
poor thing, ( Luke 16.10, 11.) a nothing, compared with the portion of the
chosen Saints of God in Heaven, (when God shall set himself to pour out Love
and Mercy into those Vessels thereof) and yet often it is much, it is strange
to see what God has given to some vile men this way; as that they are ready to
be cried up for the only happy men. This is a ready and useful meditation, when
we read in story of the Magnificence, Riches and Greatness of Worldly men, or
see and observe any instances thereof; to think, oh then what is the Glory and
Happiness that God has prepared (not of the same kind, for worldly sensitive
delights scrued up to the height, but an Happiness of an higher, a Spiritual
and Caelestial nature) for them that love him, and for the subjects of his
everlasting love in another World, if there be so much given unto Enemies in
this.

Comp. 2. Consider what the Saints enjoy in this World; I mean not of outward
things so much, (for they often have but little that way; they shall not
usually have very much of Earth, lest they forget Heaven) but of Spiritual and
Heavenly Comforts, and good things; their fore-tasts of future Glory, they are
often exceeding sweet and precious, a thousand times better than all the
Earthly outward enjoyments of worldly men: Yet all they have here is but a
taste, but an earnest, an handful of first fruits, Epes. 1.14. Romans 8.23. What
then is and will be the full draught, the whole bargain, the whole Harvest in
Heaven? Their best condition here, is but a condition of absence from the Lord,
compared with that presence they shall have hereafter, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. If God
send to them such tokens and tastes of his Love in their absence: What will he
pour out upon them when they shall be present with him? Consider it in two or
three Particulars.

1. The Communion the Saints have with God in his Ordinances here: Oh how sweet
is it, Psalm. 84.10. What then is a day in Heaven, yea Eternity there? The World
knows not, nor can they well express the sweet incomes they have; the
heart-raising, yea ravishing Communion, the Quicknings, Gracious Breathings,
the Comforts they meet with in Prayer, sometimes in Hearing the Word (a
Christian said Mr. Dod is half in Heaven, sometimes in Singing of a Psalm) in
Meditation, Psalm. 63.5, 6. in Gracious Spiritual Conference, Luke 24.32. In the
Sacrament of the Supper, where they are refreshed as with new Wine. Why if dark
glimpses through these glasses of the Ordinances be so sweet and Glorious, (2.
Cor. 3.18.) what then will the sight face to face be? 1 Cor. 13.12. The
Ordinances of God and Communion with him therein is unspeakably better than the
best of Earthly and Worldly Enjoyments ( Galeacious his Speech) Psalm. 119.72.
But all that Communion the Saints have here, is but a little compared with that
shall be in Heaven; there is full Communion, there they are present, now in
Comparison absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6.

2. The special Joys and Comforts of the Holy Ghost, that the Lords Faithful
Gracious ones do at times taste and partake of in this life. Their ordinary
constant Communion is precious, but they have also some extraordinary
Consolations and sheddings abroad of the Love of God, sometimes when under
great Sufferings and Trials, as the Martyrs (whose Consolations have been
wonderful and singular as their Sufferings were) sometimes after long sickness
and weakness, and in preparation for sore Conflicts, sometimes on Sick and
Dying Beds: Oh the Peace that passes understanding, the Joy unspeakable and
Glorious, (1 Pet. 1.8.) the ravishing Consolations in the sense of the Love of
God, which the faithful have at times been feasted with, such as in Comparison,
whereof all the Comforts of the whole World (all the Riches, Honors, Pleasures
upon Earth) are but a dry Chip; such as the surpassing sweetness and Glory
whereof cannot be expressed: And yet this but a little taste of Heaven, as a
drop to the Ocean, of the same kind indeed with the Glory that is there; but as
an earnest Penny of a great and Rich Bargain. A drop of the Joy of the Holy
Ghost, excells all the Rivers of Worldly, outward, sensual Comforts and Joys,
which the men of the World swim in, Psalm. 4.6, 7. (but infinite drops of
Worldly Joy together, it will not make Heaven, but of Spiritual Joy it will)
but this is but a drop, there is an Ocean of such Joy in Heaven, which the
Saints shall Swim and Bath themselves in to all Eternity.

3. The Visible Glory and Peace of the Church that may be enjoyed in this
World, before the coming of Christ. Great things are spoken in Scripture of the
Glorious times that are yet to come; wherein Jews and Gentiles shall walk
together in the Lord, and the Church shall enjoy freedom from open enemies and
Persecutions, Isa. 60.18. plenty and purity of Ordinances, Ezekiel. 37.26. Isa.
66.21, 23. plentiful Effusion of the Spirit and of the Graces thereof, Ezekiel.
39.29. Prevalency and Eminency of Truth, Holiness and Peace, Joel 3.17. Zephan.
3.9. Godly and Gracious, Civil Rulers who shall make their business to promote
Truth and Holiness, the honor of Christ and the welfare of his people, Isa.
49.23. Rev. 11.15. The special presence of God in all the ways and means
thereof among them, Isa. 60.19, 20. Revel. 21.23. And hence Honor and esteem
in the sight of all men, Isa. 62.7. and 25.8. Revel. 21.24. Why this condition
of the Church will be a little Heaven upon Earth (hence conceived to be
described by sundry terms taken from the Kingdom of Glory in Heaven, Rev. 21.
and 22.) and there will be much Glory in it, Isa. 60.1, 2, 7. But yet it will
be far short of Heaven indeed; no state of the Church on Earth, shall equal the
state of the Church in Heaven. There will still (in the best time on Earth) be
sin and Imperfection, and Temptation, and Flesh, and Allurements of the World
to conflict withal, and many particular afflictions too from the hand of God.

We in this remote Corner of the World, have for a long time (as may be well
conceived) enjoyed not a little taste and specimen of this peaceable and
flourishing Condition of the Church; but yet we find it is not Heaven, we find
Corruption enough in our own hearts, and in one another to keep us in a
continual conflict, etc. In the best estate of the Church on Earth, there will
be still cause to sigh and groan for the coming of Christ in the day of full
Redemption, Rev. 22.20. The greatest Glory that ever the Church shall enjoy on
Earth before the Coming of Christ to Judgment, will in comparison of Heaven be
inglorious; for that will always be a truth in this world, 1 John 3.3, 2.

But if so much Glory and such great things be to be enjoyed on Earth, what
then will Heaven be? The thought or expectation of Glorious and Happy times on
Earth, instead of Carnal drawing down our minds, it should raise and lift them
up thither: For all is but an Hansell, a Taste, a beginning and Inchoation of
what will there be Consummate: All the pledges and tastes which God does, or
ever will give his people on Earth, they are but to quicken them to press after
the prize, a full draught and rest that is reserved for them.

Comp. 3. Consider the great sufferings, troubles, sorrows and afflictions that
the faithful, (some of them especially) have endured in this life, those are a
little matter, as nothing to the future Glory in Heaven; there is no Comparison
between them, which shows that Glory to be exceeding great, Romans 8.18. Paul's
Sufferings were very great, few have ever gone through more then he did; had
you seen, much more had you felft them, you would have thought them exceeding
heavy, 2 Cor. 11.23. - 27. and 6.4, 5. 1 Cor. 4 9, 11, 12, 13. 2 Timothy 3.11. yet
there was no Comparison between the evil and trouble of all these, and the
Comfort of that Glory; this did infinitely overbalance them, they hold no
weight against it as the word imports, 2 Cor. 4.17. Not that the affliction in
these was light, but because the other end of the balance was exceeding heavy.
As you know, though there be a considerable weight in one Scale, yet if you put
a far greater in the other, (as several hundreds against ten or twenty pound
weight) why? the far greater fetches up the other, as if it were a light thing,
a Feather, a very nothing Why thus put into one Scale, all the Afflictions that
ever you felt, or have seen, others feel about you; all Sicknesses, Pains,
Diseases, Wearisome nights and days thereby; such Griefs as those in Job 6.2,
3. All the Sufferings of the Martyrs, Racks, Strappadoes, Burnings and
exquisite new-devised Torments; all the Deaths, Stripes, Pains, Bonds, Wants,
Reproaches, Afflictions that Paul went through from first to last, heap them on
altogether in one Scale; yet Eternal Glory in Heaven being put into the other
Scale, it is a weight exceedingly exceeding all this (...) this speak the
exceeding greatness of this Glory that so far so exceeding Hyperbolically
weighs down all the Heaviest Afflictions, that they are but as a Feather, as
nothing to it: And yet some one of these Afflictions will weigh down all the
good and Comfort of this World. Let a man have a dangerous Sickness, a sore
Tormenting pain upon him, it imbitters all; yea he would willingly part with
all he has (though great Riches, etc.) to be freed from it, Job. 2.4. Mark.
5.26. But put them altogether, and they will be over-ballanced and weighed down
by the Glory of Heaven, even as a few Sands by a Mountain.

Comp. 4. Consider the Excellency and Glory of this lower World, and the Cost,
Riches and stately workmanship that God has expended and laid out thereupon,
and upon the entertainment he gives to all his Creatures there in: What then is
the Glory of the third Heaven, and of those upper and Celestial Mansions?
(Gods own dwelling place) And what is the Entertainment that he will give there
to the Inhabitants thereof? This lower World is but as a stage, that is set up
for a while to be taken down again: It is but as the hovels and outhouses
where all sorts of Creatures are kept; but Heaven is the Palace, the dwelling
house of the Great King, and appointed to be the everlasting habitation of the
Blessed, Joh. 14.2. 1 King. 8.39, 43. If you should come to any Great or
Wealthy man's Place, and there find the Barnes and Outhouses excellently and
Substantially built, and much Cost laid out about them, ample accommodations
therein for every Beast and Creature about the house, and liberal Provision for
them, every thing complete and excellent; you would say, what is the
Dwelling House, and what is the Furniture thereof? Sure that is wonderful Rich
and Stately, and both the Building and Furniture beyond measure exquisite. The
application is obvious. Even this lower World is a curious and costly piece:
The Earth, which is but the dregs of Nature, is full of Gods Riches, Psalm.
104.24. In the Bowels of it is Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, Metals of all
sorts; the surface of it is in the Summer-season clothed with a pleasant dress,
delightful to the sense, and profitable for use: It is arrayed with more Glory
than Solomon had in his greatest Splendour, Mat. 6.28, - 30. Hos. 14.5, 6, 7.
Psalm. 65.12. The Sea is full of Riches and of the admirable Works of God, Psalm,
104.24, 25, 26. The Air is a Treasury of fruitful showers and other admirable
Meteors, Deuteronomy. 28.12. The Aetherial Heaven is garnished with Stars, Job 26.13.
Therein is a Tabernacle for the Sun, that admirable work of God, traveling his
daily and yearly Circuit to give Light and Heat to all things on the Earth,
Psalm. 19.4, 5, 6. In these visible Heavens is such Divine Workmanship as may
ravish all beholders, Psalm. 8.3. and 136.4, 5, 7, 8, 9. and look upon the
entertainment God gives unto all his Creatures here in this lower World; all
the multitudes that are down-lying and up-rising in this great house of his*
what Commodious and large Provision he makes for them, even Inferior Creatures,
besides and beneath man, Psalm. 104, 27, 28. The wild Ass has the range of the
Mountains for his pasture, Job. 39.6, 8. There is enough to spare for him and
all other wild Creatures that live upon the Grass in the Wilderness; their
table lies always spread, and there is enough and to spare by the stately
bounty of the large Creator. The feeble Conies want not their houses and
fortifications, Psalm. 104.18. Nor the Birds their resting places, ver. 12.17.
The young Ravens are not forgotten of God, Job 38.41. Psalm. 147.9. Why is there
such work and such Riches filling this lower World; (Earth and Sea, and Water,
and the Starry Region) what then is Heaven? And what are the Riches and Glory
that are laid up there? What is the Entertainment there given to men, yea to
Saints and Members of Christ Jesus? Christ uses that Argument as to this World,
Mat, 6.26. much more may we use it as to the World to come; when God shall pour
out the fuln^ss of the Riches of his goodness upon the chosen Vessels thereof.
If such workmanship be laid out upon the Earth, and the r^st of this house of
time, what a curious piece is Heaven? that house of Eternity, (2 Cor. 5 1.) the
City and Palace of the King, the very Region and place of Heaven, the Fathers
House where all his Children must be lodged, and accomodated, and dwell
forever) it does as far excel, and is far above the Earth as the height of it,
and the ends and uses of it do excel. The Pearls and Precious Stones, etc. that
are found in the Earth, will scarce serve to make the Walls of that City; as
appears by these Metaphorical Descriptions of the Heavenly Jerusalem, which it
meant of the Church on Earth, is far excelled by the Glory of Heaven, Revel.
21.18, - 21. and if the outside be so Glorious, (that the best of the things on
Earth are scarce worthy or fit to be shadows or resemblancs thereof) what then
is the outside? What is the Furniture within, and entertainment there? Why it
stands not in Carnal outward things and delights, (as the Mahomitan Paradise,
and the Heathen Elysian Fields) they cannot be raised up to such an height as
to make Heaven: But Spiritual holy Delights, and Joys in the frution of God,
and those in their height and fullness; compared wherewithal the Glory and Joy
of the World, is but a trif^le. And the External condition of the Body shall in
Glory, Beauty, Vigor, Strength, Spiritual Activity and Comfort, every way
unspeakably exceed what it is or can be conceived here.

Comp. 5. Consider the vast preparation God makes for the Glorifying his
Saints in Heaven. The great preparation he makes both to prepare Glory for
them, Mat. 25.34. Joh. 14.2, 3. Heb. 11. 16 And to prepare them for Glory, Romans
9.23. 2 Cor. 5.5. Col. 1.12. Election, Redemption, Christ's Ascennsion and
Intercession, Vocation, Sanctification: Christ's second coming ( Joh. 14.3.) are
all to make way, and fit for, and bring unto to this Glory. When we see great
and va^^ preparations for a thing, (much time and cost spent therein) as for a
Kings Coronation, for a Funeral, for a Wedding; we conclude it will be very
magnificent. ^n this preparation for Glory, there is much time spent; all the
time of this life the Believer is fitting for it, nay from before the
foundation of the World, from all eternity preparation has been making, Mat.
25.34. and all the time of Christ's being in Heaven: By his possessing it as our
head, Intercession, etc. Joh. 14.3. And great Cost, all Ordinances are to this
end to fit us for Heaven, and all Providence: Christ's Death, Bloodshed,
Ascension, Intercession, 1 Pet. 5.10. etc. And all the Gracious operations of
the Spirit, 2 Cor. 5.5. All the promises point thither speak of that Glory, and
empty themselves there. There and then ( viz. in the Glory of Heaven and not
till then) they shall be fully accomplished. All the great and magnificent
things which have so high a sound in all the promises in the Book of God, they
are fully found and met together there. All the great expectations and hopes of
the Saints Center and Issue there: All which show that the Glory of Heaven must
needs be exceeding great and excellent. And so the difficulty of it might be
another Argument: For difficilia quae pulchra; it cost Christ dear, his Pains,
his Blood, Life; and it must cost the Christian not a little in Praying,
waiting, watching, striving Traveling, Suffering the oppositions of Hell,
Flesh and World, and not without great difficulty, at last he gets to Heaven, 1
Pet. 4.18. Mat. 7.14.

Comp. 6. I might mention the Titles that are given to this Heavenly Glory in
Scripture. It Is called an Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.18. Act. 20.32. that is,
amongst the best things on Earth: A good Inheritance, what care to obtain,
settle, make sure of that; a Rich Heir is counted happy, though he wait long
e're he come to Age: But this is an Inheritance not Earthly, but Heavenly,
Colos. 1.12. 1 Pet. 1.4. A Kingdom, Mat. 25.34. Luke 12.32. A Crown, Jam. 1.12.
1 Pet. 5.4. Crowns and Kingdoms are counted the top of Humane felicity on
Earth; the highest that men's Hopes, Desires, Ambitions Climb; what Scuffling
and Struggling all the Earth over; to be Heirs of a Kingdom, is transporting
glistering Happiness; what a strange thing would such news be to you: Why if a
Believer thou art so, (Heirs of a Kingdom better then all the Kingdoms upon
Earth, an Heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.18. The Kingdom of God, Act. 14, 22.) how
poor and mean soever thy outward condition be, Jam. 2.5.

Use 1. It serves for the Encouragement and Comfort of the people of God in
reference to all the Afflictions and Tribulations that they meet with in this
World. We spoke somewhat of this in the close of a former Exercise; a word
further of it now. This is the Improvement the Apostle makes of this point,
both here in the close, 1 Pet. 5.9, 10. and in the beginning of the Epistle, 1
Pet. 1.4.5, 6. this the Scripture is often directing us unto out of the midst of
the mire and water of Afflictions and Troubles, out of the dark valley of the
shadow of death to lift up our head and peep into another World; look over
into that wealthy place that lies at the Journey's end, through many
Tribulations, etc. Act 14.22. The thought and remembrance of the Kingdom that
lies at the end, is the great Comfort against all the Tribulations that are in
the way. When Death is walking up and down, and taking away here and there;
though it be Affl^ction and matter of bitter sorrow to the Living: Yet to those
that hopefully die in the Lord, it is an happy change, for they go into Eternal
Glory, Joh. 14.28. They go to possess (to b^gin and enter upon the possession
of) this great Glory we have been speaking of: We do but speak and hear on it,
but they possess it; they have an end of their warfare, and are entered into
peace and rest forever (though this hinders not, but that it should be laid to
heart by the Living, when Righteous and Pious ones, Elder or younger are taken
away, Isa. 57.1, 2.) when we our selves are upon the edge of the Grave, and
Death a drawing near; when the windows of the Senses begin to be shut toward
this World, (the sight and hearing) we should open them toward another World,
and let the Glory of that shine into our minds and hearts: Labor to make our
portion therein sure, by a sound, a lively, an often renewed, and a working
Faith on Christ Jesus, and be much in the Contemplation of it, take in the
Comfort of it by sucking, and chawing, and taking in the promises and the
forethoughts of it. Startle not at Death, nor hang back from it, when as it is
a passage to this Life and Glory, when the Dissolving the old Tabernacle is but
a drawing toward the house Eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1, 8. we should not
be unwilling unto that. So ^n other Afflictions, when poor and low in the
World, under wants and straits, if in Christ you have Riches enough in Heaven,
Jam. 2.5. Treasure there that none can take from you, Mat. 6.20. Ephesians. 6.18.

When under reproach unjustly, you have names written in Heaven, Luke 10.20.
Honor and Glory there, Romans 2.7. When fears dangers and appearances of sad
Changes and troubles are before you here; you have an unchangeable portion and
rest in Heaven, and that it is safe and secure; neither Hell nor World can take
that away from you, Heb. 6.19. When Sufferings threaten here, there is a Glory
to follow that will make amends for all, 1 Pet. 1.11. Mark. 10.29, 30. Oh lift
up your eyes to Heaven, and there see and possess that Glory that infinitely
weighs down all the evil and discomfort that is here below, Romans 8.18. And
Consider, 1. Afflictions, Sufferings here are but for a while, a little while:
But that Glory is Eternal, Text 2 Cor. 4.17. 2. This Glory shall over a while,
put an everlasting end to all Suffering and Sorrow. After you have suffered a
while, then suffering comes to a final end, never to return or trouble more,
and everlasting Glory follows, Revel. 21.4. This Glory shall put a period, an
end to Suffering, and then continue without end, Job 1^.16, 17, 18. 3. The
Happiness and Comfort of this Glory that lies at the Journeys end, will
abundantly make amends for all the trouble of the way; yea the remembrance of
fore-passed Troubles and Trials that you have passed through and born with
Subjection to the will of God, will then be sweet. Haec olim meminisse Juvabit:
Labor and toil here will make rest the sweeter, Eccles. 5.12. fore-passed and
escaped dangers and difficulties and conflicts, its pleasant to look back upon:
All these the Lord has supported in and carried through, and I am here saved
by the Lord, and set down in peace: What a Song of Praise to God, and Comfort
to himself, does David sing when delivered out of the hands of all his Enemies?
Psalm. 18. and 116.3, 6, 7.4. You may make an advantage of all Afflictions to
drive you to Heaven and to this Glory, to wean you from the World, and make you
look and long, and sigh for rest in Heaven; to take you off from resting and
building on the Earth, where there is no rest, and fire you to Heaven, 2 Cor.
4.16.17, 18.

Use 2. Hence that there is a greater and better, a more Excellent portion to
be sought after and obtained, than all this World, and all the Riches, Honors,
Pleasures and Treasures of it. There is Eternal Glory in the World to come
(that we are called up to mind and seek, that is to be obtained by Christ
Jesus) and that is ten thousand, thousand times a greater and a better matter,
(a more desirable, more excellent, more noble thing) than all the Glory and
good of this World. Should Satan show you (as he did to Christ, Mat. 4.8.) all
the Kingdoms of the World and the Glories of them, and put all the varnish and
glittering splendour upon them that could be, and offer to give you all this
(could he make good his word) if you will be his? walk in the ways of sin and
sensuality, and give up your selves to be men of this World, and to take up
your portion here; you may boldly refuse the bargain, and say he offers you to
your loss: Christ far outbids him, and makes you an offer that is infinitely
better, while he sets Heaven before you and the Glory of it, and says renounce
Sin and the World, and come and possess Eternal Life and Glory in and with a
Savior: This is as much better than the other, ^s the Heavens are higher than
the Earth. Were it so that you ha^ Crowns and Kingdoms in choice, yet there
were reason that you should lay them aside in Compa^ison of this; neglect them
rather then neglect this, despise, slight, contemn them, to embrace, pursue,
possess this Crown and Glory that is above. How much more reason to prefer it
before those little s^raps of the World that are within ^our reach and compass,
those shreads of pleasure, or wealth, or honor, or outward Contentments that
you are capable to obta^n: Those little things of the World that lie before
you, when as the greatest, nay all the things of the World are as nothing,
compared with the Heavenly Portion that is offered you in Christ Jesus. And yet
this is the Bane of men; this is the stumbling stone at which their Souls fall
and perish, viz. Preferring Earth before Heaven, the present God of this World
before that to come; and so taking up their rest here, laying out themselves,
their Spirits and Affections upon present outwa^d worldly things, with neglect
of, and so as to have their hearts dried up toward Heaven and Heavenly things.
Oh foolish and unwise! Oh unspeakable sottishness and unreasonable absurdity,
to prefer Earth before Heaven, or to take up with the Earth, when Heaven is set
before you: To have Affections, Spirits for Earth, and none for Heaven, when
Heaven does so infinitely excel.

What is it most men are running after, cleaving to, setting up their hearts
upon, laying out their Spirits and best Affections, and utmost endeavors
about? Is it not somewhat in this World? Pleasure, or Profit, or Honor; lust
of the Flesh, or Eye, or Pride of Life? (Pride of Life, 1 John 2.16. i. e. an
high and pompous manner of living; affectation of height, state and costliness
in all the things of this life, both Apparel, Housing-Furniture, etc. above
Place, Rank, Ability or Sobriety) either in unlawful ways and excesses; or at
least, contentment in the lawful good things and comforts of this Life, that
is, the highest, the chiefest good that many seek after, rest in, and are
wholly taken up about: And so taken up here, as to have no heart for God, or
Christ, or Heaven; no mind, no affection to those things, they are slightly
passed over, and the other pursued as the maine; this present World ingrosses
all. But behold the Word of God shows us a more excellent Object and Prize to
run for, a better design to pursue the Glory and Happiness of another World,
that is infinitely more excellent, more necessary, worthy our pains and
affections, more proper for immortal Souls to be busied about. Should you judge
by the minds and ways of most of the Sons of men? You would think there were
no higher or better thing to be minded than the good of this World: But the
point shows us, that that is better and more excellent: What is all the Glory
and good of this World, to that of the Glory to come? It is no more, nor so
much as a pebble stone to a Pearl, or Husks to Bread, or Dirt to Gold, or Rags
to Robes: Who would take up with the former, when he may have the latter? Yea
when called (as we are continually by the voice of the Gospel) to attend and
embrace the latter. Remember all the outward good of this World is but Earthly,
the other is Heavenly: But Bodily, (pleasing and pampering, and Painting the
outward man) the other is Spiritual, adorning, perfecting and making happy the
Soul: But Temporal, the other is Eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18. The one Corruptible, the
other Incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.25. The one stands in the enjoyment of Creatures,
and but the lower sort of Creatures neither, the other in the enjoyment and
frution of the Infinite Creator, God Blessed for evermore. How far must the
latter needs excel the former.

Ah this Doctrine should take us off from, and lift us above the Earth, wean us
from the World, which is hard to effect the hearts of men are so Carnal: There
is good there to draw us, but the Lord is fain to add many evils (troubles)
here to drive us out; and well if both would do. Oh weep over our Earthly mind
and heart: Paul did so, and get to Heaven in your Conversation, Phil. 3.18.20.
Are you of the Redeemed or no? Gal. 1.4. Colos. 3.12. Good is the Object of the
Will and Affections, and where choice is of the best good, if there be one
thing better than another, the Will of man would have that, it aspires after
the best: Why here be the things, and therefore set your affections upon them,
and not on these meaner, worse and inferior things that are beneath. Oh get
that sweet evidence of Effectual Calling, that you are called out of the World,
(taken off from this World) and are men of another World, men for Heaven, bent
upward, d^claring plainly that you seek another and better Country then this,
and then you may be sure that God is your God, Heb. 11.14, 16. and will be your
guide to the death; that he will guide you by his Counsel, and afterward
receive you unto Glory.

SERMON VI.
HAving passed through the Explanation of this Doctrine, we may briefly add
somewhat by way of Reason: Why the Lord will give unto his people such great
Glory in the World to come, only out of the Text, and we may rather take notice
of some Reasons here, because they are pointed to in the Text.

Reas. 1. From the Grace (the rich Grace) of God, and for the Glory thereof.
The God of all Grace will give us this Eternal Glory. It is [his] his Glory, in
his hands and dispose, and he out of the Riches of his Grace will bestow and
communicate it (though he is the God of all Grace also, as he is the Author of
all the fruits and works of Grace in us; yet the expression leads us to the
fountain, viz. The Infinite Grace nnd kindness that is in God) so Romans 5.21. It
is from Grace as the Efficie^t: That Grace (the exceeding Rich, Infinite Grace
and kindn^ss of God) may be forever acknowledged, magnified and exalted, Eph^s.
1.3, - 6. When it shall be showed (and God will set himself to show) what a
gift Infinite free Grace (goodness, kindness, bounty) can give, then this will
be the Gift (such a thing as would Beggar all men and Angels, and all the
Riches of ten thousand Worlds; they could not all, should they Join together,
reach such a Gift as this) Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, Romans 6.23. God only,
the God of all Grace could give this. He only was so rich as to be able to fill
and store Heaven with all the Treasures and Riches of Glory that is there
prepared; and when he has done, to give it freely to his chosen. There are
Riches of goodness in the Gifts God gives and scatters among men here in this
World: But those are but little matters, and by the By. But in the Gift of
Heaven and Heavenly things, he will set himself to show the exceeding Riches of
his Grace, Ephesians. 2.6* 7. We say, how can it be that such wonderful Glory
should be bestowed on such worthless worms? Why it could not be indeed, were it
not from exceeding Rich and Infinite Grace. Grace i. e. that whereby God freely
and plentifully gives to the undeserving Creature) and in design to magnify
that.

To set all Saints and Angels a wondering at the Riches of God, and at the
bottomless and boundless depth and breadth of his Grace and Love: For it all
comes from that fountain of Gods Grace, Ephesians. 2.8. though purchased by Christ;
yet to us Christ himself and all is the Gift of Grace. Eternal Glory and all
that belongs to it is from the God of all Grace. Text. If God do in Heaven
reward any little service we do him here, it is a reward of Grace and not of
Debt.

Reason 2. From Christ. It is by the means of Christ Jesus that we are brought
to this Eternal Glory. Text. So These. 5.9. As the Grace of God is the fountain,
original and wel-spring of it ( Luke 12.32.) so Christ Jesus the Mediator is
the great way and means whereby it is accomplished for us, and conveyed,
communicated to us. Christ brings us to Eternal Glory.

1. By his purchase of it by his Death, or passive Obedience; he purchased our
deliverance from Eternal Death and Wrath: And Righteousness (or active
obedience) he purchased and procured for us everlasting Life and Happiness.
Hence Romans 5 21.

It is through and by means of the Righteousness of Christ (his obedience
whereby being imputed to us, we are made righteous in Justification, v. 19,
18.) that Grace powerfully accomplisheth our Eternal Life. For Grace will so
contrive and carry on the matter, as that Justice may be answered and attended;
that it may be a Just and Righteous thing with God to give us life, and so it
is by means of the Righteousness of Christ: Had it not been for which, the
sentence of death must everlastingly have reigned over us Sinners.

2. By his possession of it for us as our Head and Agent, Heb. 6.20. Joh. 14.2.
By the Ascension of Christ, way is made for us into Heaven. The first Adam
could have brought us but into an Earthly Paradise, but the second Adam being
Lord from Heaven (1 Cor. 15.47, 48.) and ascending thither after he had wrought
the work of our Redemption on Earth, Heb. 1.3 Hence the Head draws up the Body
after it, and to it, Jo^. 17.14. Hence Believers also shall ascend thither, and
have an Inheritance there in the third Heaven, and in all the Glory of it.

3. By preparing and ripning us for it, by the work of his Spirit; that whole
work of Grace that is begun, and carried on in this World to fit us for Glory;
conducting us through this World as he did Israel of old, through the
Wilderness to bring them to Canaan, Isa. 63.9, 14. so 2 Cor. 5.5. Ephesians. 4.30.
Romans 9.23.

4. By coming again to receive us to, Joh. 14.3. the great end of his second
coming, is the actual, full, and final accomplishment of the Salvation of his
people, or putting them into full possession and fruition of it, so to remain
forever, (which is the end and upshot of all his work) Heb. 9.28. 2 Timothy 4.8.
He will come again into this lower World, even here to put Glory upon his
people in the sight of all, Colos. 3.4. Romans 8.18, 19. and then to carry them
up to Heaven where he now is, Joh. 14.3. and 17.24.

Reason 3. From the work of Vocation, the tendency and scope whereof is to
bring us to this Eternal Glory. Text. In Vocation the Lord calls us out of a
state of nature (of sin and death) into a state of ^ternal Salvation, and lays
that foundation of Grace, the superstructure whereof issues in Heavenly Glory.
The Lord in the word of the Gospel, calls us to possess and receive Eternal
Life (or Glory) in and with Christ, 2 These. 2.14. and makes it over to them
that obey that call, or that effectually believe, 1 John 5.11. And he calls us
to look at Eternal Glory in p^rfect Communion with God as the end of our Race
or Journey; and to travel toward it, toward that mark of Heavenly Glory which
is the prize that we are called to run for, Philip. 3.14. 1 Cor. 9.24, 25. The
Lord calls us out of this World to be men of another World, to take up our
Lot and Portion in Heaven, and to seek and wait for it, being as strangers
here, as Abraham was called to leave his Country and Kindred to wait upon a
promise of the Heavenly Canaan, a figure of the Earthly, Heb. 11.8, 9, 10, 13,
- 16. It is a Christians Calling (the business he is called to attend upon) to
get to Heaven, to seek for Glory, Honor and Immortality to come. The Grace
begun in Vocation has an inseparable connection which tends to, and issues
in (grows up to) the perfection of Eternal Glory. Glory is but the Harvest of
that seed that is sown in Effectual Calling: It is the perfect man which is an
Infant in Vocation.

If the seed be sown, the Child born, as it is in Vocation or Conversion,
(Regeneration) then the harvest must needs follow. Calling is the first patent
link of the Chain (for Predestination is latent in the Counsel of God the first
openwork of Grace upon an Elect person; and Glorification is the last, but the
connection between them is inseparable, Romans 8.30. And also Vocation is the
strait gate that leads to Life Eternal, through which all must pass that get to
Glory, and by which they are prepared for it, Romans 9.23, 24. Hence none but
such, and all such, all the Effectually Called shall infallibly be brought to
Eternal Glory: If God have begun the work of Grace in Calling, he will finish
it in Heavenly Glory, Phil. 1.6.

Reas. 4. From the Sufferings and Troubles of the Saints here. 1 Pet. 5.10. The
Saints having suffered with Christ here, they must reign with him hereafter,
Romans 8.17. 2 Timothy 2.12. Having been troubled in this World, they must go to
rest in that to come, 1 These. 5.7.

The best services and sufferings of the Saints, do not deserve or merit any
such thing as Heavens Glory: But the Lord is pleased according to his free
promise, and abundant Grace, Richly to reward such poor things above their
worth. The Lord rewards his poor Subjects, not in any way of exact Justice, (as
poor men that will give the Labourer but his hire) But like Generous and
Bounteous Princes that will give a Pound for that that scarce deserves a Penny:
Yea far more largely then so, our Services and Sufferings bear no proportion
with Heaven: But God will Bounteously give it, and call it the Recompense of
Reward, Heb. 11.26. i. e. a Reward of Grace, not of Debt or Merit. But such is
the Lords promise and Grace, that he has laid up a rich Reward for his
suffering Saints, and they shall not lose it, nor miss it. They that have their
Suffering, Laboring, Fighting time here, they shall have their Rejoicing,
Resting, Triumphing time hereafter, 2 Cor. 4.17. The Lord will not be behind
hand with any of his people, nor yet deal scantly with them; for a moments
suffering and service on Earth, they shall have Eternal Glory in Heaven.

Use 3. Of awakning and Terror to all Impenitent and Unbelieving sinners from
the consideration of their loss, or of what they (continuing in that estate)
must and will inevitably lose and miss of, viz. Al^ this Heavenly and Eternal
Glory that we have been speaking of. For we see it is the portion only of the
Faithful of the Effectually Called, as Text and Doctrine tells us: Therefore
they that abide in Impenitency and Unbelief, that turn a deaf ear to the Call
of the Gospel, all their days neglect or reject the offers and motions
thereof, or are but half (but almost) persuaded, never Effectually overcome to
embrace Christ Jesus, and to be his in earnest: They will lose and be deprived
of it; lay altogether that has been said, or might be concerning the
excellency and greatness of this Glory, you will lose and be ^eparated from all
this; this must be none of the portion of any such, but they must be driven
away from the presence of God and fellowship of this Glory. The pain of loss
one part of the damneds misery, follows from the point in hand. To lose this
Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, what a fearful loss is that indeed, we cannot
now tell you what you will lose: It is more then Tongue can utter and Heart
conceive, 1 Cor. 2.9. The damned in Hell will have a quicker and fuller
apprehension of it to their own Terror than here We can reach: For they shall
see and know in a great measure what it is, though never so as to taste of it.
Oh the anguish that will thence follow, Luke 14.28. Consider a little here.

1. Who they are that shall lose or miss of this Glory, that shall never see it
as to partake of it: And let two or three plain Scriptures speak to this.

1. Workers of Iniquity ( i. e. continuing such to the end of their day of
Grace) they must be thrown out, and the door of Heaven Everlastingly shut
against them, sent away from the presence of God, Luke 13.27, 28. They that
live impenitently in any sin, that follow the Trade of any way of Evil, that
live and allow themselves in any in sin; yea though but secretly: And though
they take upon them a Profession, of the name of Christ, Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. 1
Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, - 21. Ephesians. 5.5, 6. Yea they that live in the
omission of known duties, especially the duties of Love (cordial Love) to the
people of God, Mat. 25.41, - 45. and so other duties also, Zeph. 1.6. and 3.2.
Heb. 2.3. Psalm. 79.6.

2. Unbelievers, that never truly believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom
alone we may be saved, Joh. 3, 36. 2 These. 1.8, 9, 10. We are called by the
Gospel and by Effectual Calling (as in Text) brought to partake of this Glory.
They therefore that turn a deaf ear to the call of the Gospel all their days,
never heartily listen to it, and embrace it; never give up themselves to
Christ, or receive him by faith, they will come short of this Glory.

Though you have never so many natural or moral excellencies, though you carry
it Commendable, and are useful in your places, etc. Yet if never took off from
your own Righteousness, and from Carnal rest in the World, (in Creature
Comforts) and from love to sin, to take hold of and be united to a Savior, to
rest upon him, and him alone for Salvation and become his forever: If never
divorced from all things else, and Espoused, Married to Christ by Faith; you
perish without remedy, and shall never see the face of God in Glory, Mark.
16.16. We are commanded to tell you of that, and you will find it true.

3. The unregenerate, (all unbelievers are so, but there is a distinct notion
in this which may be useful) Joh. 3.3, 5, 6. They whose hearts are not turned
from sin to God, and changed from nature to Grace, from flesh to Spirit: The
unconverted and unsanctified, (it may take in both) that are and continue such;
they that are not born again; never have a new Heart and Spirit, nor made new
Creatures: They shall never be saved, never attain to, or partake of this
Eternal Glory. Be you civilly Honest, or morally Virtuous, or pharisaically
Righteous and devout, or externally well-reputed as Nocodemus was: yet if not
regenerate, never born again, never saved. None but the new born are Heirs of
Heaven, 1 Pet: 1.3, 4. As descended from the first Adam we are only to an
Inheritance in Hell: We must be new-begotten, and newborn to an Inheritance in
Heaven. In this sense flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; our
old Hearts and old Natures are not fit for Heaven; they must be new molded,
new made before they come there.

4. The unholy will miss of Heavens Glory, Heb. 12.14. Heaven is an Holy
habitation, without Holiness no coming there. You may get to Heaven without
Riches, without Worldly Honor, or possibly without great parts and Literal
seize, [ Surgunt indocti and Caelum rapiunt, etc. As he, Apud Leigh's
Body Divinity page 230] without Earthly Contentments, but without Holiness no
man shall see the face of God in Glory. Th^re must be a sanctified heart, and a
sanctified life; yea and that here (in measure; though there will be
imperfection while here) if ever you be Glorified hereafter. You must here
begin that Holiness that shall be perfected in Heaven. There are that hate
Holiness, scorn and scoff at it; why you will have little heart to mock, when
you shall see the Holy ones, the Saints of God carried into Heaven and you
thrust out. Others have no delight at all in Holiness, in Holy Duties, Holy
Ordinances, Holy Company, it is a bu^den, a weariness, a trouble to them. Why
you are not principl'd for Heaven, Heaven would not be a Paradise, but a Prison
to you (a torment) in that Condition. Others are utter strangers to an Holy
Conversation; rather walking in the Company and ways of loose, lewd and wicked
men, than in the ways of the Holy: Contrary to 1 Pet. 1.14, - 18. nothing of
Heaven or Holiness is to be seen upon them, no Impression or Charecter thereof:
Why truly if you do not beg in Heaven in this World, you must not look to find
it in that to come.

5. They that are Enemies to the Lords Holy and faithful people; that do hate,
malign or seek the hurt or overthrow of those that love Holiness, or of their
Holy Enjoyments, 2 These. 1.5, - 9. Trouble and Rest shall then shift hands: The
Godly that now suffer Trouble, shall then ^nter into Rest: but their Troublers
shall have trouble, yea everlasting Trouble instead of Rest. They that have had
no heart to do good Offices for the Lords People, (the Members of Christ) will
then hear from Christ a depart you Cursed, Mat. 25.41, - 45. much more they
that act against them. The Godly by Gracious suffering of Tribulations get to
Heaven, Act. 14.22. But the wicked by being active in bringing Tribulations on
them, plunge themselves deep into Hell.

Oh foolish World, they can never effect the destruction of the Godly, but they
effect their own destruction by endeavoring it, Psalm. 9.13, - 17. What plainer
evidence of a state of Perdition than to be an Enemy, yea if but a secret enemy
and hater of those, who it may be your Consciences tell you are in a state of
Salvation, and are such as are like to get to Heaven. For I speak not of
pretended, but real Saints, (or real as far as appears at least) to be an enemy
to those, is the directest way you can take to everlasting Confusion, Psalm.
129.5. and 34 21. As you love your Souls, take heed of being found in the least
opposition to the Interest of Christ, or of his people.

2. Consider how, or in what way these impenitent unbelieving sinners do come
to lose or miss of this Eternal Glory, viz. in General. By neglecting or not
embracing the Call of the Gospel in this day of Grace; and turning aside to
vain things. He calls us (says the Text) to his Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus.

Hence look as by Effectual Calling, i. e. by obeying and answering (harkening
to, and embracing) the Call of the Gospel; the faithful obtain it, and are
brought into it; so on the contrary, others that live under the Gospel miss
on it by not harkening to this Call, by turning a deaf ear thereunto; refusing
and neglecting when called to come to Christ Jesus, Prove. 1, 24, 27. They that
hear not Christ when he says come, ( Luke 14.17.) in the Kingdom of Grace,
shall never hear him say come in reference to the Kingdom of Glory, as Mat.
25.34. And they that hear not this latter Call [come] it will be because they
would not hearken to the former. The Lord Jesus now calls to every one of you;
come unto me, and possess Grace and Glory in and with me: If you attend to this
Call by the obedience of Faith, you shall hear him then say to you; Come you
Blessed, etc. Isa. 55.3. But alas men lose and put away that Eternal Glory, by
neglecting resisting and refusing this Call of Grace. Here therefore, take
these two or three Considerations.

1. Every time you neglect or refuse the Call and offer of the Gospel, you put
away this Glory, as Act. 13.46. The Lord Calls you (on his part to Eternal
Glory, or) to come and receive both Grace and Glory in and with Christ Jesus,
Romans 6.23. Heaven is offered you when Christ is offered. Hence you slight and
refuse, and turn your backs upon all the Glory of Heaven, when you neglect the
Call of the Gospel, or dis-accept of Christ offered therein. The Salvation of
God (Eternal Salvation) is offered to you ( Act. 28.28.) and you will not hear
on it; you despise all the wonderful Happiness of Heaven that we have been
speaking of. Oh fearful wickedness, monstrous madness and miserable miss -- of
Heaven! So when you will not pray nor meditate, nor hear, nor wait at Christ's
gates: It is as much as to say, that you are not for Eternal Glory, which is to
be sought and obtained in such ways, and how Justly, how unexcusably do such
perish. The Lord is calling you to Eternal Glory, but you turn away from it.

2. Consider, what it is, for the sake whereof you lose or turn away from this
Glory and neglect the way to it. Why, a vile lust, a vain World, these are
chosen, and Heaven refused; these have your affections, when Christ and all his
Glory can have none of them: And so for the sake of those, for this present
World (a heap of vanities, a fashion that passes away) you lose all the good
of that to come. The voice of the World calling us to Eternal Glory by Christ
Jesus, cannot be heard for the voice of the World calling us to present Objects
and things here: And so for Earth men lose Heaven, Mark. 10.21, 22. What a mad
and foolish bargain and choice is this! And yet thus it is; there is never a
sinner that misses Heaven, but he chooses Earth before it.

3. You lose and miss of this Glory when it was brought near to you in the Call
and offer of the Gospel, when according to the order of means you might have
had it: When you were called to Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus, viz. by the
outward Call of the Gospel (a real Call, though not to you Effectual) the
reflection upon this will be one day bitter and tormenting. From under a Call
to Heaven to drop to Hell; from under a word and call and offer of Salvation to
Perdition, what a dreadful thing will that be. ( i. e. in the Eternal
dispensation of it) you that live in the visible Church, you had an Interest in
the Kingdom of Heaven, (it was in your hands as it were, left with you, and you
had the offer of it, the dispensation of it, Job. 4.22.) now to lose it, to let
it go, to be d^prived of it: For the Children of the Kingdom to be cast out,
that will bring with a witness wailing and weeping and gnashing of tenth, Mat 8
12. After you have been lifted up to Heaven, it will be a fearful thing to fall
down to Hell, Mat. 11.23, 24.

3. Consider the greatness of this loss and the bitterness thereof.

1. From the exceeding greatness of the good that is lost, viz. Eternal Glory,
all the Happinss of Heaven; the sweet fellowship of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, wherein is fullness of Joy etc. Psalm. 16.11. and all the
Concomitants thereof that Heaven affords. Oh it is beyond our Expression or
Conception. All that we have before spoken of about this future happiness,
presents matter of meditation here, aggravating this loss: Go over the
particulars and say, I (wretched sinner continuing in that Estate, or if I live
in sin and unbelief) must lose and be thrust out from all this; be separated
from the sweet p^esence of God, from the Love of the Father, the Grace of the
Son, and the Consolation of the Holy Ghost. Be stripped of Glory both in Soul and
Body, utterly deprived of the Image of God, each spark whereof is more worth
than a World: Be thrust out of the Company of Saints and Angels, (among damned
Wights and Devils) Be shut out of Heaven that place of Bliss and Glory, and
this perpetually, everlastingly, for ever and for ever more. Others must go in,
and enjoy all this: But I, I (for my br^i^ish sinning away my day of Grace, if
I should go on as I have thus long done) be thrust out: what wailing would that
produce, Luke 13.28.

2. Compare herewith Worldly losses, the loss of good things in this World, and
remember what a grief and torment that sometimes is. If you had, or were but
in a fair probability and expectation to have, and then should lose but a great
sum of Money, lose your house by Fire, a Commodious Dwelling, a fair Estate, or
all that ever you have (though but a little) by this or that occasion, much
more a Kingdom, a Crown, what a bitter thing would that be. If you do but lose
a dear Friend by death, a sweet Relation, a yoak-Fellow, a pleasant Child; how
does grief come flowing in? how are you steept in sorrows: It lies down and
wakes with you, and wrings wormwood into your Cup; yea it ^imbitters all other
Comforts, though you have many others yet about you. How do you see persons
sometimes take on, and wring their hands when they have lost this or that dear
Comfort here! What will it then be to lose Heaven! to lose the Riches,
Pleasures, the Crown, the Kingdom of Eternal Glory? Not one Comfort but all,
not one Saint, but all at once, yea not Creatures, but the Creator himself, God
blessed for evermore: Oh who can express or conceive the anguish, the wailing,
etc. That must needs accompany and follow this.

3. Remember also the bitter sense that such as have been sensible, have had
here of the loss of Gods pr^sence and light of his Countenance, or of Communion
with him. David's tears are his meat for that cause, Psalm. 42.3, 4. (but for the
want of wonted Communion of Ordinances) Job 13.24, 26. Psalm. 88 14, 15. Yea
Christ himself, Mat. 27.46. To be forsaken of God when felt as it is, is an
insupportable misery, (burden) though but for a little season; should this be
thy portion, and that for ever, the horror whereof who can express?

4. The irrecoverableness of this loss, as it will then be. When you shall have
slept out, and sinned out your day of Grace, and be found at the day of Death
and Judgment in an unregenerate and unpardoned Estate: Then you will find your
loss and deprivation of Heaven to be irrecoverable, no possible remedy or
recovery; no place for repentance or remission, nor capacity thereof: But the
sentence final, absolute, irrecoverable, Mat. 25.41. Heb. 6.2. Oh think of
these things, and lay them to heart with fear and trembling* while yet there
may be a reco^^^y an^ you may possibly come out of that e^u^ estate, and obtain
this Glory by Christ jesus, while yet the door is open before it be shut
forever, Luke 13. 24 25 - 28. Oh tremble to rest a moment out of a state of
Grace, for the end of that will be to be shut out of Glory. Oh let not present
Earthly Comforts content or quiet you, while you are like to lose or have
little hope to obtain Eternal Glory: Mourn after Christ now, that you may not
mourn then without hope.

Use 4. Consider hence what a sin and shame it is to be slight or slothful, to
stick at small matters in the way to Heaven, (in seeking and traveling toward
this future Glory) or attending to what the Gospel calls us unto; for there is
no work, no duty the Gospel calls us to, but it tends to Eternal Glory, it is
part of the Race or way thither, that is the tendency of the whole Call and
Rule of the Gospel to guide us through Grace to Glory* Text. Now we see how
great and wonderful a thing, how transcendant a good this future (this Eternal)
Glory is, and should we be slight and sluggish in pursuit after this. The
G^ea^ness and Exc^ll^ncy of that that lies at the end of the Race (of a
Christian course) may blame and shame all negligence and backwardness in the
way.

1. It condemns slightness or negligence and slothfulness in Religion, in a
Christian Course in the matters of our Salvation; which thing is our great Bane
and Woe, the Perdition of multitudes, and the sad Temptation and hindrance of
the Saints themselves; why this is here sharply rebuked, and we may have hence
a notable help against it. For, what is Eternal Glory a thing to be slightly
sought after, negligently or sluggishly attended to? Does negligence and
slightness become or suit so great a business? Heb. 2.32. Can you pray slightly
or coldly, etc. when you are praying for Eternal Glory? Can you hear carelessly,
keep Sabbaths loosely, meditate perfunctorily, confer coldly, spend seasons of
Grace idly; when as you are in all these about the business of Eternal Life
and Salvation?

Oh it is a great thing to be saved Eternally: It is no small matter to obtain
Eternal Glory, a Room among Saints and Ange^s in Heaven, etc. And though God
gives it freely, (as to matter of merit on our part) yet he will have the
greatness and worth of it acknowledged and esteemed by our seriousness,
diligence and earnest in seeking it: He gives it freely but not easily, i. e.
not without our pains and diligence in seeking after it, and waiting for it,
not without our striving, (as in Agony) Luke 13.24. wrestling Ephesians. 6.12. [in
high places, rather, in or about Heavenly things, so Gouge in Loc. page 43.
Gurnal Part 1. page 307.] fighting, 1 Timothy 6.12. in all diligence, Heb. 6.11,
12. A Prince may give a thing freely, and yet command his Servant to wait
diligently on him, to take the season to present himself with Reverence,
Humility, etc. This is necessary to a meet and orderly receiving it: So here,
we merit nothing by all our diligence; Eternal Life is a gift, Romans 6.23. but
there is a diligence required to the receiving (the Cordial, Humble, Dependant,
Suitable receiving) of it, Isa. 55.1, 2. the diligence of the Beggar is
required, not of the Buyer or Earning Labourer properly. It is a most
preposterous and absurd thing, that we should be trifling, slight and negligent
when about so great a business as Eternal Salvation; that consists not with a
due esteem and true receiving of it: It will never be got in that way. All
diligence is here called for, 2 Pet. 1.10. Heb. 6.11, 12. and good reason, for
it is a great business, 1 Cor. 9.15. Philip. 2.12.

2. It serves to blame and shame our sticking at small matters in the way to
Heaven, as viz.

1. At the pains of the Spiritual warfare, or of a Christian course. We must
(as I but now said) take pains in Fighting, wrestling, waiting, striving, etc.
if we will get to Heaven: But this men stick at; it is death to be put upon it:
They would be glad to go to Heaven, but are loath to take so much pains (to
break through Difficulties, Corruptions and Temptations to follow God) Oh
shameful folly and sloth; will not Heaven quit cost? This is as if we should
refuse to step over the way to receive a vast Estate, to rise out of a warm
Bed, put feet over the threshould, travel a little in a dark night, step forth
in a Cold Morning, in a Rainy day, or some such little small difficulty or
trouble, to get a Kingdom, or to save ones life, etc. far less than so is the
utmost pains of a Christian course, or Warfare compared with Heaven. They
despised the pleasant Land when they would not fight for it, nor venture upon
Walled Towns and Sons of Anak, etc. nor run any hazard for it, Psalm. 106.24,
25. with Numb. 13.28, 29, 31, 33, and 13.3, 4, 10. What was not Canaan worth
that, so good a Land as even themselves acknowledged it was, Numb. 13.27. So it
is a fearful despising and undervaluing of Heaven, not to be willing to fight
and strive and travail for it, or not to think it worth so doing. What shall we
stick at a little hardship, or danger, or difficulty and trouble (at the
trouble and pains of Praying, Meditating, or Renouncing our Beloved sweet Lusts
and Giant-like Corruptions, etc.) when Eternal Glory is set before us, when we
are in choice of Heaven the Glory of all Lands, that Land flowing (not with
Milk and Honey only, but) with fullness of Joy and pleasures forevermore.

2. At parting with the World and the good things of it, which the Lord calls
us to; to forsake all we have here if we will have Christ and Heaven, Luke
14.33, 26. Though he does not presently call us actually to part withal, but
only in affection and readiness of mind and in Comparison of Christ: But if he
should call us actually to part withal we have* as (by a particular command)
he did the Rich man, Mark. 10.21. It were a shame to stick at it. You that have
good Estates (great Possessions:) If Christ should b^d you now presently part
with it, give it all ^o ^h^ poor, or to the public (so to (...) ^^e Lord does
often by his Rules call y^^^^ do a good deal that way) lay it all ^^^n at the
foot of Christ, take your fare^ell on^^ (truly you must do so actually e're
long b^ ^iz. when a dying hour comes, and it may ^^ sooner: Yea indeed a man
can do no duty for Christ to purpose, nor follow Christ in earnest without the
spirit of this) and you shall have Treasure in Heaven; would you stick at it
and say it is an hard saying, and go away sorrowful: Oh the practice of many
proclaims, how like they would be to do as the Rich man there did, and so to
part with Heaven rather then part with Earth. Alas if Christ Call not for all,
but for a little, from them he cannot get it* though he offer to repay it in
Heavenly Teasure, more than an hundred or a thousand fold, Mark. 10.29, 30. And
so it is a parting with the World for Christ and Heaven, to make it subordinate
and subservient to our Communion with Christ (to Religious duties in their
season, to daily walking with God) and not to be so predominant as hinder and
crowd out the same; but how ordinarily does the world prove men's Master in this
respect; that when Christ's service (attendance upon God and upon Religion) and
the Worlds service comes in Competition, the former is made to give place, and
crowded out by the latter, and the mind and affections so engaged in the World,
that it cannot tend upon Christ or Heaven. But oh the madness here of, to set
Earth above Heaven, Vanity above Eternal Glory, or to refuse to part with, or
deny, neglect Earth for Heaven; that is a Pebble for Pearl, Husks for Bread,
Dirt for Gold. etc.

3. At the Cross, at Sufferings for Christ's sake, or from his will, at those
Tribulations which the Lord has appointed to meet us, and exercise us in our
way to the Kingdom of Heaven. Act. 14.22. Why the greatest and heaviest
Affl^ctions that you can meet with in this World, are but light (think of the
worst you can, even such as Paul, such as the Martyrs endeavored) and the
longest are but for a moment, compared with Heavens Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Romans
8.18. Is it not a shame then to stick at them, or shrink from the way to Heaven
(the way of Faith and a good Conscience) or be discouraged in it because of
them; to be offended (with the stony ground) at Religion when Tribulation
attends it, Mat. 23.21. or to baulk any part of the way to Heaven for fear of
Tribulation: Oh if we be men for Heaven, we should be above those things, or
being moved by them, Act. 20.23, 24. Who sticks at a Crossing through a Brook,
or swamp, or Miry-place, when travailing toward some place of desire, or for
some desirable end: Oh keep Heaven in your eye, and then even Moses his choice
will not seem an hard choice, Heb. 11.24, 26. May afflictions help and further
thee toward Heaven (so all afflictions sactified, and patiently endured does,
and eminently those for Christ) then you may rejoice, as Mat. 5.12.

SERMON VII.
Use 5. OF Exhortation. 1. To all to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. It
serves to invite, persuade and draw us to Christ Jesus, to close with him,
embrace him, or believe on him according to the Call and offer of the Gospel;
seeing by him, and by believing on him you shall obtain Eternal Glory. This
further great benefit is to be had with and by Christ. This is part of the
Estate and Riches that this great Suitor that makes love to your Souls is
possessed of, and will impart to all that embrace him: Your believing on him,
if you believe in truth, shall be to Life Everlasting, 1 Timothy 1.16. All the
Doctrine of Christ (his Person, Offices, Benefits) is attractive unto Faith,
(and to improve it that way, is a principlal part of our scope in these
Discourses) and so is this part of it also that we are now upon. Every one of
his Benefits are full of Argument to persuade us to believ^ on him; and so this
of Glorification, and this part of it, viz. the Consummation thereof in future
Eternal Glory. As we improved other particulars before; so let us make a little
improvement of this to that which is the great end of the whole Gospel, viz. to
make Christ sweet to us, Glorious in our eyes, and to draw us to close with
him. And this the Text leads us to, viz. Hence to lift up the voice of the Call
of the Gospel in your Ears, and to press you to attend and obey it: For God
therein Calls us to Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus. Look as by Effectual Calling
( i. e. by obeying and answering the Call of the Gospel) we are entered into a
state of Eternal Glory, so as to be infallibly brought unto it by Christ Jesus.
So the word (the General Call) of the Gospel Calls us to come, and take (to
enter upon the possession of) this Glory in and with Christ Jesus: When the
Gospel Calls us to Christ, and fellowship with him by believing, it Calls us to
Eternal Glory. Oh then hearken to this Call, and obey it: That is the
Exhortation that we are now to press upon you here before the Lord, Luke 14.17.
All things are ready provided in Christ, and so this thing Eternal Glory. Come
in, and come home to Christ Jesus: Embrace him withal your hearts, receive and
possess him, and in and with him you shall possess Eternal Glory, 1 John 5.11.

It is now given you in the promise upon the first day and hour of your true
believing: And it shall Infallibly be given to you in the accomplishment.
Attend and obey the Call of the Gospel (a Glorious Call it is, which Calls unto
such Glory) and the Lord will by a firm deed (a sure promise) presently make
over to you both Grace here, and Glory hereafter, Everlasting Life and
Blessedness, Isa. 55.3. Heb. 5.9. Oh hearken to this word of the Lord, this
voice of the High-calling of God in Christ Jesus; you that have hitherto been
stooping down to the dust, minding nothing but Earth and Vanity; yea running
down hill in the way of sin toward the lowest Hell: Incline your Ear, and
hearken to a motion and offer of Eternal Glory in Heaven; open your eyes and
see the Lord Jesus standing withal Grace and Glory in his hands and inviting
to him, to let out of your hands ( i. e. out of your hearts) the trifles of the
World, and take Eternal Glory in and with a Savior: Behold Heaven is opened to
you, the door stands open before you, if once at last you will be persuaded to
enter in. And you that have believed already, sit not by as if this Exhortation
did not concern you; but oh believe again, embrace Christ again, come to him
afresh with fresh and new sweetness, with more clearness and establishment in
believing; so you should do at every time he calls you, and sets his Glory
before you, ( Joh. 2.11.) and so at this time this day: Renew your Conjugal
Embraces of Christ Jesus, and so your lively hope of this Glory. Christ
delights to be often asking for our hearts, and setting himself before us as
the attractive object of them; and we should delight to be often giving our
hearts to him, and clasping about him as the only Glorious, Lovely, hope and
rest, and portion of our Souls.

Now for the pursuing of this Exhortation, or pressing the Call of the Gospel
by this Argument of Eternal Glory to be had (and which we are Called to) by
Christ Jesus. Let us a little improve the point and Text before us.

1. By way of motive or quickening and persuasive considerations to draw our
hearts to Christ Jesus.

2. By way of direction and help to guide us in our believing on him.

3. By way of Answer to some Objections that tend to beat us from Believing.

For the first, though it is God only can draw and persuade, yet he does it by
his word; and therefore we must apply our selves to speak and hear, to listen
to such quickening drawing Considerations as the word of the Gospel does
suggest, and in that way the spirit breaths.

1. If the Lord Call thee to Eternal Glory (or to come and receive Everlasting
Blessedness through Christ) then what does he Call thee from or out of? Why
from a state of Eternal woe and misery, which is that that we are naturally in,
and that belongs to us as sinners, and as in our selves considered, 1 Pet. 2.9.
Colos. 1.13. Joh. 5* 24. The word of Christ therefore calls thee from Death to
Life. Oh consider what damnation is about thee; yea upon thee, considered in
thy self, and in thy Natural Estate, whereby thou lie under all sin, and
under all Wrath, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal, Romans 6.23. That work thou
have done, and that wages (Death, Eternal Death) belongs and is due to thee,
thou art sinking under the burden of the Curse (lying under it as without
Christ, Gal. 3.10. and it is all upon thee, Joh. 3.36.) ready every moment to
drop into Hell, liable to everlasting separation from God; to hear that doom,
Mat. 25.41. Separation from God; thou have the beginning on it already in the
result of the guilt and power of sin, in that dead, dark and Godless heart of
thine, and thy estrangement from God thereby, and this strongly tends to
perfect separation from God, and that is Hell as e contra, etc. Why this should
make this word of Salvation, this offer of Eternal Life, and Call to come to
Christ for it, wonderful sweet and acceptable. Bread in Famine, Deliverance in
Emminent dangers, Life to him that is going down to the pit, how precious is
it? Job 33.22, 24. It is to one that is going down to the pit, that the Lord
speaks this Calling word, should not that go to thy heart? As thou art going
down to Hell, the Lord calls thee up to Heaven. When that doom is pronounced in
Mat. 25.41. and those multitudes going away to Hell, suppose thy self among
them, and that one should then come with a message from God to call th^e back
again, and to invite thee to go up with Christ in Heavenly Glory; what a
ravishing thing would that be! Why then there will be no place for recovery or
hope: But now such a like thing is really done to thee, thou art going down to
the Pit among the Uncircumcised, posting on in the way to the lowest Hell,
under the Curse, etc. And yet behold now the Lord Calls to thee to turn about,
and accept of a Savior, and of Eternal Life and Salvation in him. Thou poor
perishing Sinner, if thou have any mind to Salvation, it is offered thee freely
in Christ, ( Act. 16.31.) Is not this worthy of all acceptance?

2. Remember what Glory it is that you are called up unto, or that is to be had
by Christ Jesus. Here reflect upon all the promises, all that has been spoken
of the Excellency of Heavenly Glory; which is indeed above what Tongue can
speak, or Heart conceive. Blessedness, perfect and Everlasting Blessedness,
freedom from all evil, from the worst of Evils (sin, all sin, that deadly and
bitter evil that kills thee all the day long) the vision and fruition of God,
that Ocean of goodness, compared with which, the whole World is but a drop.
Should the Lord offer you heaps of Gold and Silver, and bid you take them
freely, what flocking would there be; and what harkening would there be to such
a proposition; should he tell you of Crowns and Kingdoms, and make Proposals
about them; Should a match be offered to thee that should bring with it Riches,
and Honors, and Treasures in abundance; how would thy heart spring and leap
within thee at the thoughts of it, and you would not need much persuading. We
offer you this, (I mean the good and Comfort that is in these things) and more,
ten thousand times more, as Mic. 2.11. If poor Ministers had Gold and Silver to
tell you of, they should be hearkened to. Why but we have that that is better,
as much better as the Heaven is higher than the Earth, and this we lay before
you in the name of our God. The Earth, and the Glory of it is too low a
business to send his Son Jesus to purchase for you, and to bless you with, or
the Gospel to tell you of. But Heaven, Heaven if you have any mind to that
Eternal Glory that is to be had by Christ Jesus, and that the High-Calling of
God in Christ calls you to. Come, will you leave the Earth, and go up to
Heaven? will you throw the World at your feet as dung and dust, and go up
thither into the bosom of God, to have the Love of the Father, the Grace of the
Son, the Fellowship of the Spirit to all Eternity? Why then Christ is for you;
this is that the God of all Grace Calls us to by Christ Jesus, and this is most
worthy of all acceptance. The Land we tell you of, (that Celestial Land of
promise) is an exceeding good Land; some Clusters and Tastes of the Grapes
whereof we have showed you: If you be wise, go up at once and possess it, and
let nothing hinder or detain you, as Numb. 13.30. and 14.7, 8.

3. Consider what a wonderful heartbreaking thing it is, that the Lord should
speak such a word of Salvation to you, or give you such a Call to Eternal
Glory. Verily next to that Call that the Saints shall have at the last day to
the immediate fruition of this Glory, Mat. 25.34. is this Call that you now
have to the possession of it, in and with Christ in the Kingdom of Grace: The
Lord now says to thee, come, come to Christ Jesus, Embrace and possess him as
offered in the Gospel, and in with him Eternal Glory; not seperating the estate
from the person (think not to have Christ's Glory without having Christ himself)
nor the end, from the way to it. Heaven from the way wherein you are to walk
thither. But take altogether, (Christ, and through him Grace and Glory to be
obtained in a way of walking after Christ in the Kingdom of Grace) and welcome
it as the free gift of God, Romans 6.23 Psalm. 84.11, 12. This the Lord Calls you
to come, and take possession of; he bids you now enter Heaven, and take your
lot there in the promise and beginning of it: And what a wonderful thing is
this. Remember,

1. Whom he speaks and Calls unto; a vile Sinner and wretched Malefactor, that
deserves to be turned into Hell, and might have expected to hear a doom and
Sentence of Wrath only; to hear only news of Woe and Wrath, and Fire, and
Blood; to hear such a word as that in Mat. 25.41. And will the Lord unto thee
say come, come to a Savior, and be forever Blessed in and with him, 2 Timothy
7.18* 19. The Lord speaks to you of a great while to come, even of Eternal
Glory in the World to come, the offer of it unto you all, and the promise of
it, if you do believe.

2. Who is it that Calls, viz. God in Christ Jesus, the God of all Grace, Phil.
3.14. He sends from Heaven to Call you up to Heaven. I tell you the Bowels of
the Lord Jesus now in Glory, are now yearning over some of you; yea all of you
as he is dispensing this word of Salvation to you, 2 Chronicles. 36.15.

We are but poor Instruments, Messengers, whom he imployes and sends: It is
from the design of Christ to seek, and save poor Creatures, to bring them to
Heaven; therefore he sets this great Salvation before you, and Calls on you not
to neglect it; therefore he lifts up his voice that you might hear it, (as all
his sheep shall) and follow him, that he might give you Eternal Life, Joh.
10.27, 28. That the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords, should call up a worm to
the Fellowship of his own Glory. Luke 1.43. much more the Lord himself.

3. Of what he speaks, viz. Eternal Glory, i. e. Grace and Glory, the beginning
of it here, the Consummation of it hereafter, the former in order to the
latter, and to the whole of both at once. He offers and calls to it at once.
The best and greatest thing that God has to give; God himself has no greater
gift than that ( Romans 6.23.) and this he thrusts into thy hands, the thing that
you have most need of, absolute need of; for there is but one thing necessary,
and that is to get Heaven, to be saved forever; the thing that is able to make
you Happy, a Beatifical good, Everlasting Communion with God which is our
Blessedness; whole Happiness at once, this he lays before you.

4. When he thus speaks and Calls to thee, when Earth is full of trouble about
you, (and there is no rest upon it) then he Calls you up to Heaven, and to rest
there. When this lower World is stormy and unquiet, then he leads you to the
upper region (to the Chambers of Glory) where Peace dwells, as Isa. 26.20. when
the Sea rages and is tempestuous about you, now he discovers an Harbor to put
into, the fair Haven of Eternal Glory, the Bosom of the Blessed God, where your
Souls may dwell at ease, Psalm. 25.13. In every other dwelling there is some
Inconvenience, trouble, difficulty, pinching, want or ail; that you do not sit
at ease, some hard knot in every Worldly Pillow, that you do not lie at ease:
But there your Souls shall dwell at ease, lodge in goodness as the word is:
Goodness, universal goodness shall be your lodging place. Yea when sin had even
thrown you down to Hell, separated you from God, provoked his wrath yet now the
Lord speaks of Heaven to you: Yea now he thus speaks, Prove. 1.33.
and Calls after all your neglects and mispence of time; he is yet calling, yet
offering Christ, and Life, and Heaven to you, this day, this hour: Behold now
an accepted time, a day of Salvation, a day of Receiving, Possessing and
obtaining Eternal Salvation in Christ Jesus: The offers of Salvation might have
long since ceased and ended to you-ward; but behold yet they are continued, and
thou have this one Call more, not only yesterday you might, but to day you may
hear the voice of Christ Jesus: Oh harden not your hearts from so doing. It may
be thou say as Isa. 55.5, 6.

5. In what way a portion in this Eternal Glory is to be had and obtained (in
what way the Lord offers it and calls thee to possess it) viz. in a way of
believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, i. e. (as I may so express it) in a way of
leaving and taking: Leaving that that is worthy to be left, and taking,
accepting, choosing that that is worthy, most worthy to be taken: Leaving and
letting go all evil, misery and vanity, sin and world, as attended and enjoyed
in a way of sin, Luke 14.33. And taking all good, Christ and all his benefits,
Grace and Glory; all saving good, in and with a Savior. This great Estate (of
Grace and Glory) together with so sweet, desirable and Glorious a person (a
match) as the Son of God is: What a wonderful offer and motion is this, and how
worthy of all acceptance. Hence

4. Consider that they that now in the day of Grace choose this Eternal Glory in
earnest, may, yea shall have it. If you choose Heaven indeed, you shall go
thither; if willing to have everlasting Felloship with God for your portion,
you shall have it. Why, if this be true, what more plain than that the offer of
of this Glory is free and real? what more inexcusable or wilful, than the sin
and perdition of those that perish? What remains, but that you be persuaded to
choose and embrace Heaven, and Life Eternal, though one would think you should
need little persuading. Now this is most true and evident. Deuteronomy. 30.19. if you
choose life, you shall live, Joh. 3.19. Therefore if they had loved light rather
then darkness, ( i. e. chosen light, i. e. Christ and all his Grace) they
should not have been condemned but saved, see Prove. 1.29. Isa. 56.4, 5. Psalm.
119.30, 173. Isa. 66.3, 4. Every man has his choice: Do you choose Lust, Sin,
Vanity, World, you shall have it. Do you choose separation from God, to live at
a distance and in estrangement from him, that will inevitably be your
everlasting portion if you continue in that choice. But if the Lord give you an
heart to choose Heaven ( i. e. not merely as a place of outward ease; but of
Holy Communion with God, and fruition of him) rather than Earth. If you indeed
choose God and his Fellowship rather than the World, Christ and Grace rather
than sin; then you shall have that. Why is there any Body that does not choose
Heaven? that would not be saved? Yea a great many, viz. they that choose sin,
Prove. 8.36. and 1.22. That choose this present World for their Portions, 2 Timothy
4.10. That will none of God, Psalm. 81.11. For it is the enjoyment of God that
makes Heaven; why if you will none of Heaven, if you refuse Eternal Glory, or
the way to it; if you care not for Blessedness, no wonder if you miss of it,
and just will be your perdition. But oh, who come to be so sottish and brutish
as to choose evil before good, Earth before Heaven and Death before Life; choose
Life and that you may have forever.

5. Whither will you turn you, if you disobey this Call, and neglect this offer
of Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus? Where will you take up your portion? Where
will you find any thing Comparable to this, or ought that can make you happy if
you refuse this? Isa. 10.3. You will go to the Creature, to a vain World, to
the pleasures, profits and preferments of it, you will dig in the Earth for a
Portion: But alas there is no Eternal Glory to be found; there is no good here
that can make up happiness, much less a durable happiness. There is no Treasure
on Earth but there is a destroyer lies by it, Mat. 6.19. There is nothing safe
in this World; you can lay up nothing where destruction may not find it: There
is but one safe place to lay up a portion in, and that is Heaven: You do but
lay up for the fire what you lay up on Earth, for that will be the last end of
all things here, 2 Pet. 3.10. When that day of the universal burning of the
World comes, what a sensible demonstration will it be of the vanity of laying
up our portion on Earth; and so are all particular burnings (of Houses or Towns
or Cities) in the lesser days of Gods Judgments now. How many ways does the
Lord proclaim unto men, that here is no suitable or durable portion for them to
be had on Earth? You must to Heaven if you will have any true or lasting
Happiness, any Eternal Glory. There no Moth, nor Rust, no Fire, nor Water, no
Pirate or Robber comes. Make this World your Inn, and not your Home, and then,
when it is fired you may leave it without loss, (the Traveller suffers little
or no loss when the Inn where he lodged all night is set on Fire) and go home
to an Everlasting Habitation. Oh men may call the things of this World a Glory,
as Genes. 31.1. but there is nothing here worthy that name; or if it be, it is
not Eternal Glory to be sure; it is but a fading fashion that passes away.
Look upon the various changes, losses, destructions, wherein the best and
goodliest portions in this World do fade, and fail, and pass away, you may
write on them, Sic transit gloria mundi. Why then, if you neglect and refuse
Heaven, and turn to the things below, you do but embrace shadows for substance,
shells and shows, and vain things that cannot profit you, and what a madness
and folly is that?

6* Consider the peril of refusing or disobeying this Call and offer of
Salvation; or what the issue would be, should you neglect it, viz. everlasting
heaviness, misery and damnation. If you will not have Heaven, you shall have
Hell, (for you must have one of them) yea a deeper and hotter Hell; because you
had the offer of Heaven, and refused it. The Lord has brought the matter to
this pinch, there is but this choice before you, either Heaven or Hell, either
Eternal Glory, or Eternal Misery: If you refuse the former, you shall not
escape the latter. If you will none of Christ and Grace* you shall have sin,
and be given up to it: If you will not have the Fellowship of God, you shall
have the Company of the Devil and his Angels: If you will not hear the voice of
the call and promise of the Gospel, you shall one day hear that dreadful word,
Mat. 25.41. Why, if this be the choice, is it not plain and easy to determine
which is to be chosen? Shall not thy Soul with fear and trembling groan to God
to deliver thee from such a madness and misery as to neglect Heaven and choose
Hell, to hate Christ and love death? And such a madness it is to dis^regard the
Call of the Gospel, the voice of wisdom, and to go after the foolish woman,
whose Guests are in the depths of Hell.

7. Remember that we must hear Christ's call now in the word and Kingdom of his
Grace, if ever we would hear his Blessed and Glorious call at the last day unto
the immediate, actual fruition of Fellowship with him in the Kingdom of his
Glory. If we would then hear him say, come (as Mat. 25 34.) we must hear, and
obey that word from him now. Come now if you would come then. Come now to
Christ Jesus, and enter into Fellowship with him (as God calls you, 1 Cor.
1.9.) in a way of Faith and Grace, if you would then come into his Kingdom, and
be for ever with him in a way of Glory. Are you willing to hear Christ at the
last and great day; when he shall break out of the Clouds, set him down on the
Throne of his Glory, and call all Nations before him; then to say to you: Come
you Blessed inherit the Kingdom? Then you must hear him now who cries to you in
the Gospel: Come, come unto me that you may have Life and Glory for evermore; (
Luke 14.17.) The same portion for substance that the Saints are called to then,
you are invited and called to now ( viz. Fellowship with Christ and
participation of all his benefits, Peace, Grace and Glory:) there from an
Inchoation you pass to the Consummate fruition of them; here from a total want,
to an entire possession of them, (so at the first believing, which is in that
regard a greater matter than the other) will that word be acceptable and joyful
then, why should not this be so now? And if you do hear his voice and come to
him at his call, you shall hear that blessed word then, Joh. 10.27, 28. as e
contra Job 21.14. with Mat. 25.41.

2. Now add we some Directions to guide and help us in Believing on Christ unto
life Everlasting; or in coming to Christ to obtain by him Eternal Glory or
Salvation.

1. Know that you may and ought to come to Christ for Salvation, for Eternal
Life: For what he gives, we may take, but Romans 6.23. what he designs in giving
himself to us (which here is to bring us to Eternal Glory, 1 Pet. 5.10. 1 These.
5.9. 2 These. 2.13, 14.) we may aim at in receiving him, and coming to him.
Christ calls us to him, and we may and ought to come to him for all his
Benefits: And we see this of Glorification, and the Consummation thereof in
special; is part thereof, see also Joh. 5.40. 1 Timothy 1.16. Act. 16.31. 1 Pet.
1.9. We may come to him for our own Salvation, i. e. not as separate from, or
in oppsition to Gods Glory; which cannot be if we understand Salvation aright.
And that is a second.

2. Be sure you have a right conception of this Glory, or Salvation, or
happiness of Heaven, i. e. Look not at it as consisting in external sensual
ease and pleasures, or freedom from outward evils (though an holy and
sanctified outward rest and freedom from outward afflictions is a part of the
good that is in Heaven, but not the main; that is but an adjunct.) But look at
the Communion with God, Fruition of God and perfect Conformity to his Image as
the main thing in it, Psalm. 73.25. 2 Cor. 5.8. Psalm. 17.15. Let Your Hearts and
desires be eminently set upon freedom from that great evil of sin (which is a
choice part of the Happiness of Heaven, Heb. 12.23.) and fruitton of that
highest good the presence of God, the fellowship of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost in perfect Holiness; let this be the mark and top of thy desires: Neither
desire the end, without the way; Heaven, without the way to it. Be willing and
desirous by the Grace of Christ to begin thy Heaven here, Communion with God
here, Holy work, and holy enjoyments in all the ways thereof here, Psalm. 27 4
For Heaven is but the perfection of what is here b^gun: They that begin not
Heaven in this World, will never find one in that to come. And therefore be
instant with Christ, not only for Grace and Comfort hereafter, or at the point
of Death, etc. but for present Grace, some beginnings of it at least, (not
limiting to measures, nor expecting the sensible fullness of it, till after you
have waited and sought, and been swimming in tears in this World, and therefore
not quarelling nor being discouraged because of the weakness of Grace at
present) so much as may keep you following after God for more: For present
change of Heart and Nature, for Grace to enable you in measure to Glorify God
on Earth, that so you may be Glorified with him in Heaven.

3. Behold Christ Jesus set forth and offered in the Gospel as the Ladder to
Heaven; or as the only and Glorious way from out of the depth of your sin and
misery, unto the height of that Eternal Glory. If there be an high place or
loft before you, you cannot g^t to it, but if a Ladder be set up, you can
ascend by that. As well can our heavy Earthy Bodies fly up to Heaven, as our
Souls ever get thither of and by themselves. (alas we have neither wings nor
legs of our own to climb Heaven with) But Christ is a Ladder t^i^her (the
Antitype of Jacob's Ladder) by him we may ascend thither: By Christ Jesus (as
in the Text) we may obtain Glory; yea he is not a dead passive Ladder only, but
a living way: He has living Arms, and a mighty power to carry u^ up thither,
to lift us up through Grace to Glory, Joh. 3* 13. Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Christ dying,
rising, ascending for us, is fit and able to raise us up from death to life in
Heaven. Christ is a Ladder whose foot reaches low enough by his Incarnat^on and
Humiliation, even as low as our low and mean Condition, yea as the dungeon of
our Curse and death, Gal. 3.13. (and hence near and fit for us to step upon, to
take hold of and whose top reaches high enough, (even as high as the height of
Heavenly Glory, Genes. 28.12. by his Glorious Deity and Exaltation; by the
infinite value of his obedience purchasing that Glory for us, and by his
Ascension possessing it for us, and by his mighty power carrying and conducting
us to it. If you take hold of him, and cast your selves on him by Faith; he
will not only (as I said) be as a Ladder to sustain you in going up, but in the
Arms of his active power and Grace he will carry you up to Eternal Glory; carry
you on his shoulders thither, as Luke 15.5. Joh. 10.18. 1 Pet. 1.5. Hence.

4. Esteem the Lord Jesus Christ as most precious and Glorious, (as a suitable
and all-sufficient Savior, or Author of Eternal Salvation, and gladly embrace
an everlasting match with him, with relyance on him to carry you through Grace
to this Eternal Glory.

1. Seeing and beholding him as the way to Heaven, and to the Enjoyment of the
love, favor and presence of God, ( Joh. 14.4, 6.) as the Glorious Author
(purchaser and dispenser) of Eternal Salvation: Prize him, highly prize him,
and esteem him; that is one ingredient of true believing, 1 Pet. 2.7. and this
point is a marvelous help to it. For shall not he be precious and Glorious in
our eyes, by whom we may obtain such Eternal Glory: He that opens Heaven to us,
even to sinners, and shall not all this World be vile and dung in our eyes in
comparison of him, Psalm. 73. in follows ver. 25.

2. Prizing him, take him, embrace him, in a Conjugal way for thy Lord and
Savior. Prophet, Priest and King; consent to have him for thy Head and Husband
for ever, and to be his, his Spouse, Subject, Servant, Dependant evermore.
Think not to have the Estate (this great Riches of Grace and Glory, Eternal
Glory) without marrying the person, the Benefits without Christ himself Having
the Son himself, you have, and shall have Eternal Life, 1 John 5.11, 12. It is
given in and with him, Romans 6.23. And therefore you must take Christ himself,
if you would have or get a sure Interest in this Glory.

3. Taking him, rest and rely on him for Salvation, or for obtaining this
Eternal Glory. Rely on his righteousness, and obedience, to procure and
purchase it, Heb. 9.12. and to give you a lawful Judicial Title to it, Romans
5.21. that now having in him pleased God, and fulfilled the Law, you shall live
for ever) on his Ascension and continual intercession to prepare and maintain a
place and room for you in that Glory, Joh. 14.2. Heb. 6.20. Ephesians. 2.6: And
rely on his mighty power and grace (his strong hand which nothing can pluck
you out of, Joh. 10.28.) to prepare you for it, to keep, and carry, and conduct
you through the wilderness of this World unto the Heavenly Canaan ( Isa. 63.9,
14. to guide you by his Spirit, and preserve you to his Heavenly Kingdom, and
at last (in the work of his second coming, Heb. 9.28.) finally to accomplish
and finish the matter of your ^^lva^^^n and Glory, I^s 73.24. Joh. 6.54.

5. Improve this Eternal Glory, which is offered, and g^ven in and with
Christ,) as an h^lp to sweeten and facilitate, and make the heart come ^ff in
that which is the hardest thing, in the work of closing with Christ, viz.
parting with the W^rld, forsaking and sitting loose from the World and all that
you have here: Renouncing sin absolutely, and Earthly contentments, in
Comparison of Christ. Here it is that men stick, Mark. 10.22. 2 Timothy 4.10. Joh.
5 44. Philip. 3.19. The Impression of Worldly Lusts and Affections, are they
that choke the word and call of the G^spel, Luke 8.14. Mark. 4.19. B^t here is
a notable help against this; when Christ comes with Heaven, and the Glory
thereof in his hands, it withers away the Glory of this World. What shall take
us off the E^rth, or ^n^ble us to contemn that, if H^^ven will not: This may
make us forsake the pleasu^es of this World, as a dry chip compared with those
above, Heb. 11. 25 29. and the profits and wealth of it, Mat. 6.19, 20. Psalm.
17.14, 15. And what is the Honor and Glory of it, compared with this Glory of
Heaven, Heb. 12.2.

3. Answ. Some Objections that readily fall in here.

Obj. 1. This (may some say) is too great a thing that ever the Lord should
offer, (to be received) or give (upon receiving) Eternal Glory (so vast a thing
as everlasting Life and Blessedness) to such a vile thing as I am! How is it
possible?

Answ. It is the God of all Grace from whom this Offer and Call, and Gift is:
If it were from men or finite goodness, it could not possibly be: But the great
God is able to do it* Romans 6.23. He is rich enough in Grace to give such a
gift; to do such a work of Grace as this. Ephesians. 2.7. Hence as 2 Samuel 7.19, 21,
22. And it is by Christ Jesus. By the infinite merit of Christ, and by his
mighty saving power, Phil. 3.26. If there were not such mighty causes at work,
(as the Grace of God, the righteousn^ss and strength of Christ) It were
incredible, that so great a thing as Eternal Glory should ever be offered or
given to, or bestowed upon such as we are. But Mat. 19.16.

Obj. 2. But I have blind eyes, and a dead Carnal heart; I cannot see nor
believe on Christ, nor take hold of him, nor get possession of this great Gift:
I want an hand and an Heart to take it.

Answ. God in Christ is the God of all Grace, in that notion also, viz. the
Giver and Worker of all Grace, and so of the Grace of Faith: That also is the
Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. why therefore in the sense of unbelief and inability
to believe, (especially to believe in Truth; we shall make no right work on it.
Lord, unless thou work all our works in and for us, Isa. 26.12.) Groan and cry
to the Lord, as Mat. 9.24 Trust not thy own heart to believe, or to hammer out
a Faith of its own, but put it over into his hands: Look to him to be Author
and Moulder of thy faith, Heb. 12.2. Colos. 2.12. The King of Glory is come to
thy door, beg him to open the door, and come in: Look to him to give all at
once, whole Eternal Life, and so this beginning of it, this entrance into it,
viz. Faith. Come to him, leaning on him and on the power of his drawing Grace,
when you cannot come by the strength of your own legs, put your buckle under
you, Cant. 1.4. Psalm. 143.10. By the land of uprightness may be meant Heaven;
not one right step thither without the help and leading of Gods Spirit.

Obj. 3. But my sins shut me out, and shut Heaven against me, and thrust me
rather into Hell: How can such an unclean thing ever hope to see the face of
God in Heaven?

Answ. Behold the Lamb of God, etc. Behold the Atonement of Christ doing away
sin, and his righteousness purchasing life for us. By Christ Jesus it is that
you are called and may come to this Eternal Glory, not by any thing in your
selves. Our sins indeed had shut Heaven, but the blood of Christ opens it, Heb
10.19, 20. Though we be unclean in our selves, we are presented there now as
holy before God in the righteousness of Christ; and Christ will make us
inherently holy before he carry us thither. Nothing indeed but our sins is the
great hindrance from Heaven: But therefore Christ is sent, and set apart on
purpose to take away sin, both by Justifying and Sanctifying Grace, 1 John 3.5.
And therefore by Christ we may obtain Eternal Glory.

Obj. 4. But though I look to Christ, and come to him for all Spiritual and
Eternal Blessings; for all the fullness of God, I feel my self a poor, vile,
miserable, empty Creature; having but little either of holiness or Comfort.
Where is this Glory that Saints have by Christ Jesus.

Answ. Believe the promise that is made to every Comer to, or Believer in
Christ. Take Eternal Life and Glory in the promise, possess it in the promise
and in the Covenant, and so as in Christ's hands, 1 John 5.11. though thou have
it not yet in thine own hands in fruition and accomplishment: Remember that
Eternal Glory is first given to thy faith, before it be given to thy feeling;
nay when thou feelst the quite contrary, as Canaan was to Abraham, when he had
yet no foot of it, nay when poss^ss^d by enemies, 2 Cor. 5.7. 1 Pet. 1 8 9.
H^b. 11.1. The actual fruitition of this Glory must not be till after you have
suff^red a while (T^xt) not only under outward ^^ll ^ctions, but also a
conflict of spiritual Corruption. Some beginnings there are of it here, but
they are but little, and they show themselves rather in ^^^^^ing after it than
feeling of it, Romans 8.23, 24. Not E^rth but Heaven, is the place ^^ the
cons^a^^, c^mfortable, sensible prese^c^ o^ God, 2 C^r. 5 8. Believe for
Heaven, fight for it now, and you shall enjoy it one day, 1 Pet. 1.6, 8, 9.

SERMON VIII.
Exhort. 2.
TO Believers, to the Faithful whom God has called (effectually called) unto
this Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus. The Godly that are Heirs of Heaven, or
profess themselves to be of that number.

1. To get assurance of their portion in this Eternal Glory.

2. To make improvement of it, even of so rich, and great, and happy a portion
as this is.

1. Labor after a settled and well grounded assurance that this is your
portion, that you are of that number for whom an Inheritance is reserved in
Heaven, who shall obtain this Eternal Glory. That so you may be able to rejoice
in the lively hope and certain Expectation of it* as Romans 5.2. and know as Paul
did, 2 Cor. 5.1. and 1 John 5.13. This may be known, though the fruition of
this Glory is reserved for Heaven; yet a certain interest in it, (title to i^)
and the knowledge thereof also is given on Earth.

Labor after this: It is that we are exhorted to by the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.10.
If we make sure of Effectual Calling, we make sure of this Glory; for there is
an inseparable Connection between them. To quicken thereunto, Consider,

1. Great matters cannot be made too sure, and in all other matters of great
moment, common reason and nature teaches men to be diligent to make all sure.
If Estate or Life be in hazard, how sollicitous are men to be upon sure
grounds: In settling of Earthly Inheritances, how careful, punctual and exact
that no flaw, no matter of doubt or danger be left. What matter is of so great
a weight, as the matter of Eternity, everlasting Life and Glory, ( Hezekiah
when like to die, was desirous of a sure evidence that he should live and
recover out of his sickness, and have his fifteen years time more here, 2 King.
20.8.) How much more sollicitous should we be, to be sure of Eternal Life,
(Life through all the days and years of Eternity) when we were so like to die
the second death; and therefore to have it confirmed not by miracles, but by
Scripture signs and evidences; in great matters, and matters wherein the
affection goes out much, men will delight to have the assurance and
ratification over and over, as 1 Samuel 20.16, 17. Oh when we are making a
Covenant with Christ, and he with us, about matters of everlasting Life, that
that is for ever after this life, as v. 14, 15. we cannot but desire him to
speak again; yea swear again, (as he condescends to both, Heb. 6.17, 18.) and
Establish his promise to us over and over; our love to him and intence desire
to be sure of his love, should induce to this. When Jacobs heart was upon being
buried in the Cave of Machpolah in the Land of Canaan, which was a type of
Heaven, and being buried therein of that possession that the faithful take of
Heaven when they die, when they go to a place of their own properly: the
Sojourners and strangers while they live in this World.) He will have Joseph
both promise and swear to bury him there, and gave charge to all his other sons
about it too, Genesis 47.29, 30, 31. and 49.29, 32. So Abraham how careful is he
to make sure his possession of the Cave of Machpelah, Genes. 23.17, 18, 20. He
can be content to have never a foot of Land of his own while he lives, but he
will make sure of a good burying place when he dies, i. e. of an happy Estate
after death, of a portion of the Heavenly Canaan, and of being buried in the
certain hope (as of all the promises of God to be made good to him and his, so
in special) of an happy Resurrection to Eternal Glory; that was the meaning of
it. Oh though you have never so little in this Earth while you live, though
strangers and pilgrims here, yet make sure of Heaven when you die; make that
one bargain sure, and you are happy, that you shall have a possession of your
own in that better Country, even an Heavenly Kingdom.

2. We have nothing else sure, we had need make sure of this; we have no
portion certain, (nothing to trust to) if we have not this portion of Eternal
Life and Glory. There is no certainty of any thing in this World; Riches have
wings, the top of honor is a slippery place, life it self is but a vapor: All
things here lie within the reach of many devourers and destroyers, Moth and
Rust, and Thieves, Pirates at Sea, and other Sons of violence at Land: And what
is saved from other Destroyers, is but reserved for the fire, that must be the
end of al^ the possessions upon Earth, 2 Pet. 3.10. All Earthly possessions
must turn into a blaze, and end in smoke, as Genes. 19.28. At the great day of
Judgment there shall be an universal burning (all the Earth on a light fire) in
particular, previous days of Judgment here (which are tastes and hansells of
that) the Lord often contends by fire. Why if men will not see by the light of
the word, one would think they should see by the flames of devouring fire,
(though indeed seldom do men see by the latter, or by any destroying Judgments
that have obstinately refused the light and voice of the former: But in it self
it is a wonderful help to see, and it will be so to them that regard the word)
the vanity, uncertainty and perishing nature of all things here. But to be sure
our enjoyment of all things in this World (at best) hangs but upon the
twine-thread of our life, which there are so many sharp edged tools
(Sicknesses, Diseases, sad Accidents,) continually ready to cut asunder, we are
not sure to have it continued one hour longer. Had we not need be sure of
something when all these things shall fail, as Luke 16.9. Paul knows what he
has to trust to when this World turns him out of doors (he has then an house
to hide his head in,) 2 Cor. 5.1. Oh it is a Comfortable thing, when temporal
habitations fail, to be sure of Eternal ones. Imagine you were now to die, this
moment leaving the World, how glad would you be to be sure of Heaven and of a
better life: Why that must be e're long, and you cannot think to be sure of it
then (in a dying hour) if you do not labor to make it sure now in a time of
health and peace. Wnen David looks over the World and sees the vanity fading
uncertainty of all portions (of Riches, Glory, Honor, fair Dwellings, etc.)
here, what a thing is it to him to be sure of a God to receive him into Arms of
Love and Mercy when he dies, and of an happy waking in the morning of the
Resurrection to Eternal Glory, Psalm. 49.6. - 15. and 73.17, - 24. when you see
men stand in slippery places and one tumbling down after another, (the Rich
tumbling into poverty, the Great into Contempt) then look to your feet and to
your standing; what foot hold have you, what sure bottom and foundation have
you to stand steady upon, as Psalm. 26.11, 12, 13. The wicked stand in slippery
places, but the godly that walk with God in integrity, stand in an even place.
The Covenant is sure (2 Samuel 23.5.) the state of Grace is a sure standing, Romans
5.2. Psalm. 20.7, 8. indeed in regard of themselves they would fall as soon as
any, but they have a sure hand to hold them, Psalm. 73.23, 24.

3. Should not we make this use of the times we live in, to quicken us to make
sure of Heaven. May we not get this meat out of the eater, this good out of all
the evils and troubles that are in the World. Is it now a time to walk at
peradventures with God, to live at uncertainties, to hang between Heaven and
Earth, to be to seek of a resting place when trouble fills the whole Earth.
When the Lords anger is burning up and down the World, and his fury poured out
like fire every where, and the Rocks thrown down by him. Had we not need make
sure of his love, and be able to say the Lord is good and my strong hold, etc.
Nah. 1.14, 15, 16. When Hypocrites cannot stand (as they cannot before God
appearing in his dreadful and devouring wrath) h^d we not need make sure of
sincerity of Grace, Isa. 33.14, 15, 16. You may bear up your head for a time,
and go up and down careles^ but sooner or later, one way or other, there will
come such a devouring fire, such an appearence of wrath, such dreadful
Judgments as no false heart, now slight chaffy professor shall be able to stand
before, Mat. 3.12. He had need have Gold tried in the f^ee* Grace that is of
Golden solidity and purity* Dross and chafe will not bi^e the fire that
unkindled in the day of Gods Judgments* when he takes his Fan into his hand to
sever, purge out, and burn up the Chafe (the hypocrites and sinners in Sion)
that is mixed with the wheat, and found on the floor of the visible Church.
When Jerusalem's sins are ripe for Judgment, and God has waited his time upon
obstinate sinners and despisers of the Gospel (as he did on the Jews in and
after Christ's time) then a threshing and winnowing, fanning, and to the chafe
a burning time comes. Then indeed the Lord will lose never a grain of sound
wheat (it had need be sound and solid wheat that can bear the tossings of the
Fan, and the blasts of the wind, and not be heaved and driven quite away.) But
chaffy hypocrites and sinners will not be able to stand or abide such a time,
Amos 9.9. (or I will fan the house of Israel as Corn is fanned, tossed in a
fan) 10. Oh we had need be sure to be good and sound wheat at such a time, be
settled, strengthened, stablished in Grace, well built and founded; as Peter
prays for them here in Text. To a time of great afflictions, Sufferings and
Troubles, 1 Pet. 5 9, 10. in a time when Judgment was begun at the house of
God, 1 Pet. 4.17. and of fiery trials, v. 12. Oh at such a time it is a
suitable and a precious thing to have a lively Inheritance, as he begins the
Epistle, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5 6. When the Earth looks uncomfortably, when the face
of things in this lower world has terror, trouble and blackness in it (and
was it ever blacker than at this day!) It is then seasonable to be looking up
steadfastly into Heaven, and to get a clear sight of the Glory there and of our
Interest in it, Act. 7.54, 55, 56. Oh we might make a gain of all the troubles
of the times, did we turn them this way, to lift up our eyes to Heaven, and to
awaken our Souls to make sure of a portion there.

4. It is a shrewd sign of one that is not like to get to Heaven, to be
careless of making sure of it. For whence is this carelesseness, but from
taking up with and resting in other portions, things of this World (and see
Jam. 4.4. 1 John 2.15. they that take up their portion in the Earth, are not
like to see Heaven, to be sure in that way they never shall) from slighting,
despising and dis-esteeming Heaven, for what a man highly prizes and makes his
portion, his chief good, he will be solicitous and studious to make sure of: To
be careless herein, is as much as to say, that we make no great matter whether
we have or lose it, get or miss it. It shows one to be a negligent seeker of
Heaven and Eternal life (for if he were in good earnest, he would pursue the
matter till he made sure work on it, till the matter were brought to some issue,
he would seek till he find.) But it is only the diligent seeker that shall,
obtain and no other, Heb. 11.6. Prove. 8.17. and 13.4. Qui frigide rogat docet
n^gare. The Lord will not pin Heaven upon our sleeves: He will make us seek
after it in good earnest if ever we have it, Romans 2.7. Luke 13.24. there may be
fits and pangs of carelesseness, but God will recover and awaken, if he intend
mercy. They that seek and run to purpose, cannot endure to be at uncertainties,
1 Cor. 8.26, 27, 28. (uncertainly, vid. Dutch Anotat.) Paul cannot end endu^e
to run at such a rate, that he may be as like to lose as win, v. 24.

5. It is sure we were once in the way to Hell* we had need to look to it, to
make sure that we are got into the way to Heaven. We lie by nature children of
wrath, were set down into the World in Hell-path; and it may be did for a long
time palpably and evidently go on therein even in the broad way that leads to
destruction, and had we not need be sure and clear that we are got out of that
way and state, into the way and state of Eternal Life. He whose life was never
in danger, will not be so solicitous: But take a Malefactor that was condemned
to die, if there be any hopes overtures of pardon; how careful will he be to
have it sure, and under all the confirmation that may be. We are by nature
under a real title to Hell, guilty of sin whose wag^s is death, and by the
Curse and Sentence condemned to die, and under the power and dominion of sin
that was ^^^rying us to Hell and would inevitably do it if left to our selves:
Had we not need look that we have got a real title to Heaven, that the^e be a
reallity in our claim to that. An empty broken hope, a shadow, an ^h^^o^^^ncy
is not enough to set against a ^^^li^ys The C^rs^ is real, and sin real, and
our being heirs of Hell real: Oh is our pardon real, our fellowship with Christ
real, our title to Heaven real, our Regeneration real and certain, Joh. 3.3.5,
6. It is certain we were flesh, are we become spirit? (new Creatures, made
spiritual and holy) we were born naturally to an Inheritance in Hell, are we
indeed born again supernaturally to see the kingdom of Heaven?

6. Consider that great danger of being deceived here, it is a matter of highest
moment; to be deceived about everlasting life is a dreadful thing, and yet we
are wondrous prone and apt to be deceived, Mat. 7.13, 14. Christ tells the
Pharisees that they could not not escape the damnation of Hell, Mat. 23.33. and
yet they themselves thought that they could not but be heirs of Heaven, and
that whoever missed of happiness they should not, and that it was another sort
of people that were accursed, and not they, Joh. 7.49. Luke 18.11, 12.
multitudes have dropped to Hell, that lived and died in great expectations of
Heaven (being deceived, some through Haeretical previty, some through practical
hypocricy of heart and life) yea many that have been great professors, it may
be Preachers of the Truth, Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. Luke 13.24, 25, 26. Prove. 14.12.
Romans 2.17, - 21. Rev. 3.17. Luke 18.11, 12. Paul acts with all diligence in the
way of Salvation, as being quickened with fear, 1 Cor. 9.27. which (though he
was assured of his Salvation through grace) was a just fear in a condition
always, viz. in case he should be negligent, sensual, slight and slothful in
running for the prize, he might then fall short and be rejected at last, as a
spurious hypocrite; his being a Preacher would not save him. The guile and
deceitfulness of our hearts, the narrowness of the way, the manifold
Temptations of Satan and the World; do make it difficult, not to be deceived in
that great point. Oh what need have we with fear and diligence to labor after
a grounded sound assurance of a state of life, of utmost care and pains to make
our Calling and Election, and so our Glorification sure.

And there is much need to press such matters as these to quicken to this work,
for the heart is very backward to it; and apt to be slight and slothful in it,
and that is a main reason why so many live without assurance; because they
neglect and put of the matter, and will not be persuaded to set themselves in
good earnest about it, to take effectual pains to make all sure. It is the Lazy
Christian that usually lives without assurance.

Quest. What course may we take for the obtaining of this assurance of Eternal
Life and Glory?

Answ. For Direction here: We have many occasions (though not too many) to be
speaking somewhat of this nature: Let me at present propound something.

1. By way of means to obtain this.

2. By way of trial, or helps to discern and discover the truth and certainty
of our title to Heaven.

1. For a way of means to obtain this.

1. Pray much and earnestly for assurance; I speak properly to those that are
regenerate, or have hopeful beginnings of Grace in them; though the things we
speak may be of use also unto others, to mind them what they are to pursue
after: Where there wants Faith, pray for it; but where there is Faith, or
somewhat of it, pray for more of it; for growth and exercise and that in
special unto full assurance. It is Christ's own direction to his Disciples, Joh.
16.24. If we have not full Joy, it is because we have empty, slight and thin
prayers; they that are much in asking, shall be much in receiving both
Sanctifying and Comforting Grace. And oh sweet consideratlon, that it is the
mind and will of Christ that we should seek and pray for full Joy and Peace in
believing, so Joh. 15.11. He speaks to us for this, and he would have us speak
to God for it: He would not have you always drooping and complaining, nor live
a poor, scant, scrambling, beggarly life. He would have you have full Joy and
abound (be rich what are you beggarly, and have sc^r^e af^w rags of broken
hopes to cover you) Romans 15.13. Pray for this, this is according to his will
you shall be welcome to ask it of him 1 John 5.14, 15 and that is the way
(prayer according to his will with faith that he hears such prayers) to come to
know, as v. 13. The Lord would have us not only sip, but take full draughts of
the water of Life, Joh. 7.37. and that by (or in a way of) asking the same,
Job. 4.10. Prayer takes up what is left us in the promise: The Lord has left
you large portions of all Grace Sanctifying and Comforting; yea Eternal Glory
to be enjoyed fully hereafter, and in the assurance, hope and Comfort of it
here. Go and take it up by humble fervent Prayer; for it is the Legacy Christ
has left you. Turn all his promises into prayer, and desire him to do as he
has said, 2 Samuel 7.25, 27, 28, 29. You are thus far sure (at least) that he
has spoken of such things that he has to give, and that you are bidden pray
and seek for them, and that he will do them for them that heartily seek them.
Oh with what sweet hope and encouragement may you pray for these things. And
prayer is not only a means for the time to come, but it often brings in present
incomes of the good prayed for. The Bucket of prayer dipped into the well (of
Salvation, or) of the waters of life comes up full, and that many times unto
feeling as well as unto Faith, (for unto Faith true prayer always does so.)
How often does the Lord sweetly comfort and establish the Soul while the
praying for Comfort and stablishment, Ps. 4.6 7. How often does David in his
Psalms close with Praise when he began, with Prayer. We have examples in
Scripture of extraordinory appearances to Gods Servants, while they were
praying, Dan. 9.20.23. Act. 11.5. and 22.17, 18. and much more frequent, are
more ordinary Communications of Grace and Consolation in Prayer: but it must be
hearty, fervernt, importunate Prayer; empty, lifeless Forms and Customary
overly performances, do much harden the heart and quench the spirit, and do
provoke the Lord to withdraw, instead of coming near the Soul: But 2 Chronicles.
15.15. Luke 11.8, 9. Hos 12.3, 4.

2. Labor after the mortifying and subduing of your special and beloved sin,
your own iniquity. For while that prevails, that darkens the sincerity and
Efficacy of Grace in the Soul; breaks the Peace thereof, grieves the Holy
Spirit, who thence withdraws his Comforting work. But when that is subdued, and
there is a good measure of victory over it, and a plain penitent departing from
it, (not only by exchange of one bosom sin into another, nor by its bring out
of date in regard of the natural disposition of the Body, etc. but when really
mortified, made better to the heart, the Soul broken from and for it, watchful
against it, improving Christ for Redemption from it) that is a plain evidence
of the sincerity of Grace, Psalm. 18.21, - 23. If that master sin be mortified,
all sin is; and where there is true mortification, there is true union to
Christ by Effectual Calling and a state of Life Eternal. Hence the cutting off
of the right hand, i. e. of the bosom-sin, is accompanied with entrance into
life, (that is a thing accompanies Salvation, Heb. 6.9.) Mark. 9.43, - 47.

Hence when the Apostle would raise them up to a Heavenly frame, such as might
show them to be indeed risen with Christ: He calls on them to mortify their
special Corruptions, Colos. 3.1, 2, 3, 5. And now when sin is subdued, and the
Soul is taught to walk with God in his ways, the Lord will delight to manifest
himself and his Love (his comforting Grace) to the Soul, Joh. 14.21, 23. Act.
9.31. It is often seen that the Lord withholds and denies assurance, and lets
the Soul be followed with fears, and doubts, and troubles on purpose to
discover, imbitter and break the power of some prevailing lust, some sweet sin.
If you can tamper with your lusts, and make provision for the flesh and be at
truce with your sins, and entertain the delights of it: Now instead of
Comforting, the Lord will break your bones, if he loves you, he will let you
have no peace till you out with this guile and repent in earnes,t and throw
away this sweet sin, Psalm. 32. Oh mind and mark out your most prevailing, most
enticing beloved sins; and if that be the provocation, the partition wall
between God and you, throw it away. Isa. 30.22, 23.

3. Labor to keep Grace in action and exercise. Be much in acting all Grace,
both in the hearty and serious performance of holy duties, and in daily
renewing of repentance for daily sins, and of Faith by going to the Blood of
Christ for pardon, and for more of his Spirit; and also in the exercise of
other particular Graces (love, brotherly kindness, charity, patience, meekness,
self-denial, zeal, etc. as there is occasion for them, 2 Pet. 1.5, 8, 10, 11.

Exercise of Crace is the best evidence of Grace: Let a man breath, eat, walk
and work, he needs no other demonstrations that he is a living man; so would
you show and see and discern that you have the life of Grace, the life of
Christ in you, (and so are in a state of Salvation) up and be doing and acting,
performing the actions of a Christian life, be breathing after Christ in
Prayer, feed on him in the Promises and Ordinances, feed upon the word of God:
Can you feed, can you eat at every meal in the season of duty, (as Luke 24.41,
42, 43. that's an evidence of a living risen Christian) can you make a meal of a
Sabbath and your Souls are refreshed thereby, etc. and walk before God, get up
and walk in his ways, work the work of the Lord that is committed to you in
Christ's strength and name; this will demonstrate the life of Grace, 1 Cor.
15.10.

It is laboring working Grace that is not vain, or Counterfeit, or dead Grace,
Jam. 2.17, 18. And to this end put forth and exercise every Grace in its
season, Psalm. 1.3. The Lord gives us special seasons and occasions, on purpose
to draw forth the exercise of such and such a Grace, we might have marvelous
improvement of them for benefit and comfort, if the fault were not our own, as
1 John 3.17. there is a season to exercise love, kindness, compassion when he
sees and hears that his brother is in need, want or misery; now bowels should
act and stir, being made tender by the Grace of Christ: If love stir not, act
not now, sure the habit of that Grace dos not dwell in him. Another wrongs and
provoks you, now is a a season to act, meekness and patience, you are troubled,
and you swell, and fret, and are vexed: But you forget that the Lord is now
come to try you, whether you have any patience in you, whether you have learned
of Christ to be meek and low in heart, 1 Pet. 2.20, 21, 23. Here Is a season for
the Gospel-fruit; to see whether that Grace will bud and bring forth, whether
you can forbear and forgive, etc. as Colos. 3.13. It may be you are stirred up
by another to an act of Charity and kindness, an object and occasion of it
presented to you: The Lord has now sent season to draw forth such fruit (as
you know if there be life in the root of the tree when the season comes, the
Spring time is, the Sun shines, etc. Now the sap will rise, and it will bud and
blossom. If you see neither bud nor leaf, but a dry sear-top in the season,
you say it is dead) Oh if thy Grace be alive, the season will draw it forth: You
think you have other Graces, yea but this Grace must act now in such a season
of it, 2 Cor. 8.7, 8. Phil. 4.10, 17. So duties of Religion toward God, zeal
for his Glory against sin, duties of Holiness or Righteousness, be ready and
active therein, in the several seasons thereof, this is an excellnt Rule both
for the Increase and Comfort of Grace, 2 Pet. 1.5, - 11. He means, add the
exercise and practice of them: Labor to have each of these Graces (according
to their several objects and occasions and seasons) drawn forth into act and
exercise, and appearing in the fruits of it. For the Beeings and habits of all
Grace are implanted at once and at first: And when all sorts of Graces are
found in a Christian, and are lively to put forth themselves in the several
proper ways (for where is one in truth, there is all in the root, and that
should appear in the fruit in the season thereof) is a choice help to make our
Calling sure, and to have an open entrance. See Baxters Saints Rest, part 3.
page 166.

4. Be much in Meditation, serious spiritual Meditation on the word and
promises of God, the condition of thy own Soul, thy own wretchedness,
emptiness, vileness in thy self; the riches of Grace in Christ, the things of
Heaven, both in more occasional, transient opportunities; and in more solemn
seasons set apart for that purpose. Meditation applies general truths to our
selves in particular, soakes things into the heart, which else did but float in
the head and fancy; gives both a clear understanding, and also a relish taft a
savor of the truth, brings the Soul acquainted with the things of God, that
now they are no longer strangers, as Hos. 8.12. It digests the food that men
take in, in other Ordinances; yea it makes all the works and providence of God
to be meat and foo^ useful beneficial to the Soul, Psalm. 104.34. And hence it
does many ways both actuate and exercise Grace, and help to discover Grace.
And indeed a spirit o^ gracious meditation, when a man's thoughts and affections
(for both are acted in meditation) do frequently, and ordinarily practically
feed and dwell upon the word and things ^^ God, it is a clear evidence of a
godly man, Psalm. 1.1, 2. yea of a living fruitful Christian, v. 3. As
contrariwise that is the Character of the wicked. Psalm. 10.4. The godly man is
either in a frame for holy meditation, or sick while he wants it, (or so far as
he wants it) mourning under, striving, wrestling against the vanity and
carnalness of his own thoughts, and after more spiritualness. He falls very
short here, and the unstediness, and unsavouriness, unprofitableness of the
thoughts is much of that body of death which he groans under. But oh his bitter
mourning, and he is getting ground herein, and the more ground he gets, the
more comfortable: And those seasons wherein the heart is at liberty this way,
and is spiritually fixed, how sweet are they! But this meditation brings in
marrow and fatness, much Spiritual Joy and Comfort, Psalm. 63.5, 6. He that has
attained the excellency of spiritual and Heavenly mindedness, he has clear
evidence for Heaven, yea Heaven is already b^gun with him.

5. In special, be much in self-examination and trial of ou^ estates, which
ought to be one eminent and frequent subject of our meditation, 2 Cor. 13.5.
God gives assurance in the way of means, and of this means in special. Pursue
and follow home in frequent self-examination, by applying and considering the
Scripture-evidences of a state of Salvation, and searching whether they be
found with thee; so shall you come acquainted with your own estate, and the
spirit breaths in that way to help us to know the things that are freely given
us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. for the spirit bears witness with our spirits or
Consciences, Romans 8.16. And our spirits come to bear witness, or give verdict
for us in a way of reflecting upon, searching our selves, comparing our selves
with the word; and Judging our selves accordingly: Think it not enough to hear
of marks and evidences of a good estate, but use them, apply them home to your
Souls, and make a sad enquiry whether it be so and so with thee. And this leads
us to the second thing mentioned, viz. Trials whether we be those that shall be
certainly saved, or get to Heaven to this Eternal Glory the Text speaks of. And
we may conclude Affirmatively.

Evid. 1. If our Souls do choose God Communion with him for our portion (our
chief good) and blessedness. If ou^ minds (or judgments) esteem, our wills
embrace, and affections adhere unto (desire, love, delight in) God and the
enjoyment of him as our happiness: If that be the portion, the whole happiness
that our Souls choose; that we might have the favor, fellowship and fruition of
God Father, Son and Holy Ghost for evermore. (For Heaven as we have said,
mainly consists in the fruition of God) if that be the portion our Souls fix
upon, then we are men for Heaven. That portion is presented to us, and left
with us in our first entrance into Christianity, being expressed in our
Baptism, (the name of Father, Son and Holy Ghost.) And the fruition of that
name, the full enjoyment of God Father, Son and Holy Ghost in all the
manifestations and communications of himself, this is the end of our Christian
race, and makes up the perfection of Glory in Heaven. Consider, has the Lord
so showed thee the vanity of all other portions and things, the emptiness that
is in thy self, and the excellency of this portion, to have the blessed God for
thine according to the whole Covenant of his Grace, (2 Samuel 23.5.) so as to
take up with this and this only, that thou can say, as Psalm. 73.25. and 27.4.
(that is the voice and spirit of the holy Saints in Scripture, and so of every
truly gracious heart) Psalm. 16.5, 6.

It may happily be said still, how shall we know this? Why this one would think
should be a sensible and palpable thing, what a man makes his chief good, what
his heart is set upon, and he pursues and seeks as the design and desire of
his heart and life, and places his Happiness, his All in. When the covetous man
makes money and wealth his main design, his chief good; may not he himself
easily see that his heart is set there; yea even others may see it: He
subordinates all to that, and makes that the business of his life, that
Interest carries him still at every turn, that Byasses him. And the same you
may say of the Ambitious man for his honor, the Voluptuous man for his
pleasures, etc. And truly this may be seen in the Godly man, that he is for
God, and for the service and Glory of God, for Communion with him and enjoyment
of him in all his ways, that is his one thing, Psalm. 27.4. there his spirit
runs, Romans 1.9. He subordinates all to that, directs all his endeavors and
labors to that, 1 Cor. 5.8, 9. That is the Interest that carries him, there
you shall find him in all changes, (when he is himself at least, he may be
shaken a little by Temptation, and violently hurried this way and that way, but
the Needle of his Soul returns to that North pole, and rests not till it stand
fixed there: As it is with the Needle of a Compass touched by the Loadstone;
you may by violence shake it this way and that way, but thither it will return,
and there will fix and stand toward the North.) He will be for God still, 2
Cor. 5.13. (for God and so for his people, and ways, and Truth, and
Ordinances, for they go together) nothing can buy him off from that Interest,
Cant. 8.6, 7. Oh wonderful is the Efficacy in the turn, that God gives to the
Soul in the work of Conversion, and so in the after impress of Sactification,
that henceforth the Soul stands bent for God (set for God) and all the
temptations, affrightments, allurements of Hell and the World shall never
utterly turn it away from him, And truly Christians should so act and walk, as
to declare plainly what they are; for (what the chief good and portion they
seek is) as Heb. 11.14. The Covetous man declares plainly that he is for money,
and the Voluptuous man declares plainly he is for pleasures of the flesh, for
his Cups, etc. Oh the Godly man should declare plainly that he is for God and
for Heaven, for the Glorifying and enjoying of God for evermore. And verily God
will have his time sooner or later, to try men to the quick w^o and what they
are; are you for this or that worldly Interest, for wealth, or for being
uppermost in the World, envying those that are any higher than you? or for
liberty to sin, etc. Why then that will carry you away from God and from his
ways and interest; when God and Mammon part, then you will follow Mammon: But
if you be indeed for God, and you seek David's one thing, Psalm. 27.4. If that be
the master Interest in your Souls, then you will cleave to God whatever come;
and many waters shall not be able to quench your love to him.

SERMON IX.
2. IF we truly believe on the Lord Jesus Christ; he that believes on Christ
shall get to Heaven, the Scripture is plain for that, Act. 16.31. Joh. 3.16.
and 6.47. (he that shall live an everlasting life, must go to Heaven to live
that life there for ever, there is no living an everlasting life in this World)
1 John 5.10, 11, 13. Christ is the Ladder to Heaven (as we said the last time)
he that sets the foot of Faith on that Ladder, shall be carried up thither,
though no worthiness of his own to deserve or obtain it, no strength of his own
to ascend to it, 1 Pet. 1.5. Now for the discovery of a true Faith in Christ*
you often hear of that. But at present take some plain Scripture Characters of
a true Faith.

1. Does thy Faith grow in an humble, lowly, self-emptying spirit, Mat. 5.3. i.
e. humbled in the sense of thine own spiritual poverty and wretchedness, so as
to have no way but to go a begging to Christ for all. Those whom the Lord will
raise so high as Heaven, he first lays them very low in themselves: If ever he
make you so rich as to give you to Heaven, he will first make you very poor,
very empty, lest, vile, helpless, wor^^iless, strengthless, nothings in your
selves lying at the foot of free Grace in Christ* quite taken off from your
selves to fix upon a n^w root and foundation in Christ Jesus, Isa. 57.15. God
dwells with such, and therefore they shall dwell with God forever; pride shuts
out of Heaven, nothing more Psalm. 138.6. there shall never come near him) they
are the humble whom God will save, Job. 22.29.

2. Is there the nature and true spirit of Faith, viz. (according to the
expression in the Text to go no further) an hearty answer of obedience to the
Call of the Gospel. Has the Call of Christ in the Gospel pierced the ears of
thy Soul, yea does it pierce them continually and captivate thy Soul into
obedience [It is a saying of Doctor Sibbs, Soul Conflict, page 37.
that is an excellent way of knowing ones Faith, as when I know I believe,
because in hearing Gods gracious promises opened and offered unto me, the
spirit of God carries my Soul to cleave to them as my portion.] Does the
spirit so breath in the Call of the Gospel, as to cause thee to come to run to
him ( Isa. 55.5.) Do thou now hear and hearken to Christ when he he says
come in the lord of Grace [come unto me!] then thou shall one day hear him say
[come] in a word of Glory, Same word in Mat. 11.28. and 25.34.
Mat. 25.34. The Comer to Christ never cease coming (1 Pet. 2.4.) till he
come to him in Glory: But if the Lord have bowed thine ear, and drawn thine
heart to hear and obey the voice of Christ, this is sweet and clear evidence
for Heaven, Joh. 20.27, 28.

3. Consider the Concomitants of thy Faith. Is it accompanied,

1. With Repentance (or breaking off from sin, from all sin in heart and
affection, and any known sin in life ann Conversation?) so true faith is, Mark.
1.5. Act. 20.21. The path of sin is the pathway to Hell, Romans 6.21.21. Prove.
7.27. And to live and go on therein, to follow the trade of any way of sin, is
inconsistant with true faith, 1 John 3.6. But the way of turning from sin to
the service of God in Christ, is the path way of Life and Heaven, having a sure
connection therewith, though not as a meritorious cause, yet as an inseparable
Antecedent, Romans 6.22.

2. With willing taking of Christ's yoke upon you, subjection to his will in
every thing, ( Mat. 11.29.) as your head and husband, Ephesians. 5.23, 24. that you
can deny your selves, and your own wills in submission to his will (to him as
Lord, as well as Savior) and in special to his disposing will, to bear the
Cross at his appointment Mat. 16.24. patience is a con^omitant and a sweet
evidence o^ true Faith, Heb. 6.12, Revel. 13.10. When dif^^culties, temptations
(on right h^nd or left) sufferings, tribulations, perils do not drive you off
fr^^ the Love of Christ, of his truth or ways, or from the way to Heaven, the
way of the rule; this shows you to be good ground, and principled for Heaven
indeed, 2 These. 1.4, 5, 7. 2 Timothy 2.12.

3. With Love to Christ Jesus, Joh. 16.27. so to believe in Christ, as to love
him dearly and unfeignedly, is an evidence of true believing: And if you love
him, you love his truth, his Word, ( Mark 8.38.) his Ways, his Ordinances, his
People as such (hence that is an evidence for Heaven, 1 John 3.14. and 5.1. and
when the people of God are under affliction and suffering, as they were in the
Apostles time; and have no worldly advantage to allure you to love them or
cleave to them, but the contrary: It may be you must run great hazards if you
imbarque with them, then it proves a searching Trial: Of many Professors, there
are but few that prove of Moses mind, when it comes to Heb. 11.25.) And when
temptations of Worldly allurements, or Worldly threatenings (trouble) cannot buy
you off from the Love of Christ, Cant. 8.7.

4. With living upon Christ and by him, Gal. 2.20. That you cling to him as
your life, have your spiritual soul-subsistance in him, and repair to him for
Grace to live to God at all times; he is your spiritual livelihood, from whom
you derive spirit, strength and Grace, Heb. 12.1, 2: 2 Cor. 3.4, 5. and 12.9.
Joh. 15.4, 5. That is a clear demonstration of true spiritual (which is
Eternal) Life, when a man lives not from nor for himself, but from Christ, Joh.
6.57. and for or to him, 2 Cor. 5.15.

5. Is it accompanied with forsaking all for him, Luke 14.33. And that may be a
third evidence for Heaven.

Evid. 3. If by the Grace of Christ we are taken off from the World, and are
strangers, sojourners and pilgrims in it: Then it is a a plain Case, as Heb.
11.13, 14, 16. Every man has, and takes up his portion either in Heaven or
Earth; if not in Earth, then in Heaven; if here a pilgrim, then his home is in
Heaven. Nothing less than a Divine and Heavenly good, and a relish thereof by
an enlightened Soul can kindly take it off from and lift it above all Earthly
good: For I speak not of a weariness of the World, though frowardness and
discontent, but of a weanedness from it. The heart of every unregenerate man is
fixed, glewed to the Word, under a dominion of it, 2 Timothy 4.10. Ungodly men are
men of this World, and have their portion in it, Psalm, 17.14. Now to have such
acquaintance with Christ as does wean the heart from the World, lift it up
above it, enable the Soul to contemn it all in Comparison of Christ, Phil. 3.8.
and give victory over it, 1 John 5.4. This is a plain evidence of one that is
called out of the World to be a man of another World, or an Heir of Heaven.

Evid. 4. If we begin our Heaven here on Earth: For Heaven is begun here (in
some measure, though indeed but in a very poor little measure, compard with the
perfection that shall be in Heaven) by them that shall get to Heaven hereafter,
as viz.

1. In loving and maintaining Communion with God according to the measure of
this life: Do you now seek and enjoy the Communion with God in Ordinances; do
you behold him in the beauties of holiness through these glasses; that is a
pledge and beginning, and so an evidence of that full Communion you shall have
in Heaven, and of your seeing him there face to face; and on the Sabbath in
special: Are your Sabbath days of bosom Communion with God? That is a sweet
evidence that you shall keep an Everlasting Sabbath in Heaven, and that you are
preparing for that Sabatism that remains for the people of God, Heb. 4.9. If
strangers to God, and profane hearted on the Sabbath, you are not for Heaven.

2. In studying, and loving, and laboring after holiness, or in begun
Sanctification. The perfection of Holiness is the Glory of Heaven; but what
shall there be perfected, is here begun: Do you love Holiness and delight in
the ways of it, Romans 7.22. weary of sin, v. 24. following after holiness, Heb.
12.24. then you shall go to Gods holy dwelling place, into Heaven, and there be
perfectly for ever.

3. In Heavenly-mindedness. Having the heart there, and finding the things
thereof, thoughts, affections, Conversations above: That wherever it is, is a
sure mark of an heir of Heaven: there is sincerity, yea some eminency of Grace
where that indeed is, Phil. 3.15, 17, 20, 21. as Mat. 6.21.

Exhort. 2. To Believers especially when comfortably assured of Heaven: To
improve Heaven and the hope of it while on Earth. Make improvement of this
happy portion of Eternal Glory which God has prepared and reserved for you in
Heaven, and now given you in the promise. Though we be not yet come to the
fruition of it, yet that Revelation, and hope, and certain promise of it that
is given to the faithtful now in this life, is of great use, and may be
improved by them unto good purpose sundry ways. As, viz.

1. To raise and ennoble their Spirits, make them of a truly noble and
excellent temper, and free them from that baseness that sin has brought upon
the Spirits of men. To be born to great things, or otherwise in way of
promotion thereto, as to a great Estate, high Honors, and a Kingdom
especially: It does naturally raise and greaten the spirit for great designs,
delights, employments than others are. This point should make the Godly of a
Princely spirit, seeing they are heirs of a Kingdom, they should be indeed
Israel, every one as a Prince of God; of a Princely spirit both.

1. In regard of Employment. It ill becomes a Prince to be scraping Kennells,
or dwelling among Scullions in a Kitchen, or driving a petty pedling Trade to
get a penny, etc. So the heirs of Heaven should holily disdain to do the Devils
drudgery, to be Slaves to the World, or to a base Lust, to cringe and crouch to
a Temptation for a little outward advantage, to go a beging to the Creatures
for a little Comfort or Refreshment, as having nothing else to live upon; such
should be ashamed to be seen in the employment of sin, in the service of Satan,
or so to follow the World as to be under it, or slaves to it, 1 Cor. 6.12. Tit.
2.3. They should reign over the World, and have dominion over it, not be slaves
to it.

2. In regard of Affection and Delight, or what you give your minds unto. David
when King, yea when set apart for that Kingdom, did not mind the Ewes great
with young, as he did when a Shepherd. The Country Peasant minds his Cattle
and Farm, etc. But the Prince has greater and higher marters to mind, the
Affairs of a Kingdom. The heirs of Heaven should not mind Earthly things, or to
set their hearts upon things below, so as to be taken up with them, and look no
higher than them, (you may use them as Servants, Philip. 1.19, 20. Col^s. 3.1,
2. nor give themselves to the base pleasures of the flesh. For such to delight
in the pleasures of sin, fleshly lusts, is as if Princes should go among the
Swine to eat Swill and Husks, or they that have been brought up in Scarlet
embrace Dunghills. They that have God and Heaven to delight in, for them to
delight in a lust, in the pleasures of the flesh, is a shameful baseness and
unworthiness, Romans 13.11, - 14. The nearer we are to Heaven, the further we
should be from minding the things of the flesh, 1 Pet. 2.11. Yea not only vile
things (as are the things of sin, but small things, little things (such as all
the things of this World) are too low and mean for the great Heirs of Salvation
to set their minds and hearts upon. He that is an Heir to thousands, or to a
Kingdom, will he covet a pin or a point, or a poor thatched Cottage, or stand
upon such small matters, etc. He that is an Heir of Heaven, should be of a
greater spirit than to thirst after Gold and Silver, Honors and Riches in this
World; these are too low things for him who has infinitely greater matters to
satisfy himself with. All that he needs is (like a Prince absent in the
Country) but so much as will carry him home to the Court, to his Fathers house,
there he shall have enough: Should such a one care for Luggage for worthless
Lumber, or for a Load of thick clay.

3. In regard of Magnanimity and Courage* Great and Noble Spirits do excel in
Valor and Courage, fit for high Actions and Designs, not daunted with danger,
nor discouraged with difficulties that lie in the way of Great Atchievments;
and in special Valiant in War. So should the highborn heirs of Heaven be more
generous and noble-minded, than to be daunted with the difficulties and
tribulations that lie in the way to the Kingdom, Act. 14.22. Not so
pusillanimous, as to faint in the day of Adversity, Prove 24.10. as to give in
when the Sons of Anak and the walled Towns are talked of, now the Courage of
Caleb and Joshua becomes them that are bound for Heaven, for that Glory of all
Lands, and not the faint-heartedness of the rest. And to be Valiant in the Wars
of the Lord, undaunted in the Spiritual warfare, to hold on, and hold out to
the last gasp in conflict with temptations, corruptions, oppositions and
assaults of Earth and Hell, become those that are fighting for Heaven, and for
Eternal Glory there, for that Crown that is incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.25, 26, 27.
2 Timothy 4.7, 8. 1 Timothy, 6.12. Paul is of too great a spirit to be moved with all
the sufferings that the whole World can bring upon him, Act. 20.23, 24. He Will
not stir an inch out of his way (the way of the Rule) for them all; those are
light things with him, (2 Cor. 4.17, 18.) while his eye and heart is upon
Heaven. Contemptus a me est romanus and favor, and furor, said Luther. He can
contemn both the favor and fury of all the World. Yea this is a holy greatness
of spirit becoming those that are in choice of a Kingdom, even the Kingdom of
Eternal Glory.

Thus Heaven should raise and ennoble our Spirits: Conversing with great
objects, makes great Spirits. We see it daily, that according as the things and
objects are, great, or mean, that men converse withal; so they are high or low
spiri^ed ( Genes. 49.9, 10, 14, 15. Judah is for a Kingdom, and therefore he
has a Lion-like magnanimity of spirit: Isachar is among his Sheep-coats, and
Cow-houses, and Rural Tents, as also Reuben, Jugd. 5.16. And therefore they are
more ignoble, Ass-like servile spirited) The great things of the World are but
seemingly great, and therefore it is but a false, and shady, and spurious
greatness of spirit that the great men of the World have: But the true
Christian, how poor soever in this World, converses with the things that are
indeed great, God, Christ and Heaven, and Eternal Glory, Jam. 2.5. and
therefore true and genuine greatness of spirit, holy magnanimity and bravery,
is, and should be found with him. It is a shame for him, if the poorest,
meanest Believer have not more true greatness of spirit (humble indeed, and
nothing in himself, but high and mighty in Christ, strong in the Lord and in
the power of his might) then the greatest Nimrods of the World: They wrestle
not for corruptible Crowns, not for a fashion that pass^th away, and that will
leave them spiritless and succourless when real distress comes: But he has
that that will stand by him, and endure through all worldly changes, and is a
sufficient support against the same; even as Heaven is higher then the Earth,
so should the spirits of true Christians be above that of the World. Hence we
find among the Martyrs, poor mean men, women, sometimes have had a spirit above
their Persecutors, when clothed with all Worldly greatness, as Act. 6.10. Mat.
10.18, 20. and in their greatest sufferings they have been more then
Conquerours, Romans 8.35, 36, 37. Sin has debased the spirit of man, and made it
so vile and low, that every temptation, every Worldly allurement or
affrightment overcomes it, and tramples upon it. But Grace raises the spirit of
a Believer who is risen with Christ, especially when it grows up to a sight of
Glory and lively hope thereof: when Faith and Holiness are lively and active,
it makes a man to be of an excellent spirit; above the spirit of the World,
Dan. 6.3. So far as this Excellent spirit is wanting in Christians, so far they
are carnal and Earthly and little acquainted with Heaven. Oh get thine heart
filled with Heaven, that will lift it above the Earth, and above that
Earthliness and baseness, and weakness that sin and estrangement from God does
clog it with.

2. Improve Heaven, and your hope thereof unto Consolation, or spiritual Joy
and Comfort. This use the Lord expects and requires you should make of that
hope of Glory hereafter which he gives unto you here, Luke 10.20. Mat. 5.12.
Romans 5.2. 1 These. 4.18. Heaven when actually enjoyed, is the fullness of Joy and
Comfort, Mat. 25.21. Psalm. 16.11. Luke 16.25. And while it is but promised and
hoped for, it is a matter of great Joy and Comfort. If any of the faithful live
without this Joy, they do either discouragedly (and sinfully) put away, or
carelessly neglect the portion that God gives them. Oh we have too much Earthly,
but too little Heavenly Joy; an Earthly Carnal heart is the reason of that,
whereby we live below the Condition that God calls to. Comfort and Joy is the
life of every life, (whether natural, rational or spiritual) If a man have no
Joy of this life, it is a death rather than life. No life so full of Comfort as
the life of a Christian, is, or may be: Spiritual life has Glory in the end of
it to put Comfort into all the way. Oh what happy and Comfortable lives might
we live, if the fault were not our own; when as we have the whole Covenant of
Grace, and therein a whole Heaven made over to us to rejoice in; God and Christ
and his spirit to be our everlasting portion, and not only an Interest in him
at present, but full fruition of him in Heaven made sure to us. What though
there be tribulations, bitterness in the way; there is sweetness enough in the
end to swallow up all the bitterness thereof, and to make it a light thing, as
2 Cor. 4.17. and therefore notwithstanding that we may rejoice more
particularly therefore, let the fore-thoughts of Heaven be matter of Comfort
and Consolation.

1. Against the loss of any of the good things of this World, one or more, some
(yea) or all, Heb. 10.34. Though you lose this or that on Earth, if you have
Heaven, you have that that is better, and virtually you have it still: A better
good contemns an inferior good in it. For Major continet minus: He that has
White-bread enough need not care though he lose a Brown-Loaf: He that has God
and Heaven to rejoice in, can lose but little, though he should lose all the
the Earth: He has the best good, and the main still and more, enduring a
permanent, a never-failing good, a good that cannot be lost. Whatever you lose
here, you have a portion in Heaven that you cannot lose; no spoiler can spoil
you of that, Mat. 6.20. He cannot lose much whose portion is in Heaven, for
that cannot be lost, and all the rest (all the World) is but a little, an
inconsiderable thing, Luke 16.10, 11, 12. The much (the main) the true riches,
and that that is your own (your proper portion that is assigned to you by God,
to have, and to hold forever) that is whole and safe still. They that have
great Estates, they may bear it to lose a little, and not feel it much; yea,
that that would be to another man the loss of his whole Estate, he may bear it
to lose a little; yea should it be all Earthly Comforts, that to an ungodly man
is his whole Estate, it is all that ever he has, he may well wring his hands
and wail, and take on as one undone: But the Godly that has all the Glory of
Heaven, all the good of the Covenant of Grace for his own; it is but a
flea-biting to him, but a little, nay indeed none of his proper Estate and
Portion; but Additionalls, but thread and Paper cast in over and above. Moses
can lose and leave all the Glory, Wealth and pleasure of the Court of Pharaoh,
and make no matter of it, while he looks to this recompense of reward, Heb.
11.24, 25, 26.

2. Against the fears and dangers of Evils that may befall us in this World,
and all manner of afflictions therein; fears and threatening dangers of what may
come, is often no small part of our trial and affliction. But Luke 12.32. in
times of greatest fears this is a quieting thought, that there can come nothing
that shall keep you from Heaven if you be the Lords: Whatever good be taken
away, it cannot take away Heaven from you; whatever evil comes it cannot hinder
you from Heaven; (It cannot separate you from everlasting Communion with) nay
it shall further you rather thereunto. And if so, then you may triumph over all
things, and evil instruments in the World that do or can annoy you. Romans
8.35.37, 38, 39. If you do or most actually go through some Tribulations and
sorrows, (such as are pinching and painful to the flesh,) yet fear them not
(with any discouraging dismaying fear) for they are but a small matter compared
with the Glory that follows, Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.17. And also you shall be sure
to get well through them; if you be sure to get to Heaven, (as every true
Believer is) then you are sure to get well and safe through all the troubles
that ly on this side Heaven. If a man in his Journey come to a place of mire,
or water; if he apprehend danger of drowning, or of not getting safe through,
that dr^ads him; but if no danger of that, if sure to get well through, why the
present trouble or hardship of wetting his foot, putting them in the cold
water, etc. he makes nothing of that. Why all that are true Believers, God has
assured you of this, that you shall never come to any bad place, to any trouble
or trial in all the way to Heaven; but you shall get well through, and safe to
Heaven at last, Isa. 43.2. Why then the present trouble of a little hardship
and pain to the flesh, should be no great trouble to you, 1 Pet. 1.4, 5, 6. But
when troubles are in the Earth, (as they are even to astonishment to this day)
then should you go up and find Comfort in Heaven: If you have Heaven to set
against Earth, and all Earthly evils, you have enough. While we tarry below, or
look only downward, or round about us, we may sink as Peter on the water: But
look upward, away to Heaven, (look up steadfastly into Heaven with Stephen) and
there all is calm and comfortable, and speaks more peace and Comfort to the
faithful, than all the World can speak trouble.

3. Against all the difficulties, straits and conflicts that lie in the way to
Heaven. The way indeed is strait and hard to flesh and blood, Mat. 7.14. it is
full of troubles from the World of temptations from Satan, oppositions from the
flesh, trials from God; requiring a continual warfare, conflict and exercise
in all these respects, and much pains and care both to get into, and keep in
the right way. It is so waylaid with enemies, that you must be fain to fight
at every step, 1 Timothy 4.6, 12. Be it so, yet there is that in the end that does
infinitely overbalance all the troubles in the way. It is but going through a
miry-lane to a wealthy Palace, or breaking through a rainy-day to go at the
time appointed to take possession of a great Estate (who sticks at that?) We
have sometimes mentioned that passage of Chrysostom [ vid. apud Buroughs on
the Excellency of the Soul, page 358.] great difficulties are rendered small
when the matter is exceeding great for which they are gone through. Who thinks
it much to ride and run through frost and snow, mire and water, night and day;
when a Kingdom, nay but a private Estate, an Inheritance, a good sum of Money
lies at stake: Men will go through great pains and difficulties and make
nothing of it for those things which the World accounts great. But they are all
trifles to Heaven, 1 Cor. 9.25. Remember the greatness of Heaven's Glory that
will lessen and lighten (2 Cor. 4.17.) yea sweeten all your labor and travail
to it. Look upon the end when you are pressed with the difficulties of the way;
so Moses did, Heb. 11.26. and Paul did, 2 Cor. 4.18. Eternal Glory is worth
Traveling for, worth Praying for, waiting, watching for, worth sweating,
suffering, striving, fighting for, and it will quit, cost and make amends to
the full. Israel had good reason to venture through hazards and difficulties,
and to go on clearly through them all, when as Canaan was such an exceeding
good Land, Numb. 14.7, 8, 9. Psalm. 106.24. so here. But seeing you are called
to Eternal Glory, travail on cheerily thitherward, though it be through
hardships and difficulties, stick not at them; there is that in the end, and
that promise of certain assistance in the way; that is enough to carry you
through. Heaven will make amends for all.

4. Against those spiritual evils and wants that you are here laboring under,
which of all other are the sorest exercise and saddest discouragement to a
gracious heart: Heaven will cure them all; the very fore-thoughts whereof is
full of Comfort.

1. Sin and remainders of Corruption, that is, the great and bitter complaint
and vexation of the Saints, Romans 7.24. that they never be free, in no duty, at
no time but still evil is present with them, and often in the prevailings of
Corruptions, and hurrying impressions of sin, make work for bitter repentance:
And after all means, mercies, afflictions, Prayers; yet the indwelling
Corruption returns, and appears again, etc. Why e're long you shall be rid of
this troublesome inmate; Heaven shall set you free for ever: No body of death
there, none of the old man shall accompany you thither. The time is coming (oh
happy time, the very thoughts of it may make you leap for Joy) when you shall
never have vain thought more, never be troubled with corruption more, never
feel any unsavory heart more, never vexed with temptations more; but among the
spirits made perfect, serving and enjoying God with sin, without weariness,
without interruption and end. Heaven was never defiled with sin, (the Devil did
not sin there, but in this lower World, and was shut out of Heaven for his sin)
nor ever shall be. In that holy place you shall be perfectly holy for ever.
Hence,

2. Heaven will cure the imperfection of Grace, which we groan under here,
having none but the first fruits of the spirit, Romans 8.23. We groan under
spiritual imperfections, wants, weaknesses. Grace though begun, is is but low,
and little, and weak. Hence we are pressed with spiritual wants, both of
Holiness and Comfort, falling short in every thing; our seize poor and
defective: We are mourning and striving after perfection, but reach it not: But
in Glory Grace will be perfected, that is a state of perfection, Heb. 12.23.
Every Saint will then become to a perfect man, Ephesians. 4.13. no longer a babe and
childish, rather Carnal than Spiritual, as man 1 Cor. 3.1. and 13.9, 10, 11,
12. Oh glorious and happy day, when the Image of Christ shall be completed in
us, and we shall be fully like him, 1 John 3.2. you shall then have that
fullness of Grace and spirit, which you are now praying and mourning: Then will
all your Prayers be answered, all promises fulfilled to the height, and as
Josh. 23.14. The day is coming when every Grace shall be full grown; when there
shall be perfect love, perfect holiness, perfect knowledge, perfect unity,
perfect conformity to the will of God. A dram of Grace is more worth than all
the World, but what will Grace in perfection be, when you shall be filled with
all the fullness of God, as full of God as you can hold, or can desire to be.
Never any more complaints of want or weakness; to be sure then there shall be
such a time, and that you shall come to it, what a joyful thought is this!

5. It affords comfort against that absence from the Lord and want of enjoyment
of his presence, which here we are mourning under, 2 Cor. 5.6, 7, 8. the
greatest presence of God that we here enjoy at any time, is but absence in
comparison. How often do we find the Lord withdrawing and absenting himself,
hiding his face, leaving us at a loss; and when after mourning and seekings, he
does draw near, and let out himself in any Ordinance or promise; yet it is but
little in comparison, and soon interrupted and clouded again, and it will be
so: Expect not a full and satisfactory and constant uninterrupted enjoyment of
God, a morning without clouds here: That is reserved for Heaven; we shall be
complaining of defects in our Communion with God while in this World: But
Heaven will answer and satisfy all our desires and expectations in this
respect. It will bring us into the presence of God, and set us before his face
for ever, Psalm, 41.12. we shall then be never absent, but always present with
the Lord, I These. 4.17. If God had not reserved this for another state and
place, we might wonder that we can reach no more of it, nor that after all our
Prayers and mournings we get so little of it, and find so many withdrawings,
and sin and World are suffered to put in, and make so many interruptions: Oh it
is to make us look and long for another World; make that use of all the defects
and interruptions we find in our Communion with God: Prize Heaven and be
waiting for that day of full Redemption, and think not to enjoy our Heaven
here: But be willing to go hence that we may go to God; be willng rather to be
absent from the Body, that we may be present with the Lord, that we may be with
Christ which is best of all, Phil. 1.23. willing not only to trade into that
Country, and with much ado fetch some tastes of the Commodities thereof
hither; but to remove thither, and there possess the fullness thereof, even of
Beatifical Communion with God Father, Son and Holy Ghost for evermore. In the
mean time let the forethoughts and belief of it (now while we walk by Faith,
and not by sight) be a comfort and rejoicing in hope that we shall one day have
what now we want; what now we pray and seek for, but cannot fully reach.
Believing rejoice with Joy unspeakable: Believing that there will come a time
when you shall lie in his bosom, and see his face, drink in the rivers of his
pleasures without imperfection, without interruption, and without end.

SERMON X.
3. IMprove Heaven and the hopes, promises and forethoughts of it, to quicken
you to prepare for it and for the great Glory there. Even those that are in
Christ, and have Grace begun in them, and have hopes to get to Heaven at last;
yet they may be unready and unfit for Heaven, unprepared to go away thither
when ever the Lord pleases. But we ought to be prepared; and the consideration
of it should stir us up to labor to be fitted for it, Colos 1.12. Mat. 24.44.
and 25.10. Romans 9.23.

Quest. How may we come to be prepared for Heaven? or what is this readiness,
and how obtained?

Answ. A main thing in it is to get a portion in Christ. Get into a state of
Justification and Salvation; and good evidence thereof. Give all diligence to
make your Calling and sure.

But this we have spoken of before; we are now speaking to those that are in
Christ; yea especially to those that have some Comfortable assurance of it,
that have a well-grounded hope of Heaven; you have got much when you have that,
and are in a great measure ready; but yet that is not all, they that are in
Christ, and have some good hold of him by Faith, have further need to be
prepared for Eternal Glory. As viz.

1. By growing in Grace. Labor to grow in Grace; and thereby to be ripe for
Heaven. Though the Cor^ be come up, yea grown up and eared; yet it is not fit
to be gathered into the, Garnertill it be ripe. If the seed of the word have
taken place in thy heart and sprouted, and come up, and be above ground that
thy self and others may hopefully discern it, that is a comfortable thing: But
alas thou art too green and raw, thou need a great deal more time, and Sun,
and growth, to fit you for Heaven; your stalk is not grown yet, nor your ear
filled nor hardened, you need more solidity and hability, and consistance of
Grace: you are not fit for the Sickle nor the Flaile yet; (to pass through
death) nor to be laid up in the Chambers of Glory: You had need improve every
days Sun, and every drop of Dew and Rain; all means and Ordinances, and the
influence of the Spirit therein to help on your growth; that so at the last you
may be as a shock of Corn coming in its season. And you must be willing to
stand abroad till then, though it be in the wind, and Sun, and weather of this
troublesome World, till full ripe; and then you shall be Inn'd and carried into
the Heavenly Garner. Heaven is the perfection of Grace, thy Grace must grow a
great deal before it come to that: It is far far short of it, it had need be
growing daily; thou art but a dwarf, a babe, yet it would be a fearful thing
for thee not to grow; (as it is to see a little child not grow,) you must come
to a perfect man, to a full stature if you be Christ's, and for Eternal Life
indeed, and how can that be if you do not grow. If you be a living, you must
and will be a growing Christian. If you be one that shall live in Heaven
forever ( i. e. in the perfection and adult state of Grace) you must grow while
you are in your childhood here on Earth, Eph^s. 4.13.14, 15. Think often of the
necessity, the absolute necessity of growth.

Think, I must have more Grace than I have, I must get further on in the way of
Grace if ever I get to Heaven: For there is perfection (which how far am I
short of) and and I must press and get on nearer and nearer toward that
perfection while I am in the way to it* if ever I get thither.

Take a man that is in a Journey, and has gone a good way, why the steps that
are remaining are as necessary as those that are past, if he mean to get to his
Journey's end: If he sit down and stop in the and w^y, he will no more get
thither than if he had nev^r set out. It is as necessary that you pr^ss ^^
forward, and make a progress in the way to: ^eaven, if you mean ^o g^t home
thither, as it was that you came thus far: Oh therefore be of Paul's mind, (so
the sincere will b^) Phil. 3.12, 13 14, 15. Yea, if we do not go on forward
toward H^aven, we shall be in danger to fall back to Hell: Negl^ct of growth is
the High way to Apost^^y Heb. 6.1.4. q. d. unl^ss we go toward perfection we
shall go backwards, and be in danger of utter Apostasy. Hence the sincere and
truly gracious (the Eff^ctually Called) cannot, shall not content themselves
with a little, or the measure they have attained, or stop in the midway, but go
on. They that are indeed appointed for Heaven, ( i. e. for full and perfect
Communion with God in Christ) shall keep traveling on till they come there.

Oh therefore labor after growth: Be as hungry after milk to grow by, (labor
as much for to take in the good of every Ordinance for growth) as ever you were
at first Conversion to get Life, and the being of Grace when felt by a total
want: Yea the taste of Gods Grace should make us more intense than we could be
before we tasted. It Is a dangerous thing when persons because they have got
something, and go for Saints, and have some hope of Heaven, then sit still and
grow full and careless, and all their prayers and seekings grow flat and
slight, and they feel no need of Ordinances, but despise them. And so spiritual
fullness and security, and pride, and sloth seize upon them; and when they stand
at a stay may quickly grow worse and decline and are in the highway to utter
Apostasy: But if God love you, he will fire you out of this frame. Oh you keep
open doors of a formal lifeless Profession, but what growth is there, what
progress, or intense and earnest strivings (prayers, mournings, labors) after
growth? Think it not a small matter to be in a stupefied withered condition,
rather of the losing than winning hand: There may be a winter upon Grace for a
time; but if your springtime return not, it will be plain, that you are dead
tree^. Oh be growing (and if you be acting, you will be growing; exercise and
growth of Grace go together: be active, stirring and lively in every duty, in
every good work in the season of it) that is both an evidence and a preparation
for Heaven.

2. Be loosened from this World; for while staked down and fixed here, while
you shoot forth your roots into the Earth, and grow here as in your place of
settlement and rest, you are unfit and unready to remove to Heaven; yea, or to
be traveling toward it. It is he that is a stranger and pilgrim in the Earth,
and that dwells in tents here, ready on a short warning to pluck up stakes and
be gone, that is a faithful seeker of that better Country and Traveller toward
it, Heb. 11.9, 10, 13* 14, 19. You cannot have two homes, nor two rests, nor
two portions: If you take up your home and rest in this World, you are not
prepared nor principled for Heaven, nor fit to go thither as your home, Etern I
dwelling. Be loosning and drawing off your hearts from the World; expect not
either a perpetual, nor yet a long abode here, (let not that be your inward
thought, while your outward and common word is, that we must all die, and be
gone over a while, Psalm. 49.11.) Be sensible of the vanity and emptiness here:
Do not so much as desire your portion in this World, but make choice of another
portion, Psalm. 17.14, 15. Be often thinking of, and expecting and waiting for
your removal from hence into another World, Job 14.14. Heb. 13.14. when under
the sanctified sense of our non-continuance in this City, we are in a fit
posture of se^king one to come.

3. Get enlarged, lively and dear affections to Christ, so as to love and long
to be with him. Heaven is the place of fullest and nearest Communion with God
in Christ, and therefore of strongest, sweetest and most ardent affections to
him; the more strong and lively our affections are, the ^^tter we are for
Heaven, and the fitter to leave all to go thither. And indeed the nearer we
come to God, and to our home with him in Heaven, the stronger our affections
will be to him. As Holy Bradford said a little before his end: As it is with men
in sailing (says he) when they come near to the shore, or Haven where they
would be, so the nearer I am to God, the nearer I would be: And (says he) I
have given over all care and study, and only do I covet to be talking with him,
whom I have always studied to be withal, [Fox vol* 3. page 305.] Heaven is
the place of love, the letting out and acting of love between Christ and his
Saints, and the same is begun here: The more affectionate love we have to Jesus
Christ, the fitter we are for Heaven. Hence those that are fit for Heaven, are
described by that Character, that they love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8.

They love his company, and because but a little of it here, therefore they
would go home to have it fully; they love and long for the presence of Christ,
and to enjoy it in the fullness thereof, Phil. 1.23. 2 Cor. 5.8. Let Christ
alone have your hearts, your whole hearts, let them not be divided and
scattered to other things: And if you have lost your affections (your first
love) recover them out of the hands of the Creatures, that sto^e them away from
Christ, and be content with him and his love alone, now you are comfor^ably fit
for Heaven, and for living t^^re alone with him separated from all the World.
Oh when we have large and overflowing affections to the World can pour out
buc^^ts full there, but scarce a drop for Christ, hearts straightened and shut up
toward him, that we can live and rest in Creatures wi^^out God, or without
Communion with him from day to day; but God and all his love and promises
cannot content us if Creature Comforts fail, or we be parted from them: Alas we
are far unfit for Heaven; this is not a spirit for Heaven, these earthly, low,
carnal hearts are unfit for Heaven. Get them raised to more Holy and Heavenly
affections, and more bosom delight in Christ, then you are fit to go into his
bosom, and to live at rest there for ever.

4. Be finishing of your work, and to that end continually doing your present
work with all your might; that is a part of our preparation: While our work is
not done, we are not ready; but Joh. 17.4, 5. when we have finished our work on
Earth, then we are ready for Glory in Heaven: Now we cannot finish the whole
work of our whole lives end: But God has appointed each days work and hours
work, the present duty of each season, by doing that, finished the work of the
day in its day; the work of every duty in the season thereof: now you are ready
whenever the Lord shall please to come and call you, that he shall find you not
idle not behind-hand, but doing the work appointed you in his name and for his
Glory, then blessed are you, Luke 12.40, 42, 43, 44. Do what God has
appointed, called you to, and that lies upon you in the season of it: Be
continually so doing, then are you ready for your Lords coming. Is there any
work that lies upon thy hand, that Conscience tells thee should be done without
delay; as to get thy soul settled in assurance of Gods love, to clear up thy
evidences, make thy Calling sure, to get down such rebellious strong
Corruptions, etc. or in thy place, in thy Family, Church, Common wealth, is
their service to be done which God calls loud for. Oh fore-slow it not, be not
slack or slothful in it, but finish, dispatch, pursue thy work; be doing with
all thy might.

5. Be upon your watch; in a wakeful sensible, attentive, vigilant frame and
posture. That is the posture of those that are ready to meet the Lord and to go
to him whenever he calls, Mat. 24.42, 43 44. Watching is the way to be ^^ad^,
or a part of readiness, so Luke 12. 36 37, 40. The Lord has told us, he will
come and take us out of this World into another, but we know not when, and he
has promised great and Glorious things to those that humbly wait on him, and
for him; great is the danger of missing the good of the promise and miscarry^ng
at last ( Heb. 4.1.) unspeakable is the happiness of those that obtain it.
Hence are we to watch; watch against all the enemies of our Eternal Salvation,
within and without (watch to escape all the snares and dangers that lie in the
way, the snare of thy own Iniquity, the snares of an evil intoxing and and
deceitful World, etc.) Luke 21.34, 35, 36. watch unto duty to be attentive
therein, Ephesians. 6.18 And watch and wait for God and for his coming to call us
hence, observing also his goings toward you in all his dispensations, that we
may be ready to attend him and meet him therein, as Luke 12 36. Be wakefully
sensible of every thing, of all that concerns your souls or the Glory of God;
watching speaks the unbinding of the senses. A sleepy, sottish, senseless
posture, is a very unready posture to be found in: The secure, senseless,
sleepy person, is unfit and unready, either to live profitably, or to die
comfortably. But he that is found watching (awake, and vigilant, and sensible,
though poor and weak, yet in a sensible manner, etc.) need not be dismayed
whatever come: The watching Christian is a blessed Christian, Luke 12.37. And
if after Conversion (as often it comes to pass) after first affection and
prosession, you have fallen into slumbering fits and secure frames (while so,
you are not ready, but) be awakned again, and recover your light, life, sense,
diligence, and be in a fr^sh posture of watching for the Lord: So the wise
Virgins are after their slumbering time, Mat. 25.5, 6, 7, 10. Oh in prove all
the lights (v. 6.) God lifts up in word and works to that ends to get awake
that we may be ready for Everlasting Communion with the Lord.

4. Improve this point unto Heavenly mindedness. If God have called us to
Eternal Glory in Heaven, given us Heaven, the promise and the hope of it; how
should our minds and hearts be upon it, as the heart of the Heir is upon the
Estate he shall have at full Age, of a Prince upon the Kingdom he is to come
unto, so Phil. 3.20 our hope is laid up in Heaven, and therefore our hearts
should be there, Colos. 1.5. Mat. 6.19, 21. It is the duty of all (even of yet
strangers) to set their hearts upon Heavenly things by way of s^^king after
them, and after a portion in him, Job 6 27 But they that have a pro^ise
thereof, and an Interest therein already given to them, they have more reason
and more advantage to lift up their minds and hearts thereunto. The H^irs of
Glory should surely be mindful thereof. To this purpose.

1. Let your thoughts be much upon Heaven and Heavenly things. Has God given
you Heaven in the promise, then look upon it, see the breadth and compass of
this gift, take many views of it as you are able, even as Abraham was to do of
the Land of Canaan the type of it, when yet he had no foot of it in hand, but
only it was given him in the promise of God, Genes 13 14, 15, 17. And when you
can view it, and go over it as yours, your own ^all this is m^ne) that will
make the view of it wonderful sweet and di^ightful. While Heaven is to us as a
strange Country, which we have no Interest in; we are strangers to it in our
thoughts: But when it is our own, this makes the thoughts of it familiar and
pleasant. Think much of Heaven, or of the things of Heaven, if you think of the
things of God, then you think of the things of Heaven (it is not necessary to
confine our meditations to Heaven strickly so called: All the things of God and
of his word are Heavenly things; the enjoyment of God is the main thing in
Heaven: Yet the forethoughts of the full enjoyment of God in Glory with freedom
from all sin and imperfection, is a gloriou object of our meditations, and
should still be the Journey's end and Rest of all our thoughts and desires,
which we should be traveling after) our thoughts are capable of ascending into
Heaven now, and unto Jesus Christ at the right hand of God, etc. Though our
bodies, our persons be not; and should we keep them imprisoned here below,
thrust them into dungeons, and bury them in the dust of the Earth, when as they
might mount upward, and walk at liberty in the Galleries of Glory, in the sweet
presence of God by the help of his word (for do not rove into empty, vain,
soaring speculations, but take up the word along with you; let Scriptures be
the guide and matter of your m^ditation) take a turn there now and then, that
you may not be strangers there; that you may say as Dr. Preston when dying, I
shall but change my place, not my Company; your Company may be now with God and
Christ, and so it shall be there.

2. Set your affections upon Heaven and Heavenly things: Affect Heavenly things
as the best things. Love, esteem, desire, delight in the things of God and
Heaven, and choose them before all the things of the World, Col. 3.1, 2. that
your hearts may be there (having taken up your treasure and portion there)
before your persons be, then it will be no strange or uncouth thing for your
persons to go thither, you do but go thither where your hearts have been long
before. The soul (as they say) is rather where it loves then where it lives.
You converse in Heaven (you may be said as it were to be in Heaven) if your
hearts and affections be there, as Act. 7.39, Though their bodies never
returned in A^gypt, yet in their hearts they went back thither, (and so many
whose faces by pro^e^ion are toward Canaan, Heaven, yet their hearts are in the
World and upon their Lusts Ezekiel. 33.31.) So the lively Christian goes up to
H^aven in his heart, though his body be here on Earth.

But hence despise and dis-affect ^l^ Earthly in Comparison of H^avenly things,
that we are said to mind most, which we have most affection and spirit for,
which we lost most. If we have any true taste of Heavenly things, we cannot but
prefer them before all Earthly things whatsoever, 2 Cor. 4.18.

3. Drive a trade for Heaven. Be trading to the Country now: By Faith and
Prayer co^^rsi^^ with God in Christ, and receiving, d^^^^^g from all H^avenly
Grace and Good. You have Conversation in Heaven when you trade thither; you act
as Citizens of Heaven (as the word in Philip 3.20.) when you have free trade
there, free Commerce and Intercourse at all times. Christ teaches us to be
daily trading, Heaven, when he teaches us to pray daily unto God as our Father
which is in Heaven, to God in Christ as an Heavenly Father, an Heavenly
Majesty, and a fountain of H^avenly good things, that has Heavenly (has Spirit
Grace, Fellowship with himself) to give to them that ask him, to them that
trade with him by Prayer for such things, Luke 11.13. Let the Commodities of
Heaven be above all precious to you: Buy them at any rate be willing to be at
any cost, pains, labor and hazard for them: willing to part with any thing you
have in hand (in this World) for them; willing to adventure much (as they that
trade to Rich Countries, they venture much thither) to adventure Estate, and
Strength, and Life, and all you have in this World, so you may take it up in
Heaven, and have it repayed you there, (as every spiritual adventure most
surely shall, Mark 10.22, 30. Mat. 5.11, 12.) Heb. 11.25, 26. and be sensible
of Every stoppage between Heaven and your Souls, of any interruption of
Intercourse between Christ and you: when Prayer speeds not, when Christ comes
not in with his Influences, when they hear no good news from Heaven, God hides
his face, and suspends and withdraws his Communications of Grace and Comfort)
The Saints that are Traders to Heaven, are very sensible of such things.

But this is a part of having our Conversation in Heaven (acting as tree men
there) to have constant trade and Commerce there. And this the word in Phil.
3.20. may in a special manner lead unto. And H^nce.

4. Judge of our condition, and of the weal or woe (the comfort or discomfort
thereof) by Heavenly concernments and Considerations: As we have more or less
of Heavenly benefits, and Heavenly incomes, so Judge we our Condition to be
better or worse. That is an act and fruit of Heavenly mindedness so to do: It
is a meditation of that Holy Martyr Bradford, on that Clause the Lords Prayer,
Our Father [which art in Heaven] that the Lord would teach us to Judge of his
Fatherly love by Heavenly Benefits, and not by Earthly and Corporal. As it
minds us (as he also says) that Heaven is our home, for it is our Fathers
house, whither all his Children must at last be gathered; so in the mean time
to Judge of his Fatherly love rather by Heavenly benefits and blessings, than
by Earthly and outward; for oftentimes the wicked prosper more in the World,
and have more Worldly ben^fits than the Children of God; so that by (this
direction in our daily Prayers) the Lord would pull up our minds from Earth and
Earthly to Heaven and Heavenly things [ Bradfords Meditations page 21.22.] If
we sh^^l^ look upon Earthl^, outward, visible and present things, how often
might the p^^^^ of God (the truly pious) be judged to be of all men m^st
miserable 1 Cor. 15.19. But look upon He^venly and Spiritual Riches and
Comforts, and upon the fullness thereof that is laid up for them in Heaven, and
given them in the promise, and then you may see them unspeakably happy, Jam.
2.5. 2 Cor. 4.16, 18. If you are the Children of God, you are men for Heaven,
and your Interest lies there; Hence look upon things to go well or ill with
you, as that Interest is furthered or not. This would be of marvelous use were
it attended: Esteem of your Condition and of Gods dealings with you by your
forwardness for Heaven. If it be Affliction, Tribulation, yea manifold sorrows
and Exercises if they set you nearer Heaven (nearer God and more in his besom)
those are happy afflictions, and you may rejoice therein, Romans 5.3.4.5. Jam.
1.2.12. 2 Cor, 4.17. I outward prosperity attend you, and the World smile, but
you are thereby drawn down from Heaven to the Earth, further from God, and your
hearts lost in the World; truly you have little cause to rejoice in that
prosperity, but to mourn over your selves, Heb. 9.1. That is to us the best
wind that lies ^air for Heaven, from what quarter soever it comes. Those are
our best days wherein we have most Heavenly Communion with God, and are most
fitted for Heaven.

5. Improve Heaven (or Eternal Glory in the World to come) and the promise and
hopes of it unto diligence, faithfulness and fruitfulness in Gods work, the
work that God sets you to do here upon the Earth, so 1 Cor. 15.58. Improve your
Talents ( i. e. all opportunities, and abilities, gifts, graces and means to do
good, to do service to God) for the promoting of the Glory of God, and the good
of men, your selves and others. The Consideration of our Masters Joy, and of
the Glorious reward that will be therein given to all that so do, not of debt,
but of Grace, should put us upon it, Mat. 25.15, 20, 21, 23. be ^iligent,
faithful and fruitful in the work of the Lord. Be it

1. Doing work, duty and service to God to be done by us; whether the work of
our General Calling; serving God in the whole course of Christianity, the whole
work of the warefare of Faith and obedience; they thoughts of Heaven should
quicken us unto that, though it be hard work to flesh and blood, as hard as
fighting, 1 Timothy 6.12. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. as running in a race, 1 Cor 9.24, 25. as
wrestling, Ephesians. 6.12. or for Heavenly things, or the work of our particular
Calling, place and station wherein God has set us in Family, Church or
Commonwealth; be Diligent, Industrious, Faithful and Constant also, not
biased by Temptations on the right hand or the left, not made unserviceable by
discouragement or discontent, (that is a woeful thing, when a man suffers the
temptations he meets with on every hand here in the World, so to disquiet,
distemper or discourage him as to make him unserviceable, and take him off from
doing good work) not cast into a sleep by sloth and sluggishness: be faithful,
serving God in thy particular course and way, so Act. 20.23, 24. 2 Timothy 4.78.
Or,

2. Bearing and suffering work, if the Lord call to that, as less or more he
ever does. We must suffer as well as do in this World, else we shall do but a
little, and but a while: Why Heaven should make us cheerfully to suffer for
God, to go through suffering work* whether losses or positive sorrows that the
Lord tryes us with here, Heb. 11.26. Mat. 5.11, 13. Heb. 12.1, 2. The Saints
have been wont to improve Heaven unto strength and constancy into suffering
work, 2 Cor. 4.26, 17. Romans 8.18. Heb. 10.34. But to quicken us to our work, of
what kind soever from the point in hand, Consider,

1. It is a great shame for those to be idle or negligent and heartless in
their work that have such a way to work in, as the way to Heaven is, and such a
reward as lies at the end of it. We serve a good Master, who serve the God of
all Grace, who calls us to his Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus; sure we should do
any thing for him. How hard soever thy work be, and how long soever kept
tugging at it, Heaven will make amends for all. There is no proportion between
our poor work, and that reward: And therefore it is not a reward of Justice,
but of Rich and Princely Grace; rewarding that with thousands that is scarce
worth a penny. You will serve men, and work hard it may be at your days labor
(and it is equal you should so do) for your penny, and shall we stick at
serving the Blessed God who sets before us such a recompense of reward as
Eternal Glory is? Were ever any losers by him, either doing or suffering for
him? No; Mark. 10.29, 33.

2. At the day of Christ's appearing, none will be more sharply rebuked and
ashamed than the Idle slothful Servant, Mat. 25.26, 27, 30. He might say what
hurt did I do* I did no body any hurt with my talent, I did not do mischief
with my wit and time, and strength: Yea, but what good did you do? what good
work did you employ your self in for the Glory of God and the good of men? Sins
of omission whereby men can let alone their work (this and that should be done,
but let alone, let lie) these will be sadly aggravated at that day.

3. You have but a little time to do work on Earth, compared with the time of
your rest in Heaven. Our resting time is hereafter, ( Rev. 14.13.) but our
working time now; there will be work in Heaven indeed, but work done without
toil, or sweat, or pain, as it was with Adam in Innocence as bodily labor;
the sweet and pleasant work of Glorifying God: Now we can do no good work but
in the sweat of our brows, with much conflict, pain and difficulty: But though
it be so, this our painful labor is but for a while, for an Hirelings day, Job
7.1, 2, though you be kept sweating at it, you may bide it in the dust, and
Sun, and heat, for the short day of this life, when after that follows rest,
Eternal rest, and that will be sweet, as the rest of the Labouring-man is,
Psalm. 104.23. Methinks we should keep close at our work, and hold out in it
till the evening of this life. (It is no long summers-day, it is but a short a
moment any time, compared with what follows,) and then you shall go to bed in
rest and peace, Isa. 57.2. It is but a little time you have to work on Earth,
and you have much work to do (for your own Souls, for the Name of God, for the
good of others) and therefore you had need be diligent that you may finish in
time, and not have your work to do when your time is out, that you may with
Comfort in measure say as Joh. 17.4.

4. We shall lose the reward of our work, if we do not follow our work to
purpose, 2 John 8. working by halves is the way to lose all our work, i. e.
working idly, negligently, slothfully; or working unconstantly and
unfaithfully; unstedfastly, going in, and giving over, not holding out, but
falling off from the truth or the ways and service of God (which the Apostle
in that place, 2 John 8. speaks of, and gives warning against) this brings a
Curse instead of a Blessing or reward, Jerem. 48.10. Malach. 1.14. Heb. 10.38.

6. Improve Heaven unto fitness for, and Comfort in Death. Death unto the
Saints is their passage from Earth to Heaven, from this place of sin and tears,
into that state of Joy, and Bliss and Glory we have been speaking of (in their
Souls presently, Luke 23.43. and in certain hope of their Bodies Resurrection
to the same Glory) Hence a real sight, and lively hope, and taste of Heaven is
able to sweeten death, how bitter soever unto Nature: This chief of Joys is
able to master the King of Terrors, and to cause the Believer to Triumph over
it, 1 Cor. 15.54, 57. 2 Cor. 5.1.4. Death is a departing out of, if we speak of
this life, (this poor, sorry, sinful, weary life) such a one we say departed
this life: But it is an entrance into life; if we speak of the life to come in
Heaven (that sweet, glorious, sinless happiless) so it is to a Saint. A going
out of a smoaky Cottage, but an entrance into a Kingdom, the Kingdom of our
Lord, 2 Pet. 1.11. Isa. 57.2. It is a going from hence: But it is a going to
Christ, Philip. 1.23. a going from your people and friends here, but it is a
going and being gathered to their people, and Blessed Congregation that is
above, Genes. 49.33. Hence the fore-thoughts and hopes of Heaven should,

1. Make the Saints willing to die, (of readiness and fitness for it in other
respects, we speak somewhat under the third head) not willing to break away
from their work before they have done it, out of frowardness, weariness and
discontent, or before Gods time be come: But willing to go home, and to leave
all the World, and pass through the dark entry of Death, that they may go to
God, go home to Christ in Heaven when ever his time shall be come. As a dying
Saint said, I have but one dark entry to pass through, and then I am at my
Fathers house. Be it that death is a dark entry, yet it leads to thy Fathers
house. Stick not at passing to it through such an entry, 2 Cor. 5 8. Be not
willing and desirous always to tarry here, among sins and temptations, and
where you are Comparatively absent from the Lord: But be willing to be absent
from the Body, to be Gloriously present with the Lord. Though the Body be a
near friend, Christ is nearer: And your parting with that for a time, is in
order to an happy meeting, Phil. 1.23. while Gods work, service and Glory, and
the good of his people detains him here, he is willing to tarry; but otherwise
desirous to be gone, when he looks forward to that that will be the Issue and
Consequent of his departure or dissolution, viz. The full enjoyment of Christ's
Company, which is better than all the World.

2. It should give them Comfort in Death, to be looking up steadfastly into
Heaven, unto Jesus Christ there (to whom you are now going) is a good dying
posture, as it was Stephens, Act. 7. And it is a sufficient support against the
discomfort of Death. Look to the Glory and Life you shall be received up unto,
that will swallow up the Death you shall be received through, Luke 9.51. Heb.
12.2. When you lay down your heads in the dust, you at once lay down all sins
and sorrows; who would not part with the Body, for a time to part with sin
forever. Death will do that for you, that all Ordinances, all afflictions, all
means could not do, it will presently carry you near, very near, fully near to
Christ, into full and everlasting fellowship with him. Thus manifold
Consolations here, Eternally serves to establish and strengthen against all
Sufferings and Death it self, 1 Pet. 1.10.

A Letter written by the Author to his Friend in New England.
Dear and Entirely Beloved Friend,
IT is an afflicting Providence from God, and just cause of shame to me [for I
cannot clear my self from a great deal of just blame] that I have not done, nor
can now do any thing for you in regard of those writings you desired of me: I
have, and am continually pressed with variety of urgent occasions, and much
time [in the way I am in] is daily taken up from my personal studies, besides
many incident avocations: And alas I can do little, and make but slow progress
in the long race of Learning I have to run! And it is my miserable guise,
either by wickedness or weakness, to fall short of that good I should either
get or do; and if it be so in this case toward you, it is no wonder though it
should be my deep sorrow! But yet considering some passages in your last and
former Letters concerning your Spiritual Condition, and knowing by experience
in my self the reality of such Complaints, I would not be so graceless as to
neglect you wholly therein: And though I can say or do very little, yet a word
or two might be of some use; nor do I know what guilt might lie upon me, if I
should be silent or slight in this Case! And therefore [Dear -- ] if my barren
heart would suffer me, I would present you with a few words, as if you and I
were alone in a Corner in the presence of God!

The Condition you express, is the Common [but fearful] Epidemical Calamity of
those times and places where the Gospel is Preached, and among such as
outwardly carry fair: Convinced, but not humbled; some apprehensions of misery
and affections now and then, but not deep effectual mournings; something
burdened with sin and misery, and wrath of God; but yet able to bear it, and
contented to live without being delivered from it: Knowing every thing, and
feeling nothing; or rather knowing every thing, and yet indeed knowing nothing;
in seeing not, etc. For my own part, it is that which has been the baneful
misery of my soul [even that very thing which thou say and mean] ever since I
knew any thing; and the Lord knows how little I am delivered from it, and how
much of my work in this point [upon which the very hinges of our Salvation
turn] is yet to do to this day! Oh [my -- ] if my heart were not Adamant, I
should weep with and for you: And truly when I am most near God, I have no
greater request then this for my self and you, that God would use any means to
make us see things really as they are, and pound our hearts all to pieces, and
make indeed sin most bitter, and Christ most sweet; that we might be both
humbled and Comforted to purpose! An imperfect work of the Law, and then an
imperfect work of the Gospel, is the bane and ruin of us in these days! Some
fears and affections, and then some hopes of mercy [without finding full rest
and satisfaction in Christ only] men rest in, and here perish! But hence is the
ground of that you speak of: An heart that does not, cannot feel sin [and
consequently, no other thing that Gods word speaks of] and the wrath of God for
it to purpose: Cannot be sensible of sin or misery in an effectual manner! Now
a word or two of Counsel to you in this Case!

First consider the end and thing you are to strive after. Secondly the way and
manner how: Your business is never to rest till you come to feel sin as an
insupportable burden, and then to find rest and everlasting satisfaction in
Christ, embracing him as your own! To go on humbling to be humbled, and to see
such intolerable evil in sin; and be so burdened with the wrath of God lying
upon you for it, as it may make sin everlastingly odious to you, and force you
to fly for refuge to lay hold of the hope set before you; and to have strong
Consolation there! This is a great thing, not easily and quickly gotten, but
fit not down at quiet till you come to this! This is the way to make all sure!
But you will say I know not whether I ever had any true humiliation; whether
there is any thing in me that will stand by me, when an hour of Temptation
comes? Therefore now resolve, I will padle and dally with God and my own soul
no longer, I will never give God rest till he show me things really, and till I
have attained that sense of sin and Faith in Christ Jesus which is real and
effectual! This is the work of our lives, Joh. 6 29. Let me never rest till it
be put out of all doubt, that God in Christ is mine own, and has made an
everlasting Covenant with me! This I will have, or I will be in bitterness
before the Lord while I have any Being; and for the residue of my days, I will
dwell with them that lie down in sorrow, I will have my society with such
forsaken souls; who being desolate and deserted, are free among the dead: If
the blessed God shall excommunicate this wretched soul from his gracious
presence, [which yet is but an Act of his most Holy and just severity] Oh! let
me find this favor in his sight, that I may also excommunicate my self from
the pleasures and enjoyment of this present World! And resolve this, if God
will not let me see the good of his chosen, [and I have nothing to say why he
should] I will mourn, I will mourn; let me live and dye in the house of
mourning: If God will not Comfort me, nothing else shall; if I may not have
peace and rest in God, I Will have none at all; if God will take no pleasure in
me, I Will take no pleasure in my self: Let my tears be my meat continually; let
me go mourning up and down the World while I have a day to live: If God cast me
off, let this be my condition! Nay, [come to this pass] I cannot live, unless
God be reconciled to me: My spirit fails, if the Lord redeem not presently!
There is no being, no biding for me, unless he speak a word of peace to me. [
Psalm. 69.2, 3, 17, 8. and 143.4, 7.] And in a time of need God will help, when
you are lost, God will find you, when you are sick to death, he will heal you,
Isa. 57.16, 28, 29. His bowels will earn toward you! Never fear want of
Consolatian, if your Humiliation be not ineffectual! And here let me warn you
of a thing or two!

Take heed least some lesser sorrows and affections heal and ease you, and so
you be kept from great and effectual sorrows, and from Comfort by Christ only!
Many a one sees himself in a miserable Condition; hereupon he goes alone, he
prays [and weeps too it may be] very affectionatly for mercy: Upon this he
grows well and whole again! His good affections please him and heal him, though
he be indeed still as far from Christ and grounded Comfort as ever! Take heed
of this. As also secondly, Of resting in some hopes of mercy, or in some tastes
of mercy! Many things give a man good hope that God may save him, and the words
of Comfort are sometimes sweet and refreshing to his heart, this quiets him: He
has enough now, he runs away with this, when as Christ himself is not yet his;
nor is he satisfied with him only! Many perish here; not but that these
affctions and hopes are very good, and they may be true [and be sure to be
exceeding thankful for any such thing; that you have any desire to seek God,
any tears at any time before him, and hope toward him; its more than thousands
have] and very good encouragement to seek after Christ more; but not to be
rested in without Christ! It Is a sign a man's heart is false, when a little of
any thing will serve him! Use those sorrows, heart-breakings and hopes, as
blessed encouragemnts and engagements to follow on still, and get nearer to
Christ and to gain in upon him; but rest not till you be sure you have Christ;
and fully rest in him, and your heart live upon him only, alone, wholly and
always! Now for the way you are to take in the Case owned and expressed by
your self: I would add a little as the Lord shall help.

Do not say there is no hope, and so give over striving! Give not way to a
sullen desperateness and deadness of heart; to a dulled sunk discouraged
spirit, as it were in vain to stir, and will never be better with you! Do not
say, thus it has been, and thus it is and you cannot help it, and there tear
it! No, no, arise and be doing, and God will be with you, is an old and good
Rule! What ever your Case be, never be discouraged: Be humble and afflicted
under sin and misery [the more the better] but never be discouraged! Resolve, I
will yet follow God for all this, come on me what will! See 1 Samuel 12.20. Know
that God is God, and not man, he can help, nay he will! He is willing to help
you, if you be not unwilling to have it: See Isa. 55.8. Jer. 33.3. Hos. 13.9.
Joh. 4.10. and 6.36. He has after mercies for them that have abused former
mercies, Ezekiel. 39.26. Jer. 3.1, 22. If it were but a may be, Amos 5.15. Zeph.
2.3. A who can tell? Jon. 3.9. Joel. 2.14. A Lord if thou will, Mat. 8.2. It Is
enough to make us follow after God to the last gasp! Secondly, look up to the
infinite God to help you for his names sake, and for the Lord Jesus sake. You
know you are miserable and have unspeakable need of his help; though you do not
feel it, and be not offended with it. Upon this ground [and this is ground
enough] go to God and tell him; that the less sense you have, the greater is
your misery, and the more need you have of his help: None but God can pull you
out of this pit, can inlighten this darkness, and break this Adamant; to him
therefore you come according to his own Counsel, Rev. 3.18. Tell him he knows
you and sees you, though you do not know or see him, no nor your self neither:
He can take hold of you, though you cannot take hold of him, Joh. 15.16. Bring
such an heart as you have [longing that it were better] to him, that he would
mend it. Bewail this impenitent heart, cry out of this secure sottifh heart,
as the greatest evil that could befall you; beseech him to use any means to
break it, and change it: Fill your mouth with Arguments before him; tell him of
his free [oh hang there upon free mercy] his tender, his preventing, his
manifold rich mercy: Say you are resolved never to leave him till he give you
this Grace effectually, and all the Grace you want, everlasting mercy: Cry to
him out of the thick darkness, and out of the low ^unge^n. Lam. 3.55. When you
have no mind to pray, when Devil and World, when heart and the gates of Hell
are against you: Yet then, even then pray in spite of all your spiritual
Adversaries: Offer violence to the Kingdom of Heaven, stir up your self to take
hold on God; lay hold on Eternal Life, when nothing but darkness and death is
about you; when God stops his ear against you, and shuts up his heart too; yet
then fall down before him put your mouth in the dust; judge and loath your
self, hate your sin that brought you to this pass: Look again toward him, [as
Jon. 2.4 7.] close with him at and upon the sword point, [though he kill me yet
will I trust in him.] Bless his name, and say as Lam. 3.22. Ch^t^er before him;
leave your self to his mercy, to his absolute, sovereign, mere mercy,
renouncing all other props and comforts: S^^^ Isa. 50.10. Tell him as Daniel
9.9. ^^solve to follow him though blindfold, an^ see Romans 11.32, 33. Gal. 3.22.
When you are shut up under sin and unbelief, then look to him who is able to
save to the utmost them that come to God by him: You know not how to look to
him, nor what it is to believe, nor how to go about such a thing; therefore
tell God that you come to him for Faith, as well as other things; You want
every thing, and you come ^or every thing: [the poorest Creature that lives]
and know that the blessed God would have you come to him in Christ for every
thing: Christ has all power in his hands to help you, Joh. 17.2. and see Joh.
6.37. Thirdly, continue in seeking God till you find him: Follow on to know the
Lord, and then be your Case what it will, you shall know him, Hos. 6.2. Col.
4.2. Luke 18.1. Many are very serious and earnest for a fit, but they give over
before the Lord come, and will rather patch up their Comfort and Salvation of
any fashion, then take the pains to hold out in seeking God with all their
might: Multitudes perish here. Oh! look to this; for do not think [especially
in the Case you are in] to get Grace and Christ [in the sense before spoken of]
presently! No, no, God may make you seek and wait many a day, but you shall
reap in due time if you faint not, Gal. 6.9. Diligently therefore and
Constantly attend and improve all the Ordinances and Opportunities that God
gives: In special, let me speak a word or two for your better help in them
[being more private and personal] viz. First, Meditation [a most necessary and
effectual thing which few practice:] Get a little time to meditate daily,
laying aside other things, and in other occasions too, think as much of
Spiritual things as you can: We do not see nor feel, because we do not think of
things; think of God and of Christ, of Sin, of Heaven, of Hell, of Judgment, of
Eternity, how few shall be saved, how necessary it is to take the present time:
What we come into the World for, of quickening passages in Scripture, of Gods
dealings with you, of your former life and present Condition, etc. But you will
say, my heart is so vain and stupid, I cannot think of things. I Answer* First,
let this deeply humble you; and the vileness of your heart that here discovers
it self will be worth the while. Secondly, bese^ch God to help you. Thirdly, By
use of time you will find it more easy. Fourthly take advantage upon all the
evil frames that at present you feel, to apply and set on some soaking
expression in Scripture: As in case of hardness, blindness, vanity, see Romans
9.18. 2 Cor. 4.4* Prove. 10.20. Yea, hence see and say, that God is true, and
his word is true; for the Scripture tells me of this heart I feel; and the rest
of it will be verified upon me as well as this. Fifthly, take the advantage of
special seasons for Meditation, when your heart is in a feeling frame [as after
Prayer, after Sermon, if you cannot before] and lay up what you get: One truth
felt in M^ditation, is worth a World, and it will make way for more. Sixthly,
do something that is equivalent and helping to it, at least when you cannot so
directly meditate: as reading of a good Book, writing of your former and
present life: [that is a thing of endless use] gathering up Gods mercies, and
your sins in writing sometimes, etc.

Secondly, Prayer; this is the blessed means of getting a poor soul to Heaven:
And what an happiness is it that we may pray to God; besides Family Prayer, get
some time for secret Prayer, daily less or more: Be telling God your heart
alone; I know your occasions and labors [the Lord break my heart for you]
would not afford you that liberty that I [wretch] have: But do what you can;
love the duty, and God will pity you, wherein you are justly, and by his
providence [not your own negligence] hindered: and this is certain, he that has
an heart shall never want time or place to pray! Endeavor to order your
matters, so as you may have time for it: And if you could weekly have a piece
of an Afternoon [as Saturdy in the Afternoon an hour or two, or as God guids]
set a part for secret and close converse with God by Meditation and Prayer,
thinking, writing, reading, examining, mourning before God; and do this
constantly you would never repent it: The business of Salvation is mainly
carried on in secret between God and a man's own soul: And by all means provide,
that you may have your Sabbaths as free as possible all the day, and the
Evening before and after, for spiritual work: Ply God in such seasons as these
be, and be very thankful if you get but any little ground of your corruptions
and miseries: Go about your lawful occasions, not as a liberty to the flesh,
[as to think that now my task of praying is over, now I may please my self, and
refresh my heart in the World, etc.] but as the service of God, and as unto
him, because he bids you be thus employed: As when he bids me pray, I will pray
with all my might; so I will work too, when he bids me work, and not do it to
please my self, [alas, if I consider it, what pleasure or Comfort is there in
this evil World] but to please him: I will busy and employ my self in this
World, [because he bids me] but my place and my rest shall be only in God, or
no where: As Seamen go to Sea, but build their houses at land; so I Will go into
the World, but lay up my heart and comfort and my whole support in God! I will
live in the World, but not upon it; I will live only upon God, and have my
Portion in him. And do not think that this sorrow and sense of sin, and
mourning after God, stands in a Monkish dooping sullenness and sadness, [though
it is certain that by the sadness of the Countenance the heart is made better,
and one should not give himself to unnecessary mirth, which is very poysonfull,
nor purposely choke his spiritual sorrows with temporal delights:] But when
you have seriously spent your time with God, and have left your heart with him,
and he calls you to your occasions; go about them with alacrity, and
chearfullness, so as you may dispatch them comfortably; and carry amiably and
delightfully to those about you. And let your sorrows and sense of your Souls
miseries lie deep and undermost, so as you may recall them in their season;
when you come to pray, or be alone with God again; labor to have a constant
habitual feeling of your self, [and get as many good thoughts and affections
as you can at all times] so as it may be livelily actual, especially in your
seasons of attending upon God, and in them drive on the business of your Soul,
as if there were no World; and as if there were nothinng else to be minded but
that. And if you find your heart gone when the season of seeking God comes; then
know that you have in some measure backslidden, and forsaken God; and never
leave till you have recovered it. Recall and review often the chief sins of
your life that you can remember; confess and aggravate them before God in a
special manner, [but have your times of confessing and bewailling all the sins
that ever you can remember] and think of what sins or course it was that caused
God to leave you, to this woeful impenitency of heart, and bewail them
bitterly. One thing more I must add; Do not think it much to have some special
seasons of seeking God, besides those I have named. If you had a friend with
whom you might now and then spend a little time, in conferring together, in
opening your hearts, and presenting your unutterable groanings before God, it
would be of excellent use: Such an one would greatly strengthen, bestead, and
further you in your way to Heaven. Spend now and then [as occasions will
permit] an hour [or so] with such a friend more then ordinary, [sometimes a
piece of a day, sometimes a whole day of extraordinary fast, in striving and
wrestling with God for everlasting mercy.] And be much in quickening conscience,
giving and taking mutual encouragements and directions in the matters of
H^aven! Oh! the life of God that fall^ into the hearts of the Godly, in and by
gracious Heavenly conference. Be open-hearted one to another, and stand one for
another against the Devil and all his Angels. Make it thus your business is
these and such like ways, to provide for Eternity while it is called today,
looking to Jesus the Author and finisher of your Faith. But you will say [it
may bee] and I speak but what I have found in my own heart, [Dear -- I deal
plainly with you, as I know you would have me do, and therefore let me suppose
it should be said] This is a tedious hard task, and my heart likes not to be so
yoaked and toiled in such things: I can take no pleasure therein; and if I
should force my self to it for a while, yet it would soon weary me: I have no
heart to these things; it may be something might be done in this way, or another
might do something: but I have no heart to it.

Answ. 1. Wonder not at this, not think the worse of that course, because your
heart lusts against it, but think the better of it. For, the better any thing
is, and the more isntrumental for our Salvation, the more it is opposed by our
vile hearts, which are enemies to God, and consequently to our own chief good.

2. Confess to God this naughtiness of your heart: beseech him to help you
against this Devil, to change your nature, and let this occasion you to see and
loath the wickedness of your nature, and be enraged against it. The spirit that
dwells in us lusts unto envy, but he gives more grace; Jam. 4.5, 6.

3 ly Consider what is the reason why this way seems so irksome and tedious,
and you have no heart to it? Is it not because of inward blindness and
security? because you see not things as they be, nor the weight and worth of
them? It is an irksome thing to a man to rise out of his bed in the night, when
he lies warm and knows no danger, nor urgent occasion to rise; but if he awake,
and see, his house on fire about his ears, he will make no demur about the
matter, but be glad he may rise? Verily, one real glimpse of the wrath of God
burning about us, or of Eternity that is a coming; one real glimpse of Gods
anger [lying upon our Souls] which is infinitely above the most awful
apprehension of man or Angel; Oh! this would make us skip at a time to pray in,
at an hour to cry out to God for mercy in, especially if we might do it with
any hope of being heard, and saved, as now we may. So that the reason why I
have no heart to this course, is not because there is want of reason to
persuade me, but because I am blind; and I feel my blindness, I know that I do
not see things as they be, and therefore I have good reason to be deaf, to the
Counsel of mine own blind ignorant heart, and to strive by all means to see
better; and in the mean time, to believe what I do not see.

4 ly. Offer violence therefore to the Kingdom of Heaven, and be resolved in
this point; let my heart say what it will, let Hell and World be against me: My
God I must have, my God I will have; I must get sight of sin and faith in
Christ Jesus, I must make my Salvation sure, or else I am undone for ever; and
therefore pray I will, and follow God I will, in despite of the Devil: Unto him
will I look, and [in such a Case as this] on him will I wait, who gives the
same spirit of zeal, of indignation against sin and self, as sometimes was in
holy Samuel, when he hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal. Lord, thou
have commanded me to seek thy face, and thy face will I seek: I wlll not confer
with flesh and blood; I will not consult with Carnal reason; but what God bids
me do, that will I do, and do it with all my might.

5 ly. Know that if you Conscionably attend upon God; he will by degrees make
it sweet and easy to you: He will strengthen your heart and hands in your way
and work, Is^. 40.31. You will find it a sweet and b^essed thing to stand
Confessing your sins before God, and emptying your heart in his sight, opening
all your Complaints and Soul-Concernments to him: You will find it an happiness
that you may pray to the God of Heaven, and have any Communion with him. Our
wicked hearts make religious duties irksome; else they are in themselves the
sweetest things in the World: Oh! if ever we come to know God aright, we shall
account it our happiness that we may do any thing, in way of service to him,
and Communion with him.

6 ly: Salvation is worth all our labor, be it what it will be: Is it a trifle
to be saved Eternally? Do we think to get Heaven by a good wish? or to go
thither in a Feather-bed? No, God will make us strive, and sweat, and wrestle
for it; and be sure it will quit the Cost! It will never repent us o^ any
Pr^yer w^ have made, or tear w^ have wept, when we come there! Oh! follow not
the guise o^ this secure World, that [in these d^y^^] is c^st into a dead
sl^ep: Many pro^ess, but ^^w knew what it is to work out their own Salv^tion
with fear and trembling: It is another m^^^^r to be a Chris^^^n ind^ed, then
^^st make of it And of th^se that are since^e and ^ively, you see but their
dark-s^^, y^u know not what they are in secret: Follow not ex^mple, but follow
the word of God.

Thus I have given ^ou the sum of my thoughts, according to my measure and
manner. I bese^ch you make some use of this poor Letter, and r^ad it at such
times as may most suit you: You may have many doubts and difficulties that I do
not here touch; but s^ek God and he will guide you. As for your outward
Condition* follow on in these things, and your trouble for sin and soul-misery,
will swallow up all other troubles; and future Consolations will sweeten all:
And whats^ev^r may happen to you here, yet hereafter it shall be well with you,
and in your wearisome pilgrimage it may be for a Consolation to you, that you
shall rejoice in time to come.

Now the tender mercies of God be with you, [Dear -- ] and the Lord lead you by
the hand to his Eternal rest, through all sins and sorrows, to his own Glory,
and your everlasting Comfort: So I remain,

From Harrard College in Cambridge, May 19, 1649. Your unfainedly loving
Friend to serve you. J.M.

FINIS.

