THE Moderate Independent, PROPOSING A Word in Season TO THE GATHERED CHURCHES,
The EPISCOPAL AND PRESBYTERIAN Parties: Tending to Their Humiliation for what
is past; To be Reconciled to each other for the time to come: AND Jointly to
Acquiesse in the Determinations of this Present PARLIAMENT, as to the
Government of CHURCH and STATE.

By SALEM PHILALATHES A Churchmember.

Let your Moderation be known unto all men, Phil. 4. 5. LONDON, Printed in the
Year 1660.

(...) was retiring from his Court) was presented by him with a little Book, in
the Beginning, Middle and End thereof was only written Moderation, Moderation,
Moderation: By which he insinuated that Moderation was the only way to make
both Prince and People happy in each other. And if so, to restore both Prince
and People to it, that have lost it by running into Extremes.

Though therefore our Breaches seem to be like the Breaches of the Sea, which
can hardly be resisted, or made up again, and the fierce Contentions, devouring
Divisions and Differences that have been between all Parties, seem to be like
the Contentions amongst Brethren, which Solomon tells us are like the Bars of a
Castle, which naturally are baracadoed to reconciliation and accommodation with
each other again: A Brother offended being harder to be won than a strong City,
Prove. 18. 19. Yet if that our own iniquities and the Jesuits subtilties hinder
not, there is a way to unite us all together, and to pluck up the Causes of all
our Dissentions by the Roots, and that is by Moderation, Moderation, Moderation.

Now it is Moderation, a Christian Condescension to, and Reconciliation with
each other, that I profess that I propound as the end of my impartial and plain
dealing with you all.

And that I may remove that which is the great Impediment and Hinderance
thereof amongst all parties, viz. the high opinion and conceit they have of
themselves; all their ways being as Solomon says, right in their own eyes,
that all others have wronged them, and they have been injurious to none.

Though I may seem (peradventure to some of you) to speak as one more likely to
widen, than to heal the Breaches now amongst us, by some smart passages and
expressions.

Yet I entreat you all to consider, that what I have written that may give any
of you occasion so to think, is only out of my unfeigned desire to remove that
great Impediment aforesaid to Moderation, out of the way from all Parties. And
that we may not be slightly healed, it is, that I so often seem to search you
to the quick.

Let not therefore I beseech you, any thing that has dropped from my Pen, be
taken by the wrong Handle, and be so far perverted, as to heighten your
passions and prejudices against one another, but as all Parties have joined
together by their sins to provoke the Divine Majesty, thus woefully to wound us,
and almost tear us all to pieces; so let us call upon one another, in the words
of the Prophet, Come and let us return unto the Lord; for he has smitten us,
and he will heal us, he has torn us, and he will bind us up.

To this purpose, let me in the first place make my address to you of the
Episcopal Party, whether of the Clergy or Laytie, as you distinguish.

Far be it from me to suggest any thing that might irritate and provoke you;
except to Love and good works. Yet give me leave to tell you that the great
encouragement that generally has been given to Profaneness, and the Scorn,
Opposition and Persecution of Godly men, in all ages, from the time of
Reformation, till God brought this Judgment upon us; I fear has much provoked
the Holy One of Israel.

That it has been a sin of a long standing amongst you, whereof you are
highly guilty. And Dr. Jackson of C. C. he also confirms what I affirm, in many
places of his works; especially in Fol. 3660. In a Sermon of his Preached to
the University of Oxford, speaking to such persons whom he styles the Reverend
Fathers of the Church, and his Respective Brethren, says he, speaking of the
stupidity of this Nation under Gods Hand, who had lately visited it with the
Plague, etc. and the City of Oxford in particular, says he, should a
Stage Player or other Instruments of Vanity turn or have entered these suburbs
within two months after our 4th. or 5th. visitation past, more of better rank
amongst us, would have been more afraid of being censured as Puritans for
speaking (...) (though in this place) then would have blushed to have been
spectators of their most unseasonable sporting.
I shall present you with a complaint of that Pious and Learned Bishop Downam,
in his Sermon preached at Spittle, above forty years ago, called Abraham's
Trial, p. 72. Even in these times, says he, the Godly live amongst such a
generation of men, that if a man do but labor to keep a good Conscience in any
measure, though he meddle not with matters of State, or Discipline, or
Ceremonies; As for example, If a Minister diligently preach, or in preaching,
seek to profit rather then please; remembering that saying of the Apostle, If I
seek to please men, I am not the Servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. Or if a private
Christian make Conscience of swearing, sanctifying the Sabbath, frequenting
Sermons, or abstaining from the Corruptions of the times, he shall straightway
be condemned for a Puritan, and consequently find less favor than either a
Carnal Gospeller or a close Papist.

It seems in those days persons of meek and quiet Spirits, though
conformable to the Government of Church and State, met with the persecution of
the Tongue, under the odious and reproachful name of Puritan; and found less
favor than Profane ones or Papists. How you proceeded to higher degrees, not
only of the Tongue, but Hand, to the Silencing, Suspending, and imprisoning of
many Pious and Conformable Ministers, that would not publish that woeful Book
for the Profanation of the Lords Days; forcing many Godly Ministers and
Christians to leave their Native Country, and flee into New England, Holland,
and other Places. The first Remonstrance of the Parliament begun in Nov. 1640.
does at large demonstrate; together with those many Speeches spoken by Sir
Edward Deering, my Lord Digby, and others, that were no Puritans, nor yet for
the total abolition of Episcopacy. Speeches and Passages of Parliament, p. 98.
Printed for William Cook at Furnifuls Inn Gate in Holbourne, 1641.
Says Sir. Edward Deering, The Pride, the Avarice, the Ambition, the
Oppression of our ruling Clergy, is Epidemical, it has infected them all:
There is not any, or scarce any of them, which is not practical in their own
great cause in hand, which they impiously do miscall the Piety of the times,
but in truth so wrong a Piety; that I am told to say,

In Facinus jurasseputes -- So he. And says my Lord Digby, P. 65. of the same
Collections, There is no man within these walls more sensible of the heavy
grievance of Church Government than my self, nor whose affections are more keen
to the clipping of those wings of the Prelates, whereby they have mounted to
such Insolency; nor whose zeal is more ardent to the searing of them, that they
may never spring again.

I suppose you are so eaten up with the sense of your own sufferings, that you
have forgotten the occasion you gave to many of Gods people to cry out to God
against you their hard Taskmasters. Let my Lord Digby be your Remembrancer, p.
70. Me thinks the vengeance of the Prelates has been so laid, as if it were
meant, no Generation, no degree, no complexion of mankind should escape it.

Was there a man of a nice and tender Conscience, him they afflicted with
scandal in adiaphoris, imposing on him those things as necessary, which he
thinks unlawful, and they themselves know to be but indifferent.

Was there a man that made the Establishment by Law, the measure of his
Religion, him have they netled with innovations, with fresh introductions to
Popery.

Was there a man of a meek and humble Spirit, him have they trampled to dirt in
their pride.

Was there a man that durst mutter against their Insolences, he may enquire
for his Lugs, they have been within the Bishops Visitation. As if they would
not only derive their Brandishment of the Spiritual Sword from Saint Peter, but
of the material one too, and the right to cut off Ears.

Now as it was thus with the Governors of the Church, who usually did exercise
their Severity in all their Visitations, upon such as could not upon
Conscientious Grounds conform to their superstitious Ceremonies, etc. as my
Lord Digby witnesses against them. So the subordinate Clergy for the most
part, were of ambitious and superstitious spirits, and of such vicious lives
and conversations, that like the profane Sons of Eli, they made many to adhor
the Offerings of the Lord. And in stead of pressing upon the people the
necessity of regeneration and holiness, without which no entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven; to that holy Singularity and preciseness which the Word of
God requires; the most of their zeal vented it self, in close Sarcasmes at
Purity in the Pulpit; though it was their Common Prayer in their Desks, that
the rest of our lives hereafter might be pure and holy.

To all which do but call to mind that general Profaneness that had overrun
the Kingdom, in Court, City and Country; and you will find that you have no
great cause to look upon your selves as innocent Martyrs in what you have
suffered from God and man.

Surely that Flood of Profaneness that now again begins to arise, and that
extreme violent Spirit that appears still among many of you, does evidence,
that though God has humbled you and brought you low, that yet you have not
humbled your selves under the Almighty Hand of God, nor have yet repented to
give him Glory.

Be wise therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges and Rulers of the Earth;
Kiss the Son, lest his anger which he has made to smoke against you, be
further incensed, to your Ruin. And you of the Episcopal Clergy, If you have
no zeal for the Honor of your Master Christ Jesus, whose Ambassadors you
pretend to be; or pity to the precious Souls of men; yet if there be in you
any real respect to the restoring of your Sovereign to the Government of the
Land, and his prosperous and peaceable Government, preach down that horrid
profaneness that still appears in the most of those that espouse his I mean the
profane Phanatick, who in this juncture of time that they have but a little
hope of peace, fall to such revelling, roaring, drinking, and other ways of
wickedness, that we may justly fear, may provoke the Lord to repent of the Good
he has begun amongst us. Dr. Jackson has drawn the Character of our present
condition in the City of London and other places to the life, Fol. 3660.
Comparing us to the City of Trireres, one of the most flourishing Cities
amongst the Gilles, who were so intemperatly set upon their wonted delights,
that after the City had been sacked 4 times, and did not retain so much as the
likeness of with it had been, yet they were still the same. No sooner was this
storm of Blood and War broken up, and the Beams of Peace restored again, but
they erected their Stages even in the fresh sent of deadly Vapors from their
murdered Citizens, buried in their City Ashes.
Interest: press them to follow as much after Holiness as they do Peace;
without which they shall never see God. Exhort them to Repentance for their
present incorrigibleness under Gods Hand: Urge them to a Spirit of Love and
Moderation. And be ye exemplary to them in all these things. And do not still
discover your pride and obstinacy by a violent pursuit of a restoration and
return to your former worldly Pomp and Greatness, your Domineering Dominion as
to Government, your former splendid, superstitious and ceremonious Service of
God. Why should either Clergy or Laity imagine, that what pleases their own
carnal Fancies in Gods Worship and Service, is pleasing to him who is a Spirit,
and will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth. Our Blessed Savior is of another
mind, and tells us, Luke 16. 15. That which is highly esteemed amongst men, is
abomination in the sight of God. And so also is one of your Judgment, Learned
Mr. John Hales, in his Works set forth by Mr. John Pierson, Page, 172. Says
he, Quid juvat hoc nostres Templis admittere mores? Why measure we God by our
selves, and because we are led with gay shows and goodly things, think it is so
with God. Seneca reports, that a Pantomimus, a Puppet-Player and Dancer in
Rome, because that he pleased the people well, was wont to go up every day into
the Capitol, and practiced his Art, and danced before Jupiter, and thought he
did the god a great Pleasure. Beloved, In many things we are like this Puppet
Player, and do much measure God by the People, by the world: Because that your
gay and gilded Churches, your golden Copes and Organs, your square Caps,
Rochets, Lawn Sleeves, and Sirplices, your Cringing and Bowing, your Dopping
and Ducking to the High Altar, your Dancing up and down from place to place, to
read the first and second Service, with many frivolous, superfluous and
Superstitious Ceremonies, pleased your selves and the ignorant People,
therefore you thought God was pleased therewith also. But if you consult with
Mr. Hales, he tells you, P. 170. That to add to the Church outward Stateliness
and Pomp, is nothing else but to make a Centaure; marry and join the Kingdom of
Christ with the Kingdom of the world: a thing which I do the rather note (says
he) because the long continuance of some Ceremonies in the Church, having
occasioned many, especially of the Church of Rome, to think that there is no
Religion, no Service, without these Ceremonies, etc. How far you were gone
toward Rome in this respect, your silencing many Godly, Orthodox and Able
Preachers, for not conforming to your Superstitious Ceremonies, does witness
against you: And that you remain still of the same mind, that there is no
Religion, nor Service without these Ceremonies, your violent Desires and high
Hopes to see them again imposed, does abundantly declare.

Let me therefore persuade you to more Moderation. And though you have as our
aforesaid Author says, fallen too much upon that Spartans Page 170.
Conceit, that in his Travels, seeing the Beams and Posts of Houses squared and
carved asked, if the Trees grew so in those Countries? so having been long
acquainted with a Form of Worship, squared and carved, trickt and set out with
show, and Ceremony; have been apt to think that Trees grow so; that there is no
natural shape and Face of Gods Worship. Yet he will tell you, that abinitio non
fuit sic, and this he does learnedly and largely prove, p. 171. To which I
refer you.

Let therefore the woeful miseries and calamities which you have brought upon
the Land, by so altering the Face of the English Church, since the Reformation
thereof in Queen Elizabeth's days, through your so Popish and Superstitious
Innovations; that you made it look so like the Painted Whore of Babylon, that
Sancta Clara has published, That the Face of our Church began to alter, the
Language of our Religion to change; and setting Puritans aside, our Articles
and their Religion would soon be agreed. Let also your violent urging
conformity to these Ceremonies, which you made the Devils Sieves to winnow
Pious men of Tender Consciences, out of their Ministerial Employments: I say,
let these with your many other Provocations of the Divine Majesty, meeken and
moderate your Spirits, restrain your eager pursuit of Episcopacy in statu
corrupto, with its superstitious vanities; especially considering how much
Blood and Treasure has been expended in this Quarrel. My Lord Digby was of
another mind, before a Drop of Blood was spilt: Says he, P. 74. Let us not
destroy, but make Bishops such as they were in the Primitive times.

Do their large Territories, their large Revenues offend? let them be
retrencht: The good Bishop of Hippo had but a narrow Diocese.

Do their Courts and Subordinates offend? let them be brought to govern as in
the Primitive times, by Assemblies of their Clergy.

Does their intermedling in Secular Affairs offend? Exclude them from the
capacity, it is no more than what reason and all antiquity has interdicted
them.

That you may be glad of this when you can get it, and may meet with no further
Obstructions, I shall now direct my Discourse to you of the Presbyterian Party.

Who also have as great Cause to be humbled and repent, as the Party before
spoken to, though not for the very same sins.

The great and cogent Argument by which God would restrain his people of old
from oppression of others, was this, the sense of the oppressions which they
had lain under in the Land of Egypt: And one would think, this should have
restrained you, that groaned so much under the oppression of your Consciences
and Estates. And yet no sooner were you come out of great Tribulation your
selves, but like that cruel Servant in the Gospel, you fell to beating and
wounding of your Fellows in both. All that woeful cruelty and severity which
you inflicted by Sequestration and Imprisonment, upon those that could not join
with you, in taking up of Arms, and in the Eradication, in stead of the
Reformation of the Government of the Church, while you were in Power, should
very much melt and molifie your hearts, and much incline them to accommodation
and moderation: Especially considering with what little respect unto the
Consciences of others ye violently imposed upon them vows and Oaths, wherein
you only were satisfied your selves: For refusing whereof many Orthodox
Ministers lost their Livings, that could not otherwise have been ejected as
scandalous and insufficient; but only for this particular Malignancy:
Forgetting how much you cried out against the Bishops new Oath, which they
would have imposed. Surely had you in this observed that Golden Rule of our
Savior, to do to others, as you would be done by: you would not to promote the
Interest of your own Party, have hewed out a Reformation with so much violence;
and to impose a rigid Presbytery, have spared none of a different judgment from
you, that stood in your way.

I hope in all this time that God has laid you aside, ye who are what you
profess your selves to be (whether Ministers or people) such as fear to offend
the Divine Majesty, and avoid all appearances of evil, have made some serious
reflections upon your selves, and have humbled your Souls before the Lord for
your many miscarriages, while you were in power, and for those extremes into
which you have run with the rest.

I am sure it was your Duty in the day of Adversity to consider. You should
have considered what might provoke the Lord against you, not only to disappoint
your hopes of settling your so much admired Church Government, but also to bring
the whole Ministry of these Nations as near to an utter extirpation, as you had
brought those that ordained you, and set you apart to the work of the Ministry.

But the violence of many of your Spirits, which appears in this daybreak of
your hopes of deliverance from men of Antimonarchical and Anti-ministerial
spirits, makes me think you have not truly and thoroughly been humbled for what
is past. No marvel therefore that so many of you are so pertinacious in your
way.

I beseech you therefore let your Modesty and Moderation be known unto all men,
in giving over your violent pursuit of an absolute and independent Presbytery,
from the Angels of the Churches; and be of a condescending toward others, who
may have as much Reason and Scripture on their side, and may appear to be as
pious and conscientious as your selves. Do not think that there can be no
purity of Ordinances, but where there is a Parity in their Administrators.
Neither any Reformation of Church Government, without the extirpation of it
root and branch.

The great Objection that lies against this Motion is, that you lie under an
Obligation by Covenant to extirpate the Government of the Church by
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. And therefore you cannot recede from it.

To which I Answer, that an unlawful Oath binds not. Now whether that long
League or Covenant (wherein were too many words to be without sin) were lawful
yea or no, I desire you to compare it with those Rules and Qualifications of a
lawful Oath or Vow laid down by the Assembly of Divines, in their Humble
Advice,. 11.

An Oath say they, must be imposed by lawful Authority; whosoever takes it, is to
avouch nothing but what he is fully persuaded is the truth, what is good and
just, and what he is able to perform, and binds not to sin.

Now I say, if you do but compare the Covenant with these Qualifications, you
will I suppose be of my mind, that it calls rather for your Humiliation, than
your Ratification of the same.

Perusing some of your Proofs to these Particulars, I find Genesis 24. 2, 3, 5, 6,
8. Before that Abraham's Servant would swear unto his Master, though the Oath
was plain and short, he puts in a Peradventure, v. 5. What if the woman will
not come with me into the Land? Shall I then be discharged of my oath? v. 8.
Surely if ye had feared an Oath, ye might have propounded many doubts and
scruples before you had taken the Covenant your selves, or so harshly imposed
it upon others, under such severe penalties.

Quest. 1. What if the Church of Scotland, whose Doctrine, Discipline and
Government (I understand not) will alter their way of Government, etc. whether
I will or no, Am I then discharged of my Oath?

2. What if the Government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. being
settled by the Law of England, cannot be removed without a Law made by the Three
Estates in Parliament, consisting of King, Lords, and Commons: Is it not
unlawful for me to swear the extirpation thereof? And does a new Oath imposed
without the Authority aforesaid, bind me to observe it?

3. What if the Parliament whose Rights and Privileges I swear absolutely to
preserve, shall introduce Popery, Heresy and Profaneness, which is not to
preserve and defend the true Religion, am I not then discharged of my Oath?
seeing my Covenant ties me to defend his Majesty's Person and Authority only
with this Which limitation of our loyalty to Kings, no further then they
preserve the true Religion, neither the Word of God, the Oath of Allegiance, or
the Protestation which ye all took before this Covenant, does not in the least
mention or allow: for therein ye protested according to the duty of your
allegiance, to maintain and defend his Majesty's royal Person and Estate.
limitation, in the preservation and defense of the true Religion.

Many other things might have been suggested to this purpose. You should do
well to consider whether you did not force many not only to swear, but to lie
also, in affirming that they entered into this Solemn League and Covenant, after
other means of Supplication, Remonstnance, Protestations and sufferings, when
they never had the least hand in any of them, but merely to prevent or
mittigate their Sufferings under your hands,

And also whether the greatest number of those that took the Covenant
willingly, could be persuaded of that which they did avouch as truth, that they
entered into this Covenant, according to the commendable practice of these
Kingdoms in former times: Or whether it were not rather a manifest untruth. For
except what was done in former times by the Kirk of Scotland, the Chronicles of
England or any other History give no testimony to what you affirm.

It appears therefore from these Considerations, and by the swallowing down
of this Covenant so rashly your selves, and imposing it so harshly upon others,
that to one scruple of Conscience, there was a pound of worldly wisdom and
carnal policy; and that the design of this Oath was to oblige men, more to a
Party, than to Duty.

I have spoken the more freely and largely of this business concerning the
Covenant and its non-obliging power, because that I have observed many
Ministers much bewail the backwardness of people to Covenant-Reformation, and
the great guilt of Covenant Breaking they lie under: Yet never heard any to
bewail the taking of it. Though by what has been suggested, there is as much
cause for the one as the other.

And therefore be persuaded I beseech you, in stead of a maintaining what you
have done, truly to repent for what is past; especially for your great severity
in imposing it upon many others, who did as truly scruple that, as some of you
did the Engagement: and I suppose many of you would have done the often
attempted Oath of Abjuration.

Sirs, ye are now brought to the Touchstone, whether ye be indeed such as ye
have publicly professed your selves to be in your Apologetical Declaration,
your serious Representation and Vindication of your selves from the irregular
actings of the Independent Party: That you were Friends to a Regulated
Monarchy, to a Free Parliament, that you never intended the subversion and
change of the Fundamental Laws and Government of this Nation, that it may
appear that these were not the male-contented evaporations of a disappointed
Faction (as some are still apt to judge, by the violence of many of your
spirits, now you are again on the rising side.)

Let the sense of those miseries and calamities which ye brought upon the
State, by your violent attempts and endeavors totally to subvert and change
the Government of the Church, before the Treaty at the Isle of Wight; the
experience you have had of the great unpleasingness to all Parties, but your
selves, of the way that you propound. And as ever ye desire to prevent the
letting in of a sweeping destruction at the gates of our Divisions, which are
never like to be composed, while you violently pursue that wherein the Divine
Providence has so signally crossed you, now prevail upon you to lay aside your
eager contention for an absolute Presbytery: And humbly as becomes Christians
professing Godliness, to be subject to Authority, acquiesce in the
determinations of this great Council, the Parliament, which God has so
wonderfully brought together; in reference to the Government both of Church and
State.

And to this purpose, as I have in particular addressed my self to the
Episcopal Clergy, so I also shall conclude with a word or two unto you of the
Presbyterian Ministry.

It is most evident, that your work as Ministers of the Gospel is, to be
instrumental in turning not only of the hearts of men unto God, but also to
turn and reconcile the hearts of men unto one another. It was prophesied of
John the Baptist, who was a burning and a shining light, that he should turn
the hearts of Parents to their Children, and of Children to their Parents, Mal.
4. Luke 1. 17. I desire you to consider, whether in stead of doing this good
work, ye had not a great hand formerly in turning the hearts of Children from
their Parents, both Natural and Civil; when from your Pulpits, ye sounded those
Allarmes to this Civil War, and so mightily provoked young people (who
understood not the Quarrel) to leave both their Masters and Parents (without
their consent) and to adventure their lives in the high places of the field,
for the Cause of Christ. I beseech you therefore now be as forward in turning
the hearts of Children to their Parents again: Take heed of raising and
fomenting jealousies and fears, whereby to alienate and turn away the hearts of
people from Affection and Subjection to the Fathers of their Country. And as
John the Baptist did this by the preaching of Repentance, by an impartial
pressing of every one to the conscionable performance of the duties of their
particular places and callings; so be ye persuaded to do the like in this
juncture of time. Press upon your Hearers, and charge upon their Consciences,
who are forward enough to make profession of the Duties of the First Table; to
be conscionable in the observance of the Duties of the Second, and especially
of that Fifth Command, to which the Promise of long life is made, and the
violation whereof we have cause to fear, has shortened the days of many in
this Nation, and sent them to their Graves in Coffins of Blood.

Many there are I suppose, which have offended in this kind, through Ignorance,
for want of Information from their Teachers. But that both good Ministers and
People are apt to forget themselves, as to this Particular, though the Drums
should never have beaten it out of their Heads, is evident, by the memento that
Paul gives to Titus, Chap. 3. v. 5. Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, and that they be obedient to Magistrates.

Certainly this Duty was never more in season than now, to urge upon your
Hearers, to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to be obedient to all
the Lawful Commands of Magistrates, without disputing their expediency; to
judge whereof they have no Call from God or man.

And as a further means to reconcile us unto one another, insist much upon
those Duties which follow in the next verse, and pathetically exhort them
thereunto, and dissuade from those contrary impediments to Peace and Love.

V. 2. That they speak evil of no man, be no Brawlers, but gentle, showing all
meekness to all men.

Doubtless were but this Gospel Precept in this verse, conscionably practiced,
it would exceedingly tend to the healing of all our Breaches, and the making up
of our Rents and Divisions, by which we are almost consumed. We have in order
hereunto, bitten and devoured one another, not so much with our Teeth, as with
our Tongues. To cure us, Put them in mind that they speak evil of no man. There
is none of us, but take too much liberty even to this day, to speak
contumeliously of those which are not of their own Party, whereas there is
nothing more clear than this, that we are under a Divine Charge and
prohibition, to speak evil of no man, of what Party soever. And that we be no
Brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness to all men, is also another Gospel
Precept. To be affable, gentle and peaceable toward those of our own
judgments, and that are of our own Party, is no singular Act of Humanity. Our
Savior tells us, if we be friendly only to our Brethren, What singular thing do
ye, Do not even the Publicans the same? But to show all meekness to all men, of
what Party soever, you see is the bounden duty of those to whom the Grace of
God has appeared.

Make use therefore of your Divine Oratory, to urge these aforesaid Duties upon
your Hearers, by all those Arguments which are drawn up by the Holy Ghost to
your Hands, in the 3, 4, and 5. verses of the same Chapter, and I doubt not,
but by Gods Blessing, who is the God of Peace, he will once more bless his
people with Peace, according to his Promise, The Lord who sits upon the
Flood, yea, the Lord who sits King for ever, the Lord will give strength
unto his People, the Lord will bless his People with Peace, Psalm. 29. 10, 11.

And that this Peace may not be obstructed, but as vigorously pursued and
followed after, as Holiness, to both which we are equally engaged Jure Divino.

Let me now make my particular address to ye of the Independent To the
Independent Party, or Gathered Churches.
Party, and of the Gathered Churches; to whom though I have many things to say,
which lie upon my heart, and I find my self bound in Spirit to make mention of;
yet in this time of trouble and day of Rebuke, which the Righteous Lord has
most justly brought upon us for our sins. I find the sense of our many
Provocations, very much afflicting my heart with grief, and soul with sorrow,
under this aggravation; That though I have all this while looked upon my self
and all that were in our congregational way, as the only Saints of the most
High, separated from the rest of the world by the strictness of our Profession
of Purity of Ordinances and Church-Administrations, and that I judged those who
joined not with us therein, either as the Profane Rabble of the world, or at
the best, but as a company of Carnal, Moral and Formal Persons; yet that many
of us, by our Practices, in reference to the public Affairs of the
Commonwealth, and to our righteous Administrations in order thereunto, have
not only fallen very short of many of those whom we have thus censured, but
have acted in such ways that some Heathen Patriots that knew not God, would
blush and be ashamed of.

Ye may peradventure look upon this as a very uncharitable, or at least a very
unseasonable passage, from a Friend, in this day of our calamity: But if you do
consider what I have already spoken to ye amongst the rest, wherein I sincerely
discover the reason of my plain dealing; and if God has awakened any of you
(by his stupendous and amazing Providential Dispensations) as I hope he has
done many, who for these late years have been fast asleep, and have had many
Golden Dreams of being Godly in Christ Jesus without suffering, and of ruling
others, while our Lusts ruled us, you will be of another mind.

I do profess unfeignedly, that were our miscarriages to be concealed, I should
as David in another case, admonish all that have any respect to the Honor of
the Gospel, that they tell them not in Gath, that they publish them not in the
streets of Askelon, lest the Daughters of the uncircumcised rejoice.

But alas! our sinful and irregular actings for these late years, have been
committed in the sight of the Sun. They are like the sins of Judah, written
with a Pen of Iron, with the point of a Diamond, they are recorded in the
several Declarations and Remonstrances of the Army, In the first and second
Part of the History of Independency, and such other Books of that nature which
now walk abroad without Control.

And now while I am speaking of Books, I cannot but tell you of that which
should be a very cutting Consideration, and should deeply humble us; That
although in that hour of Temptation, that power of darkness we were under, some
of the Episcopal and Presbyterian Party, by their public addresses in Print,
did pathetically diswade from, and bear witness against those unwarrantable
ways, into which some of us were running in a full Career, in Anno, 1648. Yet
amongst our selves, I do not find any dissent or disswasion from them published
to the world, by any of our Congregational Party; but rather such Books as did
justify and approve the same: Excepting what was written by Mr. William
Sedgwick, in his Book called Justice upon the Armies Remonstrance, Wherein were
many Passages, which would we have hearkened unto, as coming from an intimate
friend, might have prevented those woeful confusions and revolutions of
Government that have since befallen the Nation; and that reproach that is come
upon Religion.

But he as soon fell from those serious convictions he tendered to our Party:
And by his Book called A new View of the Armies Remonstrance, which he made to
issue out after the other, unsaith what in his Book aforesaid he had presented
in many passages thereof.

I wish from my soul that we had hearkened to those many Christian Counsels that
were given us in those days: And that although we could not through prejudice
receive them from the Parties abovenamed, yet that we might have considered
what our Friend in Justice upon the Armies Remonstrance said unto us. But
though it be too late in reference to what is past, yet that we may not through
the high opinion that we have of our own ways, as to the Piety and Justice of
them; that all others have been injurious to us, and we are the only innocents
of this Island: Which as I have said before, is the great impediment to that
Moderation and Christian Condescension which I desire may be amongst us.

That we may no longer I say, persist in the Justification of our selves, for
what is past, and desist from any further endeavors of interrupting the
Public Peace and Settlement of these Nations for the time to come; that we may
be delivered from those corrupt and destructive Principles to all Civil
Government, which many of us are infected with; that we may not too much deject
our selves at these our present disappointments, as if now a Knife were put to
the Throat of the Public Interest of the Nation, as some have spoken in plain
English.

I shall present you with some remarkable passages, in our aforesaid Author,
Justice upon the Armies Remonstrance, which may be of singular use to us, for
those ends and purposes aforesaid: Considering they come from one, who is
neither of the Episcopal or Presbyterian Party.

I shall begin with what I named last, in the first Place, as being that which
I find does most perplex our Spirits: That now by the Current of the times, the
public Interest of the Nation for which we have so long contended in our late
wars against the King and his Family, is like to fall to the ground; and our
Government by a Commonwealth, to return to King-ship again in the same Family.

Now to undeceive us, and deliver us from this fundamental error, consider
what Mr. Sedgwick says, in his Justice upon the Armies Remonstrance, p. 22.
says he, In the proposing of such an Interest as ye hold forth to be the
ground of the Quarrel (namely the things before expressed) ye lie grossly: For
these things as ye propose them, were never thought of in the beginning of the
Quarrel: Yea, the Parliament, and we also protested to the contrary; never to
alter the Government, never to alter the Fundamental Laws; yea, to protect and
defend the Kings Person, etc. For says he, p. 9. That which ye offer is not
the public Interest, but your own particular Interest. It is very clear that
this is not half the Interest of the Kingdom; it is much too narrow for a rich,
honorable Nation. Generally ye know the people of England desire Peace, Settled
Religion, Established Truth, Freedom of Trade, and this with his Majesty, their
King, that he may Govern them according to their honest and known Laws, that
they may live in Prosperity and Honor.

For your devised things ye propose, the people know them not, and less affect,
than know them. They are invented only to please and secure your selves. And to
pull down Monarchy, ye are but a part: And alas! an Inconsiderable Part of the
Kingdom; not one of an Hundred will own what ye set down for the Public
Interest; a diseased Part ye are, a Bone started out of his place, a Piece of
Timber gone from the whole Frame of the Kingdom, which is large, and consists
of King, Lords and Commons, with innumerable excellent Branches that grow from
these. Further, p. 11. This is a great fault that ye all along carry the
Public Interest in opposition to the King; which is a wicked thing, to divide
them which God has joined; wherein ye indeed destroy and mangle not only the
Kingdom, but the Word Interest; which is of a uniting signification; Interesse
is to be in or amongst each other. The Public has his Interest in the King,
and the King his Interest in the Public; for they have the same Esse or
Interest, which is to be in each other: The King is in the People, and the
People in the King. And though, says he, ye will disjoyn your selves from
Kings, God will not, who is the King of Kings, neither will I. And therefore as
he acknowledges, p. 44. It is the Peoples right to have a King. So of himself
he says, I confess it is my Birthright to have relation to a King, and if I
am denied it, I am denied my native right. And says he in the same page, For
the King against whom ye go in full cry, I have this to say to check your
violent course, That he had and has a true lawful right in the Kingdom, and
to the Kingdom, and as good as any man has to any thing he possesses: His
Crown, Revenue and Dignity is as truly his Birthright and inheritance, as
another man's house or lands; and he that denies this is wilfully blind.

These quotations do sufficiently evidence, how much we have been mistaken, and
that the public interest has not been driven on, whatever has been
pretended. But because I find that many of us are dull, and slow of heart to
believe it; Out of my unfeigned desire that you may lie under the same
Convictions I now do my self, as to this particular, I shall present you with a
passage out of the said Author, which speaks very plain English. Says he,
Page 23. I must deal plainly with you and my self too, it is so gross that it
cannot be concealed, That we had Designs of Particular Interest and advantage
when we began the War (therefore the public interest of the Nation has been
but a pretense.) There was this in our minds, and has been in our minds
continually. That the King and his party were wicked men, and not worthy and
fit for their places and power they had. And that we were the Saints, the
Godly, and they did properly belong to us. That the Saints are to have the high
places of the earth; and that now is the time for these things to be performed,
and that no body is now fit to administer Justice, to rule over men but our
selves. And therefore we were always glad of any of the Kings ways that
tended to difference and breach; Glad when he left his Parliament, and took
Arms, thinking he was running to his own destruction, that he would split
himself and his party by it; and that we should have the spoil of them, and
have an opportunity to obtain our ends. And though we complained of the Kings
obstinacy, really we have been always glad of it, because that it led to his
destruction. And the Kings not yielding at this time ye know was thirsted after
by us, (meaning at the time of the Treaty in the Isle of Wight.) And ye would
not stir (by force to seclude the major part of the Members out of the House of
Commons, and so to interrupt the Treaty) till the King manifested a willing
mind to accommodation; Peace being always held destructive to our ends, or the
recovery of our rights the whole Kingdom; for we think our selves the only true
Lords, unless the King would take part with us, and become one of our Saints.
And that this was all the change of heart was expected, appears by another
passage of our Author aforesaid, that speaks to purpose indeed, Page 27. Ye
say the Kings heart is not changed, to which I answer, Ye expect that he should
turn not to God, but to your selves, to your own form of Religion and
Government; and cannot account any thing a change, but yielding to your own
Way, Which if he should he would be seven times more the child of the devil.

May other passages to this purpose I might have collected out of the said
Book; but these I hope will now undeceive such of us as have been plain
hearted, and did believe what was with much confidence affirmed, That the Cause
which of late years has been pleaded for since the Interruption of the Treaty,
was for the Public interest of the Nation, that the Liberties of all Gods
people were imbarqued therein: Especially considering who makes this discovery
of these private, ungodly designs, which have from the beginning been driven on
by many that look upon themselves as the only Saints. One, as I have said
before, neither of the Episcopal or Presbyterian party.

Let therefore the Consideration of these particular passages, not only humble
us deeply for what is past, but rectify our judgments for the time to come,
incline us to the public peace and settlement of the Nation, and free us from
those corrupt and destructive principles to all Civil Government; with which
many of us I fear (by what I have observed) are leavened and corrupted.

And to this purpose I shall from all these before recited collections, lay
before you these undeniable Conclusions, flowing from the premises aforesaid.

1. The first Conclusion then that I desire you to observe with me from the
Collections aforesaid, is this, That the Good Old Cause in which we first
engaged with the Parliament, was to preserve, and not to subvert the
Fundamental Laws and Government of the Nation; to protect and defend the Kings
Person and Family, and not to ruin and destroy the same.

2. That the Public Interest of the Nation consists in being governed by
their King, according to their known Laws, and that this is their Birthright.

3. That the Crown-Revenue and Dignity of the King are as righteously his
Birthright, as any other man's House or Lands are his.

4. That to divide between the Interest of the Public and the King (terming it
only the Interest of Charles Stuart, as we have done of late years) is a very
wicked and ungodly thing.

5. That to change the Government into a Commonwealth, was to pervert that
righteous Cause in which we first engaged; and was an invention to secure a
guilty Party, and altogether against the public Interest of the Nation.

6. That the real or supposed wickedness of a Prince or People, is no Scripture
Ground for those who are, or do profess themselves to be more holy, to usurp
Dominion over them, and to get the Government of the Nation into their own
hands.

The five former Propositions our aforesaid Author has expressed in Terms, and
may be plentifully confirmed by the several Remonstrances and Declarations of
the Parliament, our several Oaths and Obligations, and by the Protestation
which was so generally taken, by the known Laws of the Land, and many other
ways besides. But this sixth and last being only declared as a Principle upon
which many took occasion from the Differences between King and Parliament, to
act thus desperately, to the ruin both of Prince and People. Because as Mr.
Sedgwick says, there was this in our minds, that the King and his Party were
wicked, and so unworthy of the places and power, and we were the Saints, etc.

Being through mercy converted from this destructive Principle of Government,
with which many of us are more or less corrupted; besides the fifth Monarchy
men, in whom it reigns: I hold it my Duty to strengthen my Brethren against
the Power and Contagion thereof.

That therefore which I meekly offer to your Consideration, is this:

That this aforesaid Principle of invading the Rights either of Prince or
People, because wicked and ungodly, is expressly against the written Word of
God, in the Old and New Testament; contrary to the Examples of Christ and his
Apostles, of the Primitive Christians, and to the Judgment of all Reformed
Churches, and derives its Pedigree and Original from the Devil and that Roman
Antichrist, which we profess so much to hate and abhor.

All this you shall find at large proved by that Reverend and Holy man In an
Assize Sermon of his preached above 30 years since, bound up in his Works.
Mr. Robert Bolton, who being dead, yet speaks, fully against this wretched
Principle: Wherein you shall find that Bellarmine, Father Bennet, and other of
that Jesuitical Party and Popish Crew were the Founders and Authors thereof.

I shall only add, that our Savior (whose Disciples we all profess our selves
to be) when he commanded us to give to Caesar, the things which are Caesar's,
does plainly evidence, that Caesar (which was the Name, by which all those
Pagan Princes and Roman Emperors were called) they had (notwithstanding their
Impiety) their dues and rights, which did belong to them, and we are all
commanded and enjoined to give to them their rights and dues: But to take their
Rights and Dues away from them, upon the A warning piece for England,
especially for London, in the famous Hystory of the frantic Anabaptists,
Printed 1642.
pretense of their Impiety or our Saintship, is to be found no where, but in
the History of John of Leyden, who with his Disciples, whilst the City of
Munster the Prime City of Westphalia, was besieged, out of which they had
driven many of the Inhabitants, without respect of age or sex, running
throughout the Streets in Troops, crying out, Get ye hence all ye wicked, if ye
mean to save your lives, p. 9. They also published a Book called the
Restitution, wherein they affirmed this Doctrine, That Christ shall have a
Kingdom here upon earth before the Day of Judgment, wherein only the Godly and
Elect shall reign, the wicked being every where destroyed; That it is lawful
for the people to cast off their Governors: And although the Apostles had no
secular Jurisdiction, yet the Ministers of their Church had power from God to
use the Civil sword, and by force to set up a new Commonwealth, etc. Whose
Dreams and Dotage, says my Author, were confuted by many Learned men,
Melancton, Justus Menius, and Urbanus Regius, whose Writings are extant, p. 15.
The Holy Word of God either in the Old or New Testament giving so little ground
for this Principle, and the practices that issue from it, that Thomas Muncer
the Ringleader of all that uproar and Confusion that Germany was involved in
about Anno 1525. is forced to pretend to Divine Revelations for it, and by this
seduced his Followers, That he had received a Command from God to kill and root
up all wicked Princes and Magistrates, and to choose better in their places, p.
2.

But as our Blessed Savior has commanded us to give to Paganish and Heathen
Caesar's or Kings their Due, by way of Reverence, Subjection and Maintenance to
support their Authority, so well knowing how backward many that professed
themselves to be his Followers, would be to it, and how forward the enemies of
his Gospel, would be to calumniate his Disciples unjustly, as we find they did
his Followers, Acts 17. 17. for such as did act and were disobedient to the
decrees of Caesar, he therefore gives us a President for our Imitation:
showing how exceeding tender he was in this particular to avoid all appearance
of any such practice as might flow from this Principle. Therefore says he,
lest we should offend them, lest they should take scandal at our refusal of
what was required for Caesar's Maintenance, he works a Miracle, says he to
Peter, Go thou to the Sea and cast thy Hook, and take up the fish that first
comes, and in his mouth thou shall find a piece of silver, this take, and give
them for me and thee, Mat. 17. 27.

The same mind that was in Christ Jesus, was also in his Blessed Apostles.
Saint Peter to prevent the Scandals that might be taken or given by the Saints
scattered throughout the world, knowing the enemies of the Gospel were apt to
speak evil of them as evil doers, 1 Pet. 2. 12. advises them by well doing to
put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. But how this should be done, he
tells us, v. 13, 14. By submitting your selves to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether to the King, as Supreme; or to Governors, as those which
are sent by him, etc.

And the Apostle Paul in stead of directing the Godly to depose or oppose their
Kings, Governors, and such as were in Authority, that they being suppressed as
wicked and ungodly, they might then lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
Godliness, etc. He advises them instead of making Insurrections, to make
Intercessions, to be much in Prayer and Supplications for them: And that it
seems is the Scripture way of procuring peaceable and quiet times, with all
Godliness and Honesty under their Government.

And as the Scriptures evidence, that they which are Saints, have no warrant
from them to invade the rights of the Magistrate to rule, but threaten
Resistance against them, with Damnation, Romans 13.

So that they have as little to invade the rights of their Fellow Subjects upon
the same account, that they are Profane, Wicked and Ungodly: And that
therefore we may impose a Government upon them, to which they have no
Inclination, and by Sequestration take away their Estates, if they will not
comply with us therein. For God has set a double Hedge about their Propriety,
viz. the Municipal Law of the Land, and the Moral Law of the Lord. All the
Commandments of the Second Table being as a Fence set about his Right to Rule,
Govern and be Governed according to Law, Command, 5. about his Life, Com. 6.
about his Estate, Com. 8. about his Good Name, Com. 9. And that nothing that
does belong to him, be so much as coveted or unlawfully desired by us, Com. 10.

And to conclude, the Holy Ghost does expressly characterize those for wicked
and ungodly men, that are injurious to others in any of these Particulars, Job
16. 10, 11. Psalm. 73. 12. Jud. 15. and in many other places, where we shall
find, that not only those that swear and take Gods Name in vain, and other
ways violate the First Table, are pronounced impious and ungodly; but so also
are those which break the Second, in reference to our Neighbors Rights and
Proprieties, and therefore such cannot then be Saints themselves.

The Objections which are made against the Scriptures I have alleged, which
require obedience to the King as Supreme, and consequently condemns the
doctrine of deposing, dethroning, and murdering of Kings, because wicked and
ungodly, or Heretics, as the Papists phrase it; I say the Objections which are
made against them, by Bellarmine and other Popish Authors, from whence those
that write in the defense and justification of what has been acted since the
Treaty at the Isle of Wight, had their main Arguments, you may find them
answered by Mr. Robert Bolton in his Sermon before the Judges, page 15. where
you will find their impiety and simplicity fully demonstrated, to which I refer
you.

Pardon me I beseech you that I have been so long upon this last Conclusion,
for I now look upon this principle as that which has been the Principal cause
of that confusion which has befallen this Land of our Nativity.

And thus now having by the Collections and the Conclusions drawn from them,
made it evident, That we have deceived our selves, and shall deceive others, if
we still persist in making the particular private designs of some in subverting
the Ancient Government of the Nation, to be the concernment of the Kingdom;
which as Mr. Sedgwick says, is large, and consists of King, Lords, and
Commons; and that if Monarchy be restored, and that in the Family of our late
King, this is not to Apostatize from the Cause in which we first engaged: For
we find M. Sedgwick affirming, who ever says so, does lie grossly.

If it should be objected, What are all these quotations to us of the Gathered
Churches to the Independent Party. These particular Passages are charged by Mr.
Sedgwick only upon some of the Army, that were guilty, but they belong not to
us.

To which I Answer, I wish from my very soul they did not.

But I beseech you bear with my plain dealing, and let us all lay our hands
upon our hearts, and make a serious reflection upon our selves. The Eye that
sees all other things, cannot see it self but by reflection: and we that can
see and highly aggravate the Moats that are in the eye of others, cannot see
the Beams that are in our own, without a due reflection upon, and a sincere
inspection into our selves. It is that which of necessity must go before
Repentance, even Consideration before Conversion, Psalm. 119. I considered my
ways, and turned my feet, etc. Now therefore let me entreat you to consider.

The Nation being as I have said before, divided into three Parties, which of
them have longest persisted in those ways that Mr. Sedgwick charge upon the
Army, and in the justification of them, which of our Gathered Churches declared
the trouble of our hearts, and our great dislike of the Armies disobedience to
the Authority of the Lords and Commons that raised them; that bewailed the
great severity, and John of Leyden-like cruelty they afterward exercised: when
fire came out of the Bramble, and consumed the Cedars of Lebanon, which of us
professed with Holy Jacob, Genesis 49. 6, 7. Into their secret let not my Soul
come, my Glory be not thou joined with their Assembly: Cursed be their wrath,
for it was fierce, their anger, for it was cruel: But rather blessed them and
God for it, joining with them in days of Rejoicing and Thanksgiving,
accounting the other Parties refusing, but old and new Malignants. I desire you
also to consider what Party have enriched themselves with the spoil, which Mr.
Sedgwick speaks of: That have as I said before, not only bid the Army, God
speed, and so are partakers of all their evil deeds, but have joined with them,
and have owned them in all those woeful changes and Revolutions that our eyes
have seen, we have been for all Governors and Government but the right (except
a few fifth Monarchy men that are only for King Jesus) We have been for a
Commonwealth, without King and House of Lords; for a Protector and his Son,
for a Commonwealth again, and then for that most dangerous Committee of
Safety, erected by the Soldiery, that did so much threaten the Ruin and
Eradication of the Magistracy and Ministry of this Nation, and last of all, for
the last Sediment of the House of Commons; also many of us unnaturally
complying with them in their horrid violence upon the City, for declaring for a
free Parliament.

To which Free Parliament also, how much we have showed our aversness: and how
well we have wished to Col. Lambert and his Party, whom many of us hoped would
interrupt their Meeting together, is notorious to the world, otherwise I should
not have spoken so freely thereunto.

Let us therefore upon these Considerations, take shame to our selves, get our
proud hearts humbled, our Souls softened, our Spirits cooled, the heates and
animosities of our minds abated, and make all our harsh censuring, judging and
accusing of others, to terminate in the accusing, judging and condemning of our
selves.

And let us in these days, wherein of late we have seen our selves so much
neglected by the Nation, so few of us being put either into the Militia in City
or Country; or by the people of this Nation, chosen for their Representatives
in Parliament, let us be so far from censuring and judging of them for profane
and ungodly in so doing (imputing it only to the enmity that is in the hearts
of all unregenerate and unconverted men to the power of Godliness) But let us
who have so much denied the Power of it as we have done, judge and condemn our
selves, for that Cruelty, Injustice and Usurpation of ours over them, of which
we have given them just occasion to be so sensible of for these many years.

I do profess, it is that which much saddens my Spirit, to observe, that we
that do profess our selves to be Saints, and to be of such scrupulous and
tender Consciences, that in the Circumstantials of the Worship of God, we will
do nothing without an express Command, though it be no where forbid, but all
must be according to the Pattern in the Mount; dare not communicate with any at
the Lords Table, but such as we account for Saints like our selves, though
Christ did with Judas; or baptize our young Infants, because we find no express
Command for it in the New Testament. Many of which Judgment renouncing the
Ministry of this Nation, as coming from the Pope, and yet that many of us
should carry on the Sea Mr. Strongs Sermon. Preached at Paul's Nov. 5. 1653. Page
19.
Papists designs all this while, and act from their Popish and Antichristian
Principles, against Magistrates, because Heretics or ungodly, and go against
the express Precepts and Presidents of our Lord and Master Christ. I say, this
should very much humble us, especially to consider, That such as make not that
high Profession with us, should stumble at the Scandals we give and they take
at our Principles and Practices in reference to Civil Government.

And that the Profane Rabble of the world, Swearers, Drunkards and
Sabbath Breakers, Whoremongers, and such like Flagitious Sinners should exceed
us in Loyality to our Native Prince; when as the Scriptures, even the New
Testament is as clear and express in the charging of that upon our Consciences,
as to hear, to pray, to meditate, to walk with God, and to fear his Dreadful
Name. And therefore we shall find, that to fear God and honor the King, are
joined together by the Holy Ghost, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Giving us to understand, that
the contempt of this Precept (which answers to the Fifth Commandment) is not
only inconsistent with the true fear of God, but also draws after it, the
Breach of all the rest of the Commandments of the Second Table, Rebellion,
Treason, Regicide, Paracide, and all kind of Murder, Injustice, Cruelty, and
Oppression, the slanderous defaming and devouring of our Neighbors Good name;
of all which I could wish, that our own times did not give too full proof and
evidence of the same.

Let us therefore upon all these Considerations, be moved to the exercise of
Repentance as to these particular sins: To think upon Restitution, without
which as one of the Fathers has it, non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituetur
ablatum: And let us be persuaded to give over the reproaching of such who are
for a regulated Monarchy, that desire the Throne may be established in
Righteousness, I say, let us no longer revile them with the odious Name of
Cavee and Malignant, which words ye know are frequent amongst us, and with
which now we are apt to brand all that are not of our Party: Whereas if we
would look into the first remonstrance of the Parliament, we should find the
Malignant Party to be described to be such as would introduce erroneous
Doctrines into the Church, endeavor to subvert the Fundamental Laws and
Government of the Nation, to erect an arbitrary power to distemper the Army
that then was in the North, and to bring it up to overaw the Parliament. By all
which Characters, my Friends, I fear the Name does most properly belong to our
selves.

And let us now get out of these Extremes into which we have so madly run, for
some misse-governments in the King, to cut him off, and cast off all Kingly
Government, and upon selfish designs, to erect a Commonwealth; which Mr.
Sedgwick calls a Hoddy Doddy and all Breach, such a one as derogates from the
Majesty of God, and the wisdom of man. Though it had a precious Foundation, and
the Mortar thereof was tempered even with the Blood of all degrees of men in
the Kingdom, and of all Parties but our own, and has consumed more Millions
then any, if not all the Kings of England ever did.

I say, let us be weaned from this Novelty; and now let our Spirits be
reconciled to Kingly Government again.

Even that Ancient Government by Kings, which owes its Original to the Ancient
of Days, who has said, By me Kings reign, and to Jesus Christ, who is the
Lord of Lords, the King of Kings, the true Fountain of Honor: That Government
by which God has promised in Gospel times, that his Church shall be provided
for, and protected; that Kings shall be their Fathers, and Queens their Nursing
Mothers: That Government in the want of which, we have found by experience all
those wickednesses perpetrated as were done in those days, when there was no
King in Israel, Judge. 17. 6. and 19. 1. That Ancient way of Government by which
God ruled his people of old, even by Moses, who was King in Jesurun, and by
which this Nation has been Governed for many hundred years, and never by a
Commonwealth before.

I say, let us by these Arguments shake hands and be friends again with Kingly
Government, with which we have been at odds these many years.

And to bring us together again, I shall to these Arguments give you one
Quotation more from our Friend Mr. Sedgwick; says he, P. 11. Kingliness
agrees with all Christians, they who are of a Royal Nature, and made Kings
with Christ, cannot but be Friends to it. It is a Bastard Religion that is
inconsistent with the Majesty and Greatness of the most absolute Monarch: And
such Spirits are strangers from the Kingdom of Heaven, and know not the Glory
in which God lives, and are of narrow and evil minds, that are corrupt
themselves and not able to bear Greatness, and so think God cannot or will not
qualify men for such high Places, with answerable and proportionable Goodness
and Power.

In my mind there is very much of Truth in this Quotation, and I wish he be of
the same mind still that then uttered it. Without all doubt, they which know
any thing of the ways of Gods administrations, either in the Kingdom of Grace
or of Glory, should not be of Anti-monarchical Spirits. Their Spirits as he
says, are narrow, their Minds are evil: Especially those amongst us who have
loaded with such reproaches, him whom I am apt to believe the Divine Providence
has so wonderfully preserved to rule these three Kingdoms.

And now the very naming of Providence does furnish me with a most cogent
Argument in my judgment, to prevail with us all to incline to what I move you.

For how has the Divine Providence overturned, overturned, overturned all the
ways of Government we have attempted to set up contrary to the Right both of
Prince and People, as Mr. Sedgwick teaches us.

Doubtless, we have cause to fear we have highly offended in walking so by
Providence, making that to legitimate those Actions of ours, for which the Word
gave no warrant, but condemned rather. This was the Argument by which we
answered all our Opposers: Oh the Providence of God has declared from Heaven
the justness of our Cause and Ways! Our Protector though in his long Speech at
the Dissolution of the Parliament (so called) Jan. 22. 1654. he does very much
in many places press all to observe the voice of Providence, which had done
such great things, wondering that they could not proceed further to the
Settlement of the Government of the Nation, according to his desire, for which
he broke them up: yet he was somewhat loath to own the Providence of God
therein: For says he, I cannot apprehend what it is, I would be loath to call
it a Fate, that were too Paganish a Word, but there is something in it that we
have not our expectation, P. 26. And sure there was the Divine Providence
counter-working.

But how evidently it has appeared since, is our Duty as Christians to own and
acknowledge; especially since this remarkable passage in his Speech aforesaid,
P. 27. As for this Cause it is either of God or man: If it be of God, it will
bear up; if it be of man, it will tumble, as every thing that has been of man
has done since the World began: And as this is, so the all wise God deal with
it.

Now let us who have made the Providence of God our Rule, contrary to this
express Command amongst others, that we should do no evil that good might come
of it, Let us I say, as becomes Christians, acknowledge the all-wise,
Providential Dispensations in so stupendiously tumbling down the chief Actors
and Agitators in those unwarrantable ways, we have too too much owned and
justified.

Truly me thinks the strange Tumblings that we have seen since the Protector
was laid in his Grave, and how by an evil Spirit the all-wise God has sent
among the men of Sechem, he has so strangely Judge. 9. 23.
tumbled down the Family of Abimelech, I say, that the near Relations of the
Old Protector should be so instrumental in pulling down the New One; and in
that, to lay the Foundations of that Disgrace that is come upon themselves.

And how strangely the Providence of God has brought about the Calling of this
Parliament, defeated Col. Lambert since his escape, scattering the Disturbers
of the Nations Peace, and disappointed their hopes of hindering the peaceable
Meeting of this great Convention.

I say, these strange and most admirable Providence which would fill a Volume
with the Observations of all the Circumstances of them, should now convince us,
that it is hardkicking against the pricks, and should very much bring us into a
low Opinion and esteem of our selves, and incline us to a peaceable and
Christian Accommodation with all Parties, and to show forth more Moderation of
mind than we have yet made known to the World.

It is only for these ends that I have spoken so home, and dealt so impartially
with you, being acquainted with the temper of many of your spirits which
require it.

But if any Prophanatick shall make this cursed use of what I have written, as
thereby to heighten that hatred of holiness (that is so natural to all
unregenerate men) or to harden himself in his way of wickedness, stumble and be
scandalized at the fallings of some I have here presented, I say no more to
him, but at his eternal peril be it: For though it be true which our Savior
has said, Woe be to them by whom offenses come; so it is as true also, Woe be to
the world Matthew. 18. 7.
because of offenses.

As for many of the late Kings Party, that have been the greatest sufferers for
him, I fear not that any such ill use should be made by them; so many of the
Nobility and Gentry from Somersetshire, Northamptonshire, Kent, and about the
City of London and other places, having most piously and Christianly Declared,
That they do reflect upon their past sufferings, as proceeding from the hand of
God; and that they do abhor all revengefull thoughts or actions against any
party or persons whatsoever.

Which Declarations of theirs have very much won my heart, and I desire that
they may have the like effect upon all of our Party, toward those truly noble
and gentle Persons, who have thus prevented us with their love and goodness.

Let us therefore no longer harbor any jealous and uncharitable surmises
against them: Let us not say it is an easy matter to give good words, though
they never intend it. The Apostle tells us, Love, it neither thinks or
speaks evil. But let us all who have seen how evil and destructive divisions
and contentions are amongst Brethren; now come and see how good and joyful it
is for Brethren to dwell together in unity; for doubtless we are Brethren, and
all have one Father, though we most unhappily like Joseph's brethren, have
fallen out by the way.

And that this good work may be prosecuted and carried on in all our
Congregations, As I have spoken in particular to the Episcopal Clergy, and to
the Presbyterian Ministers, so I shall address my self to ye who are the
Pastors and Teachers of our Congregations; such as labor in the Word and
Doctrine, being lawfully called thereunto. Oh be ye instant in season, and out
of season, at all times, and upon all occasions, more frequently then ever
pressing upon your hearers, and faithfully applying to them, the Doctrine of
Self-denial, the want of which I fear is the cause of all that selfishnesse
which is in our party; which selfishnesse is the sum of Vice, the capital
enemy of God and the King, of Order and Government, of all grace and virtue, of
every holy Ordinance and duty, especially of unity and Brotherlylove, of the
welfare of the Public, and our own true good and eternal happiness. Oh
therefore, let the Doctrine of Self-denial be more preached, be more practiced
then ever. Make also Conscience of preaching more then ever against hypocrisy,
against disobedience to the fifth Commandment. And as the most of your hearers
profess themselves to be such as have the Spirit of God, see to take heed of
those ungodly lusts which Jude tells us argue, v. 19. that they have not the
spirit. And persuade them above all things to show forth in their conversations
for the time to come, those fruits of the spirit, which the Apostle speaks
on, Ephesians. 5. 9. The fruit of the spirit is in all goodness, righteousness and
truth.

Such fruits of the spirit as these breaking out in our lives and
conversations, will make them winning, and draw those that are without to like
and approve of the Religion we profess. These are such fruits which have but
little appeared to the world in these late years amongst us.

And therefore be persuaded and entreated to charge it upon the consciences of
your hearers, that they bring them forth. The Apostle tells us indeed of other
fruits of the spirit, as faith, love, etc. these do unite our souls to God, and
God to us; but goodness, benignity, an affable and charitable disposition,
Righteousness in our converse and commerce in the world; Truth, veracity and
faithfulness in our words and promises, these unite and tie the souls of men to
us all; These things, says the Apostle, are profitable to men. All other our
gracious qualifications, our most elevated common gifts of the spirit; though
we could be never so Seraphical in our Contemplations, though never so
Angelical in our expressions, though we had the tongue of men and Angels,
though we should consume our lungs by our long prayers, and even weep our
selves blind for many of our sins; yet should these be abstracted from
goodness, righteousness and truth, which the Apostle calls (...), the fruit
of the spirit, we should show our selves to be but of a selfish and solitary
disposition, and no way allure others to be in love with Religion.

Persuade therefore your people to shun that supercilious morosness of many in
their conversation, saying unto their neighbors, Stand by for I am more holy
then thou; that hard-heartedness that commonly appears in many Professors
toward poor and indigent persons: For though the household of faith are to have
the pre-eminence, yet we are expressly commanded to do good unto all; even to
Gal. 6. 10.
such as upon whom our heavenly Father causes his sun to shine, and his rain
to fall, which are the bad as well as the good. Matthew. 5. 45.


Tertullian relates of the Primitive Professors in his time, that they were
called, not Christiani, but (...), unde venit (...).
Chrestiani, from (...), a word which signifies good, bountiful, 1 Pet. 2. 3.
sweetness of manners and disposition; profitableness, 2 Timothy 2. 14. and that
fruit of the spirit, Gal. 5. 22. translated gentleness. It should seem then
they were such close followers of the gentleness of Christ, and of his
goodness, who went about doing good, and that they were so profitable unto
humane society, by their sweetness of disposition, their gentleness, their
bounty, benignity and goodness, they did so abound in such fruits of the
spirit, that they were called Chrestians. Now if we that live in these evil
times, could be brought but to this excellent temper, how should we adorn and
crown our holy profession, and draw in others to a love and liking of our zeal
for God in matters of the first Table, and make all our present divisions to
vanish: Especially if it be in conjunction with Righteousness, which will make
us give to all their due; Obedience and Loyalty to the King as Supreme, and to
all other Governors sent by him; and to all our equals love. By this means
then shall all parties be united together, and the effect of these works of
Righteousness shall be peace, and a quiet settlement of these three Kingdoms.

I have now but a few words to speak unto ye of the Congregated Churches, in
reference to the extremes into which we have run, in relation to matters of
Religion and Church Government, and to press you to moderation therein also, as
I have done the Episcopal and Presbyterian parties, and so I shall conclude my
Discourse.

Though I must needs say the parties before named have not run into that
extreme with us, in reference to the Civil Government of the Nation, and
therefore I have not had that occasion to speak to them on that subject which I
have so largely insisted on to our selves.

Yet in Reference to Church Government, or matters of the soul and conscience,
there are none of us all can wash our hands in innocence.

What just occasion was given to all truly conscientious and pious men to be
offended at the persecutions of the Prelates, and their superstitious
injunctions and innovations; and consequently what need there was of a
Reformation in Church Government, Sir Edward Deering, my Lord Digby, and others
of their own party have declared by the former quotations.

But how this blessed work has miserably miscarried in all our hands, hinc
illae lachrimae. I know the Presbyterian party are apt to say, if we
Independents had not interposed, this work of Reformation had gone on with
speed, their Government had been settled in the Nation; not considering that the
progress that they had made therein by the sword, would (like the Commonwealth
we have been raising all this while) require the continuance of the same to
support and bear it up at vast charges: The Government aforesaid being not only
dissatisfactory and displeasing to our late King, but to the greatest part of
the Nobility, Gentry and Commons of the Land, besides our selves; especially as
universal conformity thereunto by the Covenant was intended.

Now to avoid these extremes into which we saw both others run before us, even
of a violent, absolute and universal compulsion of conformity; that nothing in
Matters of Religion might be urged that might go against our Consciences, and
that according to our Principle, that particular Congregations are Independent,
and subject to no Censure from any other Church but that of non-communion. We
have given a boundless and lawless toleration to all corrupt and erroneous
Opinions, from the Anti-Trinitarian to the Quaker, wherein though we have run
into much Confusion and Disorder, yet have we therein come nearer to the
Judgment of Mr. Hales before quoted, than either the Presbyterian or Episcopal
Party themselves; who in his Discourse about dealing with erring Christians,
does neither approve of the High Commission Court, or of a Covenant to swear
down the Extirpation of Error, Heresy and Schism Or any other way of severity
. For says he, P. 55. Severity against, and separation from Heretical
companies, took its Beginning from the Heretics themselves, and if we search
the Stories, we shall find that the Church did not at the first arising, thrust
them from her, themselves went out. And as for severity, that which the
Donatists sometimes spoke in their own defense, Illam esse veram Eccclesiam
quae persecutionem patitur, non quaefacit, She was the true Church not which
raised, but which suffered persecution, was de facto true for a great space.
For when Heresies and Schisms first arose in the Church, all kinds of violence
were used by the erring Factions, but the Church seemed not for a long time to
have known any use of a sword, but only of a Buckler; and when she began to use
the Sword, some of her best and chiefest Captains much disliked it. The first
Law that ever was made in this kind, was enacted by Theodosius against the
Donatists; but with this restraint, that it should extend against none but such
as were tumutuous: and till that time, they were not so much as touched with any
mulct, though but pecuniary, til that shameful outrage committed against Bishop
Maximian, whom they beat down with Bats and Clubs, even as he stood at the
Altar; so that not so much the Error of the Donatists, as their Riots and
Mutinies were by Imperial Laws restrained.

Thus sar Learned, Pious and Moderate Mr. Hales, of whose Judgment had the
Episcopal Party been in the time of their Government, these troubles in the
Church had never been raised, nor had these miseries come upon the King and
Kingdom: And were but what he has written, seriously pondered by considering
Christians of all Parties, it would pluck up the cause of all our Divisions by
the roots. As I shall therefore commend to you all Who shall be called to
advise about matters of Religion.
his Works set forth by Mr. Pearson aforesaid, so this one particular Passage
more amongst the rest; It is not says he, p. 54. It is not the variety of
Opinions, but our own perverse wills, who think it meet that all should be
conceited as our selves are; which has so inconvenienced the Church. Were we
not so ready to anathematize each other, where we concur not in opinion, we
might in hearts be united, though in our tongues we were divided, and that with
singular profit to all sides. It is the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
peace, and not Identity of Conceit, which the Holy Ghost requires at the hands
of Christians.

This short Quotation gives us a true account of the Cause and Cure of all our
Church Dissentions and Divisions.

Now that these Rents and Schisms may not grow wider, but be healed up (and I
hope therein offer the sense of very many Church Members) I say, I shall humbly
propound this expedient: Let but the Episcopal and Presbyterian Parties abandon
and renounce their Principle of universal Conformity and compulsion, and we of
the Gathered Churches, ours of a universal toleration and liberty for
Conscience: They exercising no other compulsive power over tender Consciences,
than what they are furnished with from the Word of God; and we expecting and
requiring no other liberty from them than what the Word of God allows us.

And no doubt but we shall find the Son of Righteousness arising upon us with
healing under his wings, and give us all that unity of Spirit, which is the
Bond of Peace, though we have not Identity of Conceits and Apprehensions, and
will make us all to be of one Heart, though we are not all of one mind.

By what way of Government this may be best effected, I leave to the Advice of
an Assembly of Religious and Learned Ministers of all Parties (whom no doubt
the Parliament will speedily summon) and to the Result and determinations of
the Parliament thereupon, in reference to Church Matters (I hope) all sober and
moderate Independents if not very weak in judgment or strongly possessed with
prejudice, and many other corruptions therein, will humbly submit to acquiesce
therein.

And not only so, but also to the judgment of that great Council, in reference
to what they have voted, not only of the way of Government by Monarchy, but
also to the Government of his Majesty.

Whose Gracious Declaration of a free and general pardon to all his Subjects,
how faulty soever, excepting only such as shall be here after excepted by
Parliament (which cannot now be many, considering the chiefest are gone down
into the dust.) And also of Liberty to tender Consciences, and that no man
shall be disquieted or called in question for differences of Opinion in matters
of Religion, that do not disturb the Peace of the Kingdom.

I say, these Offers of Grace and Mercy from his Majesty, whom many of our
Consciences tell us we have so much offended, and exposed to such great
afflictions and Sufferings, should now melt our hearts through great contrition
and penitential remorse for what is past, and work us to Resolutions of all due
Loyalty and Subjection to his Government for the time to come, and that not for
fear, but for Conscience sake.

Methinks God having (as we ought to judge in Charity, by his Gracious
expressions) turned his Royal heart toward us, how should it turn our hearts
to be Loyal toward Him and make us now to make good what I now believe (...)
by his Royal Father, in the Advice he gave to him before (...), when Prince In
his (...).
of Wales; says he, None will be more Loyal and Faithful to you and me, than
those Subjects, who sensible of their Errors and great Injuries, shall feel in
their own Souls most vehement Motives to Repentance, and earnest desires to
make some reparation for their former defects. Nay, this Confidence his Late
Majesty had of his most offending Subjects, that he further says, in the said
Advice, For those that repent of any defect in their Duty to me, I believe ye
shall find them truly zealous to repay with Interest that Loyalty and Love to
You, that was due to Me.

Surely by what I have so largely insisted upon in all this Discourse, we of
the Gathered Churches cannot be so stupid, but needs must be brought to a sense
of this, that we have been exceeding defective in our Duty to the Late King.
The Presbyterian Party in England and Scotland about the Late Kings Death, and
since have Some of them suffering death and banishment, etc.
testified their Repentance for their Defects in their Duty to the Late King,
by their Loyalty to his Majesty. Methinks we should no longer lie under the
same reproof as they did, 2 Samuel 19. 12. Wherefore are ye the last in bringing
back the King? Well, nunquam sera est ad bonosmores via. Let us therefore
though we have set out after others, yet let us overtake them in the speedy and
vigorous expressions of our Repentance for the Defects of our Duty to the Late
King, by our Love and Loyalty to our present Sovereign.

Let our Contentions now be turned into this Christian emulation, which Party
of us shall be most pious toward God, most Loyal toward the King, and most
loving to one another: And then no doubt if our ways please the Lord, he will
make not only our enemies to be at peace with us, but us to be at peace and
amity with all dissenting brethren and they with us, and will give us favor in
the eyes of the Authority of the Nation, the King and Parliament, AMEN.

FINIS.
In the Integrity of my heart have I done this, Genesis 20. 5. Salem Philalathes,
and a Churchmember.


