MISERICORDIAM VOLO: OR, THE Pharisees LESSON. SHOWING The Impiety and
Unreasonableness of contending for outward Forms and Ceremonies, to the
Violation of Obedience, Charity, and the Public Peace.

Haud dubitem affirmare eos qui falluntur and tamen fraternam communionem cum
aliis retinere parati sunt, esse coram Deo magis excusatos, quam qui veras
opiniones in iis controversiis tuentur, and mutuam communionem cum aliis
Ecclesiis etiam desiderantibus, aspernantur. Davenant. pro pace Ecclesiae, p.
24. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1677.

THE PREFACE Concerning the Ceremonies of the Church.
IT is granted by all sober Protestants, that the Church has power of making
Canons and Constitutions, for Decency and Order in the public worship of God;
and not only to prescribe the necessary circumstances of time and place; but
also to continue and establish those ancient rites of the Christian Church,
which were practiced in the primitive times, and are in themselves of an
indifferent nature; which authority of the Church was asserted in the Augustan
confession, Instit. l. 4. c. 10. S. 27. See T. C. l. 1. p. 27.
and particularly by Mr. Calvin, and other worthy persons in the Reformation.
Which our Reformers also did assume to themselves, as is declared in the 20th.
Article; and has been practiced and defended against all Dissenters, Acts
15.28. 1 Corinthians. 11.16.
as well by Scripture, as by Antiquity, and right reason: and therefore those
persons that condemn the Ceremonies of the Church, which the Martyrs and
Confessors of our Church, did establish upon mature deliberation, do reflect
too severely upon those Worthies, who with equal prudence and constancy, did
commend them to us. And the Royal Martyr was so tender of their reputation,
Exact collect. p. 26.
that in his answer to the Parliaments Remonstrance, he promises to reform the
Ceremonies with these cautions. 1. That the Reformation were pursued with such
modesty and submission, that the quiet of the Kingdom were not disturbed: 2.
Nor the decency and comeliness of God's service discountenanced: 3. Nor the
pious, sober, and devout actions of those reverend persons, who were the first
laborers in the blessed Reformation, be scandalized and defamed. And some that
are not friends to Ceremonies, Saints care for Church Communion. p. 334.
have vindicated those persons in this respect. What shall we say of reverend
Ridley, (says Master Crofton) hearty Hooper, sincere Sanders, trusty Tailor,
and most brave Bradford, with the cloud of Witnesses that served God by the
Liturgy to their last breath, even in their most personal and dying devotions,
and suffered also for so doing, having the same objected against them by their
Persecutors, and also pressed the people, and their choicest friends, to adhere
to it, and serve God by it. And however some succeeding Christians have desired
some reformation of the Liturgy, they have constantly, and with due devotion
served God in the use thereof, and defended the same against the censorious
Brownists, and rigid Separatists. -- And the first reformation had the
perfection of substance, though not of degrees, Gods true worship was restored
to a right order of ministration, the Ordinances of God did then truly exist,
as to their substance, and salvably as to their Ministerial mode toward the
people; otherwise those holy Men had not wherein to rejoice before God and the
World. And certainly they did not entayl a Popish, Superstitious, or Idolatrous
Yoke (as some call the Ceremonies) on the Church of God. Mr. Cartwright was one
of the first Opposers of the Ceremonies, and instead of acquainting you with
the Answers of Archbishop Whitgift, and judicious Hooker, to his arguments, it
will be sufficient to say, that Mr. Cartwright himself has said enough to
confute the dissenters of our times, for first he opposed them, only as
inconvenient, not unlawful: and persuaded Ministers rather to wear the Garments
than cease their Ministry, 2d. Reply. p. 262.
and in his Evangelical Harmony, on Luke 22. ( a v. 14. ad 19.) he says, that
kneeling in the receiving of the Sacrament being incommodious in its own
nature, p. 877. Edit. ult.
and made more incommodious by Popish Superstition, is not so to be rejected,
that for the sake thereof we should abstain from the Sacrament, because the
thing is not in its own nature unlawful -- And what his judgment was in the
case of Separation, appears in a Letter of his to Mr. Harrison lately
published: And in another Letter to his Sister Anne Stubs, reproving her for
stumbling at this stone, that because of some defects in a Church, instead of
concluding that Church to be imperfect, she concluded it to be no Church. The
wise and holy Mr. Hildersham, Bradshaw, Paget, Ball, Gifford, Cure of
Divisions. p. 188.
and other learned Nonconformists of old did foresee and greatly fear this
Spirit (says Mr. Baxter.) But this Spirit being very troublesome and
pragmatical, the most learned of the dissenters did always endeavor to moderate
it, as well by their quiet and peaceable practice, as by their learned and
earnest arguments, and exhortations to unity in the public Worship. And
accordingly when King James, shortly after his entry into the Throne, had
appointed the conference at Hampton Court, where Doctor Raynolds, Dr.
Chaderton, Dr. Spark, and others were appointed to discourse the matters in
controversy, with some Episcopal Divines: They were so far from affirming the
ceremonies to be unlawful, that they would not have it known that any of that
party were so weak, as to affirm it; and Dr. Raynolds was so far satisfied,
that before his death he solemnly declared himself to be of the communion of
the Church of England, and desired absolution according to the form appointed
in the Liturgy. About this time Bishop Morton, Doctor Burges, Mr. Sprint, and
others did most rationally, and irrefragably assert the innocence of the
Ceremonies, and the necessity of the Ministers conforming rather than to suffer
deprivation, and of the peoples, rather than to be deprived of the Ordinances
of Christ. I intend not a History of the transactions in this business, and
therefore shall only give you a brief account of it, from the beginning of our
unhappy troubles. The Long Parliament in their Petition, and Remonstrance
joined with it, December 15. 1642. inform us of some Malignant parties, whose
proceedings evidently appeared to be, mainly, for the advantage and increase of
Popery, and were composed, set up, and acted, by the subtle practice of the
Jesuits, and other Engineers and Factors for Rome, who had so far prevailed, as
to corrupt diverse of the Bishops and others, in prime places of the Church,
Exact Collect.
and p. 20. they intimate, that Idolatry, and Popish Ceremonies were introduced
to the Church, by command of the Bishops; and the people were not only debarred
the Church, but expelled the Kingdom. And that those were counted fittest for
Ecclesiastical preferment, and soonest attained it, who were most officious in
promoting Superstition, most virulent in railing against Godliness and honesty.
We desire (say they) to unburthen the Consciences of men, of needless and
Superstitious Ceremonies, suppress Innovations, and take away the monuments of
Idolatry. To this His Majesty of Blessed Memory answered thus. The fears for
Religion, may happily be, not only as it may be innovated by the Romish party,
but as it is accompanied with some Ceremonies, at which some tender Consciences
really are, or pretend to be scandalized. Concerning Religion, as there may be
any sufpicion of favor, or inclination to the Papists, we are willing to
declare to all the World, that as we have been from our childhood brought up
in, and practiced the Religion now established, so it is well known, we have
(not contented simply with the principles of our Education) given a good
proportion of our time and pains, to the examination of the grounds of this
Religion, as it is different from that of Rome, and are from our Soul so fully
satisfied, and assured that it is the most pure, and agreeable to the Sacred
Word of God, of any Religion now practiced in the Christian world, that as we
believe we can maintain the same by unanswerable Reasons, so we hope we should
readily seal to it by the effusion of our Blood, if it pleased God to call us
to that Sacrifice. And therefore nothing can be so acceptable to us, as any
proposition which may contribute to the advancement of it here, or the
propagation of it abroad, being the only means of drawing down the Blessings of
God upon our selves and this Nation. And we have been extremely unfortunate if
this Profession of ours be wanting to our people -- For differences among our
selves, for matters indifferent in their own nature, we shall, in tenderness to
any number of our loving Subjects, very willingly comply with the advice of our
Parliament, that some Law may be made, for the exemption of tender Consciences
from punishment, or persecution, for such Ceremonies, and in such cases, which
by the judgment of most men are held to be matters indifferent, and of some to
be absolutely unlawful. (Provided etc. as before mentioned, under the three
cautions.) To that clause which concerns corruptions (as you style them) in
Religion, in Church Government, and in Discipline, and the removing such
unnecessary Ceremonies, as weak Consciences might check at: That for any
illegal Innovations which may have crept in, we shall willingly concur in the
removal of them, but we are very sorry to hear in such general terms,
corruption in Religion objected, since we are persuaded in Conscience, that no
Church on Earth can be found, that professes the true Religion with more
purity of Doctrine, than the Church of England does, nor where the Government
and Discipline are jointly more beautified and free from Superstition, than as
they are here established by Law, which by the Grace of God we will with
constancy maintain, while we live, in their purity and glory, not only against
all invasions of Popery, but also from the irreverence of those Schismatics
and Separatists, wherewith of late this Kingdom and City abound, to the great
dishonor and hazard of Church and State. Doubtless they had very much of the
nature of the Adder in them, who instead of being charmed into a quiet and meek
submission by these most pious, gracious, sincere Reasons and condescensions,
did precipitate themselves, and the three Nations to those horrible confusions,
which that Prophetic, as well as Royal Spirit foretold, for immediately after,
the people of the Land being frighted by frequent remonstrances of fears and
jealousies of Popery and Superstition, run themselves into certain snares as to
their Estates, by the insatiable oppression of their new Masters, and their
Lives, by their want of Loyalty, and as to their Consciences by illegal Oaths
and Covenants, till the beauty of Religion was destroyed for want of Order and
Reverence, and the substance of it devoured by Sects and Heresies of all kinds.
And this mostly for Reformation of Ceremonies, for the Doctrine needed it not.
I do even tremble to relate in a corner, what a Preacher who was then of great
repute, spoke in the most eminent meeting of the Nation (the present
Parliament, Anno 1656.) in these words. Worthy Patriots, you that are Rulers,
in this present Parliament -- Praised be God, who has delivered us from
Prelatical innovations, Altargenu-flexions and cringings, with crossings, and
all that Popish trash, and trumpery; and truly, I speak no more, than what I
have often thought, and said -- The removal of these insupportable burdens,
countervails for the Blood and Treasure shed and spent in these late
distractions; nor did I as yet ever hear of any godly men, that desired (were
it possible) to purchase their friends, or money again, at so dear a rate, as
the return of these, to have those Soul-burthening Antichristian yokes imposed
upon us; if any such here be, I am sure, that desire is no part of their
godliness, and I profess my self in that, to be none of the number.] Can any
that bears the name of a Christian hear such things without hornor, especially
when he shall seriously consider what a deluge of blood had overflown the land,
The King being Murdered about Eight years before, and the Sword, and the Axe
having glutted themselves with the Blood of many Noble Heroes, and learned
Clergymen? And besides the many thousands that dyed for their Religion, and
Loyalty, there were very many that perished also in Rebellion, against God and
the King. He had little charity for his Brethren, that would not on such easy
conditions, redeem them from the grave and hell; if we may argue from a
Parable, Dives had more charity in that place of Torment, than was in this
Preachers breast, and if this be a mark of godliness, Satan needs not to be
transformed, to pass for an Angel of light, sure I am nothing can be more
opposite to this Evangelical truth, which the Text that is before us commends,
(viz.) of preferring mercy before Sacrifice. I commend it therefore to your
serious consideration, whether those persons, who so pertinaciously insist upon
the abolishing of our Ceremonies, as to increase our divisions, and engage us
again in Blood and confusion, are not acted by a like Spirit of perverseness,
that delighting it self to live in the fire of contention takes pleasure in
drawing others and tormenting them in the like flames.

At the happy return of our Dear Sovereign, who after the example of his
Martyred Father, was careful to see the Church established in its beauty, we
found this evil Spirit so violently to oppose as if it had taken seven worse
than it self, to secure the possession which it had in the hearts of the
people, being in danger of being cast out: then was Nehustan sent abroad to
persuade the people, that the Liturgy, Ceremonies, and other things used in the
Church of England, ought not to be imposed, nor retained, but utterly
extirpated, and laid aside, and that every one in his place ought to do his
part to the abolishing of it, and not sit still in the midst of such
defilements and snares, but discover their hatred of them, decline their use,
and endeavor the rooting of them out; and all upon this ground, that things
which have been abused in false Worship must be laid aside. Gilaspy.
Then comes another Boreas from the North (whence most of our evils came)
called a Dispute against the English Popish Ceremonies, which he explains to
be, a contending for the purity of Christ, against the corruptions of
Antichrist, and this Spirit, as if he were indeed of the triumphant party,
leads in chains no meaner persons, than Hooker, Morton, Burges, Sprint,
Paybody, Andrews, Saravia, Tilen, Spotswood, Lindsey, Forbes, etc. who were all
particularly confuted, and vanquished by him, as he boasted. But this pitiful
man dealt very mercifully with them, for their chains were such as fell off of
their own accord: and so do those viperous appellations which he endeavors to
fix on the Church, and her practices, Preface, p. 6.
calling them Popish, Antichristian, Idle and Idolized, for thus he bespeaks
the Church of Scotland: Oh thou fairest among Women, what have thou to do with
the inveagling appurtenances and habiliments of Babylon the whore etc. But his
Arguments are as impotent as his Obloquy, the naming of which is confutation
enough, at least, if the Reader will but turn his negatives into affirmatives,
and his affirmatives into negatives, the weakness of the man, and his manner of
arguing will be manifest to all.

As First, when he says we are not to account the Ceremonies matters of small
importance] contrary to the sense of ours, and all the Reformed Churches which
account them things indifferent and not worth the contending for. Secondly, Let
not (says he) the pretense of peace and unity cool your fervor, or make you
spare to oppose your selves to those idle and Idolized Ceremonies] contrary to
the Text, and to Romans 14.17. Thirdly, beware also you be not deceived with a
pretense of the Churches consent, and of Uniformity, as well with the ancient
Church as with the now Reformed Churches in the forms and customs of both] as
if the consent of the Ancient Church before Popery, and all the Reformed since,
were one of the snares to be avoided. Fourthly, moreover, because the foredeck
and hindeck of all our opposites probations, do resolve and rest finally into
the authority of a law -- therefore we certiorate you with Calvin, that Si
acquievistis imperio, pessimo laqueo vos induistis] as if there were no
difference between the establishing of iniquity by a Law (of which Calvin
speaks) and the laws of our Superiors for -- decency and order. Fifthly, do not
reckon it enough to bear within the enclosure of your secret thoughts, a
certain dislike of the Ceremonies, Contrary to S. Paul, To. 14.22
and other abuses now set on foot; except by profession and action you evidence
the same, and so show your Faith by your fact: principally prayers and
supplications are the weapons of our Spiritual warfare, but as they ought to be
done, so the atchieving of other secundary means, ought not to be left undone.
These are the chief of his arguments, which he sums up in the Epistle dedicated
to all and every one in the Reformed Churches of England, Scotland and Ireland,
and you may judge by these, of the validity of the whole Book which consists of
336. pages, wherein is nothing objected, or asserted, but what has been
abundantly confuted by cogent reasons and arguments. After this Scottish Pipe
march many English Reformado's headed by Dr. Owen, whose chief objection is,
Evangelical love. p. 212.
that the ceremonies are unwritten and unscriptural inventions of Men, and that
Christ's warrant and authority must be shown, for what is imposed in the
worship of God. The ridiculousness of this objection has been clearly
demonstrated by the Reverend Bishop Sanderson; and others. Then Mr. Hickman
sends forth his Apology, and his Bonasus Vapulans, who inveighs against the
ceremonies, especially for being significant, and instanceth in the sign of the
Cross, which is made a sign of dedication to God, in Token that etc. Whereas
others of his party do oppose them, because they are not significative enough.

To him succeeds the Author of the Rehearsal, who says that the Conformists
defining a Sacrament to be an outward and visible sign of an inward and
spiritual grace (Omitting the chief part of the definition [ viz. ordained by
Christ himself]) do make the ceremonies of a Sacramental nature. To these the
learned Ritchel in his Tract de Ceremoniis, gives satisfactory answers to all
unprejudiced Readers, and Durel, Parker Mr. Calvin and Mr. Baxter have done the
same. 41.61. p. 90, 454.
, and others have done no less. It will be but labor in vain, to repeat here
all the solid replies to those empty objections. One such argument from
Scripture, as our Savior urges in the Text, against those that on pretense of
contending for their own, against the established rites and customs of the
Church, do violate the laws of Obedience, Love, and Peace, will silence them
all, if they be not possessed with a spirit of contradiction. For if we should
suppose that the rites and ceremonies were as expressly set down in the Gospel
to be used, or forborne in the public worship of God, as the rites and
circumstances concerning Sacrifices, were in the ceremonial law: yet as the
Sacrifices themselves, much more the modes of preparing and offering them,
might be used or omitted, for the performance of moral duties; so doubtless, if
things of an external, ceremonial nature, had been commanded, or forbidden in
express terms, they might yet be observed, or omitted, as the substantial
service of God, and obedience to his greater commands, for charity and peace
might be best performed. But these things being not determined particularly by
the Gospel, but left under general rules, for decency and order, may doubtless
be determined by a lawful authority, such as that of our Church, under our
Gracious Sovereign, is, and being so determined and imposed, there is an
advantage on the side of Authority, against a scrupulous conscience, which
ought to over rule the practice of such who are members of that Church. It
remains only that I endeavor to remove an objection or two against what is
here said.

Object. 1. If the ceremonies be things of such indifferency, Why do not they
who are in authority, dispense with the use of them, or totally lay them aside
for the sake of peace and unity?

Answ. 1. The Magistrate does but his duty in providing for the solemnity of
Divine worship, according to those general rules for decency and order
prescribed by the Apostles. 2 ly, What the Magistrate does, is not only
agreeable to his private discretion and conscience, (for he practices the same
things that he prescribes) but according to the deliberate determinations of
the most wise and pious persons of the Nation, in their solemn Assemblies, and
doubtless (as St. Ambrose wrote to St. Augustine) if they had known any thing
better, they would have practiced that. 3 ly, It will very much impair the
authority and reputation of Magistrates, so to comply with the importune
clamours of scrupulous persons, as to alter or abrogate their laws and
constitutions, as often as discontented or seduced persons shall demand it. And
though it be very uncertain that the craving party will be satisfied, when they
are indulged in all that they desire, yet it is certain that others will be
encouraged to make new supplications, and so create perpetual disturbances. And
the gratifying of a few weaklings, or malcontents, may give just cause of
offense, to a greater and better party, who are desirous to worship God in the
beauty of holiness, and are really grieved at the irreverence and disorders
which are, and have been too observable in the Meetings of dissenting parties.
4 ly, Hereby the Magistrate should tacitly confess himself guilty of all those
accusations that have been charged upon him, and his predecessors, of imposing
unlawful, superstitious and Popish ceremonies, and persecuting the godly and
conscientious people, that could not conform to them. And 5 ly, It would
greatly defame those worthy Martyrs, who not only thought fit to retain them,
and gave cogent arguments for the lawful use of them, but sealed the
established worship and discipline with their blood, not only in the Marian
days, but under the late Usurpation also. 6 ly, It is an unreasonable thing, to
demand that, which they themselves would deny, if they were in the Magistrates
place; for let me ask them, whether they, being well persuaded of their
discipline and order ( viz. that it is agreeable to the Word of God, to
antiquity and reason) would comply with the desires of dissenting parties, to
make such alterations, as should from time to time be required by others,
contrary to their own judgments and consciences? and to this we need no other
answer, than the practice of the Objectors, when they were in Authority. And
who can doubt, but that they, who being subjects, do assume to themselves a
power of directing and prescribing to the Magistrate, if they were in the
Magistrates place would take it very ill to be directed by their Subjects. 7
ly, If the established ceremonies were removed, others of a like nature would
succeed, as unscriptural, and symbolical as they, (such as sitting at the
Sacrament, and lifting up the hands to Heaven,) it being impossible almost to
perform divine service, with any decency, without such: and seeing that for
many centuries of the Primitive Church, wherein other ceremonies have been
complained of by Saint Augustine, and others, no man ever objected against the
ceremonies which are used in our Church, and which were by those famous
Reformers and Martyrs retained in our Liturgy, it is no argument of a meek or
quiet spirit, to make objections, and cause divisions upon pretense of
Superstition in the Liturgy and ceremonies, and to expect that the Church to
salve their reputation should betray her own, and by abrogating her sanctions,
give the world more reason than yet has been given, to believe, that the
Church of England, even from the first Reformation, has been in a dangerous
error, and the Factions that opposed her, have had truth and justice on their
side.

In the second Objection, Papists and Sectaries jointly say, That other
dissenters may as well justify their separation from us, on pretense of the
Ceremonies retained by our Church, as we can justify our separation from the
Church of Rome by reason of the Ceremonies enjoined by her. To which I shall
not need to make any other answer, than a short appeal to the Consciences of
all unprejudiced persons, Whether the Church of England, requiring the use of
three Ceremonies declared by her self to be indifferent, and acknowledged by
her enemies not to be unlawful, can be thought by any sober person to give as
great, and just a cause of Separation: from her, as all that load of
Superstition in the Church of Rome, of which St. Augustine complained in his
days, that the Jewish yoke was less heavy. To require Prayers in an unknown
Tongue, and to Saints and Angels is doubtless more offensive, than to use a
solemn plain form of words, taken either from the Scripture, or the ancient
Liturgies of the Church. What is the Surplice, Cross in Baptism, and kneeling
at the Sacrament for devotion, if compared to their Adoration of the
transubstantiated Host, worshipping of Images, invocation of Saints, their
doctrines of the Popes Supremacy, and Infallibility, of Purgatory and
Indulgences, besides the innumerable ceremonies daily practiced by them? And as
the Sectaries will not condemn the Church of England, for receding from these
extremes, so neither can the Romanists blame her for want of moderation, in
retaining both purity of Doctrine, and decency of Worship, and abhorring those
other extremes of Sacrilege and profanation of holy things, of Rebellion and
Bloodshed, though under pretense of Religion, wherewith both they and the
Sectaries have defiled themselves. It was the pious care of the Pilots of our
Church, to conduct their Successors (between the two rocks of Superstition and
Idolatry on one hand, and irreverence and irreligion on the other) in the same
course in which (I hope we all believe) they themselves went to Heaven. And the
Governors of the Church have ever since taken caution of all its Ministers, not
to depart from the same, either in their public ministrations or doctrines, so
that the people need not doubt of their security in such good old ways,
wherein, as the ancient Martyrs did, they may even in the midst of outward
troubles, find peace in their Souls. But as for those that give themselves up
to the guidance of Unstable men, (who have degenerated not only from the
moderation, and charity of the ancient Nonconformists, but even from their own
principles, and neither are what they lately were, nor have given their
followers any security, that they will continue to be what now they are) They
must needs be like children, tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, by
the slight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive.
There are perhaps some weak persons among us, whose Consciences are really
offended at the use of our Ceremonies, these we ought to regard so far, that if
it were in our power, we should rather omit the use of the Ceremonies, than
give them offense. But as we are forbid to give any offense to private persons,
so much more to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.32.
by our disobedience. And whereas those that have real scruples of Conscience
will be diligent to enquire, and ready to receive satisfaction, from their more
learned Brethren, it cannot be presumed that there are many such among us, who
have the arguments and examples of the first Reformers and Martyrs, the fence
and Harmony of the Reformed Churches abroad, the deliberate constitutions of
the Church and State at home, to instruct them in the necessity of Obedience in
such indifferent things; and if weak persons will attend rather to the wicked
suggestions of a few discontented and turbulent men, Qui obstruunt pectora
hominum, ut ante nos odisse incipiant, quam nosse, that so Lord it over the
Consciences of weak persons, as to make them hate their Brethren, they know not
for what; if they neglect to hear the Church, and despise instruction, and
choose their own delusions, they are no longer weak Brethren, See Calv.
Institut. l. 3. c. 19. S. 11.
but resolved adversaries, and of such Christ says, Matthew. 15.14. Let them
alone, they be blind Leaders of the blind. And that most dissenters among us
are of this kind, may appear from that ready conformity, which they practiced
before the late Indulgence, and since that upon the test, which argues, their
revolt to proceed from humor, or interest rather than from Conscience. And as
Mr. Calvin says, S. 13.
If such weak persons never grow so strong as to digest inoffensive and slender
food, it is certain they were never well nursed with Milk. I conclude therefore
with Peter Martyr: Loc. Com. 2. l. 4. c. 32.
We must not always yield to the weak in things indifferent, but so long only,
until they have been well instructed, after which, if they are still
scrupulous, their infirmity deserves no farther respect, for then it is not
Scandalum pusillorum sed Pharisaeorum. Calv. ubi supra S. 12.
And the Church has a necessity of vindicating her liberty when by the unjust
actions of false Apostles it is questioned and endangered in the Consciences of
her weak Children.

MISERICORDIAM VOLO: OR, THE PHARISEES LESSON.
Matthew. ix. 13. But go ye, and learn what that means, I will have Mercy, and
not Sacrifice.


TO find the genuine sense of these words, it will be convenient to consult the
Context, from v. 9. where our Savior calls Matthew, a Publican of no small
reputation and wealth, to follow him who had not a house where to rest his
head. A strange effect (by virtue of two words) wrought on such a Subject; of
which we are obliged to say something, Ne arreptitiam and enthysiasticam
conversionem expectemus, (says Jansenius in Locum) lest we also should expect
(what too many pretend unto) an instantaneous and impulsive power to work
irresistibly upon us for our Conversion. Julian and Porphyry do both object
this very instance, to overthrow the credit of the Gospel, as if the whole
History of it were fictitious and false, or at least to prove that they were no
other than giddy and fanatic persons, that followed our Savior: In locum.
Of this S. Hierome takes notice, and answers thus, Fulgor ipse and Majestas
Divinitatis occultae, quae etiam in humana facie relucebat, ex primo ad se
videntes-trahere poterat aspectu. Si enim in magnete, etc.

But this reply is not thought sufficient by learned Men, to silence the
objection, to which it is answered more satisfactorily, as follows. That S.
Matthew was brought up in the Jewish Religion, wherein that he was a good
proficient, appears, as from many passages in that Gospel, so especially by the
Hebrew Tongue, wherein he wrote it. In his time the coming of the Messiah was
generally expected by that Nation, and our Savior having entered on his public
Office, proclaims himself to be that Messiah, and proves it, not only by the
Divine Doctrine which he taught, but by the Miracles wrought by him, such as no
other Man did. One was newly effected on the Paralytick Man, v. 2d. whose
bodily Disease being cured by two words, Arise, and walk, was applied by our
Savior to persuade the People, that he could as easily and graciously pardon
their sins. Now St. Matthew living in Capernaum where this was done, could not
be ignorant of the fact, nor can we probably suppose him negligent, to certify
himself of the real truth of that and other Miracles, which our Savior wrought
in Capernaum; and comparing the predictions of the Prophets, (with which he was
well acquainted) with the several circumstances of the time and place, and the
mighty deeds of the promised Messiah, he was persuaded to believe him to be the
Christ; of which (it is also probable that) our Savior more fully convinced
him by some particular arguments, besides the general Doctrine which he taught
in that City, although only the close of that Discourse be recorded; so that he
was not converted as St. Paul was, by a Miracle from Heaven, but by the
ordinary rational method, by which it pleases God to draw other sinners to
himself, Acts 26.18
Opening their eyes, and turning them from darkness unto light, and from the
power of Satan unto God. It is no Thus we find that Xenophon became the
Disciple of Socrates; for meeting him in a narrow passage, Xenophon asked him
this short question, (...); (i.) How the necessaries of life might be obtained?
to which having answered satisfactorily, he demanded again, (...): (i.) Where
Men might be made good and virtuous? Socrates answered, (...), (i.) Come and
learn, whereupon Xenophon followed him, and became his Disciple. Diog. Laertius
in vita Xenophont.
wonder then, that Saint Matthew follows such an effectual call, and without
farther consultation with flesh and blood, leaves all and follows his Savior.
We say not then that our Conversion is the work of an instant, nor that it
comes with such observation, that we can ordinarily point at the time and
place, and say, Lo here, or lo there it was; the work is done gradually, and
not in a moment, rationally and not violently, in a soft calm voice, and not in
a Whirlwind, that carries us irresistibly, and in a manner unaccountable, to an
estate of grace. Whatever impulses some Men may have on their spirits, to
believe themselves thus sanctified, they will find at last that God was not in
that Wind, for although it be violent, it is not long, and though it might
shake the heart, yet it does not sweep it, it is a work of time and Christian
circumspection, to make our calling and election sure. St. Matthew having found
the Messiah, and become his Disciple, partly in gratitude to his Savior, and
partly in charity to his neighbors, that they might partake of the same grace
with himself, invites them to his House, where, as St. Mark says, Chapter 2.15. As
Jesus sat at meat, many publicans and sinners sat also with Jesus, and his
Disciples. The Pharisees observing our Savior too familiar (as they thought)
with Publicans and sinners, insinuate this objection to his Disciples, Why
eats your Master with Publicans and Sinners? v. 11. To this our Savior
replyeth by a threefold Argument; The first of Reason, in a proverbial speech,
The whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick: The 2d. from
Scripture, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: The 3d. from the end of his
coming, which was, not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to repentance. The
Text is the second of these Arguments, and I cannot omit a short remark upon
our Savior's Preface; for, whereas he conversed in a familiar manner with the
Publicans and Sinners, he turns off the Pharisees, who pretended to more
knowledge and piety than others, with an imputation of Ignorance, and
Uncharitableness, facessite, Get you home, and study your own duty to God, and
your neighbors, and trouble not your selves or others about such niceties of
the Law. Go learn what that means, etc. By Mercy we are to understand,
Quicquid humanitatis fratri debemus, all those offices of Humanity, or
Christianity, which we owe to our selves or Brethren, whether in respect of
their Souls, or Bodies, goods, or good names; and by Sacrifice (which being the
chief part of God's public Worship among the Jews, is put for the whole) Totum
externum cultum, all the Paedagogy of the Jewish Discipline, of which only the
Pharisees were zealous, to the neglect of the weightier matters of the Law,
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith: And now I shall need only to entreat you to read
over the whole Verse in Hosea 6.6. from whence the Text is taken, for a full
exposition of it, where it is thus written, I desired mercy, and not sacrifice,
and the knowledge of God, more than burnt-offerings; the latter part whereof,
being exegetical of the former gives us this sense, I desired mercy, more than
sacrifice, for the Hebrews wanting the terms of comparison, do use the
negative, (...) and (...) or the preposition (...) which signifies prae, as in
Proverbs 8.10. I desired instruction, (...) and not silver; and knowledge (...)
rather than fine gold: where the negative is not exclusive, but comparative,
for when two things come into comparison, it is usual with the Hebrews, to deny
of that which is less, and to affirm of that which is more excellent. And this
may help us to understand many places of Scripture, which without this
knowledge of the Hebrew Idiom, seem very difficult, as Jeremy 7.22. I spoke not
to your Fathers concerning burnt-offerings and sacrifices but this thing
commanded I them, saying, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall
be my People, which cannot be understood, as if God had not commanded them
concerning Sacrifices, but that he did not require them chiefly, or
principally; Obedience being the duty which was most aimed at: So in the New
Testament. John 7.16. My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me: 1 Cor.
1.17.
So St. Paul says, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel; and
Romans 9.16. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God
that shows mercy; where our endeavors are not excluded, but the grace of God
preferred. Sacrifice then, as it imports the public worship of God, is not
excluded. God that made our Souls and Bodies, 1 Cor. 6.20.
requires that we should glorify him in our Souls and in our Bodies which are
his, and that we may serve him acceptably, he requires outward reverence, Heb.
12.28.
as well as inward fear; and therefore to forsake the assembling of our selves,
or in our Assemblies not to use that solemn Unity and reverence which may
manifest our awful apprehensions of that great Majesty, with whom we have to
do, and which may add a beauty to holiness, is a gloss besides this Text, as if
God had said, Sacrificium nolo, I ear not whether ye worship me publicly or
no, whether it be at Jerusalem, or on mount Gerizim, whether ye keep my
Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary, whether ye agree in those things which ye
shall ask, or pray pro and con, or whether ye pray sitting or standing by your
selves apart, as the Pharisee did, as if God were indeed the Author of
confusion, and not of Peace and Order.

Secondly, 1 Cor. 14.33.
When God says Miserioordiam volo, He does not exclude Justice, for though his
tender Mercy be over all his works, yet the Judge of all the earth will do
right. Mercy and Judgment were the two great strings that sounded so
harmoniously in David's Harp, Psalm. 101.1. God requires of us, first to do
justice, and then to love mercy, Micah 6.8. If private persons may defend their
just rights, without violation of the rules of Charity, much more may such as
are public persons, who may not show mercy, but with a Salvo to the public
peace and truth. By the Laws of God and man we are to give the precedence to
acts of Justice, before the works of Mercy. He does not hate his flesh, that
suffers a gangreen'd member to be cut off, Gal 5.12.
I wish they were even cut off that trouble you, says the meekest Apostle. When
particular offenders grow obstinate, and incorrigible, it is an act of Mercy to
make them a Sacrifice to the public justice. If the offense be not capital,
his punishment may be a means to reclaim him; if it be, the example of his
sufferings may deter others from the like sins, when they shall hear, Deutr.
13.11.
and fear and do no more so wickedly: and so it may prove a means of preventing
the judgments of God from falling down upon the Land. Psalm 59.5.
God himself will not be merciful to them that offend of malicious wickedness,
though he have said Misericordiam volo, I will have mercy, etc. Which words
commend unto us this seasonable and necessary instruction, that

Pharisaical temper, contrary to the Will of God.

For the proof of which position, I shall weigh Mercy and Sacrifice in the
balance of the Sanctuary, that you may clearly see of what different esteems
they are in the sight of God. And first, of Sacrifice, whose Antiquity might
justly gain a great veneration among that people; for though I do not think it
as ancient, as the state of Innocence, (as Bellarmine and Greg. de Valentia
(the better to countenance their Sacrifice of the Mass) do affirm, Bellar. de
missa l. 1. c. 20. Valent. de missae Sacrif. l. 1. c. 4.) yet it is almost as
old as Adam, who taught his Sons to offer both of the fruits of the earth, and
the fatlings of the Flock, which was done, as some learned men affirm,
immediately upon that Covenant made to the promised seed, which was solemnized
by Sacrifices, as the Apostle intimates, Hebr. 9.18. and 22. And the Skins
wherewith we find Adam and Eve clothed, shortly after the fall, and which were
afterward made the Priests portion, Levit. 8.8. were given them by God, (he
having first had the flesh in Sacrifice) to be Symbolum propitiationis a sign
of that Propitiation by which their sins were covered.

Secondly, Sacrifices were of greater esteem for their Institution, than their
Antiquity, God himself having commanded the several sorts of them, and the
particular circumstances concerning them. As first the Peace Offering, for the
fruits of the earth. Secondly, the Sin-offering, for Atonement and pardon of
Transgressions. Thirdly, the Burnt-offering, as an acknowledgment of Homage to
God the Sovereign Lord of all. The book of Leviticus is but a Directory for
these.

Thirdly, They were very considerable for their usefulness. First, as they were
to be Signa innocentiae, testimonies and declarations of Innocence. For as the
creatures offered unto God ought to be only such as were clean for their kind,
so particularly they ought to be without spot or blemish; and no beasts or
birds of prey, but the Ox and the Lamb; the Turtle and the Dove, harmless and
useful creatures only, must be brought to the Altar, and the offerer was to lay
his hands on the beast, either to profess his innocence, that he was not guilty
of bribes or of blood, of fraud or violence, or if he were, then to confess his
sins, and deprecate the wrath of God by virtue of that Covenant, whereof the
Sacrifice was a testimony, and so it was propitiatory. They were, Secondly,
Eucharistical pledges, and earnests of their gratitude, expressing their
readiness to forgce all, or to return it to him from whom they received it.
Thirdly, they were Admonitions to the guilty persons, to repent of their sins,
or else that they must perish as those beasts did.

Fourthly, By external Sacrifices they were minded of their internal duties, as
mactare propriam voluntatem, to mortify all beastly lusts and affections.

Fifthly, They were fences and boundaries to the Religion, God commanding the
Jews to Sacrifice those very beasts which their Idolatrous neighbors did
worship (as the Ox, the Sheep, and Dove, which were worshipped as Gods, among
the Egyptians and Zabii) to maintain a greater detestation of Idolatry in their
hearts.

Sixthly, They were as so many penalties, and forfeitures, taken on that people
upon every trespass, which also served, not only as a present punishment, but a
future terror, minding them that they had forfeited their own lives and Souls,
which God was pleased to spare, expecting better obedience, even a living
Sacrifice.

And yet all this notwithstanding, though Sacrifices were venerable for their
Antiquity, more for their usefulness, as well to the Religion in general, as to
the Reformation of particular persons, but most of all, for its divine
Institution, the Levitical Law being but a Rubric or directory for the
Sacrifices, Misericordiam volo, etc. I will have mercy.

For if hypocritical Jews should have amassed all these Sacrifices in one, as
the Prophet Jer. 7.21. speaks, Put your burnt-offerings to your Sacrifices and
eat flesh; If they should go with their Flocks, and herds to seek the Lord,
Hos. 5.6. If they should have presented a Sacrifice as magnificent as that of
Solomon, 22000 Oxen, and 120000 Sheep; 1 Kings 8.63.
If they should have invented more costly ones, thousands of Rams, and ten
thousand rivers of Oil, their firstborn for their transgression, the fruit of
their bodies, for the sin of their Souls; yet to do justice, and to love mercy,
is preferred to them all, Mic. 6.8.

For though Sacrifices were commanded, yet not for any intrinsical goodness in
them, but with respect to some greater good. Eze. 20.25. I gave them Statutes
that were not good, and judgments whereby they should not live, they were not
originally good, as the duties of the Moral Law, these were commanded because
they were good, the other good only because they were commanded, they did not
make the Offerer, but he made them acceptable, as in the case of Cain and Abel.
Thus God speaks to wicked men, ver. 19, 20.
Psalm. 50. that gave their mouths to evil, and did sit and speak against their
Brother and slander their own mothers son, I will not reprove thee for thy
Sacrifices, or burnt-offerings, Offer to God Thanksgiving, etc. And Psalm.
51.16. Thou desire not Sacrifice, else would I give it thee. The Sacrifices
of God, are a broken Spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will
not despise. Solomon tells us [after that he had presented that costly
Sacrifice] To do justice and judgment, is more acceptable to the Lord than
Sacrifice, Prove. 21.3. for it is true of the house of God, what he says of
ours, Better is a dry morsel with quietness, than a house full of Sacrifices
with strife, Prove. 17.1. In this therefore, the young Scribe was better
instructed than these Pharisees, for he consented with our Savior, Mark 12.33.
That to love the Lord, with all our heart, etc. and our neighbors as our
selves, is more than all whole burnt-offerings, and Sacrifice. In a word, our
Savior has told us, that whatever our gift be that we bring to the Altar, if
we remember, that our Brother has ought against us, (i.) if we are conscious
of any injury, or unkindness, wherewith he may charge us, it is our duty to go
first, and be reconciled to our Brother, before we presume to offer our gift,
though it be of prayer, or praise; God will never accept of a peace offering,
from them that live in enmity with their Brethren.

And now if I should put into this scale, the whole Economy of the Jewish
discipline, their Oblations and Incense, their New Moons and Sabbaths, their
calling of Assemblies (for Feasts or Fasts,) and their Prayers too, as Isai.
1.11. they would for want of mercy be found too light. To what purpose are
they? says God, v. 11. Who has required this at your hands? v. 12. Bring no
more vain Oblations, incense is an abomination to me. I cannot away with it, it
is iniquity even your solemn-meetings, ver. 13. they were esteemed but mock
services by God, for want of mercy to their Brethren.

Two other instances I shall add, because they seem of great weight.

First, That of Circumcision, which is called Gods Covenant with Abraham by
which he promised to be his God and the God of his seed, Genesis 17.10. and the
Apostle-calls it a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11. And as God
instituted it, so he commanded the observation of it by a severe Sanction. The
Uncircumcised was to be cut off, Genesis 17.14. And the Rabbis tell us, that as
God appointed destroying Angels to that end, so he assigned guardian-Angels to
every one that was Circumcised. Certain it is, that they bearing the marks and
tokens of Gods Covenant in their flesh, did boast themselves to be Gods
peculiar people. And as our Apostle intimates, they preferred it to the Cross
of Christ which the Apostle, though he himself was Circumcised, abhors with an
absit, Gal. 6. ver. 14. But it was a saying among the Jews, that Circumcision
was equal to the keeping of the whole Law, and that Heaven and Earth could not
stand if Circumcision were omitted, therefore they made the eight days before
Circumcision to be a preparation for that solemnity at which they invited their
friends as witnesses and Sponsors for the child, that he should observe the
Statutes of the God of Israel, and in the later times, had always an empty
Chair set for Elias, expecting that he should descend from Heaven to be a
witness of the Circumcision; and yet in truth it was as the Apostle says, a a
burden which neither they nor their Fathers could bear, and therefore God
himself dispensed with the use of it to this people forty years together in the
wilderness; Acts 15.10.
and though St. Paul was Circumcised, and to make his own and Timothy's
ministry the more acceptable to that people, Acts 16.1.
took Timothy and Circumcised him, yet he teaches them that if they were
Circumcised (i. e.) with an intention to obtain Salvation by the works of the
Law, Christ should profit them nothing: And Galatians 6.15. (to them that were)
in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision availed any thing, neither
uncircumcision, but a new creature; by which he understands, Gal. 5.6. faith
which works by love: And in the 1 Cor. 7.19. a keeping the Commandments of
God: so that circumcision was not to be contended for, when the propagation of
the Gospel, or Charity came into competition with it.

A second instance shall be that of the Jewish Sabbath, of the profanation
whereof the Pharisees complained to Christ of his Disciples, Matthew. 12.2. and
for whose vindication our Savior urges again the right understanding of this
Text, v. 7. If ye had known what this means, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless. Many of Christ's
Disciples (as well as himself) were circumcised, and so obliged to sanctify
the Sabbath according to the Commandment, and great were the punishments which
God threatened and inflicted on the transgressors, such as struck a terror to
them, which made them run into superstition, insomuch that they would not go
out of their places, nor dress their meat, nor carry a stick, nor defend
themselves against their enemies on that day. And the crime for which the
Disciples were complained of, was rather for transgressing their tradition,
than any precept of God; for if the fault was their walking through the
Cornfields, it does not appear that they exceeded 2000. Cubits, which was
allowed by them for a Sabbath Days Journey; if plucking the ears of Corn, that
was approved by the Law, Deuteronomy. 23.25. If for eating (which seems most
probable, because our Savior answered the objection by the instance of David's
eating the shewbread) yet being hungry, their necessity might excuse them, nor
was this forbidden (though perhaps contrary to a superstitious practice of
theirs, for which the Heathen upbraided them, (i. e.) their Sabbathdays Fasts)
therefore Christ vindicates them, as guiltless upon the Plea in the Text, I
will have mercy, etc. As if he had said, You Pharisees do not understand the
substantial and spiritual part of your own Law, for as long as there is not
contumacy or contempt in the neglect of Ceremonial Precepts, but the excuse of
a just necessity, or the rational consideration of a greater good to outweigh
that neglect, God will not impute it as a sin. Of this our Savior convinces
them by the instance of David, v. 4. and of the Priests in the Temple,
profaning the Sabbath by dressing the Sacrifices, for they were wont to say --
In the Temple there is no Sabbath. If then the service of the Temple excused
the Priests for profaning the Sabbath; the service of Christ who tells them of
himself, that he was greater than the Temple, v. 6. might excuse his Disciples,
who being Prophets and Preachers of the Kingdom of Heaven, were greater than
the Priests of the Law, as our Savior said of John the Baptist, Matthew. 11.11.

Now a Prophet even under the Law, was above the Law of the Temple, and might
sacrifice in any place, as Elias did, and therefore it could not be unlawful
for Christ's Disciples, so earnestly attending his work, that they became
hungry, having no other provision, to eat a few grains of Corn for their
present relief. Again, our Savior tells them, v. 8. that the Son of Man is
Lord of the Sabbath, which that he speaks of himself as the Messiah (who had
power to abrogate and alter the Sabbath) is the opinion of some, though not so
clear, because Matthew. 16.20. he would not have it yet known that he was the
Messiah, and if our Savior had made this his argument he needed not to have
used any other. Others therefore think that by the Son of Man is meant every
Son of Man, for Christ himself was not blamed but his Disciples, whom he
pronounces guiltless for this reason, The Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath,
which S. Mark expresses more plainly to this purpose, Mark 2.27. The Sabbath
was made for man: and so the argument stands thus, That which was made for
another thing is to give place to that for which it was made, but the Sabbath
was made for man, ergo, etc. Now though the Jews were so superstitious, that
even in the time of the Maccabees, they would not defend themselves against
their enemies on the Sabbathday, yet shortly after they began to grow wiser,
and would not only desend their own Lives, but assault their enemies, and do
any necessary work; for they had dearly been taught this Maxim, Periculum
vitae dissolvit Sabbatum, that the danger of losing Life did dissolve the
Sabbath: And as Seldom, de Jure Gentium, l. 2. c. 10. they held that in case of
sickness, a Jew might not only eat forbidden Meats, but for recovery of health,
or avoidance of any great danger, he might break any commandment, except these
three, (viz.) I dolatry, Murder, and Incest; and I have heard from the mouth
of a modern Jew, an odd interpretation of that Text, Pro. 4.4. which he
interpreting the copulative, by a discretive; reads, Keep the commandments, but
live; i. e. so keep the commandments, as to be careful of preserving thy life
in keeping of them. But to return in our Savior's time, it was practiced by
them, as a thing lawful on the Sabbathday, Luke 13.15
to pluck an Ox or an Ass out of a Ditch, or to lead them to Water, and to
permit Merchants and Carriers to travel about their necessary affairs on that
Day. So that the sum of all is this, that when two Laws seemed to interfere, so
as both could not be kept, the lesser must yield to the greater, the ritual and
ceremonial, to the moral or evangelical, which is the sense of the Text: I will
have mercy, and not sacrifice.

But it may be objected, What is this of the contention of the Jews for
Ceremonies, to the contending of Christians against them, when they are imposed
contrary to their Christian liberty?

Answ. These Objectors do no more understand their Christian liberty, than the
Pharisees did the right meaning of the Text, which equally concludes against
them that contend against Ceremonies, as them that contend for them, to the
breach of Charity, Obedience, and Public Peace, which as I have already proved
against the Jews out of their Law, so I shall prove it (contra Gentes) against
contentious Christians out of the Gospel. -- Christian liberty is the restoring
of Mankind by Christ to such an estate as it was in, before the Ceremonial Law
was imposed, so that now every Creature of God is good, 1 Timothy 4.4. nothing is
of it self unclean, Titus 1.15. but all things are lawful, 1 Cor. 6.11. (i. e.)
it is lawful for a Christian to do those things, against which nothing of
moment can be alleged from the Scriptures, or right reason, to prove them
unlawful. Those Men therefore go the wrong way, and puzle their own and other
Men's consciences, who argue, It is not commanded, therefore I may not do it;
whereas they ought to argue, It is not forbidden, therefore I may do it without
prejudice to my Christian liberty: although it may be truly said, that it is
commanded of God (in genere) from 1 Cor. 14.40. and (in specie) by authority,
to which we are bound to yield obedience for conscience sake, not as if the
commands of our Superiors did immediately bind the conscience in such cases,
but by virtue of God's commands for obedience to the higher powers. The truth
of all this will appear, from the Apostles own practice, Acts 15.28. who
imposed on the Primitive Christians such things, as were in their nature
indifferent, to be observed as necessary, bono pacis, so Piscator, Non semper
and ubique, nec per se and simpliciter ad salutem necessaria, sed ad pacem
Ecclesiae and vitandas offensiones, ut aleretur mutua benevolentia inter
Judaeos and Gentiles: The sense whereof I shall give you from the English
Annotations on the place, The word necessary is not referred to the Ceremonies,
but the present occasion, and persons whose Salvation and Unity was necessary.
Now who dares say, they were not bound to observe those Canons, when the
Apostles say, it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, as well as to them, to lay
these things upon them, as necessary to be observed for the time and ends above
mentioned?

Again, we find St. Paul commending the Corinthians, 1 Epistle, Chapter 11. v. 2.
for keeping the Ordinances which he delivered them, that is, say our
Annotators, particular Ordinances for comeliness and good order, which belonged
to Ecclesiastical Polity, and were afterward called Canons, against which, if
any but only seemed to be contentious by disputing against them, the Apostle
silenced them by that, in Verse. 16. We have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God, that is, say the same Annotators, to contend about matters of
this nature; but willingly and cheerfully to obey those that have the
oversight of us in the Lord And it is fit to consider the nature of the matter
treated of, which was, how Men and Women ought to behave themselves at public
Prayers, which behavior the Apostle would have to agree with those signs and
gestures of reverence, Camcron. in loc.
which Subjects are wont to yield to their Princes: and although the Jews
worshipped with their Heads covered, which was esteemed a sign of reverence
among them, as also do the Turks to this day sit covered, and bowing their
Bodies at their Devotions, as they are wont to do in the presence of their
Rulers; yet the Apostle being to plant the Church among the Romans, and
Grecians, with whom the uncovering of the Head was a token of reverence, he
appoints the same behavior in the Worship of God. And this was practiced by
the Christians in Tertullian's days, Apologet.
who prayed Capite nudo, expansis manibus, with bare Heads, and Hands lifted
up, and this Tertullian calls legem Dei, God's Law, Quaeris legem Dei? habes
communem istam in publico mundi and in naturalibus tabulis ad quas and
Apostolus provocare solet cum in velamine faciei, inquit, Non natura vos docet?
For by Nature here, as Grotius observes, such general customs as had obtained
among the Gentiles are intended, Non est hoc plane Natural, Grotius in loc.
sed quod long lateque receptum, ut Jurisconsulti dant nomen Juris Naturalis,
Juri Gentium. Our Apostle then in this place does, as with a twoedged Sword,
cut off all disputations, contentions, against decent Ceremonies in the Worship
of God, 1. By his Apostolical injunction. 2 ly, By the custom of the Churches
of God: and to contend about such things, and disturb the peace of the Church
is as unreasonable, as irreligious a thing, which is my second argument, The
unreasonableness of contending for Ceremonies, to the neglect of Moral duties.

1. For it agrees with the sentiments of Mankind, as Plato discovers them,
(...). The Gods respect not our Sacrifices, but our Souls: And we our selves
acknowledge not them for our Friends, or Servants, who only complement us, or
put us off with eye-service, or a little lip-labor, Quin demus Superis --
Compositum Jus, fasque animi, sanctosque recessus -- Mentis; and incoctum
Generoso pectus honesto: Haec cedo ut admoveam templis, and far litabo.

2. Because the works of Mercy are (...), the resemblances of the Divine
nature, and life: Be ye merciful, says our Savior, Luke 6.36. as your
Heavenly Father is merciful. In Divinitate nil divinius, in bumanitate nil
humanius.
Lactantius tells us, Summa Religionis est eum imitari quem colis, it is the
perfection of Religion, to be like him, whom we worship. Now God is love, and
he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16. And he
that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can he, (i. e.) he cannot,
love his God whom he has not seen, 1 John 4.20. God has made our charity, and
our peace, as well as our holiness, Heb. 12.14
conditions, without which we shall not see God: The Prophet Hosea, c. 6.6.
to instruct us in the mercifulness of God, commends to us the knowledge of
God; did we know God better, we would love our Brethren more; 1 John 4.8. He
that loves not, knows not God, for God is love. It is spoken of Josiah, that
he judged the cause of the poor and needy, was not this to know me, says the
Lord? Jer. 22.16.

Heu! primae scelerum causae mortalibus aegris Naturam nescire Deum. Sil. Ital.
We are mostly prepossest with unreasonable and uncharitable Opinions, and
passions, which do not only dispose us to think amiss of our Brethren, but of
God also, See Jer. 9.24.
as if he were such as our selves, as the Indians being black, paint their Gods
so too. That Man must needs be very unmerciful, that can think his God to be
so, and sure it is, that if God should be as unmerciful toward others, as we
fancy him, or as we are, there are but few that would be saved, except those of
the same fraternity with our selves. Jain. 3.15.
But such black thoughts are fruits of the spirit of Darkness; the fruits of
the best spirit, are love, joy, peace, Gal. 5.22.
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, etc. I shall ever suspect that Religion,
that teaches Men to love God, and hate their Brethren with all their heart.

It is no wonder if the Stoics, that deny the Deity, and ascribe all to an
inexorable fate, do also unman Humanity, and unbowel Virtue, teaching that a
wise Man ought to cast away all compassion, and making that a defect of the
Soul, viz. bearing one another burdens, which a better Philosopher says, Gal.
6.2.
is to fulfill the Law of Christ. Well might Cicero reject them; (neque enim
audiendi sunt, qui virtutem duram, and ferream esse volunt) as not fit to be
heard, who would transform Virtue, which is of a gentle, tender, tractable, and
yielding quality, into a rigid, stupid, implacable, and unsociable
constitution: Such wise Men have as little brains, as bowels, seeing St. James
tells us, that the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality and without hypocrisy. And thus, though I have but casually let
fall some drops of Mercy into the other scale, you may perceive how much they
do outweigh the whole Jewish Discipline and Sacrifices. The treasures of Mercy
are as boundless as the Ocean, and therefore I shall not attempt to contract
them within this scale. My thoughts are not your thoughts, Is. 55.8.
neither are my ways your ways; for as the Heavens are higher than the Earth,
so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts, says
the Lord. What great things the mercy of God will effect for such as love him,
may partly appear by the things he works in them, and by them, whom he causes
to partake of his own spirit, and so sheds abroad his love into their hearts,
that they can extend it again throughout the whole World, and be merciful, as
their Heavenly Father is merciful, even in that great instance of making (as
instruments) the sun of righteousness to shine, and the Dew of Heaven to fall
upon the just and the unjust, and by their compassionate desires, and faithful
prayers, their tender mercies are over all the works of God. How gladly could I
cast my self into this Ocean, as Aristotle to Euripus, and say, Quoniam ego non
Comprehendam te, tu Comprehendes me; because I cannot comprehend thy mercies,
Lord, let me be comprehended of them!

But as every dust of Gold is Gold, so every act of mercy is precious, and
therefore I shall not need to mention the infinite perfections of Divine mercy,
nor those Heroic deeds of merciful Men, whose love has been more strong than
Death; but confine my self within those ordinary bounds of Charity, wherein
every Christian may and ought to converse with other, such as the Apostle
names, 1 Cor. 13.4. To be long-suffering, and kind, not to envy, or vaunt
themselves, not to be puffed up, and seek their own, not to be easily provoked,
not to think or speak evil: any of these defects will, as the want of Salt to
the Sacrifice, make it corrupt, and become unsavory. Every malicious thought
will be as so much fire, to make them evaporate into smoke. So the Apostle
assures us, 1 Cor. 13.
Though I spoke with the tongue of men and Angels, though I had the gift of
Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries, and knowledge, and had all Faith, and
have not Charity, it profits me nothing. The bare omission of the meanest
acts of Charity, such as our Savior mentions, Matthew 25.25. is sufficient
to exclude our Souls as well as our Services from Heaven. The Pharisees then,
had little reason to insist so exactly on a Levitical Ceremony of touching and
accompanying with unclean persons; when they admitted that pride and contempt
of their brethren, that envy against Christ, which rendered them by far the more
unclean. A principle which has much troubled the Church of God in all ages,
when Pharisaical men, first censure and condemn their Brethren, and then
separate from them, and grow in hatred against them, when they have no other
reason to think ill of their Brethren, but because they think too well of
themselves; and by their zeal for the externals of Religion, seek to palliate
their neglect of the most essential duties. To these our Savior commends the
Lesson in the Text (as well as to those ancient Pharisees) Go learn what that
means, etc.

Having endeavored to convince your understanding of the truth of the
proposition in general, I shall apply it as effectually as I can for the cure
of our present distempers, for we also do trouble our selves, and others, about
many inconsiderable circumstances of external Worship, to the neglect of those
moral duties of Humility, Charity and peace, which are of the very Essence of
Religion. And I doubt not but if we would lay aside our pride, prejudice, and
carnal interest, and as new born Babes, desire the sincere Milk of the Word,
that we might grow thereby, this plain Lesson of our Savior, touching the Love
of Mercy, would more edify us as well in holiness, as in peace and love, than
all the public declamations or private insinuations of contentious persons,
whose zeal (like the little impotent heat in Insects, which not being
sufficient to form sound vitals within, runs out into many weak and useless
members and produces (an Ephemeron) an Animal that endures but for a day)
running out into many nice circumstances, may have something of the show, but
very little of the substance and life of Religion. To such I do in the fear of
God propose this method of learning the Lesson in the Text.

First, That our Agreement in the Substantials of Religion, and the liberty to
profess and practice all things necessary to Godliness and Salvation, ought to
be an indissoluble bond of peace and unity to us all. As the lower Spears,
though they have a proper tendency of their own, yet yield to the motion of the
higher Orb; so though we have some fond conceits, and small concerns of our
own, we should forsake them to comply with the great ends of Religion, Mercy,
and Peace. We agree in the substance of the Gospel, in the Creed, and
Commandments, in the Ministry, and the Sacraments; we are built on the
Foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20.
and on this Foundation we may build as high as Heaven, why should our Pride
and Contention pull down the Judgment of Babel upon us? Methinks there should
be no place left for discord among Brethren that are united by so many
Obligations, Ephesians. 4.5.
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, one Father of all: but though we
all pretend to meet in the same Center, yet the Leaders in every Faction (as
the Lines that are protracted to the greatest length) are farthest from
reconciliation.

Though others murmur and will not be content with Manna except they may have
their fleshpots too, Let us bless God, that he has established truth and
righteousness among us by a Law. Ps. 127.20
He has not dealt so with other Nations, nor was it so with us of late days,
and we may justly fear that our ingratitude and contentions may reduce us to
the like confusion.

Secondly, If God himself will dispense with all the externals of his Worship,
to show us mercy, we need not fear his displeasure, if we either omit some
things that please us, or admit some other things that displease us in the
outward administrations, for the freer exercise of mercy and peace: better it
is to submit to a doubtful inconvenience, than to run into a certain mischief.
And it will never be accounted among our infirmities, that we were not more
careful of the public Worship of God, than he himself.

Thirdly, Neither the external circumstances of Worship which are enjoined, nor
those which are contended for, in opposition to them, have any positive command
from God, or our Savior; for our Savior has not prescribed the circumstances
of Divine Worship, foreseeing (as Mr. Instit. l. 4. c. 10. n. 30.
Calvin says) that the same Rites would not agree with the several Nations, and
Ages, wherein the Church should be planted; and if we consider that whereas the
Two Sacraments only are positively instituted in the New Testament, there have
been so great controversies moved about them, that many large Volumes have been
written, and many bloody Battles fought by men of contrary minds, it will
appear a great mercy, that other things did not come under precept; for then,
greater pretenses for maintaining differences would have been pleaded, which
now have no color, for as much as the matters in dispute fall not under any
command, and if there be no command, it follows that they are left at liberty,
but by offending against plain Commands, for obedience and peace, our sin and
condemnation are the greater.

Fourthly, This shall be a Fourth consideration, that whatever cannot be
referred to Faith or good manners, and is neither commanded, nor forbidden,
that may be done or omitted, as is most conducible to the great ends of peace,
Charity, and Unity. To evince the indifferency of an action, these things are
sufficient, First, that there be no command injoyning or forbidding it. 2 ly.
That it be declared by the Magistrate imposing it, that it is not intended as a
part of Divine Worship, as having an antecedent necessity, (and so becomes an
indispensable duty,) but for Order, Decency and Unity, and therefore as the
Casuists say, extra contemptum and scandalum, if the Superiors authority be not
despised, nor our Brethren scandalized, the practice of such things may be
omitted, as you know the Ceremonies may be, in case of necessity, and in
private duties, which could not be if they were not things indifferent. So
that, that part of the Churches declaration, that says, she has power to add,
alter, or abrogate such Rites, manifestly declares their indifferency, as
Calvin also affirms, speaking of the Sacramental Bread, whether it be Levened
or unlevened, and the Wine, whether Red or White, whether delivered into every
man's hand by the Deacon, or not. Haec indifferentia sunt and in Ecclesiae
liberate posita. The Institutions and practice of the Church are a sufficient
rule for such practices. The not prescribing them in Scripture, argues that it
was as unnecessary as impossible to be done: for as to that rule of the
Apostle, To. 14.23
that whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin, it imports not, that we either should
have a command for every action in the Word of God, or that the thing done, is
in it self pleasing to God, but, if it be not forbidden, nor really evil, but
is in order to other good ends, it may or may not be done, (without a
Superstitious fear of offending God,) by virtue of our Christian liberty.

Fifthly, In all things not determined by the Word of God, we are bound to obey
the Magistrate, by virtue of the general Commands of God, Romans 13.
and otherwise the Magistrate should have no authority at all, for those things
which are good in their own nature, are commanded by God, and therefore the
Magistrate must have power in things not commanded, or he has none at all: and
so in things forbidden, which will more plainly appear by what follows,

For, Sixthly, If I may do, or not do things in their nature indifferent,
rather than offend a weak Brother, (which is the Nonconformists Plea to the
Conformists) much more ought I so to do, or not do, rather than offend a
Christian Magistrate, or disturb the public peace, because public offenses
are more carefully to be avoided than private, and when the Magistrates command
is added (whether he be Civil or Ecclesiastical) that which was but lawful
before, becomes, pro hic and nunc, necessary, as a means to peace or
edification, Acts 15.20. It is certainly more sinful, to oppose the command of
many wise men (and such perhaps as are entrusted by us) or which is the same
thing to go against their judgment, and offend their Consciences, than to go
against the judgment, and offend the Consciences of a few weak Brethren, who
neither have the advantages to inform themselves of the nature of things, nor
that authority, or concern, to provide for the public peace, as their
Superiors have, but may be easily imposed on, by crafty men that lay in wait
to deceive. Judge in your selves Brethren how intolerable would that Servant be
in your Family that should be always quarrelling at his Masters habit, or the
directions given him for his work; and though he have good and wholesome food in
plenty, yet dislikes the Cookery, and being reproved for his pride and
curiosity, is obstinate and instigates his fellow servants to desert the
Family. But herein the Apostles example may direct us better how far we may, or
may not do things indifferent, (and such as have some appearance of evil in
them to others) rather than to give offense to a Brother, as in the case of
meats, which had been declared unclean by the Law, (but that difference was by
the Gospel abrogated) and were much more accounted polluted by having been
offered unto Idols, yet the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 8.8.
meat commends us not to God, for neither if we eat are we the better,
neither if we eat not are we the worse, it is grace and not meat by which the
heart is established; our Christian liberty is an Amulet against any corruption
in such things, for though the practice be determined, the judgment is free,
there is libertas ad oppositum. So in the case of Circumcision before
mentioned, which was so abrogated, that S. Paul says, Gal. 5.2.
if ye be circumcised ( i.e. with an opinion of the legal necessity of it)
Christ shall profit you nothing: Yet to the Jews, that he might win them, he
became as a Jew, and then used Circumcision, Acts 16.3. and to them that were
without the Law, as without Law, that he might win the Gentiles, and then he
would not Circumcise, and in all this he was Christ's Freeman, though he made
himself a servant to all.

The Apostle knew that his Christian liberty was founded in freedom of Judgment
and not of practice, and that neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision were any
thing, 1 Cor. 7.19.
but the keeping of the Commandments. Now no actions of ours that are required
in obedience to our Superiors about the Public Worship, are so obnoxious to
censure and scandal, as these were, but are under our Christian liberty. And as
we ought to serve one another in love, in obedience to Gods commands; so ought
we in obedience of the same, to submit our selves to every Ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, and not use our liberty as a Cloak of Maliciousness, or an
occasion to the flesh, to cast off either our Love to our Brethren or Obedience
to Magistrates. For to what end has God, according to his promise, raised up
Kings, to be Nursing Fathers to his Church, or what possibility is there, that
they should provide for its peace, if they have not power in these External
things? If therefore the things commanded be indifferent, it is certain that
obedience to the Magistrate is no indifferent thing, but as necessary, as peace
and unity, which cannot otherwise be preserved.

Seventhly, The means are always, as subservient, so inferior to the end: Now
the end of the Commandment is Charity, as the Apostle says, Col. 3.14.
and therefore both he, and St. Peter require charity above all things, 1 Pet.
4.8. When therefore these externals of religion, become apples of contention,
they are forbidden fruit, which cannot be enjoyed without the breach of the
great Commandment: and if they had each of them a particular precept; yet when
lesser duties come in competition with greater, they cease to oblige. Private
Laws yield to public, humane Laws to the Laws of God; and among God's Laws,
Positive Precepts yield to those that are moral and natural; A Vow, or an Oath
concerning a thing lawful, if it hinder Majus bonum Natural, cease to
oblige. The Corban might not be pleaded in Bar, to the relieving of Parents;
much less may any Covenant oblige, against the Peace of the Church, and the
Public Parent (as some still plead, for that which they call the National
Covenant.) Those things therefore which are matters of Discipline, and external
order, how precisely soever enjoined, ought to give place to those that are the
more substantial parts of Religion, such as mercy and obedience to Magistrates,
charity, peace, and unity among Christians; and as we may disuse some things
which have been generally received in the Church of God, (as were the kiss of
charity, the love feasts, and anointing of the Sick) so certainly we may use
some other things, which are enjoined by our Superiors, for the sake of Order,
and Unity. When St. Paul had established the Doctrine of Faith in the Church of
Corinth, he tells them, 1 Cor. 11.16.
that if about rites and ceremonies, Any man seem to be contentious, we have no
such custom, neither the Churches of God: that is, the custom of the Church is
a sufficient Plea against such contentious persons. Thus when the Council of
Nice had composed the Articles of Faith in that Creed, they all with one
consent approved of the Ancient rites and customs: (...). And Sozomen says, L.
7. c. 19.
it was ever esteemed an unreasonable thing for those that agreed in the
Substantials of Religion, (...), to separate from each other, for customs, and
matters of doubtful disputation.

And it is generally agreed, that the Churches, which are sui Juris, agreeing
in the same Faith, may differ in Rites and Ceremonies, which they have power to
alter, or abrogate, and therefore Calvin says, they are Mali filii, wicked
Sons, that will disturb the Peace of the Church, their Mother, for such
external rites, and as the Pharisees in the Text seek to withdraw the Disciples
by such objections against their Master, Why eats your Master with Publicans
and Sinners? And yet certain it is, that the Authors of Sects and Divisions
among us, have no better grounds for all the disorders and confusion, the proud
contempt, and unchristian censures, the slander and vexation, that have been as
so many evil spirits raised among us; and I desire, that such as are yet in the
fault, would not only consider the insufficiency of the grounds, but also the
mischievous consequences of our divisions, how directly opposite to our
Savior's rule in the Text, I will have mercy, etc.

Now, that there are Divisions among us, may be proved by the same arguments,
that the Apostle uses to prove, that there were Divisions in the Church of
Corinth, 1 Cor. 3.4.
(viz.) when one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, etc. which
Divisions, as they cannot be warranted, but on a supposition of some great
corruption in our Doctrine, or Worship, or some grand profaneness in our
Members; so are they not raised without such thoughts in the hearts of those
that do separate from us, as Mr. Newcomen observed in his Sermon at St. Paul's,
Febr. 8. 1646. p. 40. Who are they that brand their Brethren with the title of
Proud, Time-servers, Prelatical, Tyrannical, Antichristian, but such as
separate? Who will say that they are of the same opinion in Fundamentals, and
that their differences are, but in minutioribus; but, Why do they in matters of
lesser moment transgress the Apostles rule? Why do they not keep their opinions
private, and have their faith to themselves before God? Why do they upon so
small differences, withdraw from Communion with us, and gather themselves into
distinct and separate Churches? This is certainly a Pharisaical leaven, that
ferments and imbitters our spirits, and though the effects of it may be hid for
a time, yet on every heat and agitation it spreads through the whole lump, and
swells Men with Pride, and an unsociable sowrness of Spirit.

And though the things wherein we differ, seem to be but small, and have a show
of piety, yet the consequences are so notoriously and really evil, that the
most zealous pretenses for the Discipline of Christ, are too narrow a Plaster
to cover or cure the festred rancor and malice toward his members. Ceremonies
are no fit matter to exercise our zeal and contention, but obedience and
charity. Yet as the Ordinances and Rites that were retained by the believing
Jews and Gentiles, were still a Wall of separation between them, and the
Apostle calls it the enmity, Ephesians. 2.15.
so is it with us: The Jews and Samaritans differed chiefly about the place
wherein they ought to Worship, upon which there grew a mortal hatred between
them, so as that there was no commerce between them, they would not salute one
another. -- Nec monstrare vias eadem nisi Sacra colenti; and it was accounted
all one to be a Samaritan, and to have a Devil. So when once Men swerve from
the center and basis of charity, there is no consistency, but Men fall, first
to vain jangling, and that increases to more ungodliness, for where bitter
envying, or (as the original word is) zeal is, there is confusion, and every
evil thing. Behold, says St. James, how great a matter a little fire kindles;
if Men snatch a Coal from the Altar, it is blown up and down by popular breath,
until it be raised into a flame, and has this property at least of the fire of
the Sanctuary, that the busy Levites will not permit it to go out.

I know it will be troublesome to others, for it is a terror to my self to
recount, what cataracts and inundations of blood, our Church-divisions, that at
first, as the prophets Cloud, were but as a hand-breadth, have rained down upon
the whole Land. I shall give it you therefore in a Foreign instance, namely of
the Donatists in Africa: who, because Cecilian their Bishop had admitted some
to his Communion, whom they accused for Traditors, first withdrew from the
Church, which as they pretended ought to consist of such only as were (...),
holy, and without blemish: and because they had read in the Canticles, that
Christ caused his Flock to rest sub meridie, they concluded, that their Party
in the South of Africa, was that Flock; and hereupon they are very industrious
to gather Congregations, and pick up one of a Family, and two or three of a
Village, which, as Optatus observes, were generally of the weaker sort. Aut
exivit Vxor and resedit Maritus, etc. The Wife is withdrawn from her Husband,
the Son or Daugh^er from their Parents. And my Optatus.
Author sets down the Method which those Seducers used, Cai Sei! or Caia Scia!
bonus homo, sed traditor, libera animam tuam: Thou good Man, or good Woman,
thou art among Idolaters, and Superstitious persons, thou have good affections,
but they are not rightly placed, come out of Babylon, and deliver thy Soul:
When they had thus increased their Party, they built Basilicas non necessarias,
more Churches than were necessary, and their Sermons were generally Satyrs
against the Catholics, and though they were frequently confuted in private
disputations, and condemned by many Synods at home, and several Councils
abroad, and diverse Edicts of the Emperors, yet never would they acquiesce, or
be reconciled, but vexed the Churches of Africa for more than a Hundred Years,
increasing their Numbers, and subdividing into Factions, as the Primianists and
Maximianists, the Rogatians and Callidians, Luciferians and Circumcellians, and
all of them Donatists; and the Circumcellians were a Generation of Zealots, so
fierce and implacable, that Domitian himself did not use more cruelty in
shedding Christians blood, nor Julian, who was in Rempublicam Christianam
ingeniose nequam, could ever contrive more mischievous Instruments to destroy
Christianity withal, than these Donatists were, and therefore he countenanced
them against the Catholics. And when at last their grievances, and the grounds
of the Schism came to be inquired into, in the Conference of Carthage, they
could object nothing against the Catholics, but what here the Pharisees did
against Christ, Why eats your Master with Publicans and Sinners? And can any
Christian Spirit think, that this Plea for a Levitical Ceremony, will justify
such barbarous cruelties and bloody Sacrifices before him, who has said, I
will have Mercy and not Sacrifice? For let it be considered, that we live in a
Church, which is established on the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone; a Church, wherein nothing is
forbidden which the Word of God commands, nor any thing commanded, which that
forbids; a Church, whose Constitutions are truly Ancient and Apostolical, for
which it is envied by her Adversaries, though blamed by those that should be
her Friends. In a word, a Church, wherein we may be as holy, devout, and
charitable, as flesh and blood will permit us. This Church is protected by a
Gracious King, settled on the Throne of his Fathers by many miracles of
Providence, ready to gratify the just desires of all good Men. And what
sufficient reason can be given, to disturb the peace of such a Church, or to
disobey the commands of such a King, for the preservation of peace and unity,
under whom all things are lawful, except (libertas pereundi) a license to undo
our selves and others?

That there are some such imperfections in the Church, as discontented Persons
may quarrel at, is no strange thing, and if causless and frivolous objections
may be a ground for Separation, Tanta est imperitiae morositas ut vel in rebus
probatissimis habeat semper quid reprehendat. Call.
there can never be a firm peace in any Church, seeing that ignorance, and
interest, and malice will still prevail in the hearts of some Men: but that
such things may be tolerated, and submitted to, rather than to destroy the
foundations of peace and unity, and rent the Body of Christ, is the judgment of
all sober Christians. Our Savior did not withdraw himself and his Disciples
from the Jewish Synagogues, because there was a High Priest, and the Scribes
and Pharisees sat in Moses Chair: A tolerable Sore is better than a dangerous
remedy. Mr. Hooker.
Nor did the Apostle persuade the Christians to forsake the Church of Corinth,
wherein were many profane Persons, and great abuses, but he dissuaded them from
their divisions, which had given occasion to those scandals. And if the Church
in imitation of her Master, do retain some sinful, persons in her Communion, in
hope to reform them, it is no charitable course to seduce her Disciples, as
here the Pharisees did, Why eats your Master with Publicans and Sinners?

If the Church did impose such Sacrifices, as the Church of Rome does, for the
Living, and the Dead; a few Pence at the Pope's shrine, for Sins past, present,
and to come; if it did require that daily Mock-sacrifice of the Body and Blood
of Christ, in the Mass, of which they themselves can have no great esteem,
seeing they order it to give place to the (...) or Worship of the Cross, on a
certain day set apart for that end, on which, (says Darand ( Rationale l. 6.
c. 77.) Hora nona convenit ad adorandam crucem vacare,) they must be wholly
intent upon the Worshipping of the Cross, as if that were indeed the Altar that
did Sanctify the Sacrifice; or if they did impose such gaudy and numerous
Ceremonies as should quite hide and obscure the substance of Worship and
Devotion, that it might be said of the Church as the Poet says of his gaudy
Girl -- Pars minima est ipsa puella sui; Then we might have cause not only to
recede, but to resist, as the Martyrs did: but to contend as Hugh Broughton,
and Mr. Ainsworth did, to Separation and enmity upon a needless controversy,
whether Aarons Ephod were of a Blew color, or Sea-water-green, and Tragoedias
agere in nugis, to act Tragedies upon no other ground than our own fears or
jealousies, and to use our Christian Brethren, as the Heathen did their
Predecessors, wrap them up in the skins of Wolves or Bears by defaming,
slandering and condemning them, as Profane and Antichristian persons, and then
bait and devour them; this is to deal worse with them than the Pharisees did
with Christ.

Suppose there were a better Government and discipline revealed than ever yet
was known, or practiced in the Church; suppose the Presbytery were agreeable to
the pattern in the Mount, as some phrase it, (and if they had said to the
pattern of the air, it had been alike intelligible) yet if it could not be
erected without Rebellion and Rapine, without the effusion of Christian blood,
and rasing the foundations of Churches and Kingdoms, that were well established
in the truth, and peace of Christ, the Text does warrant the rejection of it, I
will have mercy and not Sacrifice.

But wherein, I pray, does the Discipline opposed by Presbyterians, etc. to the
Peace and Unity of the Church, exceed or parallel that which is already
established? or is it as venerable for antiquity as the Jewish Sacrifices were?
is there any thing of such beauty as the Temple, and the several Orders of the
Priesthood? is it such a prop to the Royal Tribe as the Priesthood was, or does
it serve the Ends of Religion, as the Sacrifices did? Alas very little of all
this will appear, it is but an invention of yesterday, that like Jonah's gourd
sprung up in a night, and has a worm always gnawing at the root, and yet men
think they do well to be angry, and to contend for it, even to the death of
their Brethren.

Has not God said I hate robbery though it be for burnt-offerings? will God be
well-pleased with such as sacrifice their Loyalty and Charity, and all moral
virtues, to a pretended Reformation of Ceremonies? This Mask is so worn out
that a Pharisee would be ashamed of it, and yet a late Gentleman has taken it
up, and though his business was to cast fire into the several parts of the
Nation, especially into the Churches, yet makes himself very merry, and tells
us in his Rehearsal, that the good Old Cause was (not only good enough but) too
good to be fought for: but God forbid, that others should be of his mind, to
think only so well of it, as to fight for it again, for it is so impossible,
that any Cause fought for with such horrid circumstances as that was, should be
good, that if an Angel from Heaven, Gal. 1.8.
(much less when only one transformed into an Angel of light.) should assert
it, I have warrant enough not to believe him.

The Sacrifices and Discipline of the Law were termed by the Apostle (...), 2
Cor. 3.7. the ministration of death, because without shedding of blood ((...))
there was no remission. Heb. 9.22.
And if in this, the Discipline contended for do resemble the Jewish
Sacrifices, in the shedding the blood, not of Beasts, but of Christians, and
cutting and dividing the very body of Christ, in fire and smoke, and making
whole Kingdoms burnt-offerings, we may be assured the God of Mercy cannot be
well-pleased with such Sacrifices.

The Honor of God, the Success of the Gospel, and Salvation of Souls, is not
concerned in the erecting of such a Discipline, nor in contending about
Ceremonies, which are not otherwise hurtful to those great ends, but by our
needless contentions about them. If we could order our Conversations according
to the Doctrine of the Church, we need not fear of displeasing God by
Conforming our Devotions to the Liturgy of the Church, for the Kingdom of God
is not meat and drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost:
he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of
men.

There is no Reason we should be thus disjoined and mutually branded. By. Hall
in a Sermon. of the mischief of Faction, p. 83.
This man is right (ye say) that man is not right, this sound, that rotten; and
how so, dear Christians, what for Ceremonies and circumstances, for Rotchets,
or Rounds, or Squares? Let me tell you he is right that has a right heart to
his God what Form soever he is for. The Kingdom of God does not stand in meats
or drinks, in stuffs or colors or fashions, in noises or gestures, it stands
in Holiness and Righteousness, in Godliness and Charity, in Peace and
Obedience, and if we have happily attained unto these, God does not stand upon
trifles and niceties of indifferency, and why should we? Away then with all
false jealousies and uncharitable glosses of each others actions and estates.
Let us all in the fear of God be entreated in the bowels of our Dear Redeemer,
as we Love our Selves, our Land, our Church, the Gospel, to combine our
counsels and endeavors to the holding of the Unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace, and labor and study, not how to widen, and gall, and rankle, but how
to salve and heal these unhappy sores of the Church and State. And as Mr.
Calvin says, Epist. ad Catech. Genev.
When we shall come to that great Tribunal, where we are to render an account
of our Ministry, There shall be no question concerning Ceremonies, neither
shall this conformity in outward things be brought to examination, but the
lawful use of our liberty, and that shall be adjudged lawful that conduces
most to edification. Let therefore all our care, circumspection and diligence
tend to this, which we may know so far to succeed, as we become Proficients in
the serious fear of God, in sincere piety, and unfeigned Sanctity of manners.

I know you will all join with me, to condemn those pitiful pretenses which are
still to be heard from the mouths of some profane persons, to excuse their not
frequenting of the Lords Supper, a Sacrament which may assure them of infinite
comfort, and blessings, if they did not obicem ponere, make themselves
incapable. They pretend a grudge against a neighbor, on a punctilio of profit
or reputation, or perhaps a pet against their Minister, for demanding his Dues,
or reproving their Vices, and therefore they cannot come. It is the very same
that is pleaded against the Communion of the Church, in whose Peace and
Communion they might have Peace and Salvation; they have some perverse Opinions
of their Brethren, or Minister, some point of Reputation, profit, or trade lies
in the way, or some strange reports have been whispered in their ears, by
Schismatical persons, the truth whereof they had never time to examine, nor
discretion to judge of; and yet there are such invincible prejudices created
within them, that they cannot be reconciled, Non amo te, nec possum dicere
quare, that is they must keep at a distance, and live in hatred and malice,
though they have no reason for it. But when God shall call us to an account for
our ignorance, and uncharitableness, and make inquisition for the Authors and
grounds of all those divisions, that obstinacy and cruelty that has been
practiced among us, what shall we answer him? can we say as Saul did except it
be falsely, I have kept the Commandments of the Lord? it will be replied then,
what means the lowing of the Oxen, and the bleating of the Sheep that are
gone astray? if it be pretended that they are set apart for a more solemn
Sacrifice, the Prophet demands, has the Lord as great delight in Sacrifice,
and burnt-offerings, as in obeying the Voice of the Lord? Behold to obey (the
Commands of God for Peace and Charity) is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken
than the fat of Rams. Shall we say all our divisions were occasioned by
misinformation, that the Cause of God and the Kingdom of Christ were concerned,
or that it was done in opposition to a Ceremony, because we would not receive
the Sacrament on our Knees, or see our Minister wear a Surplice, or because we
would not submit to the injunctions of our Rulers in matters of Decency, Vbi ad
summum illud Tribunal ventum fuerit ubi reddenda erit olim functionis nostrae
ratio, minima erit de Ceremoniis quaestio. Call. Epist* in Catech. Genev.
or which is as much as any of the rest, because we would not eat with
Publicans and sinners? Consider, if this be not contrary to our Saviors rule,
of preferring Mercy above Sacrifice, when we sacrifice Mercy and Peace, and
Charity, which are so strictly commanded, to our own ignorance or interest, or
to the discontent and maliciousness of wicked men, which are so peremptorily
forbidden.

Remember the Blessing pronounced to the Peacemakers by our Savior, and the
Cu^se against them that are Contentious, and obey not the Gospel, and then
think, whether true Comfort and Piety, do lie most in being instruments of
Peace, Deterior est qui recedit ab Ecclesiae concordia, and in haeresin aut
Schisma demigrat, quam qui impure vivit salvis dogmatibus. Eral. de Eccl.
concordia, p. 113.
of Mercy and good Works, or in being Firebrarnds in the Church of God,
instruments of Satan, accusers of the Brethren, enemies of Peace, and authors
of Confusion. And think often, that God has made our following of Peace, a
condition of Salvation, as well as of Holiness. Follow peace with all men,
(with all our Christian Brethren more especially) without which no man shall
see the Lord.

The Plea of Templum Domini, will but aggravate the guilt of such as do steal,
Jer. 7.4.
and murder, and commit Adultery, and swear falsely, Is this House which is
called by my Name become a den of Robbens? What greater dishonor can we do the
Church of God than under pretense of Zeal for Reformation of things
inconsiderable and doubtful, to open a gap for the greatest impiety, such as
Rebellion, and Schism, a contempt of things Sacred and Civil, which have been
after mature deliberation and Primitive custom legally established in the
Church of God?

If men do indeed desire the honor and safety of Religion, and the whole
Nation, there is no better method of effecting it, than by a hearty endeavor,
that we may all speak, and mind the same things, and keep the unity of the
spirit, in the bond of peace: by this the power of godliness will appear, as
well as the form of it, when that Dove-like spirit shall possess our Souls, and
banish all those proud and wrathful dispositions, James 1.20.
that do as much hinder the righteousness of God, as love and charity to our
Brethren. What an honor is it to be a Repairer of the breaches of Sion, to
settle the Ark of God, that has been so long in a wandering condition, to
convert Thousands of Souls from the error of their ways, and as the good
Samaritan, pour in Wine and Oil to their wounds, that have fallen among
Thieves, in their journeying from Jerusalem to Jericho? If Christ will so
graciously reward at the last day, all those temporal and bodily supplies, that
we bestow on his distressed Members, as himself has expressed, Matthew. 25.34.
much more bountifully will he recompense all that labor of love, which we
manifest for the preservation of those Souls, which he redeemed with his
precious blood, to reduce a sinner from the error of his ways, by a mild
reproof, a seasonable instruction, a peaceable and pious example. This is to be
as Moses was to Aaron, ( Exodus 4.16.) instead of a God and a Savior unto them.
Great is the advantage and opportunity that those Men have, who by their parts
and reputation have an influence upon the spirits and consciences of their
misguided Brethren, if they would instruct them in this plain lesson of
preferring works of mercy and charity above all external services whatsoever;
if they would convince them, how hateful to God a Pharisaical temper is, that
disposes Men to quarrel about external circumstances, wherein they are not at
all concerned, and to neglect the most necessary duties of the Gospel,
Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, which are of Eternal concernment to their Souls. In
so doing, they may save themselves, and perhaps thousands of those that know
them, and are ready to follow them. And if there be a pleasure in doing good,
there is no pleasure like that, which will arise, from being instrumental in so
public a blessing, wherein the very being of Religion, the peace of the
Nation, and the salvation of souls are bound together, especially in this
juncture of affairs, when for want of exercising mercy to one another, we
expose our selves as a Sacrifice to our common enemies. Misericordiam volo, is
God's voice to us, and may it ever be heard in our Land. If he should have
dealt with us, as we do one with another, and lay hold of every provocation to
destroy us, the whole Land might have been a sacrifice to his Justice: but he
has in the midst of judgment remembered mercy, and seeing it is his mercy that
we are not consumed, let us not be so unmerciful to our selves, Gal. 5.15.
as to bite and devour one another till we be utterly consumed. Misericordiam
volo, is the Kings Motto, as well as God's; He has sometime graciously
manifested his readiness, to dispense with the use of those established forms
of worship, which himself retains as most agreeable to the Word of God, and in
which, the Arguments and Sufferings of his Royal Father have confirmed him
(next to a Jus Divinum) against all doubtings or contradictions: yet to show
that he also loves mercy, rather than sacrifice, he indulged the omission of
them, as long as the peace and welfare of the Nation could bear it; how ill do
they requite this great condescension, that will not recede one step from their
pretended holy, but really unpeaceable Discipline, to follow such a Divine and
Royal example, as both God and the King do propose to them? Misericordiam volo,
should be our Petition to the King to pardon all that obstinacy and peevishness
of spirit, that keeps us still in disobedience and contradiction to those good
and wholesome Laws, whereby we might lead quiet and peaceable lives, in all
godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. Sure I am Misericordiam volo will one day be
our Petition to God, that he would not enter into judgment with us; and we may
know what our sentence will be then, Romans 2.16.
for by the Gospel we must be judged, and that assures us that with what
judgment we judge we shall be judged; and, Mat. 7.2.
he shall have judgment without mercy, that shows no mercy, James 2.13.
Voluit Deus ut quisque sit sibi mensura misericordiae. And now Misericordiam
volo, shall be my Plea also, that you would pardon my trespassing on your
patience, and that you would suffer a word of Exhortation. God has planted us
in his own Vineyard, Isay 5.
hedged us about with his Almighty providence, and been at the expense of
Miracles of Mercy, to restore and establish us on foundations of peace and
righteousness: And now that he expects Grapes, let us not bring forth wild
grapes, he looks for judgment, let us not bring forth oppression, and when he
expects righteousness, let us not bring forth a cry of our own sins and
divisions, and the sufferings of our brethren, lest he take away our hedge, and
we be eaten up, and lest he break down our wall, and we be trodden down of
them, that bear evil will to Sion, and watch opportunities to lay us wast.

If there be any fanatic principle among us, (and there are certainly very
many) this is one, to think that purity of Ordinances will commute for the
impurity of our lives, or that we are either better, or safer, for being of
this, or that Party: Lot and Noah are commended for being righteous in a
wicked, and perverse Generation; their condemnation will be the greater, that
are wicked and unrighteous in a holy Nation, and Schismatical in the Communion
of a Church truly Catholic and Apostolical: Let none of us be as the Sons of
Eli, Sons of Belial, that snatched at the flesh while it was raw, and served
themselves before the Lord, whereby they made the offerings of the Lord to be
abhorred of the People: Let none of us be like the Proud and Hypocritical
Pharisees, who thought to cloak their real impieties, in neglecting works of
mercy and peace, by a pretense of zeal for the minute circumstances of external
Worship and Discipline; but let us offer to God the sacrifices of a humble and
contrite heart, and not forget to do good, and communicate, Heb. 13.16.
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased: and then he will accept our
praises, and answer our Prayers with a Misericordiam volo: I will have mercy
upon you, and heal your Land. Which God grant for the sake of Jesus Christ,
Amen.

FINIS.

