The Way to True Honor and Happiness.

A FRIENDLY ^DDRESS TO ALL ^ARENTS, (...)ters of Families, AND ^ANDLORDS, (...)
Persons most capable to Honor (...) and to gain Honor to them(...) by
beginning and carrying on a (...)IONAL REFORMATION.

To which is Added, (...)emorandum for Mothers,

(...) John Mitchell, M. A.

LONDON, (...) I. Dawks, for B. Barker by the Fountain-Ta(...) the Foot of the
Hay-Market, near Pell-Mell; (...)d by R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane, 1697. Price
stitch't, 4 d,

IT is earnestly desired, That Magistrates, Landlords, and other Rich People,
would distribute some Copies of this little Book, among their Tenants and
Servants, and among poor People, that many may be awakened to a sense of their
Duty, and may concur and unite their Endeavors for carrying on that Glorious
REFORMATION, which all sober Persons are longing and praying for.

Dan. 12. 3. They that turn many to Righteousness shall shine.

A Friendly ADDRESS TO ALL PARENTS, ^asters of Families, AND LAND LORDS, etc.
Dear Friends,
^N reading the New Testament, you may (...) see, That the Practice of
Christianity is (...) degenerated; and in observing the ways (...) of Men, you
do see, that the Nation is (...)rupted. Vice abounds, and Wickedness (...)ails.
Almost none walking in the ways (...)ety and Virtue, and very few walking in
(...) ways of Civility or Honesty. All Fami^^ all Persons have corrupted their
Ways; most are vicious and all are negligent; there is none Righteous, no not
one.

The Justice of the Eternal Majesty is provoked, his Laws contemned, his Mercy
despised, his Grace abused, his Promises and Threatenings disregarded, and all
the Methods of his P^^vidence neglected. And what shall be the end thereof?

The Word of God gives us ground to hope, that a real and speedy Re^ormation
may be a Mean to prevent deserved Condemnation, Isa. 55. 6, 7.

But without this, let none presumptuously expect Mercy. For the Righteous
Judge of the world is unchangeably just and holy, and will not, yea, cannot
pardon impenitent Sinners: for it were against the Declarations of his Eternal
Truth, which is firmer than the Pillars of Heaven and Earth. For though the
Mercies of God and the Merits of Christ ar^ infinite, yet neither of these can
save one Impenitent Sinner; for He who cannot lie, has said, Luke 13. 3, 5.
Except ye repent, ye shall likewise perish, Mat. 18. 3.

So that true Repentance and a through Re^ormation is the only door of Hope, and
way to Escape.

Quest. But how shall this Reformation be done? who shall begin and promote it?

Answ. Some Person must beg^n it, otherwise it cannot be done; and who is so
capable ^s you, my Friends? Indeed Magistrates and (...)s^ers may do much, but
they cannot do all. (...) so ^it as you (Masters of Families and (...)lords) to
Reform the Nation, and to reap (...) Honor and Reward of so Noble and Glo(...)
a Work. The whole Nation depends (...) you, and lodges within your Doors; and
(...) can say with good resolution, courage (...) zeal, as that good Man said,
Ios. 24. 15. (...) for me and my house, we will serve the Lord: (...) may you
signalize your selves for Men of (...)our, and gain the honor due to
Conque(...), over the power of Darkness. And though (...) meet with opposition
and discouragement (...), yet after wards, when Men are inlight(...) and made
sensible of their own good, the (...)ole Nation will respect and honor you,
yea (...)ren and Earth will smile upon you, and join (...) you in Songs of
everlasting Joy and (...)mph.

Object. Alas! What can we do? We need (...)ormation as well as others. Most of
us are (...)orant, and all of us are Guilty: we know (...) what to do; we
cannot Re^orm our selves, (...) less others.

Answ. It is true, you have neither Skill, (...)ll nor Power, to Reform others,
until your (...)res be new Creatures; you cannot direct o(...)rs in the way
which you know not, and you (...) not assist others in the work which you (...)
not; you cannot lead others, while your (...) are Blind, nor strengthen others,
while (...) selves are weak in Grace.

Therefore Self-Reformation must go before Family-Reformation; you must first
learn before you can teach.

And for your Assistance, this Method is humbly offered to each of you.

1. Retire from the world for some time, and remove from thy mind all thoughts
of it, and all Concerns about it, that there may be room for Spiritual
Meditation.

2. Consider that thou have a faculty or power of thinking, whereby thou art
capable to know spiritual Things, and to converse with spiritual Beings: And
that this spiritual part of thee, is out of its Element, and acting contrary to
its Nature, when it is employed about earthly Things.

3. Consider that thou gave not Being to thy self; for thou can not make
thy self wiser nor taller; thou can not give to thy self the things which
thou want; thou can not add one finger to thy Hand, nor one joint to thy
Body; neither can any other Creature give them to thee. And this will oblige
thee to believe, that there is a Supreme Being, which made all things, and upon
whom all do depend.

4. Being convinced that there is a God, or a Supreme Being, who made and
maintains all things, and to whom all are accountable; surely there must be
some acknowledgments of dependence upon him, and of Duty toward him; and this
will oblige thee to enquire after his Will, Laws and Commands.

5. And since his Will and Laws are to be (...) no where so likely, as in that
Book which (...)lled the BIBLE, and which is commonly (...)ed for his Word,
thou will think it thy (...) to enquire diligently and seriously into (...)
Book, and remark every thing contained (...)ein, which will wonderfully inform
thy (...) and direct thy Judgment, and show thee (...) his will and ways, and
thy state and duty. (...) Particularly, this Holy Book will teach thee (...)
Six Things; without the knowledge (...)ereof thou art not safe, and can not
be (...)ppy.

1. That Man was created innocent and ho(...) endued with the Image of God,
whereby (...) was admirably furnished and fitly qualifyed (...) glorify and
enjoy God.

2. That God the Creator made a Covenant (...) Man, including all his
Posterity, promi(...)g them Life and Happiness upon their Obe(...)ence; and
threatening them with Death and (...)isery, upon their Disobedience.

3. That Man did disobey, and rebelled a^^inst his Maker, and turned away from
him, (...) made himself and all his Posterity, (...) (...) miserable; so that
the holy Nature of God (...)orred him, the righteous Law of God con(...)ned
him, and the Honor and Justice of (...), required, that the Curse of the Law
should (...)inflicted upon him.

4. Man being thus become abominable and (...)serable, he was altogether unable
to restore himself to his former State; he had no power to satisfy the Justice
of God, no skill to entreat his Mercy, and no Merit to procure his Favor. Yea,
he had no Creature in Heaven not Earth to befriend him, nor to interceed for
him.

5. In this extremity of Misery, the infinitely wise and gracious God, was
pleased to pity Mankind, and did promise, and in due time sent a Savior to
redeem him, and to restore him to Favor, and that without any necessity, merit
or motive, but only of his own free Love and abundant Grace, Genesis 3. 15. Io. 3.
16.

6. That in and through this Savior, God was graciously pleased to enter into
new Terms with Man, to make a Covenant o^ Grace with him, promising Life and
Salvation to those who believe, and receive him upon the terms that he is
offered; and denouncing Death and Damnation to those who believe not, but
despise and reject this Savior, Io. 3. 18, 36.

Quest. What needs all this? Is Sin so great an Evil as to offend God, and make
Man so miserable?

Answ. Sin is the greatest Evil in the world(...) and the only Cause of all
other Evil, because i(...) is contrary to the Nature and Will of the^ greatest
Good. It is the only thing in the world that God hates, yea, he must abhor and^
spunish it, because it is contrary to his Purity and Holiness, and the
violation of his Laws^ which are holy, just and good, Hab. 1. 23.

So that as the Law of God is violated by (...), it must be repaired by
Suffering, either in (...) Sinner or his Surety. For the honor of (...)d is
concerned to vindicate his Justice, and (...) Justice is concerned to maintain
his Law.

Quest. Adam sinned, and must I suffer? What ^th his sin affect me?

Answ. Adam being the natural and federal (...)ent to all Mankind, his guilt is
reckoned (...)e, his punishment is due to thee, his cor(...)ted nature is
inherent in thee, and many (...) of Rebellion and Transgression like unto
(...)^ have been committed by thee. And if (...) did most justly condemn the
whole world (...) one sin, he may likewise most justly con(...)n thee for many
sins.

Quest. What way then can I be saved?

Answ. There is Salvation to be obtained. (...)d if thou diligently studiest
two Books, thou (...) be thereby disposed to look and long for (...) Savior,
and gladly accept of him, being of(...)d unto thee.

^. Seriously study the Book of God's Law, (...) be firmly persuaded, that all
the Precepts (...)eof are holy, just and good, and do oblige (...)inward as
well as the outward Man, the (...)rt and Affections as well as Words and
(...)ions; and declares every one accursed (...)o continues not in every
thing written in (...) Law to do the same, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10, The Law
cannot pass by a Transgression, nor (...) give a Sin.

^ Diligently acquaint thy self with the Book of thine own Conscience, that
thou may (...) know thy self; and thou will find, that thou ^ art a Sinner, and
a Transgressor of the Holy ^ Laws of God, both in thoughts, words and ^
actions. Yea, thou will find, that in thy natural and unregenerate State, thou
do nothing^ but sin, Heb. 11. 6. Romans 8. 7, 8. And in thy renewed State, thou
do nothing without (...) Eccles. 7. 20. 1 Io. 1. 8.

Thou will find, that naturally thou art destitute of the Image of God; that
thou a^ dead in Trespasses and Sins, and art by natu^^ a child of Wrath, and
liable to the just Judgments of God, Romans 5. 18. Ephesians. 2. 1, 3.

That thy whole Man is corrupted, and treasures of wickedness in every faculty
of thy sou^

1. Thy Understanding is full of Darkne^ and Error, great ignorance of God and
of sp^ritual Things, and yet thou would be accounte^ wise, but art negligent in
seeking after use^^ Knowledge, Ephesians. 4. 18.

2. Thy Will is obstinate, perverse and co^^trary to good, rebelling and
fighting against God and his Law, and wholly inclined to Ev^^ and Vanity, Io.
5. 40.

3. The Conscience is perverted, corrupted an^ de^iled, full of treachery,
deceit and lies, apt (...) call evil good, and good evil, and to flatter t(...)
Soul with formal pretenses and shadows, wit^ out sincerity or reality, 1 Timothy
4. 2. Tit. 1. 1^

4. The Memory is corrupted and vain, a(...) to forget God, dependence upon
him, and eve^ ^^ty toward him, both as to matter and (...)er, substance and
quality. It is apt to re(...) Wickedness, Vanity and Trifles, but to let
(...)seful and necessary Truths.

5. The Affections and Passions are all cor(...)ed and abused; our admiration,
our love, (...) anger, our hatred, our desire, our fear, our (...), our grief,
our anger, etc. are often em(...)ed and exercised about things quite con(...)y
to the appointment of God's Law.

(...) that the heart of Man is become a very (...) generate thing, a sink of
Sin and mass of Cor(...)ion, full of Malice, Impiety and Impurity, (...)ereby
the spiritual and heaven-born Soul is (...)ome despicable, base and miserable,
a slave (...) own Servants, yea even to its greatest (...)mies, under the
dominion of Sin, Satan, the (...)rld and the Flesh.

And yet the greatest misery of all is, That (...) is not sensible of this his
miserable condi(...), he knows it not, he is not affected with it; (...)goes
light under his load, and is cheerful (...)is chains, fancying himself safe,
happy and (...) Rev. 3. 17. And why? because his mind (...)nded, and his heart
hardened. For it is of (...) nature of sin to blind the Mind and harden (...)
Heart, as well as to de^ile the Conscience (...) pollute the Soul. That very
sin which (...)es the Man guilty, makes him likewise past (...)ng, Ephesians. 4. 18,
19.

^oe is me! is this my condition? Am I one (...)hese miserable creatures? Am I
yet in a natural and unregenerate State? I am not safe. What shall I do?

If thou art truly awakened from thy Lethargy, and convinced of thy Sin and
Misery; if thou art deeply humbled under a sense of the same; if thou art
persuaded, that thou can not be saved by thy own Power, thy Skill, thy
Duties, nor thy Merits; if thou art so humble, that thou art willing to be
beholden to another for help and safety; yea, if thou have hungring and
thirsting Desires after Salvation, and art glad to submit to any terms to
escape Sin and Misery, and to obtain Happiness and Glory: Then (and not till
then) art thou fit to hear of Christ the Savior, and to receive that
comfortable invitation, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me, etc. Isaiah 55. 1, 2.

Christ came to seek and to save such lost Sinners, as despair of Salvation any
other way; He will be a Physician to such sick Souls.

Behold the Terms of the Gospel Covenant. If thou truly and sincerely repentest
of sin, so that thou inwardly loathest and abhorrest it, and thy self, for
being guilty of it. If thou truly and sincerely believe in Christ, so as to
prize him above all things; If thou receivest and acceptest of Him upon the
Terms of the Covenant of Grace, as he is offered in the Gospel, for thy Prophet
and Teacher, for thy Priest and Peacemaker, for thy King and Ruler, for thy
Lord, and Lawgiver, as well as thy Savior and Redeemer; if thou submittest
(...) committest thy self unto him, and art as (...)ing to give obedience to
him as to receive (...)ation from him, to be sanctified by his Spi^^s well as
to be saved by his Merits, and (...)ly resolvest to continue steadfast in this
hap(...) (...)emper of Mind to the end of thy life; then (...) Sin is pardoned,
thy Soul regenerated, thy (...)re sanctified, and thy Salvation infallible,
(...)8. 1. Io. 6. 35, 37. Io. 5. 24. Io. 3. 18, 36. (...) after thou have laid
the firm Foundation of (...) Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, thou dili^^ly
addest to thy Faith, Virtue, Knowledge, (...)perance, Patience, Godliness,
Brotherly (...)dness, Charity, and the rest of those heaven^^ Graces and holy
Virtues, which are Fruits (...) Effects of Faith; and do abound in all
(...)se, acting all Graces, practicing all Ver^ues, (...) performing all
Duties; and yet (...)ting in (...)ce of them, but only in Jesus Christ for
Sal^^ion; Then art thou as sure to be eternally (...), as thou art sure that
thy Repentance is (...), thy Faith true, and thy Obedience sincere, (...). 5.
4. Act. 3. 19. Mark 16. 16. Act. 16. (...) Heb. 5. 9. 2 Pet. 1. 5, 10, 11.

Be careful still, to use humble and hearty (...)yers, as the Mean to procure
all this, Mat. (...). And still apply unto, and depend upon (...) Holy Spirit,
as the effectual worker of all (...), Romans 8. 26. Io. 15. 5. 2 Cor. 3. 5.

Now, my Friends, This is the way, walk ye (...). If ye know these things,
happy are ye, if (...)o, and teach them. Be not content to go to Heaven alone,
but take compassion upon other^ and help them forward in this good way.
Per^swade your selves, that Christ's command ob^liges you, Luke 22. 32.

When you are Converted, strengthen you Brethren, especially your Children,
Servant and all within your gates, and under you^ Charge.

God's Command is your Duty, and bin^ you to obedience in this particular, Mat.
22. 39^ Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

Quest. What Method shall we use in Reform^ing our Families?

Answ. Having brought your Mind to a ser^^ous Frame, and being persuaded of the
nece^sity and excellency of Holiness, and havin^ learned the Duties of Humility
and Self-D^^nyal; Then follow this Method.

1. Presently set ^p, and zealously keep up the Worship of God in your
Families, use Prayer^ Praises, and reading of the Scriptures twice ^^very day
at least, in presence of all the Family ^let nothing be an ordinary hindrance
of these daily Sacrifices each day; and on the Lord Day, let these Duties be
doubled, as the ol^ Sacrifices were, Numb. 28. 9, 10.

2. Spend one hour at least, in instructin^ and examining your Children and
Servants, i^ explaining Difficulties, and opening the mean^ing of the
Scriptures to them. At first you man set them Tasks in some fit Books of
Question^ and Answers, till their capacity be enlarged. (...)ecially be careful
to teach them to know (...)selves, what they are in their natural and (...)
State, and what the effects, consequents (...) wages of sin are; and this will
make your (...)er-work more easy. For if you can tho^ly convince them, that
they are sinners, (...) that the wages of every sin is death and (...)ation,
and that there is no safety but in (...) Christ, and that in him is perfect
Righ(...)sness and plenteous Redemption to all that (...) receive him as he is
offered; Then it will (...)asy to persuade them to learn to know (...)st and
the Method of Salvation by him. (...)ey will be glad to be directed to the City
(...) Refuge, when they see themselves pursued (...) the Justice of the
Sin-revenging God, and (...)ble to all the Curses of his Law.

Whereas without the knowledge of them^^es and their own State, they will not
desire (...) knowledge of Christ, nor submit to Chri(...) Duties. What are all
the Physicians in (...)wn to a Man in Health and Vigor, or all (...) places of
Refuge to a Man that thinks (...)self honest and innocent.

3. Allow them time, and exhort them to (...) prove it in secret Prayer,
reading the Scrip^^es, Meditation, and examining their own (...)rts; and give
them directions how to do (...)se things to good purpose.

4. Let your holy Example be their constant (...)ern, and your watchful Eye
their constant (...)itor, and your frequent and familiar Conferences with them,
be their constant Encouragement. Occasional Advices and pious Directions
insinuated and dropped into them a^ Work, or at Meals, will wonderfully advanc^
and set forward your solemn Teachings.

5. Neglect not to use Meekness and Patience, Love and Kindness in all your
Dealing with them, in matters of Religion, that the^ may be convinced, that you
chiefly intend the good of their Souls.

6. Let no stubborn Despisers of Piety remain within your Doors, lest they
poison the rest, and render your Labors fruitless.

7. Encourage the tractable and diligent, a^ first, with little Rewards, till
they come t^ feel the sweetness of Holiness, the power o^ Grace, and the habits
of Virtue; till they b^ acquainted with the teachings of the holy Spirit, and
then your work will be pleasant and delightful, your Scholars will then become
Teachers.

If you doubt of your Duty, and think that this is more than is required of
you, then consider these Arguments to prove your Obligation.

1. It is the express command, and positive^ Law of the great King of Heaven,
the loving and gracious God, that you should teach and instruct your Families;
and therefore it is your indispensible Duty: And you cannot neglect it without
Rebellion against your Creator, your Father and Sovereign. Take your Bible,
read (...) consider these Texts, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Deuteronomy. (...).19. Deuteronomy. 4. 10 Ephesians.
6. 4.

(...) God's faithful Children and Servants (...) carefully performed this
Duty. Christ (...)ed with and instructed his Family, Luke (...) Mark 4. 10, 14.
Cornelius feared God (...) all his House, Act. 10. 2. Abraham's pur(...)s
approved of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. And (...) Lord tells you, Io. 8. 39. If ye
were Abra(...) Children, ye would do the Works of Abra(...); that is, if ye had
Faith, ye would imi(...) his Example.

(...) holy David's Practice be your daily (...)ern, Psalm. 101. 2 Samuel 6. 20.

(...) The Law of Nature obliges you to this (...); your Children are pieces
of your selves, your Servants stand in a near relation to (...) You feed and
cloth their Bodies, and (...) it your Duty to do so, it is unnatural (...)ty
to neglect and starve the Soul, and suf(...) to perish for want of knowledge
and good (...)ation. They cannot serve you without (...), but with the whole
Man; therefore (...)ght to take care of the whole Man, and (...)t your greatest
care upon the better (...); otherwise many Birds and Beasts are (...)ng behind
with you. Let your Religion Reason appear, in taking more care of the (...)ts
of the most high God, than of your (...) and Horses.

(...) The Oath of God is upon you by your (...)small Engagements, that you will
keep God's holy Will and Commandments all the days of your life; and you daily
pray, that the Will of God may be done on Earth as it is in Heaven.

And since it is the Command and Will o^ God, that you worship Him in your
Families and oblige all that are under your charge to d^ the sam^, you mock
God, if you act not according to your Promise and Prayers, and yo^ give your
selves the lie, when you do not a^ you s^y.

5. God has entrusted you with the charg^ of your F^milies, as his Vicegerent
and Deputy and has invested you with Christ's three O^^fices, to enable you to
discharge that Trust.

1. Of a Prophet, to instruct and teach all u^^der your charge, to make known
to them t^^ mind of God.

2. Of a Priest, to offer up to God the Sacr^^fices of Prayer and Praises, with
and for the^^

3. Of a King, to rule, govern, and keep goo^ order in your Family; to rebuke
and puni(...) Error and Vice, and to encourage and rewa(...) Piety and Virtue.

And since you must give account of this yo^ Charge and Stewardship to the
righteo(...) Judge, be careful so to manage and dischar(...) it, that neither
the Law of God, the Gospel (...) Christ, your own Conscience, nor any in
yo(...) family, may accuse or condemn you at that da(...)

6. Seriously consider the bad and dread(...) effects of the neglect of
Family-Piety, Solom(...) (...) you, Prove. 22. 6. Train up a Child in the (...)
where in he should go, and when he is old, he (...) not depart from it. So that
all the Enor(...)es and Impieties that every where abound, (...) the miserable
and unhappy consequences (...) your neglect and carelessness. And when all
(...)ese Iniquities are charged upon your score, (...)at a dreadful r^ckoning
will it make? No (...)nks to you, that England is yet (...), (...) does not
suffer like Sodom.

7. Consider the glorious and com^ortable ^ffects that will attend your
diligent and faith(...) ^ discharge of Family Duties, and that in a
(...)reesold respect.

1. In respect of the Public. Your Fami(...) are the Nurseries and Se^inaries
both of church and State. Parishes, Towns, Cities and Societies are made up of
them, and all ^e(...)ions flow from them.

Therefore to make Families good and reli^ious, is the most ready way to make
good ^^gistrates, good Subjects, good (...), ^ood Church Members, good
Husbands, good ^ives, good Masters, good Servants, good ^iends and good
Neighbors.

So that if your Families be Schools of Piety (...) Virtue, both Church and
Commonwealth ^ill reap the Fruits of your Labors, and ^weetly commemorate your
Commendation.

Neither Magistrates nor Ministers are ^o ^a^^ble to do this as you are,
because your (...) are contin^ally under your ^ye, and do more immediately
depend upon you, and ar^ more awed by you.

B^ this your religious care and diligence^ ye mi^ht be very helpful both to
Magistrate^ and Ministers, and make their Offices pleasant and delightful,
which now are comfortl^ss and toilsom. Particularly you would greatly assist
and encourage Ministers, by preparing ^he ground wherein they might sow (...)
(...), by laying a good Foundation o^ (...) and solid Principles, whereupon
they (...) ^uild by Preaching; whereas now by (...) neg^^ct, their Labor is
lost, and their P^ins unprofitable.

Moreover, were your Families reformed and made Sanctuaries for the Worship
and Service of God, good Ministers would take pleasure to visit you, to assist
and encourage you: Whereas now they are afraid to come near you, lest they be
flattered, ^louted or vainly diverted by your carnal Conversation. For I verily
suppose, that much of the fault lies in you, that they do not practice that
ant^^nt and laudable custom of teaching from house to house, whereby they might
do more good ^o Souls in one year, than perhaps they can do by public
Preaching in seven.

2. In respect of your selves, the effects of your religious care of your
Families will be g^^at. When the Inhabitants of your house become the Children
and Servants of the great King of H^aven, your Families will be happy
(...)ourable; the rich Blessings of the boun(...) God will be multiplied unto
them, as La(...) as blessed for Jacob's sake, and Potiphar (...)sephs. Moreover,
they will be more active, (...) and faithful in serving you, when they (...)m
their Duties in the fear of the Lord, (...)om a Principle of good Conscience.
Piety (...)ays the best Policy.

The Fruits of your religious Care will be (...), with respect to your Children
and Ser(...) themselves, both as to time and eter(...) Your holy care may be a
Mean to make (...) happy, both here and hereafter. You may (...)r^ments of
preventing and preserving (...) from many Miscarriages, Misfortunes and
(...)ies, which the want of good Education, (...) vicious course exposes them
to, and of (...)ying them from eternal Damnation.

(...) now, my Friends, what greater honor, (...)ess and comfort can you
desire, than (...) employ and signalize your selves, in (...)e honorable and
happy Instruments (...)orifying God, and of reforming both (...)h and Kingdom,
of promoting Religion, (...)eating the designs of Satan, of prevent(...) (...)d
removing much Wickedness, and (...)g many Souls to eternal happiness.

(...)efore zealously ply your work, and (...)ntly expect your Reward, from Him
(...)ath promised, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Them that (...) ^e, will I honor, etc. Dan.
12. 3. They (...) many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars, for ever and
ever, James 5. 20. He th^^ converteth a Sinner from the evil of his way, sh^^
save a Soul from Death, and shall hide a mult^tude of Sins, Psalm. 112. 6. The
righteous shall in everlasting remembrance, Mat. 25. 46. T^^ Righteous shall go
into Life eternal.

Let this encourage your diligence, that yo^^ satisfaction and comfort will be
great in th^^ life, your Memory will be sweet to Posteri^^ and your Reward will
be everlasting Glory.

Not withstanding all that has been sa^^ wicked Men and Hypocrites will be apt
(...) make several Objections, to excuse themselv^^ from this Noble and
Excellent Work; un^^ which I shall subjoin proper Answers, as (...) many
Arguments and Motives, to encoura^^ your Labor and excite your Diligence.

1 Object. If we should instruct our Famili^^ we may make them Hypocrites, we
cann^^ make them Christians; It Is God alone th^^ can change the Heart.

Answ. God ordinarily works by mea^ and bestows his Grace in the use of the
O^^dinances which he has appointed. VVhatev^^ God works in us or, for us, He
ordinar^ does by us, and with us; and what He promises to us as Blessings, he
requires of us as D^ties, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Ezekiel. 18. 31.

2 Object. The work is impossible, the case (...) desperate; wickedness is
become so univers^^ that it is folly to attempt a Reformation.

Answ. God and his Servants can do ^^ (...) Phil. 4. 13. God has promised his
ho(...)it to all those who ask him, Luke 11. 13. (...) a Spirit of Wisdom,
Couns^l and Power,(...) if you sincerely use the means of his Ap(...)meant, He
will guide you into all Truth, (...)ill help your Infirmities, he will
encourage (...) Hearts, direct your Judgments, and as(...) your Endeavors.

^ Object. We have not time nor leisure to (...)ct our Families every day, and
to call (...) to account, to pray with them, and read them, etc.

Answ. You will ^ind time to eat, drink, (...), and to enjoy your sensual
Pleasures, and (...) not to mind spiritual Pleasures, which are (...)e Noble?
You will ^ind time to die, and (...) be judged, and why not to prepare for the
(...)e?

Your only business in the world is to honor (...) glorify God, and to work
out your Salva(...); this is the one thing needful: ^f this be (...)glected,
all other business is to no purpose.

Be careful to Redeem your time from these (...) great Robbers, and you will
have leisure (...)ough for spiritual concerns: to wit, from, (...) Vain
Recreations, 2. Vain Discou^ses, 3. Vain (...)houghts, 4. Immoderate Sleepi^g,
Eating (...)d Drinking; and 5. Immoderate Care about (...)orldly Business.

There is nothing can hinder your minding (...) spiritual concerns of your
selves and Fami(...), but the Vanities of the World, or the Lusts of the
Flesh; and these ye have renounced in your Baptism, and vowed a perpetual War
against them; so that you are perjured if you suffer your selves to be
entangled an^ hindered by them, Mat. 16. 26. 1 Io. 2. 15, 16.

4 Object. It is below us to stoop to so mea^ an Office, as to teach Children
and Servant^ the first Principles of Religion; we can employ our selves more
Nobly in the Tavern or Alehouse, in playing at Cards, or conversing with our
Friends.

Answ. This is rather the Language of Practice, than of the Tongue.

Christ our Lord was of another mind, who went about doing good, and has left
us an Example that we should follow his steps. He took delight, and counted it
his Meat and his Drink, to do the Will of his heavenly Father; and so should
we, Prove. 11. 30. He that wins Souls, is wise.

Lewis IX. King of France, was found teaching a Kitchen-Boy: and being asked
why he stoopt to so mean an Office? he said, The meanest Child of Adam has as
precious a Soul as mine, and bought with the same precious Blood of Christ, and
must shine in Heaven, or fry in Hell for ever.

The first step to Christianity, is a profound humility. A proud Christian is a
painted Devil.

5 Object. We are ashamed to begin that Exercise, which we have often
intermitted, or long neglected.

Answ. If thou art ashamed to repent and (...)d, and to own Christ and his
Service, pre(...) thee to receive that Sentence, Depart from (...) ye workers
of Iniquity, Luke 13. ^7. Mark (...)8. Christ rejoiced to take our Nature^ that
(...) night die, to redeem us. We should re(...)to have our Nature renewed,
that we (...) become like him, and be made partakers (...) Salvation, 2 Cor. 5.
17. Romans 8. 9.

^ Object. We are wllling to set up the Worcester(...) of God, and to reform our
Families, but (...)e loath to begin yet; we would have (...) to show us the
way, and bring this Exer(...) into custom.

(...)sw. All Delays are dangerous, but here (...) are damnable, because
contrary to God's (...)mands, Heb. 3. 7, 8. 2 Cor. 6. 2. If you (...)se your
selves, and postpone, decline and (...) this great and necessary work, God may
(...) remove you out of the way, and raise up (...)rs, who may be Instruments
of a great and (...)ious Reformation, which you may never (...) the happiness
to see. For the glorious (...) will be glorified, and his holy Name shall
(...)llowed; and happy they who shall be in(...)ents of it. Let a holy Ambition
always (...)s your Souls, and covet that Honor (...) comes from God. If you
desire the (...) est Honor and Reward, do not decline (...)rdest Work.

^ Object. We shall be jeered and laughed (...) i^ we be singular, and differ
from our (...)ghbours.

Answ. Sober singularity, is safer than joint ^ ^mpiety. It is better to walk
alone in God'^ ^ way, than with company in the Devils. As the ^ world goes now,
none can get to Heaven, wh(...) go not contrary to its course. Let Ioshuah'^
Resolution be your Example, Ios. 24. 15. A^ for me and my House, we will serve
the Lord (...) Yea, the great God commands you to be singu^lar, Exodus 23. 2.
Thou shall not follow a multi^tude to do evil, Romans 12. 2. Be not conformed t^
this world. Yea, you need not be altogether^ singular; join Counsels with some
hones^ Neighbors, and encourage and assist one ano^ther.

8 Object. If we shall spend so much time a^bout Religions Matters as is
requisite to ac^complish these ends, we shall neglect our Em^ployments, lose
our Custom, and so becom^ Poor.

Answ. That is the suggestion of Satan, an^ the distrustfulness of thy corrupt
heart. God'^ Promises are a sure Portion, Mat. 6. 33. Luk^ 12. 31, 32. Psalm.
84. 11. Psalm. 37. 3.

Moderate your worldly Desires and sensu^^ Appeti^es; deny the extravagant
Cravings o^ your corrupt Nature, and be contented, if yo(...) have Food and
Raiment; then you are as ric(...) as you desire to be, and no Man is more.

If your greatest care be for the better part^ you will find by experience,
that a few thought^ of holy Faith, Hope and Trust, will save you (...) great
many thoughts, cares and fears for you ^emporal Life. Notice these Texts, Prove.
(...). 2, 3, 4, 22. Psalm. 34. 10, 22.

^ Object. If we shall addict our selves to a (...)ligious Life, then we shall
be dull, mopish (...) melancholy, and never have a joyful day (...) pleasant
hour.

Answ. Mistake not the Shadow for the Sub(...)ce; carnal Pleasures are
transient and vain, (...) spiritual Pleasures are satisfying and dura(...), Job
20. 5. The triumphing of the Wicked is (...), and the joy of the Hypocrite is
but for a (...)nt, Psalm. 37. 35, 36. You may read, Job (...) Job 20, Job 21.
Prove. 24. 20. how unsa(...)ing and uncertain the Pleasures of the (...)ed are.

^arthly Pleasures may for a season gratify (...) earthly part of us, the
Bodily Appetites, (...) they can never fill the unlimited D^sires of (...)
spiritual Substance the Soul, which those (...) have been under trouble of
Mind, do (...) by experience.

(...)deed, sensual and ^arthly-minded persons, (...)se Souls are dead, and
Consciences asleep, (...)seem to rejoice and be merry, when they (...) the
Objects of their Desires; but their (...) is both shallow and short, Prove. 14.
13. Even ^ughter the Heart is sorrowful, and the end (...)t Mirth is heaviness.

(...) is true, the Children of God may ^ave (...) sad and sorrowful hours,
before they be (...)ed of their Reconciliation with God; the (...) and sense of
their corrupt Nature, their sinful State and sinful Practices, their
estrangement from God, and the sense of his displeasure against sin, their
daily rebelling corruptions, and restless enemies, do cost them many Groans,
Sighs and Tears, much Sorrow and Lamentation; yet the end of that heaviness is
joy, Psalm. 30. 5. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

In the midst of all their Sorrows and Sufferings, the faithful Servants of God
can draw present Comfort, solid Joy, and spiritual Rejoicing, from these five
Springs which never fail.

1. From the Fountain of God's Bounty and Goodness, who gives to all Men
liberally.

They recounting the great Mercies and many Blessings which they enjoy, and
finding that they far exceed the Troubles they undergo, their hearts are filled
with Praise and Thanksgiving, whereby their Minds are eased, and their Souls
comforted, so that they can joyfully serve the God of their Mercies, even when
he seems to frown upon them, Job 1. 21. and 2. 10. and 13. 15.

2. They find the Spirit of God carrying on the work of Sanctification in their
Souls, in his ordinary method, first humbling the Soul, and breaking the heart,
exciting to Mourning, Contrition and Repentance, before he intimate Pardon and
Forgiveness. And they know, that he who is now a sancti^ier and worker of
grace, will e're long, appear to be a Comforter and (...)ne^s of grace, Mat. 5.
4. Psalm. 126. 5, 6. Romans (...)16. They know that the Penitent have (...)omise
of Pardon; and finding Repentance (...)rking in their Hearts, by their hatred
and (...)hing of sin; in hope of pardon of Sin, (...)ce with God, and
Inheritance among them (...)t are sanctified, they joy in the Lord, and
(...)oice in the God of their Salvation.

3. The Word of God assures them, that (...) are spiritual Pleasures
sufficient to fill the (...)res of the Soul, Io. 16. 24. 1 Io. 1. 4. Ps (...)
11. And their Spirits do experimentally (...)est this Truth; so that they are
filled with (...)oy and Peace in believin^ Romans 15. 13. and (...)glory even in
Tribul(...)n, Romans 5. 2, 3.

4. The Promises of God are an overflowing (...)ntain of Joy, Peace and Comfort
to all the (...)ithful. The Child of God esteems them (...)etious, and would
not part with them for (...) whole world, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Psalm. 110. 72.

These Promises do fully assure us, that Sor(...) and Mourning shall come to an
end, and (...) Joy, Peace and Comfort, shall succeed, and (...)ure for ever,
Io. 16. 20. Isaiah 51. 11. (...). 21. 4.

5. The Children of God do rejoice, and (...)re inward comfort in their Union
with (...)is it, and Conformity to him. Since he who their Head, did live here a
Life of Sorrows (...) Sufferings, and then entered into his Glo(...) they
rejoice to suffer with him, that they (...) be glorified together with him, 1
Pet. 4. (...). Romans 8. 17.

So you see, and you ought to believe, that if you sincerely love and serve
God, you may have solid Joy and continual Comfort from these five grounds: 1.
From God's love and goodness. 2. From the Workings and Witness of the glorious
Spirit. 3. From the Truth of God. 4. From his gracious Promises. And, 5. From
your interest in Christ, and likeness to him. Yea, Prayer and Meditation will
never fail to refresh the Soul, and cheer the heart.

So that it is your great mistake to think, that Religion yields no Pleasure,
but is a dull and Melancholy State; ^it is great ignorance and delusion, that
makes ^s ^en to think or speak so, contrary to God's Word, and his Childrens
Experience, Prove. 3. 17. All her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all his
paths are peace, Psalm. 34. 8. O taste, and see that God is good; blessed is the
Man that trusts in him, Psalm. 63. 5. My Soul shall be satisfied as with
Marrow and Fatness, and my Mouth shall praise thee with joyful Lips.

Yea, there is no true Pleasure in the world but in the ways of Religion,
because none else can satisfy the Soul. All earthly Pleasures are Brutish and
^it for the Body, that earthly part of us, and are common to us with the
Brutes, and which some of them enjoy in a larger measure than we do. Only
spiritual Pleasures are fit for spiritual Beings.

If this be your temper, that you take more pleasure in earthly Things and
bodily Concerns, than in Religious Exercises and the divine Promises: besure,
you are yet in your ^atural and sinful State, and cannot be sa^ed, till you be
renewed, regenerated and ^orn again, Romans 8. 5, 6, 7, 8, 13. Io. 3. 3.

10 Object. Our Consciences tell us, and we confess ingenuously, that the chief
cause o^ our Neglect of these Duties, is our Sloth and Lazi^ess, Prove. 15. 19.

Answ. This is as dangerous, deadly and ^mning a Sin as you can be guilty of,
and will ^ore slily and as effectually undo you, as the ^ost heinous Crimes,
Mat. 25. 26, 30. The ^thful and unprofitable Servant is condemned as ^ll as the
wicked, Prove. 18. 9.

Every omission of a Duty, is the commission ^f a Sin, Iam. 4. 17. Romans 12. 11.

Now, my Friends, I am persuaded, that ^^st of you will approve of, and assent
unto, that is here proposed; and you will own, that ^is every ones Duty and
Interest to help for^ard a Reformation. You do faintly wish, O ^at the world
were better! O that People ^ere more honest and faithful! O that my ^hildren
were good and tractable! O that my (...)vants were more honest and trusty! O
that ^eighbours were more kind and friendly! ^c. But Wishes are vain, where
E^deavour^ ^e wanting, Prove. 13. 4. Prove. 21. 25.

Therefore since your Judgment approves, and your Conscience consents, let not
your Will gainsay, and your Practice contradict. But agree with your self, be
all of one piece; let all the Faculties of your Soul and Powers of your Body,
be employed in carrying on one Design, to wit, the Glory and Honor of God, and
the eternal Happiness of Souls, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Phil. 2. 4.

Let not not this Paper be a witness against you, nor a mean to condemn you,
but rather a motive to excite you, and an instrument to persuade you.

Let your Conscience be so informed and exercised now, that you may not be
afraid nor ashamed of its Testimony at the day of Judgment.

Take heed to your selves, what Conscience you have,
For Conscience will damn, and Conscience will save.
A MEMORANDUM FOR Mothers, And those who expect to be so.
Honored and loving Friends,
YOU being reasonable Creatures, and called by the Noble Name of CHRISTIANS,
(...) supposed and taken for granted, that you (...) well informed in your
Judgment, and firm(...) persuaded in your Conscience, that the Glo(...)os and
Wise CREATOR of all things, has (...)ed and appointed you to bring forth, and
(...)g up Children for his Honor and Service, prepare Members of his Church on
Earth, (...) Partakers of his Glory in Heaven. And it (...) be thought, that
all of you are ambitious ^ this Honor, to be instrumental Causes of a (...)oly
Seed and Blessed Offspring, which may ^ake up the Church of Christ in the
world, and replenish Heaven with Saints, to shine in Glory, and celebrate the
Praises of the Eternal King.

I believe all of you are desirous of Dignity, and ambitious of Honor, and
here is Honor indeed, to be the Mothers and Nurses of little Angels, Children
of the most high, that may reign in Glory, and shin^ in Heaven for ever.

I believe none of you will say, that you are willing to gratify Satan to bring
forth and educate Children to be his Slaves, and Subjects of hi^ Kingdom; who
being Enemies to God and his Ways, may carry on the Devil's work in the world,
and then (...) tormented with him, and howl in Hell for ever.

Surely, you will not affirm, that you are willing to go to that place of
torment your selves, nor to have any of your Children so unhappy and miserable,
as to remain in the burning bottomless Pit to all Eternity.

And yet woeful Experience does plainly show, that many imprudent and fond
Parents (especially Mothers) are the greatest Enemies to their own Children,
and do further their Ruin and Misery more than the Devil, or any other Enemy
can do, by gratifying their sens^al Appetites, pleasing their foolish Fancies,
satisfying their unreasonable Desires, pampering their corrupt Nature,
encouraging them in Vanity and Folly, and perhaps by showing them bad Examples;
in a word, by giving them their own Will, and withholding from them that
^ecessary instruction and seasonable correction, which is requisite to the
renewing of their co^rup^ed Nature, and bringing them out of a (...)ate of Sin
and Vice, into a State of Holiness ^d Virtue. And by this means, they are
fit^ed for Satan's Service, and prepared to com^ly with most of his Temptations.

It is most certain, that neither the Devil nor ^e World, can tempt Children,
until they be ^apable of yielding and giving their consent. Now if the first
buddings of Vice and Wicked^ess springing from the Root of corrupt Na^^re, were
timely suppressed and removed, the Root would languish and decay, and Satan
^ould find nothing in them whereupon to fa^en his Temptations, Io. 14. 30. And
if the Seeds of true Knowledge, Piety and Virtue, ^ere timely and carefully
sown, and duly and diligently watered, the^ would be sufficiently ^^rnished
against his Assaults, and quali^ied to resist his greatest Temptations, Ephesians. 6.
11, 13.

Now since Children are born ignorant (though ^ot innocent) they must be taught
and in^^ructed, they must know their Duty before they can do it; And who can so
properly do this as Parents, especially you MOTHERS, who have the immediate
management of them i^ their Tender Age, who are oftenest with them, have
greatest influence upon them, and are most capable to oblige and prevail with
them. You who are the causes of their Being, are most obliged to contribute to
their wellbeing.

Quest. What Means shall we use? What Method shall we take?

Answ. 1. Being entered into a Married State, and having diligently and
faithfully acquainted your selves with the Duties incumbent upon you in that
State (which God's Word and other good Books do teach;) let your chief Design
be to honor and glorify God in that holy State which he has ordained. And by
humble Supplication beg his Blessing on the means of his own Appointment, that
your Seed and Offspring may be instruments of his Glory, and Subjects of his
Kingdom; And imitate holy Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 11. Dedicate unto the Lord what he
lends unto you; and pray that his Grace may sanctify and prepare it for his
Service.

2. When your Child is born, renew your Oblation, dedicate and offer it up to
God as a living Holy-Sacrifice, to be employed in his Service, to live to his
Honor, and to be under his Protection all the days of its life, Exodus 34. 19.

3. At the time of the Child's solemn and public Dedication or Christning,
instead of foolish Feasting, Flattering and Prattling, call together some
Christian Friends, who may join with you in praising God, for adding a new
Member to his Church, and for making you the happy instrument of it; and in
praying to God for the Preservation, Sanctification and Salvation of the Child.

4. If it be possible, carefully nurse the Child ^our self, and let it take its
Nourishment ^hence it derived its Substance, that it may be ^holly yours. You
may read your Duty in ^his particular, in Ier. Taylor's Doctrine con^^rning the
Virgin Mary's nursing the Holy Child Jesus, in his Book called, The great
Examplar. And in the Section concerning Wives, in the Book called, The Ladies
Calling.

5. When the dawnings of Reason appears, ^^d Nature begins to show it self in
the Child, ^^en bestir your self, and apply great care and ^iligence in Prayer
and Pains, to have the cor^apt Nature rectified, the Image of Satan re^oved,
and the divine Nature and Image of God renewed in it.

Quest. Are Children destitute of God's (...)age, and a new Nature?

Answ. Yes; All the Posterity of Rebelliou^ Adam, are guilty and polluted, void
of good, (...)d full of evil, Psalm. 51. 5. They are shapen in ^quity and
conceived in sin, Job. 14. 4. They are (...)clean branches of a corrupt root,
Jo. 3. 6. That ^^ich is born of the flesh, is flesh; that is, unholy ^^d
corrupt, Romans 8. 8. They that are in the ^lesh, cannot please God, because they
are not (...)ke him, they are not pure and holy.

You find, Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24. that the ^^age of God consists in Knowledge,
Righte^sness and true Holiness.

Now you see, that Children are altogether ^estitute of these Qualifications,
and are very averse and backward to learn or acquire them, which Teachers of
Youth find by experience.

Quest. Have Children the Image of Satan, and a corrupt Nature?

Answ. Yes; All Adam's Posterity are not only destitute of Righteousness, but
inclined to all iniquity, Genesis 6. 5.

A Subject capable of two contrary Qualities, must have one of them; the Air
must be either dark or light, Wax must be either hard or soft. The Heart of
Mankind must be either good and holy, or else bad and wicked, it must be either
for God or against him.

Now God's Word tells us, Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, and
is no^ subject to his Law. And indeed no worse can^ be in the Devil, than
Enmity against God, and Rebellion against his Laws. We are not only Strangers,
but Enemies to God, Psalm. 58. 3. Romans 5. 10.

But the depraved and corrupted Nature in Children, appears in several
particulars.

1. They are altogether ignorant and destitute of Knowledge, a thick cloud of
darkness overspreads their Understanding, Ephesians. 4. 18. They are wholly
unacquainted with the natural as well as the positive Law of God, and unwilling
to use means, or take pains to know the same.

2. Pride and Self-conceit appears very early in them; they love to be
flattered, to be called good and pretty; they are apt to value (...)emselves
upon account of their great or rich (...)ents, their fine Ornaments or gay
Cloath^ etc. Now Pride is said to be the first sin (...)he Devil, and is most
contrary to the na(...)e of God, and abominable in his sight, (...) Pet. 5. 5.

3. All know how Children are generally in^ined to Lying, Dissimulation and
Falsehood, (...)ich plainly shows, that they have too much (...) the Nature and
Image of him who is the (...)there of Lies, Io. 8. 44.

4. All their Passions and Affections are cor^pted and distempered, and far
from that (...)nd, which was in the Lord Jesus, and must (...) in every
Disciple of his, before they can (...) saved, Phil. 2. 5. Io. 3. 3. Mat. 18.
How (...)ward are Children to Anger, Hatred, Ma^e, Envy, Revenge, Quarreling,
Fighting, (...)enging themselves on those that wrong (...)m, domineering over
those they can Con^er? How much are they inclined to sensual (...)tish
Pleasures, Vanity, Folly and Trifling? (...)w prone are they to Fretting,
Murmuring, (...)ishness and Discontent, if their Humors (...) not pleased, and
their Appetites satisfied? (...) these are plain indications, that their name
is wholly Evil, and directly contrary to (...) innocent, patient, meek, humble
and holy (...)ure, which appeared in our Lord Jesus (...)rist, Mat. 11. 29. 1
Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23.

5. That Faculty the Will, is basely (...)rupted and and depraved, which
plainly appears in Children, by their Stubbornness, Perverseness, Wilfulness,
Untractableness, Unplyableness and Disobedience. If Childrens Will were not
restrained by something without them, they would soon run into Ruin.

6. Their Memory (that Treasury of the Soul,) is corrupted and vitiated. How
soon do they forget good Instructions, Admonitions and Advices; yea, their own
Promises and Resolutions? How apt are they to remember Trifles, Folly, Play and
Vanity?

7. Their continuing in this black and miserable State, when they come to
years, their willingness to squander away time in idleness, play or wickedness,
and their backwardness to go to School, to yield or hearken to the instructions
of Parents and Teachers; their unwillingness to go to Church, and their
unattentiveness there, does plainly declare, That they are not only under the
dominion of Sin and Satan, but that they are willing Slaves to that ^oul
Spirit; and delight to do the Devil's Drudgery, rather than to serve the high
and holy God in Spirit and Truth.

Does not all this show, that Children have need of early Care and diligent
Education?

Now if you, Parents, patiently permit them to run on in their natural Course,
and do not timely and diligently use means to convert and reclaim them, you
consent to their Sin and Wickedness, and declare your willingness, tha^ they be
miserable for ever. But if you en^ourage them in their Vices, and smile upon
(...)eir Follies; if you feed their Lusts and please (...)eir Humors, if you
give them their Will (...)nd approve their Cunning, if you pamper and (...)eck
their Bodies, put Money in their Pockets, and (...)ovide Portions for them, to
feed their sensual (...)esires; then you forward their Damnation, (...)ou side
with Satan to make them miserable, (...)d you put Weapons in their hands,
whereby (...)ey may rebel against the King of Heaven.

Though you do not think this, nor believe it (...)hen it is told you, yet your
Practice speaks it, (...)d the Event often declares it. And it is not
(...)obable, that you can be acquitted, when you (...)tribute so much to the
condemnation of (...)ur Children.

Many of you complain much of your Chil^ens Ignorance, Negligence, Idleness,
Diso(...)dience and Extravangancy. Truly, when I (...)sider their Education, I
nothing wonder (...)t they walk in the way which they have (...)en accustomed
to, and obey that Master whose (...)ice they love best, Ier. 13. 23. Io. 8. 44.

If your Children prove your cross and af(...)tion, blame your selves, who are
the prin(...)al Causes, by neglecting timely Instruction (...) prudent
Correction, and perhaps by gi(...)g them bad Example. And if you smart (...)der
the Rod of your own preparing and (...)serving, do not complain, but seriously
re(...)t and speedily amend.

For as you are the Causes of your Childrens Being, so should you be of their
Well-being; as you contribute to their natural life, so should you to their
spiritual: As God has made them yours by natural Generation, so should you
endeavor to make them his by virtuous and religious Education. They are a
Trust committed to your Charge by our heavenly Father, who will surely call you
to account.

As for you, whose Children have more Years than Virtue, and do follow their
own Will more than the Will of God, I leave you to the advice of Spiritual
Guides, or Civil Magistrates, according to the Command, Deuteronomy. 21. 18.

But as for you who have, or may have young Children, be careful to observe
these Rules, and you may easily rule them, and reap good Fruit and Comfort for
your Labor.

1. Speak Truth and no Lies to your Children; that is, whatever you teach them,
see that you practice it your selves; otherwise they will not believe that you
are in earnest, nor listen to your Dictates. Few words will suffice, where
there is a continual good Example. Therefore let every Christian Duty as well
as Moral Virtue, be your daily Practice.

2. Love your Children prudently, and do not hate them effectually. Fond and
foolish love, proves to be the greatest hatred, Prove. 13. 24.

Away with that fond and foolish, hurtful and childish Flattering, Hugging,
Caressing and Dandling of Children, that is usual, which lessens your
Authority, tickles their Fancy, and feeds their Folly. Make not Idols of your
Children; they are God's gifts, make them not his Rivals; set them not up in
his Throne, lest he pull them down, and punish you, either by taking them from
you, or making them your cross and scourge. Therefore love your Children
piously, and let the Fruits and Effects of it, appear in promoting their
spiritual Good.

3. Feed, but do not poison your Children. God has given them sive Senses, but
has left it to you to regulate the Objects. Let them neither see nor hear any
thing, that may corrupt their Mind or Fancy. Do not poison their Eyes with
seeing any base, wicked or foolish Action, till they be fortified against it,
and capable to reprove and abhor it. Do not poison their Ears with hearing any
wicked, vain or idle words, till they be able to tes^i^ie against them, and
r^buke the Tongue that speaks them. For Children are capable to think as soon
as to see, and to form Idea's as soon as to hearken. They are capable to
remember, before they can judge or determine. Therefore let them hear none
speak, who have not learned the Language of Canaan; and let them converse with
none, but those who are acquainted with the Lord Jesus, and can help to make
them so.

Let the Streets and Public Places be an abomination unto them, until Holiness
to the Lord be written on the Foreheads of all who walk there.

4. Seasonably and gently bow their IronSinew, before it become too strong;
that is, make their Will pliable. Teach them to be denied, and to deny
themselves: Let them not know, that you give them their Will in any thing:
Humor them not in any thing they cry for: And let them have what is fit at
another time, rather than when they call for it. If you let them have their own
Will, they will soon torment you, and ruin themselves. An unbridled Will,
makes an ungovernable Person. But when you have effectually and prudently
brought the Will into good subjection and order, more than the half of your
work is done.

5. Throw water on their Wild Fire, that is, let not Passions prevail: Let
Frowns, Rebukes and Rods, curb, restrain and suppress their immoderate Passions
and irregular Desires: Let Discipline chastise and keep in order these Wild
Beasts, till Reason be able to tame them: Let them know by your Countenance and
Behavior, that Patience, Meekness and Sobriety, are lovely and commendable
Virtues.

Beware of giving bad Example here.

6. Regulate their Diet; nourish their Bodies, but do not pamper them: Let them
know that Temperance is a Virtue, and that Fasting is Physic: Let their Food
be course and plain, for Strength and Nourishment, not for pleasing the sensual
Appetite: And as soon as possible, let them gain their Bread by the Sweat of
their Brow, according the Command, Genesis 3. 19. 2 These. 3. 10.

7. Moderate their Apparel, and do not feed their ^ide: Adorn their Minds
before you deck their Bodies: ^^ch them the use of ^loaching, and let Gaudiness
be (...) Abomination to them: Suffer them not to be proud (...) that which
covers their Shame.

8. Moderate their Recreations; let them never be ^e, and let every thing they
do be useful and instructive, ^^pen their Reason and inform their Judgment.

9. When they are capable of being instructed, then ^ch them first by the Ear,
before you make a Book ^ir Burden: Let them have a good Treasure of sound (...)
useful Truths in their Memory, and be able to answer ^any Questions, before you
^ix their Eyes upon a let^ (...) And that ye may build them high in Faith and
Ho^^ss, be careful to lay a sure and solid Foundation: (...) therefore, let
Humility be the first Virtue that you ^^t in them. And for this end, make them
acquaint^ ^ith themselves: Let them know, That they are (...) degenerate
Offspring o^ sinful Adam; show them the ^^ption of their Nature in all the
parts of it; what (...) ought to have been, and what they are in their cor^ed
State. Make known to them the Purity and Ho^^ss of God's Nature and Law, and
that every sin is an ^ence against God, and a Transgression of his Law: (...)
them the Evil of Sin, and the dreadful consequents (...), that every Sin
deserves Death and Damnation, and (...) this is due to them, because they are
Sinners, guilty (...) unclean Creatures, Enemies to God by nature, and ^^els
against his just and holy Laws: Let them know, ^t whatever good they receive
and enjoy, is purely (...) God's Free Grace and Bounty, and not of their own
^^^ving; and that it is of God's great Mercy, Patience (...) Long-suffering,
that they are not thrown into Hell ^ady.

10. When you have thus awakened their Minds, con^^ed their Judgments, humbled
their Hearts, and sof^^ their Spirits, then ^ou may make known to them, (...)
Lord Jesus Christ, the only Savior, his Person, his ^^ures, Mediation and
Offices, and what way he is given for Mankind, offered unto them, and must be
received by them, in order to their Reconciliation with God: Show them the
Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace, and the Method and Terms of Salvation, and
what is the nature and extent of that Holiness, which is absolutely necessary
to fit them for Glory and Happiness, Heb. 12. 14.

Teach them to understand the Person, the Offices, the Dictates, Motions and
Operations of the Holy Ghost the Sanctifier and Comforter.

Teach them to understand the nature and manner of the Temptations of their
spiritual Enemies, and how to resist and overcome them.

Make them acquainted with the Doctrine and Duty of Prayer; and oblige them to
pray by themselves, not by a formal repeating of Words, but expressing the
humble and hearty desires of their Souls, from a sense of their own wants of
God's Goodness and gracious Promises, of Christ's Merits and Mediation, and of
the Holy Spirit's Assistance and Intercession; and teach them to trust in God,
and wait for a return of their Prayers; and in every thing to be thankful to
him. Particularly teach them to believe in, to prize, esteem and love the Lord
Jesus Christ, as the Fountain and Foundation of all the Blessings and Benefits
which they enjoy and expect, Io. 14. 6. and that they are bound in Covenant
with him by their Baptism.

11. Being thus instructed and prepared, it will be easy for you to teach them
to Read; and to understand the Word Preached, for their further Edification,
and to inform their Judgment, and excite their Practice in all the Parts of
Public Worship. And when they are examined and approved by the Governors of
the Church, they may be admitted to renew their Covenant with God publicly and
solemnly at the Lord's Table.

12. When they are thus prepared, fenced and fortified, by the pious care and
faithful diligence of Parents, and especially of you MOTHERS, then may they go
abroad, and be sent to School to learn Languages, Arts and Sciences, and such
Accomplishments as are requisite and useful for them; which they will easily
attain to, (...) the Mind is so enlightened in the Knowledge of (...)

^ there I shall leave them to the Conduct of faith^^chers: But do not you
leave them, while life lasts. (...) However you may be pleased with your
Childrens ^^^^dings, yet never flatter them; never commend (...), till they
really deserve it: Never call them good, (...) be effectually so; tell them
that Perfection is (...) Duty, and that yet they are far from it, but must
^^rance to higher degrees of Grace and Holiness.

Now, MOTHERS, these are some hints of that (...) you ought to do for the
Sanctification and Salva^ of your Children. This is no matter of indifferency,
(...) your indispensable Duty, ( Prove. 1. 8. and 6. 20.) ^^^ore neglect it not;
it cannot be done in a short time, (...) little pains, therefore delay it not;
but begin (...), and proceed diligently; and endeavor to obtain (...) Honor
of being the happy Instruments of a glori^^^ Reformation in England; and may
all your endea^^^^ be crowned with happy Success.

(...) It is not good to burden Children, and break (...) Spirits with too
much Religion; it raises Prejudi^^^ in them, and gives them false Notions and
apprehen^^ of God and Religion.

(...) Surely, this Language proceeds from the Devil this greatest Instruments,
because it is so directly con^y to the Dictates of God's holy Spirit, Prove. 22.
6. (...) a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old, (...) depart from
it, Eccl. 12. 1. Remember thy Grea^^ the days of thy Youth, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Timothy i^ ^^mended for knowing the Holy Scriptures from a (...), whereby he
was made wise unto Salvation.

(...). We have not leisure to take all this care and (...) upon our Children.

(...). You find leisure to beger, nurse, feed and cloth (...); to take care
of the Body; and will you neglect (...) Soul? He who gives you time, and all
that you en(...) appoints you this Work, and will reward you ac^^ing to your
management of it. Therefore let nothing be a hindrance now, which cannot excuse
you at that ^ of Account. Yea, let compassion to the Fruit of your ^ dies, be a
forcible motive to excite your diligent ^ zealous endeavor, for its
Sanctification and Salvat ^ And when you have done your utmost, still
acknowle^^^ your selves unprofitabls Servants, and that all you'^ done, is to
no purpose, without the sanctifying Grace (...) the HolySpirit. Therefore
continue your earnest Sup^cations to the good and gracious God, the giver of
ev^ good Gift, that he would give his Holy Spirit, to m^ your Labors
successful and effectual; and the Rig^ousness of his beloved Son, to make your
Endeavour^ (...) ceptable with him. Therefore, though you ought, and (...)
obliged to use every Mean of his Appointment, yet (...) to no Mean, rely upon
none of your Performances, (...) all your dependence be upon the Lord Jesus
Christ; beg the Spirit of Christ for your Assistance, and the (...) rits of
Christ for your Acceptance: And in every the give Thanks and Praise to God the
Father, Son (...) Holy Ghost.

FINIS.

