Mr. FITZ-HARRIS (Now Prisoner in the Tower) His CASE truly stated; Humbly
offered to the Freeholders of England, why he ought to be tried by a Jury of
his Neighbors, and not by the House of Peers; In a Letter to Mr. C. L.C. F.S.
and B.H.
Greeting.
What a noise is this you Politicians make sipping and smoking at
Coffce-Houses? Cannot our Capitol be otherwise saved, but by such Geese as you?
Forsooth, now you have got somewhat by the end; Now you want not for something
to fling in the teeth of Government; now you are pleased, What! the House of
Lords you say, has rejected the Impeachment against Fitz Harris; This is your
Monstr' horrend' inform' ingens, etc! Realy, it is pretty such fine Fellows as
you should thus judge and censure what you no more understand, than a Cuckoe
making a Cabinet. But a Fools Bolt is soon shot; whither will Design, Envy,
Malice and Impudence run! you think (I warrant you) the House of Lords is like
a Club at a Tavern or such Vermin as you at a Coffee house. But why so fast?
Consider on it. By the Common Law, by Magna Charta. and by 37 other several
Acts of Parliament confirming, and c no man is to be tried but by his Peers.
All Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and Barons of the Lords House of
Parliam. in respect of their Nobility, be Peers amongst themselves. And they,
and any of their Dutchesses etc. be always, in Case of life and Member, to be
tried by the rest of them and not by Commoners, And all others beneath them be
Commoners and Peers amongst themselves, and to be tried by these Peers of
theirs, but not by any of the said Lords. Only the Lords, the Bishops if
Parliament sit, be tried by the said Lords, else the Commoners. Consider your
privileges in this. A Commoner when he comes to be questioned for his life, is
tried by his Neighbors and 'acquaintance; these probaby knowing most of the
Fact of the person accused, and of the witnesses etc. those he can speak to
etc. those which are not so much above him as to esteem too little of his life
etc. those he knows whether fair, indifferent, and good men for him to be tried
by; By a Jury that he may purge, except against and choose 20. and in some
Cases 35. out of [that he likes not] without showing any the least cause why;
and always as many more as he will, if he can show any cause. He is to be tried
by Judges on their Oaths, and by the Jury all on their Oaths, even by two
Juries all several persons on their several Oaths. He is to be tried according
to the Common Law and Statutes. If his Judges or Jury err against him, they are
punishable. But in that Trial before the Lords, is not so so much as one Jury;
unless you call H. of Commons that one. No exceptions can be made against any
of the Triers, though never so great cause. None of the Judges nor others be
here on their Oaths. The Triers, etc. be not Neighhours, etc. but almost all
perfect Strangers, etc. the Trial is per leg. and consuetud. Parliamenti,
unknown to others; so most proper for themselves, or at least, for Offenders in
Parliament; as matters arising in War by a Court Marshal. If any err against
one in his Trial, never so grossly, where is the remedy? In short, Gentlemen, He
that understands a Trial by Juries, will never part with, wave, or
discountenance it; he that is for any other, is against it. Why should I wish
another that Trial I wish not my self, if in his circumstances? Why should I
press for that other Trial before the Lords, in stead of this? Why should I
seek to bring such Trial in practice or so much as consent to such a President
of their changing the Trial? No man knows the consequences. Persons and Times
may alter: there may come as bad a H. of Commons as ever did a good one.
Presidents are no little authentic in Law, no little dangerous. Against this
Trial by Jury, was once an unhappy Act, 11 H. 7. c. 3. That Justices of Assizes
or Justices of Peace should (without any. Verdict of Twelve men upon
Information before them, have full power of hearing and determining all
Offenses, etc. But says Lord Cook, by Color of this Act shaking the
Fundamental Law of Juries, it is incredible what horrid oppressions, exactions,
etc. to the utter undoing of infinite numbers of people were committed. And
experience soon taught the Parliament, 1 H. 8. c. 6. to repeal it. Are
Parliaments always out of heats? etc. or free of mistakes? Who are? What is
infallible, any thing but the Deity? Was not there a Subject of this very
Kingdom committed to the Tower, and though ready and desirous to be heard, yet
judged and attainted by Parliament, without ever being heard or sent for, Rot.
Parl. 32 H. 8. If a whole Parliament be subject to failings, etc. much more
part of it. Why then so fond and mad of Trials in Parliament? Thus, seeing your
Right is Trial by Juries, what Law is there to take away, dispense with, etc.
this Trial by Jury? That which is either Common Law or Statute Law, cannot be
altered without an express Statute, Co. L. 115. But where is there any such
Statute for enabling the Commons to impeach, etc. any Commoner, or the Lords to
try any person of Life and Death, but the Lords own Peers? Oh but the H. of
Com. is the Grand Jury of the Nation the Inquisitors General, the Guardians of
the Kingdom the Representatives of the People, all the Commonalty, all that by
such Trial can possibly suffer. [fine words!] And so if they consent, the
person offended consents in Law, in as much as his Representative consents; and
consent takes away the error. Truly this is fine, something it seems may be
said for any thing. But if choosing, the House of Commons do implicitly empower
it to do some things, must it therefore all things? I choose Arbitrators, or
make a Letter of Attorney to one, he can do no more than what is expressly
mentioned for him to do; nor can he do that otherwise than expressed. But this
is too large a Subject at this time, only this, I cannot any ways empower any
one to do any thing which is not according to Law; so neither can my choice of
Parliament men enable them to do any thing but according to Law; any other
Power is void in Law, absolutely void. The power given Parliament men is the
weaker also, in as much as so general, and only implicit; and therefore to be
construed strictly. Thus, How have they power in this case to consent for me?
Nay, Do not you say your selves, that several Acts of Parliament [the King,
Lords, and Commons] are not binding, in as much as against the Fundamental Laws
of the Kingdom, against Magna Charta, etc. Then why the single Account of the
House of Commons so potent and strong, etc. The truth plainly is, it is more or
less strong, as more or less suits your humor. Oh, but say you, this is the
Law in Parliament, the Lex and Consuetudo. You will not grant the King, House
of Lords, or any private person can call any Commoners life into question
before the Lords, without the consent and approbation of the House of Commons;
then how will you reason in Law, that the House of Commons may? Give me one
sound honest reason for the difference. But if by seeking to bind the House of
Lords to retain and judge a Commoner upon an Impeachment from the House of
Commons, you introduce or warrant the King, House of Lords, or any private
persons to do it, or the like. Where are you then? The same R^ason, the same
Law, is a Maxim never fails. But for the People of England, be it said
anciently the Lords never gave Judgment of Life or Death upon any but their
Peers. This with little Oil and Sand might easily be made out from the Rolls in
the Lords House; a Commoner was in these cases out of the Jurisdiction of their
Court. I know of one opinion against this, but no matter, it alters not the
Law, About Edw. 2. and Edw. 3. it was somewhat disputed as now; and in Simon de
Beryfords case, the Lords being mightily importuned to give judgment against
him, refused a considerable time, alleging he was a Commoner, and they were
not bound to give Judgment of Life and Death on him; but at length did, upon an
Act of King, Lords, and Commons, passing that this should not be drawn into
president.

The Act is Rot. Parl. 4. Edw 3. n. 6. to this effect; It is enacted, That
albeit the Lords and Peers of the Realm, as Judges of Parliament, in the Kings
presence had taken upon them to give judgment in case of Treason or Felony,
against such as were not their Peers, That hereafter no Peer shall be driven to
give Judgment on any other but their Peers, according to Law.

Note, the words [according to Law] show the Law was so before, The words the
[the Kings presence] are mentioned because the Kings assent was anciently as
the Commons demand seems yet necessary in the Lords judging any Capital crimes;
Besides should the Lords, be bound to judge all men Impeached before them, it
might be made ill use of, an Artifice sometimes to divert etc. them; Nor seems
it fit and becoming the honor and dignity of that House that it should stoop
to trouble themselves with trying every inconsiderable Fellow for every Treason
and felony that may happen, though perhaps to a shilling or farthing value
which yet they are as well bound to do, as try Fitz-Harris, let his Crimes be
what they will, (I shall not judge them before he is heard, and Witnesses at
his Trial.) By this means too, the great business of the Nation, that of the
Parliament might be fettered, delayed, obstructed, etc. when yet the Trial
might be as Well if not better, as aforesaid, by and before others; The Lords,
as to the practice also, have accordingly, several times before, done the like
as they did now, They referred the Trial of one so impeached to another Court
since the Kings happy restoration. Oh, but say you, Why should the Lords make
use of this Privilege now, when oftentimes they have done otherwise,
notwithstanding the said Act, etc. Truly sometimes they must use their Liberty
of refusing such Trials else lose it, both to their own and our danger; when
better than now? Especially, since you seem so hotly to deny it already; since
their was so much, such extraordinary and so far greater and more earnest
pressing business before them and for them to do; and since had the Lords, as
you say, retained the impeachment, Fitz-Harris could not have been Tried till
the leisure and pleasure of the House of Commons were it should be so; If he
should have never been tried, he could never be brought to Justice. But no
question the House of Commons were zealous for his speedy Trial, and Death if
deserved, and would have made a vigorous prosecution; else it were an ingenious
way of new found pardoning, There is some small difference sure, between
denying Justice to be done at all and between leaving or Commanding it to be
done by other Courts, as the House of Lords did in this case; There is some
small difference also between Courts that ought to do other, and but for
necessity (if ever) such things as these: and other Courts that ought to do
such things as these only; and whose only end and business these things and
Trials be. Oh, but no other Court can try this now, there is a Vote of the
House of Commons against it. It is true, but is their Vote any Law. any
Judgment, any Record, any matter or thing in Law, more than the noise of
Thunder last Midsummer is to us now? If it would be ever so much as taken
notice of, it was only during the same Sessions, and is now become abortive,
and so as if never had been. He that holds contrary, endeavors by it,
altering, etc. the Government. Whereas nothing in our Government is binding but
Common Law, or other, from King, Lords, and Commons, nor ought to have mere
influence than what only good manners allows.

Mr. Smith, You in your Commentaries say, All prosecution at the Suit of the
King must stop, till that of a private Person be determined. Good now, Did you
ever consider it before? Is it not diametrically otherwise in all Civil Causes
undoubtedly? And that it is so altogether, I must tell you there are plenty of
Authorities better than yours. As for a taste: Albeit the Judges finding
Appeals were usually prosecuted more effectually than Indictments, would
therefore endeavor that all Parties might be tried on Appeals, and so would
sometimes stop the Indictment (which is the Kings Suit) to rather try on the
Appeal (which is the Suit of a private person;) yet if they were informed the
Evidence were clear, etc. they would always proceed at the Kings Suit, and
never stay for the Suit of the Patry: 7 H 4. 35. 21 H. 6. 28, 29. 38. Or rather
than the Kings Suit should be long delayed, as if on Infant brought an Appeal,
now, because it could not be tried till he came at Age, they will Indict the
Party, etc. and immediately try him again for it, 21 Edw. 3. 23. tit' Age in
Fitzh. 57. in tit' Coron. in Fitzh. 278. Anno 13 H. 6. and ibid. pl. 279. Anno
32 H. 6. Let the Appeal of what person soever, and whenever depend, yet that
the Judges might immediately try the Offender at the Kings Suit, I would is 16
E. 4. 1 Coron, Fitzh. 469. Anno 8 H. 5. and so were several others tried, tin'
conspir. Fitzh. H. 6. and tit' coron' Fitzh. 82. and 7 H. 4. 35. b.

Thus may we see how justifiable the Lords were in what they did; how generous
in preserving our Rights of Trial by our Peers; how much worthy more of our
grateful acknowledgments than misunderstandings; how we ought maturely to
consider all things before we judge; and how we may unjustly err in our
Opinions before we rightly understand all circumstances and reasons of the
matter we presume to give our opinion of. Therefore ought we to meddle with
nothing but what is within our own Sphere and capacity; and that neither, but
when free of Passion and Prejudice.

Cum multis aliis quae nunc perscribere longum est.
Printed for John Smith in Great Queen Street. 1681.


