THE GOOD PATRIOT Set forth in the Example of the Publick-Spirited CENTURION,
In a Sermon Preached in the Gray-Friar Church of EDINBURGH, On the first Monday
of June 1683, being the Day ordinarily Observed for the Anniversary
Commemoration of George Herriot, The Religious Founder of the Hospital called
after his Name Herriots Hospital.

Ruth 4.11. And the Elders said to Boaz, do thou Worthily in Ephrata, and be
Famous in Bethlehem. Esther 10.3. For Mordecai -- was accepted of the Multitude
of his Brethren, seeking the Wealth of his People, and speaking Peace to all
his Seed. Nihil habet nec Fortuna tua Majus quam ut possis, nec Natura tua
maelius quam ut conservare velis quam plurimos. Cicero de Caesare. Quae est
melior in hominum genere Natura, quam eorum qui se Natos ad homines juvandos,
tutandos, conservandos, Arbitrantur. Cicero Tuscul: Quaest: lib: 1. EDINBURGH,
Printed by John (...) at his Printing house in Bells-Wynd, 1694.

TO The Right Honorable SIR JOHN HALL Of DUNGLASSE, Baronet, Lord Provost of
EDINBURGH, President, And to the much Honored the Other COMMISSIONERS
Representing the State of the ROYAL BUROUGHS now Assembled in CONVENTION; HUGH
BLAIR Dean of Guild, Commissioners for Edinburgh. ALEXANDER THOMSON Conv^^ner,
Commissioners for Edinburgh. JAMES CREE, for Perth. JAMES FLETCHER, for Dundee.
JOHN DICK, for Stirling. JEREMIAH HUNTER, for Li^^^gow. JAMES SMITH, for St.
Andrews. JOHN ANDERSON, for Glasgow. HUGH CRAFOURD, for Air. JOHN MILLER, for
Kirkoaldie. ROBERT ARBUTHNET, for M^^^^^se. Sir ARCHIBALD MURE, of Thorntown,
late L. Provost of EDINBVRGH, Comm^ss^^n^rr for Comp^^. ROBERT JOHNSTCUN, for
Tumfrice. JAMES DUNBAR. for Inverness. ALEXANDER SPITTEL for I^^erk^^king.
ROBERT BRUCE for Kingborn. ALEXANDER YOUNG for Bric^en. WALTER SCOT for
Jedburgh. JAMES COOK for Pittenw^^m. JOHN CHALMERS for Dunfermling. JAMES
MITCHELHILL for Selkirk. Mr. JAMES SMALLET for Dunbartoun. ROBERT KELLIE for
Dumbar. PATRICK STEVINE for Arbrothick? WILLIAM CRAFOURD for Cryle. PATRICK
RUSSEL for Bamff. ALEXANDER JAFIREY for Forfar. JOHN HOOM for Northberwick.
CHARLES LAUDER for Lauder. HUGH BROUN for Innerara. Mr. JOHN BVCHAN Agent for
the Royal Buroughs. Mr. AENEAS MACLEOID Clerk to the City of Edinburgh, And to
the Present Meeting.
And to the Rest of the Members Assistants in the said Honorable Convention.
IT was an ingenious Conceit of the Painter, how likely soever he was by some
Masterpiece of his Art to render himself Famous to Posserity, yet to indent
his own Image in Minerva's picture; knowing the Veneration universally paid
the Goddess, might conduce to the preservation of his Memory. I have in some
degree transcribed this Practice, when I prefix the Names of so many Worthy Men
to this Treatise, and though I could not consult better for my own Reputation,
or the General Acceptance of the Discourse, then by Dedicating it to so
Illustrious a Society; Yet I dare truly Aver the true Esteem I have of the
Royal Buroughs, and A^^ectionat Concern for their Interest, has induced me to
lay hold on this Opportunity, to testify the same to the World.

And what Honest Country Man that wishes well to the Honor and Felicity of the
Nation, can be otherwise inclined toward so deserving and considerable a part
of it: With whose Fortune the Rest of the Kingdom most either stand or fall;
For what ever of Riches or Reputation the Nation can have, must be Attributed
to the Care and Diligence of the Royal Buroughs.

The Towns you Represent, are not only the Seats of Trade and Commerce, but
likewise, some of them are the Fountains of Breeding, the Seminaries of
Learning to the Young Nobility and Gentry, the Springs of good Manners and
Laudable Customs to the adjacent Parts: Nay the meanest of them are Repaired
to, less or more by the Neighboring places, for Training up their Children: So
that it is to the good Order and Discipline which a Vigilant Magistracy causes
be observed in them; We owe that our Youth are polished in any part of Civil
Education, Refined from the Dreggs of a Rural life, and preserved from
Wickedness and Immortality.

The Royal Buroughs are these Planets which by their Light and Influence
dispose the other parts of the Nation to a happy eultivation. They are those
Fountains which convey Water to Fertilize all about them, And I am sure the
Husbandmans labor would fail, and the Landlords Revenue too, if the purses of
Citizens were not a spurr to the One, and a Seasonable Supply many a time to
the Other. I may safely allude to that Apologue of Menenlus Agrippa, and say
that the Royal Buroughs are the stomach of the Nation, which digest and
distribute whatever of Wealth or necessary commodity is by the care and
Industry of Traffiquers imported to it, for the common benefit of the Kingdom,
without whose Care and Prudent Mannagry, the other parts of the Body politic,
the Head and Arms, the Ribbs, and Legs, that is the Sovereign and Nobles, the
Gentry and Commons, would Famish, and become unfit for Action or Motion.

Is it not to the Royal Buroughs we owe the improvement of Arts, the
Advancement of Trade, the Increase of Wealth, the Education of Youth, the
Encouragement of Industry? And whatsoever else can conduce to the Prosperity
and Plenty of the Nation. Hence it comes These deserve the Name of Patriots
best, who Be-friend the Interest of the Royal Buroughs most. Nor can there be
any Enemies to them, but such as are unnatural sworn Adversaries to their
Country, and envy its Flourishing in Happiness and Renown.

I doubt not but you consider and lay to heart, that not only the Civil and
Politic, but likewise the Moral and Spiritual concerns of the Kingdom, are a
great part of your Province. The Providence of GOD which has raised you to move
in a higher Orb in the Buroughs you reside in, and you now represent in this
Honorable Convention, Oblieges you by your Creditable Stations to be Patrons
of Piety and Virtue, as well as of Industry and Trade: Your Example in the
Honorable Sphere you now move in, is no less instrumental to promote the One
than the Other. Certainly the circumspect Religious Deportment of Magistrates in
their several precincts, would conduce extremely to beget a love to Piety in
those under their Charge, and would contribute to work a great Reformation in
the adjacent parts of the Country, from which there is such frequent Repair to
Towns, and often converse with Citizens: By which those who resort to them
would be insensibly wrought on to imitate their Practice, and Transcribe their
Virtues: There is a greater force in Religious Society and good Example to
beget a Conformity in us than is well adverted to, the sweet friendly converse
of a City acquaintance may charm an honest Country man into a liking of that
godliness, he sees him embrace, and Thrive so well with in following his
Worldly Calling, And with his Civility and Discretion, with his kind
Expressions, and Oblieging Discourse, he may instile into his Soul a love to
these Virtues, of Goodness and Ingenuity, of Candor and Honesty, of Fidelity
and Justice he sees him make Conscience of in his Commerce: And how happy were
it if the Towns in this manner would become instructers of the Neighboring
parts in matters of Religion, as well as in those of Breeding, Givility and
Trade.

Would GOD, Magistrates were more Intent and Serious in the Work of Religion,
then their own Private and the Public Affairs of the Communities they are
severally concerned in, would prosper the better under their Conduct; 1 Timothy
4.8.
For, Godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which is to come; Let
me beseech you labor to feel the power of Religion in your hearts, to maintain
it by a close walking with GOD in your Families, by Integrity in your several
Trusts, and an Examplary, Behavior toward, the. Encouraging of others to
espouse it; And so ye will engage Heaven to bless you in your Private and
Public Capacities, and crown your honest endeavors with Success and
Prosperity, for GODS Glory, the Honor of the Nation, the Advantage of the
Royal Buroughs, and your own Comfort; For which, none Prays more Cordlally
than

Your most Humble, most Oblidged Servant, and Cordial Well-Wisher JO: MACKQVEEN.

TO THE READER
IT is not to Court your Favor to the Author, or your Pardon to the Escapes of
this Discourse, or to Acquaint you with the Motives of publishing it, he
Addresses himself to you, these are such Trite and common things as are not
worth his or your pains to insist on; He knows he has Friends and Foes, the one
will seek no Excuse, the other will Admit none for his forwardness to be in
Print; Hence it is as he does not expect immunity from Censure, so he is
resolved calmly to abide it, and disdain it with contempt proportionable to the
malice with which it is often impregnated.

He sees, Who does any thing out of the common Road, how innocently or Honestly
soever intended, cannot avoid the Envy or Obloquie of some snarling men: who
can censure and condemn better than they can help or correct the Eslayes of
others, how saint soever, or benefit the World with any thing of their own. He
believes these who can do better will be modest and sparing; and he would think
himself happy, if as the unskilful play of an indifferent Musician excites
those of a more delicate touch, to take the instrument into their hand, so he
could awaken others of profounder Learning, and greater Eloquence, (which like
deep streams pass silently on) to something of this nature. Nothing can rejoice
him more, than that some of these once burning and shinning Lights, which are
now under a Bushel, (in comparison of whom any thing ever he did or can do, is
but a Glimering Blaze,) could be induced to edify the World by their Pens as
once they did with their Mellifluous tongues, he is not of the Feminine
Constitution of some Fair Creotures, who though they be tollerably Well
Favored, yet shun some places of public Resort for fear of being Eclipsed by
the splendour of the Dress, or the sparkling of the Beauty of Rivals, He can
cordially say, in allusion to Moses, when he cried out, Numb. 11.29.
Would GOD all the LORDS People were Prophets, so would GOD some of his
afflicted Reverend Brethren could be persuaded to make themselves more known to
the World by their Labors. Carmina proveniunt animo deducta sereno Nubila sunt
subitis tempora nostra malis carminase cessum scriben it is and otia quaerunt me
mare me venti me saeva jac tat hiems, Ovid Trist lib: 1. Elg: 1.


But the hard Circumstances we are in for the present is a great obstruction to
this, when Men's minds are unhinged, and their Spirits depressed, they can do
little this way. Yet there have been to whom their tribulation has not only been
the Trial of their Patience, which was perfited by their Sufferings, but a
Spurr to Virtue, a Whitestone to Industry, the Occasion of displaying these
Lights which were hide under a favorable Sunshine, stiffled under the weight
and silenced amidst the Noise and Hurry of their public Imployes: Seneca is
never more Eloquent than in these Excellent Composures he exercised his Spirit
with, in his Banishment. Boethius never darted such Rays of Light and Life,
when he sat Senator on the Bench, as when he lost his Eyes in a Dungeon. The
Amorous Poet's vein was never more brisk, his Style never more smooth, his
Fancy never more free then in his Exile. The hardness of their Fortune by a
kind of Anteperistasis, contracting their Luxuriant imaginations, divided
formerly among Variety of Objects, uniting their scattered thoughts, and
inspiring their minds with more Vigor and intensness: But these are instances
of a higher Elevation than we can imitate in our distress; I Pray GOD Sanctify
our affliction to us, that what some of us cannot do for the benefit of the
Public, through the fears, ears, and wants some of us are in; yet that all of
us may by a Recollection of our thoughts, a Reforming Inspection into our Lives
and Hearts, improve the Providential dispensation we are under for our own
benefit, into a further Increase in Humility, Heavenly mindedness, and a
Generous contempt of the World.

It is like the Authors present Necessitous condition, The fate of better and
more learned Men of his Principles, through his scruples against the present
Establishment, by complying with which, he might have bettered his Fortune,
puts him on this practice of publishing discourses. And if he can gain any
thing that way; It is but a Gentile Expedient, which more Excellent Spirits
have formerly made use of: And truly if Lawers plead for Money, and Soldiers
fight for Money, if Divines Preach for Money, and Physicians work for Money; If
this be the Idol to which most Altars are erected, and receives most
Sacrifices, if this be the reconciling object of all the different addresses,
and employs of Mankind, the Author thinks he can boldly challeng all the World;
Let him who is freest from some Glance this way cast the first stone at him:
since it is so he imagins he may without either sin, shame, or scandale, Print
and make Dedications for Money too.

This Discourse was Preached some Years ago in Commemoration of George
Herriot, the Religious Founder of that Hospital, which is no less Ornament for
the Beauty of its Structure to the City, than its Revenue is advantageous to
many of the Inhabitants: Whose numerous Families are too heavy a burden to the
Narrowness of their Fortunes.

It may be expected I should give some Account of this Worthy Man, but truly
although I was at some pains in enquiring after several things which might
relate to Him, and afford matter for a Narration, I could get no exact
Information concerning Him, and I humbly desire, into whose hands this comes,
they may acquaint me with what may be useful to impart to the World concerning
Him, for there may be an occasion to publish the same at another time: But
truly I think, his Works may supercede any historical account of Him. He has
left a more lasting Monument of his Piety and Charity, to bear His Name and
perpetuat his Fame. then all paper Memorials whatsomever are capable to
perform, so long as there will be any Memory of this honorable City, his name
shall be mentioned with honor and esteem, when all the flashes of sensual
pleasure are quite extinct, when all the glances of Temporal Felicity, and
Human Excellency are quite forgot: When all the flowers of Secular Glory are
withered away: When all earthly Trophies are buried in their funeral ashes:
When all the Elogies of Conquerours engraven on Brass, or these pompuous
Inscriptions on Marble, undergo the fate of those drawn on the Sand, or written
in water; When all the stately Monuments and sumptuous Statues of the Roman
Heroes, are levelled with the ground: When this World and all its parade shall
be consumed, Isay. 34.
When the Heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll, and the Host thereof
dissolved, When the Elements shall melt, and the Earth be burnt up with Fervent
heat; Psalm: 112.
The Name of the Renowned G. HERRIOT will be blessed before the LORD, and his
Works will be in Everlasting Remembrance.

I must tell you such Houses are not so complete or fully finished, but a Good
Man will easily find some what or other, always to be added to their Beauty
and Glory. THOMAS FISHER.
And this we find by the Care and Industry of the present Worthy * Treasurer of
this House who thinks no pains too great, no cost too much for the Honor of
the Religious Founder, the Credit of the City, or the Benefit of the House in
all its Charitable concerns. What Beauty is added to the Edifice in the great
reparations made about it, what considerable improvement of its Revenue, how
the number of the Boys maintained is doubled, That whereas at his Entry they
were but Threescore, they are now Sixscore, daily Furnished and Supplied with
all necessaries: If Religious Founders of Hospitals and Churches, of Colleges
and Almshouses, are Blessed before the LORD, Certainly the Names of those that
better and improve the Revenues of those places of Charity, shall be Honorable
among Men, these who are entrusted with the custody, and mannagement of them,
who distribute them, and discharge their office with a good conscience may be
reputed the Repairers of such Houses, and placed next the Founder; And I know
none in this City who can deny this Honor to Worthy and Honest THOMAS FISHER

Some may think I should have pressed the Head of Benificence more amply, for
as it is a vanity to speak much of some Barren Theames: So it is difficult to
speak little of some Fertile Subjects. But to people of large Souls and
proportionable Fortunes, there is enough said to excite them to acts of
Charity; And for those who are otherwise disposed, there is enough said to
condem, and Witness one day against them. I am afraid the most eloquent,
Harangues of better heads and Neater Pens will operate little on this Iron Age
to induce them to works of Benificence; It were well some Zealous Pretenders
did more to adorn their Religion by good works, and stop the mouths of our
Roman Adversaries by such demonstrations to the World, that we lay not the
stress of our hope of Salvation on an unactive fanciful Faith, or an idle
verbal Charity.

I am not so vain as to imagine by publishing this Discourse to prevail with
many to follow the Centurions example, 16. Oration de amo^e pauperum.
or the Renowned Herriots either. I know the great and Famous Nazianzon
insinuates, People entertain discourses of Charity, with the same coldness and
indifferency, they do the Poor themselves, Although we be all but Beggars and
Objects of the Divine Charity. For all the little Scantling measures of
Advancement some of us have above others. As he prettily and floridly words it,
(...) I had once a design and it is not altogether out of my head, to tranflate
the whole Oration; With some others of this Eloquent Father, but the
Pointedness of his Periods and Politness of his Phrase, does somewhat fright me
from the Attempt; And I know all Translations are short of the Original, how
soever there be who magnify some refined pieces of this Nature of some French
Beaux Spirits, beyond the Authors expressions. Whatever Truth be in this as to
some Glassick Moral Writers, yet for the Fathers of the Church, whether Greek
or Latin, I am sure they are most charming in their own Dress; Like those Roses
which are best adorned with their own Natural Leaves.

I think as it is to no purpose in this dull and heavy Age, to spend much time
in pleading against the Possibility of Perfection, no more need we declaim
against the pompous Magnificenee and the Prodigal Superfluities of
Superstitious Romanists: Nor see I any great necessity to strain our Rhetoric
too much against the Merit of Good Works, for I think few will be so impudent
as to lay Tittle to Heaven by their Charitable Deeds, or are like to storm it
by violence to their covetous Inclinations: Or will make themselves friends of
the Mammon of unrighteousness, by founding of Hospitals, or building of
Churches, by enriching of Colleges, or erecting of Bridges. I know not whither
the Superstition of Romanists, or the Sacrilege of Protestants is most to be
lashed: But it is matter of Regrate to all serious considering minds, that we
should have the best Religion in the World, and the worst practice: That we
should counteract it in so considerable a Branch of it, placing so little of it
in Acts of Benificence and Works of Mercy, Cap: 1.27.
while according to St. James Divinity. Pure Religion and undefiled before GOD,
and the Father is this, To visit the Fatherless and Widows in their
afflictions, and to keep our selves unspotted from the World.

The great and pompous things wherewith we seek to set off our Profession, and
commend it into others, will not so much promot it as our uncharitableness and
oppression will prejudge and discredit it with opponents, whether Turks or
Jews, Pagans or Papists, if they see under an affected humility, pride, lurking
starchtly, under an averseness to superstition, fraud, sacraledge, and
cheatry, sheltering themselves under a sham-zeal against Dissenters, cruelty
and bitterness, advancing their Trophies. If they hear men speak like Angels,
but see them act like devils: If they see them lifting up eyes to Heaven, while
their hands are dyed in Blood and with feet marching toward hell: They will be
apt to look upon our Religion as a piece of Pageantry, a devout complement, and
a cloak of licentiousness. From which I pray GOD every man may vindicat his
Profession by transcribing the Pity and Humility, the Faith and Benificence of
the Centurion. From viewing of which, I will detain you no longer.

Luke Chap. 7. Verse. 4. And when they came to Jesus, they besought Him
instantly, saying, That he was worthy for whom He should do this. Ver. 5. For
he loved our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue.
AMongst all the Effects of that Self-love we bring with us to the World, and
is so great a Predominant in our Constitution, there is none more early and
lasting, none more Powerful or Universal, than that wherewith we pursue the
Good Will and Esteem of others: How timely and strongly does this Passion
discover it self, in those pleasant harmless Devices, and pretty little Arts of
Insinuation, by which our tender Young Ones, these mute but persuasive true
Supplicants for favor seek to ingratiat themselves with these about them. Nor
does it expire with our Infancy, vary with the changes of our Condition, or
decay with our declining Age: But grows with the several Stages of our Life,
keeps Pace with the Circumstances of our State, and bends with all the turnings
of our Race; As we advance in Years, as we increase in Knowledge, as we enlarge
our Store, prevail in Power, or prosper in Preferment. Yea whither we go
foreward or backward in Honor, whither we rise or fall in Employment, it winds
it self with the vicissitude of our Fortune, and upon every Emergent preserves
an equal Pulse under all Alterations. As this affection is the first that Buds,
so it is the last that Withers. Most Men at their Exite out of the World, would
be satisfied, that as the Sun in the serene Evening of a clear day, sets in a
beautiful Cloud, they could so change their Scene, leaving scattered behind
them some bright Rays of an immortal Reputation; Yea, the worst of Criminals
would step to Eternity with good Opinion in the Hearts, and kind Verdicts from
the mouths of the Spectators of their disastrous end.

I have known few or none what ever they talked in contempt of Applause, An
erit qui velle recuset os populi meruisse. Persius Sat. 1
or pretense of self-denial, they made upon this score who were really so
mortifyed as to the desire of pleasing others, or coveting to be Esteemed or
Beloved by them, but though they were not at great pains to gain: Yet they were
content while they lived to have and receive the Creditable Testimony of their
Acquaintances, and when they Dyed, disdained not the Favorable Validictory
Wishes of the Witnesses of the Conclusion of their Lives. And these Artificial
Discourses, Hoc ipso placere cupiunt quod plaeere contemnunt, and mirum in
modum Laus dum vitatur, appetitur. Hieronimus.
and set Modes of Speaking, wherewith they sought to conceal their Ambition
this way, were no more to Penetrating minds, than these thin Vails are, by
which some fair Creatures would fain seem to cover their Charms; Only with this
difference, the one is desirous to hide their vanity, as much as the other is
tacitly delighted, through this transparent Obstruction to display their
Beauty.

This Passion after Esteem and Renown is the great Spring of all generous
Motions, the spurr to all glorious Actions of Mankind: But how to acquire and
retain the Favor and Approbation we so much pant after, many are in the dark.
It is certain Virtue is most Meritorious of Praise and Estimation, this
exercess a Soveraignity over the minds of Men, and extends its Empire over its
Rebel Enemies: Is justified of its Children, and Revered of its Adversaries; is
Loved by its Friends, and Honored by its Poes. There are such Rays of
Majesty, such draughts of Beauty, in Virtue and Goodness, as makes Good Men
Enamoured with and Applaud it: Yea, it constrains the worst to do homage to its
Shade and Picture, when it is but counterfited by those who hate it, pretended
by those who will not practice it; If there be such a commanding Force in the
very image and livery of it^ O! what is due to it then in its real being! in
its native luster! in its purest brightness in its fullest glory! Nor is there
in the catalogue of the Virtues, as shall afterward appear, any one more
attractive of Commendation and Respect, of Affection and Repute, then
BENIFICENCE of which our Text is an Instance, and the occasion of this day's
Solemnity, a Commentary upon, and a Witness of it.

How applicable this Text is to our present Business, how agreeable the good
Testimony and Character given here, is to the Religious Founder, whose
Benificence we are this day to commemorate, you are all convinced upon my first
Reading of it: Optima semper paucissimus placent Non tam been cum Rebus humanis
agitur, ut meliora: pluribus placeant. Seneca.
And what faults soever some of you may find and spy in the handling of it, yet
you will conclude the choice of this parcel of Sacred Writ, suitable to the
Task of the day, in the words you have these two things: First, the High Elogie
and Commendation the Elders give the Centurion when they interceed for him in
behalf of his sick Servant, they proclaim him Worthy. Secondly, you have the
Probation of it in the fifth verse, He loves our Nation and has built us a
Synagogue.

As to the first, Non si quid turbida Roma elevet, accedas examenve improbum in
illa castiges trutina: Nec te quae sieris extra. Persius sat. 1.
It is not unworthy your consideration, to advert, who Extol him with this
Epithete, and pass this Verdict on him. It was nor the dregs of the Multitude,
or the Offscouring of the people that thus sound his praise: For than it might
be sufpected, the effect of Ignorance, the Result of chance, or the Product of
partiality: The usual springs of Vulgar Report; Whence it comes it seldom hits
right, or if it do, (as it is one to a thousand) it keeps not long the same Tun.
Therefore Wise Men are as little Elevated with its flatteries, as they are
depressed or fretted with its slanders, having an equal generous
unconcernedness for either, while they are found in the discharge of their
Duty. It is rate that Merit has the Euges of the Rabble, or the Applause of
the Multitude, the kind votes of the Populace has seldom or never been the
Companion of Virtue, or the Domestic of the Graces, how frequently does the
Suffrage of the fluctuating unstable Mob, like Water, carry up Cork and
Feathers while Solider things sink to the Bottom: None merit more honor from
the Vulgar, than those whom they load with Reproaches: Nor are any less
deserving, than those who by such easy Idolaters are commonly adored. I have
known in my own time, the Best Magistrates and Ablest Ministers, the greatest
Promoters of the Spiritual and Temporal concerns of some places, become the
Objects of the common hatred, and were well near fallen Victims to the Rage of
a popular torrent.

But those who came to our Savior with this public declaration in the
Centurions behalf, that he was worthy, were the Elders, as you have it in the
third verse, Elders, Men for their Experience more knowing, by their Station
more competent Judges of his Desert, by their Authority less liable to the
impressions of Fear or Favor: so more faithful distributers of due praise:
Indeed the Approbation of Men of Wisdom and Power, is the best Pillar and
Preserver of Reputation. The good Gratior and validior ^st december virorum
bonorum sententia quam totius multitudinis imperitae. Cicero. pro plant.
Opinion of a few Judicious Persons is preferrable to the Populat Vogue, and
will preponderate the clamorous censures of the Giddy and Unskilful Crowd.
King Antigonus thought more renown accreased to him from the single Testimony
of Zeno; than from the Applause of his whole Court. The Love and Esteem of
Honest Men is one of the most desirable things in the World, Gloria vera
consentiens laus bonorum.
and is according to Gicero's Notion, the best basis of true Honor and Glory.
Certainly next the Commendation of GOD and our Consciences, there can be
nothing more comfortable than the concurrent Testimony of Excellent Virtuous
Persons. Ea est prof^cto jucunda laus quae obbis profisiscitur qui ipsi in
laud vixerunt. Cic. -- Tanto major famae sitis est quam virtutis, quisenim
virtutem amplectitur ipsam praemia si tollas. Juvi. Sat. 1.
The harmanous Approbation of such as proclaim us Worthy, is not further to be
valued, than it is truly Reciprocal, and they Worthy to receive what they so
liberally bestow, and their praises recoil duly to themselves.

We are all but too covetous of Praise and Reputation, we need neither spurr or
wand, as we say, to excite us to pursue this. Virtue it self for all its charms
would languish for want of Suitors, if this Waiting-Maid did not attend her,
yet are they Adulterous Lovers who transferr the Affection due to the Mistress
to prostitute it to her Handmaid. Would GOD we were all as careful to be that
in reality, we are sollicitous to bear the World in hand we are. Let us do
worthily in our Capacities, whether the World notice us or no, Namque iicet
virtus semet contenta quiescant, sola tamen justos virtus assciscit honores
solaquese merito landum fulgore coronat. Ang: politianu^.
Virtue is sufficient Reward and Solace to it self without this slender
Recompense. It is better to have Worth without Repute, than Repute without
Worth: Yet if they go together, a wise Man will take any esteem he has, as a
Favor of Providence oblieging him to deserve it by continuance in well-doing,
as a Provocation to excel himself in some fresh instance, or new Experiment:
And will so much the more regard it, as it begets a generous Emulation in
others to Honor, Imitate, or Outdo his Virtue; whosoever makes this
improvement of it cannot miss the commendation of our Text, He is worthy.

However as I would not have you disdainfully slight, nor industriously court
the Approbation of others, so when you meet with Praise or a fair
Representation, weigh the Airth whence this wind blows, and value it no further
than it is the Echo of Virtuous Deeds, reflected from the hearts and mouths of
true Lovers of Worth and Merit: These are the most discerning Umpites of it,
and the justest Dispensers of such grateful retributions; the Best are ever
less biased with partiality to lessen any performance; less acted by prejudice
against our Profession or Persons, to depretiat what we do or defraud us of any
Tribute of Praise or Commendation, due to us upon the account of any Excellency
or perfection.

And this we see if we consider in the next place, the condition of the Object
on whom they bestow this Encomium, he was a Centurion, as you would say, a
Captain of an hundred Men, a Commanding Officer, a Stranger to their Country,
a Gentile or Heathen by his Birth and Extraction, as is apparent, and by reason
of these Circumstances, less gracious to them, who looked upon themselves as
the LORDS Select People: yet maugre these Objections they become Sollicitors
for him at our Saviors hands; his Zeal for their Religion old remove any
averseness they might have had against him, on score of his Pedigree as an
Alien: His Affection to their Nation made them overlook the concomitant faults
of his Galling, as a Soldier, for which they being now a Conquered People, it
is not probable they had any great kindness, and no wonder, persons of that
employment are not ordinarily the most Humane or Oblieging, yet his Excellent
Qualities make them Advocates for him, and Trumpeters of his praise, He is
worthy, etc.

It seems the Roughness of the Military profession took not away the softness
of his Natural Disposition, nor did the attendant temptations of that Office
corrupt his inclinations, Enervat the Sanctity of his Mind, contract the
Liberality of his Heart, or restrain the Charity of his Hand. For all his being
a Soldier, and a Stranger, yet he is an affectionat Lover of their Nation, a
great Encourager of their Devotion, a mighty Favourer of their Religion, a
person beyond all peradventure, who as he was formerly instructed in the Jewish
profession, is now become no small Proficient in the Christian, otherwise our
Savior had not passed the Judgment on him, in the 9 verse, That He bad not
found so great Faith, No, Not in Israel; All which considered may furnish us
matter for this reflection.

Religion may have its Favorers and Followers, its Lovers and Admiters every
where, in the Camp as well as the Cloister, in the Court as well as the Church,
Piety and War are not inconsistent, Devotion may keep Quarters in a Souloiers
Tent, the Military Profession has afforded as Illustrious Examples of Virtue,
yea as Eminent Saints, as many other Vocations. We find in the Gospel and
Ecclestastick History, some of this Employment, no less Renowned for their
Goodness, than others of more peaceable Occupations, Matthew. 27.54.
did not a Soldier become a Remarkable Confessor for Christ, When his
Followers shrunk, his Disciples fainted, the Jews mocked and derided him. The
Noble Army of Martyrs who planted the Church by their pains, Watched it by their
Prayers, Watered it by their Tears, and fatned it with their Blood. Went not
some of the Military Discipline in its Front and Rear? Eusebius.
You Will find a Sebastian in the head of Diocesians Troops, disputing for
precedence with some Resolute Christians, who should first have the honor of
Mattyrdome. Hormisdas for Constancy in the Christian Faith is degraded by the
Persian Monarch from being General of his Forces, to be the Keeper of his
Camels, yet would not change his Religion to exchange his Disgrace, or recover
his former Post.

I will not wade any further for Instances to prove the Happy Agreement of
Piety and Zeal, with the qualitys of those that follow the Court and Camp: It
would take up too much of your time to speak of Gideon and of Barak, of Sampson
and of Jephtah, of David, and his Worthies, and all these who have allied the
Divine Graces, with the Moral Virtues of the Military Profession. I will not
say but such Examples were rare in former and latter times, and it is to be
regrated that Godliness is not so generally entertained, countenanced or
practiced, by Men of this Office as could be wished. Lucan. lib. 10
Which made the Historian Poet, say, Nulla fides Pietasque Viris qui Castra
sequuntur, If he had put Rara for Nulla he had lighted on the Truth of the
Matter, without marring the Elegancy of his Meeter.

It is truly matter of Regrate that the Camp should be no better than a
Correction house, or common Goal the ordinary Receptacle of Thieves and
Robbers, of Villains and Malefactors. That such who are nottour for the
Daringness of their Nature to commit all kind of Mischief, and for their
habitual hardiness in all manner of Wickedness, should be singled out to fight
the cause of GOD and the King, while these are more likly by their Blasphemies
and sins to undermine the Interests of both, then promote them by their
Strength and Number; Yet we know when Princes are engaged in War, Men levied
for advancing or carrying on the same, the Naughtiest and most Scandalous
Rogues in the Country are sought and marked out, as fit Champions to mantain
the honor of the Sovereign, and the Safety of the Country, it is a miracle, a
good cause prospers in the hands of such Mannagers, whose Enormities
prognosticat more Vengeance, than their Arms do Victory, the Strength of an
Army consists not in the Multitude of its Troops, nor is the fury of Russians
its strongest fence: Pr^^ 28.1.
It is Piety and Virtue that inspires Men with Courage and Brav'ry, and is like
to Crown their Attemps with Success and Conquest: Which is not to be expected
from the Scum and Off-scourings of a Nation, too frequently the Recruits of our
Forces.

However we see, We are not altogether to Discredit or Disgrace the Military
Calling as if it were a kind of Nazareth, Out of which no good can come; As if
it were a sort of Wilderness, Barren of Trees of Righteousness, we see both the
Camp and Court present us with some no less conspicuous for Size and Verdure,
for Zeal and Constancy, than those of other vocations. Virtue is open and free
calls welcomes, yea and Conquers some every where: Wisdom despises no
Passengers, there is no Fortification against the Engines of Grace, no
Rampires, no Bulwarks Impregnable to its force, no condition of life can resist
its opperation: It has carried some spoils from every Occupation, raised from
Trophies in every Region, and there is no Nation or Profession where it has not
left some Prints of its Power, and Vestiges of its Conquest. It has with a
Mighty hand broke through strong Holds, and Levelled Mountains of opposition,
the Simplicity of the Gospel has Triumphed over the subtility of Philosophers;
the Sword of the Spirit has Vanquished the Carnal Weapons of the Redoubted
Generals of the World: some of the Roman Conquerors, and Grecian Orators have
stooped their Power and veiled their Crest to the Humility of the Cross.

We may say then with St. Peter, at the Conversion of another Famous Centurion;
Of a truth GOD is no Respecter of persons, but in every Nation: So I may say in
every Profession, Acts 10.33.
in every Occupation, he that fears GOD, and works Righteousness, is
accepted of Him. The Camp has furnished Champions no less Va^iant for GOD and
Religion then they have been for their King and Country. Devotion is not so
Narrow or Morose, but it may adapt and suit it self, to the several
Circumstances and Employments of Human life, Religion without any imputation of
Levity, or prejudice to her Matron Gravity, may vary her Dress, while she
retains her Natural Purity and immaculate constitution, and these Directors of
Spiritual Life, who present her in the same habit, to a Soldier or a Courtier
that they do to a Priest or a Monk, spills her shape, or laces her straiter
then he needs; The Sentinel does his duty in Watching, and the Bed chamberman
in his Waiting hours, as well as a Regular in observing his Cannonical diets,
or a Pastor in his Preaching turns.

Behold here then the Excellency of Religion, it can sort with every State,
accomodat it self to every Condition, it can lodge under a Scarlet or Purple
Robe; As well as lurk under a Coul or Hair shirt: It can enter and tarry in a
Soldiers Tent, as well as an Anchoret's cell there are Devour Courtiers and
Godly Centurions, who led a Life of Continence in Palaces of Pleasure; afford
Examples of Abstinence amidst the Incentives of a full Table, are Paterns of a
Real Humility in their greatest Magnificence, while a Crou^ of Attendants with
bare heads and Bended Knees flock about them, they retain pure hands and mild
hearts, maugre all the Provocations to Cruelty, and temptations to Violence
which surround them, their fr^quent rough Warlike Exercises remove not Piery
from their Souls, Humanity from their hearts, Tenderness from their Breasts,
Compassion from their Natures, or Civility from their Manners: There are who
can unite the Piety of a Divine, with the Policy of a Statseman, the Devotion
of a Regular with the Debonairness of a Courtier, the Courage of a Hero with
the Meekness of the Gentler Sex, the Gallantry of a Wa^riour with the Charity
of a Christian: whose Religion does not soften the undauntedness of their
temper, or rebate the Vigor of their Resolution, nor does their Valor impair
their Affection to Divine Worship, or abate the fervours of their prayers, make
their Confessions less humble, their Devotion more Austere, or their Behavior
morose. No, no, their conversation bears all the caracters not only of a
Courteous and Civil but likewise of a Religious and Virtuous Education: Who
amidst all the punctilios of Honor they so much stand upon; And vie with
others about, have consciences tender of a sinful as well as a cowardly action:
Who avoid all appearances of evil, and giving offense into GOD, or disrespct to
his Laws: They place no courage in daring GOD, or braving the Devil, nor do
they count it a despicable piece of timorousness, to dread the Judge of all the
World, to fear hell, or flee from damnation; they esteem there is more of fool
hardiness than of Courage, of Raging madness then of true Gallantry, in
sporting with sinful occasions, dallying with Spiritual dangers, playing with
what may consigne them to infernal flames, or in an overventerous marching near
the Precipice of everlasting burnings.

Well then while we see such Lill^es among Thorns and Roses among Thristles;
when we see such virtue and Goodness keept alive amidst such an Army of
Temptations and difficulties, may we not admire the Divine Bounty, and Magnify
the Energy of His Grace, that selects Souls brought up in the Tumults of War to
make them examples of Piety, and Patterns of Charity: He makes them hear his
still voice amidst the clashes of Swords, and the Sounds of Trumpets: He
Mollifyes their Hearts amidst the cruelties of the Camp; He preserves them pure
amidst infectious Air, honest amidst Troops of contrary provocations, that
batter and rush in daily upon them. These these O Omnipotent Jesus! are the
Miraculous Effects of thy universal love, the Victorious Trophies of thy
irresistible Grace, the singular Masterpieces of thy absolute power, and
stupendous Triumphs of thy Infinite Glory.

If the Genturions Function did npt preclude him from Piety and Charity, it
cannot incapacitate others of that Rank, for the Reception or improvement of
the Divine Favor; Nor should any of this Order bring in the infelicity of
their Calling, as an Apology for their Infidelity toward GOD, their Injustice
or uncharitableness toward Man. What others have been and done, Nobis non
deficit grat^a aut Nature sed industria atque cura. Augustinus.
may by a generous Emulation, be aspired after, and obtained, if not in that
high pitch and degree, yet somewhat near, if a wilful impotence, or sordid
dejectedness of Spirit, a cowardly faintness, or malicious averseness keep them
not back.

Let us further inquire if these other things which are the Ordinary measure,
by which we take Estimate of a persons worth, be, to be found in the Centurion,
that the Elders be not found a pact'd ignoramus jurie, (as we say in their
sentence of him, nor we partial or implicit Honourers of his Virtue upon Hear
say; There are three things which procure the character of Worth to a person,
bona Naturae, bona Fortunae, bona Gratiae. 1. The Advantages of Nature. 2. The
Benefits of Fortune, which in a more Christian dialect in our discourses and
Writings should be called the common Largesses of Providence. And 3ly. The
Ornaments of Grace, a Man is never reputed Worthy, but upon his possession or
Fruition of some of these. Now what share the Centurion here had of these, is
the matter of our Meditation.

For the First, The gifts of Nature, these Natural Endeuments whether of Body
or Mind, such as Strength and Beauty, Wit and Judgment, Sagacity and
Dexterity, Prudence and Courage, etc. Those make a person worthy in the eyes of
the World, Bespeak and obtain Favor and Esteem from People to their Owners:
How much the Centurion partaked of these, is not upon Record, but we may
probably conjecture from his eminency in other Regards, from his Benificence
and Piety, he wanted not these Natural Embellishments and Abilities which in
order to his other Accomplishments, might serve as the first dip toward a
finer color, or the first strok of the pensil toward the perfiting of the
portracture!

As to the Second, The Benefits of Fortune, or rather the common largesses of
Providence, these external accommodations or emoluments, as Honor and Wealth,
Power and Authority, which in the corrupt Judgment of the World, seems to be
the only Standard of VVorth, and Attractive of Esteem. His station as a
Centurion, which was a place of Dignity and Command, sufficiently shows he
might be reputed Worthy upon this score. There is Honor and Reverence due to
the Quality and Character of persons upon this account, be they never so void
of Virtue or inward VVorth. Yet would I have such more intelligent than the
silly Als, who thought all the Congies and Cringies which were paid by the
superstitious People to the Idol he bore, was out respect to himself. No, no,
be not proud of what is paid to the Station in which by the favor of
Providence you are posted; But labor to maintain the Dignity of it by Virtue
and Fidelity in your Trust, and so you need not decline: or abandon the Civil
Respects which are the appendages of it. The story of When Quintus was
Lieutenant or Governor of Suiffa his aged Father, who had been five times
Consul, came Amhassadour to him from the Senate of Rome, he called to one of
his Vshers to make him dismount, as the custom was for all persons, what ever
their former Station had been, when they came upon Embassy to the Governors:
Out of Deference to the Lieutenant, they were at the first sight of him to
dismount, and come on foot toward him: Which his Aged Father knew well. But to
try his Sons temper forebore to observe, yet he was well pleased with his Sons
Deportment, knowing that the Paternal Relation was to be waved when it came in
competition with the Consular Dignity; And that private Respects were to strick
sail to Public Authority. Non ego inquit Fili summum imperium tuum contempsi,
sed experiri voui satin? scires te consulem agere, non ignoro quid Patriae
venerationi debeatur: Verum Publica instituta privata Pietate potiora Judico.
Valerius: Max: lib: 2: cap: 2.
Quintus Fabius his Son, who would not forego these ceremonies of State due to
his Grandeur, from his Aged Father, does illustrate this. But it was neither
any Natural Perfection or outward Accession of Splendour or Riches the Centurion
enjoyed, that made the Elders repute him worthy, so much as his Piety and
Benificence; for this they plead for him, and proclaim him worthy, even because
he loves their Nation, and has built them a Synagogue.

It was the Centurions pre-eminence above others in these best Gifts, the
Graces and Heavenly virtues of the Spirit, which raised his Esteem. These give
the completing stroke and illuminating Varnish to his Natural Faculties,
Accidental Advantages, and Moral Accomplishments: Those and what else we most
admire, become more Grateful and Beautiful in conjunction with Divine Grace. As
Mounsieur Du Boscq
Jewels cast into honney take thence a flash of luster, according to their
Natural color: So there is no preferment, no excellency or condition of Life
in the World, which is not the Fairer and more Valuable, when accompanied with
piety: This is the great perfective of our Nature, the Crown and Dignity of Man
in every Estate: Quantum Ratio dat Homini tantum Literatura Rationi, Religio
Literaturae. and Religioni gratia Casaubon:
This bears the Seal and Signature of Heaven, to magnify and extol us, to
enhaunce any other thing in us commendable. Reason is Man's prerogative above
Animals, Learning is the politure of his Reason, Religion the best improvement
of his learning, and grace the Soul and Complement of all. What the Eye is to
the Body, what the Diamond is to the Ring, what the Light is to the Sun, and
the Sun is to the World, that grace is to man: It beautifyes and adorns him
there is no person so mean and low, but this elevates and exalts him, nor is
there any so great and honorable, but this illustrates and diguifyes him: and
the want of it is (as a Bar of infamy in a coat of Arms) a dash to all other
his enduements or achievements, of which it may be said as of Naaman, a great
man, an Honorable Man, a mighty man, but a Leper: this but blots all: so an
Eloquent man, a learned man, a witty man, a Rich man, an honorable man, but a
Graceless man, this mars all: Other Accomplishments to such a person, are at
best but like poison in a Crystal Glass to a Frantik man, or a Precipice
Tapistred with Jessemin and Lillies to a blind man, whereon he is turning and
streatching himself with dangerous delight; therefore let me exhort you in the
words of that Oracle of Wisdom; if you would have the caracter of Reputation
here given the Centurion, and be accounted Worthy, Frove: 4.7.
get Wisdom, (this and Grace are one and the same through most places of this
book of the Proverbs) and with all thy getting, get Understanding, exalt her
and she shall promote thee, she shall bring thee to Honor when thou do
embrace her, she shall give to thy head an Ornament of Honor, and a Crown of
Glory shall she bestow upon thee.

Although there was a concurrance of these things in the Centurion which are
the ordinary Loadstone of Reputation, and Props of Renown, that they justly
term him worthy, yet there are some peculiar Graces specifyed in him, for which
he is set forth more Remarkably in the Text, and context as a pattern for our
Imitation; first his Pity, his care and tenderness toward his sickly dying
servant. Servi sunt alii a conventione alii a fortuna alii a natura Aristot: 2.
pol:
Whether he was his Servant by paction or agreement, or his servant by chance
of War as a prisoner, or his slave bought with his Money, or so by extraction
from slavish Parents; It is not my business nor much to the purpose to inquire:
it is enough the Text says, he was his Servant, yet he is sollicitous for his
condition, and will become a supplicant to our Savior for his health.

Is is good carrying humanely and discreetly toward our Servants, and not use
them like beasts or slaves. The providence which pat them in subjection to us,
might have turned the scales made us Servants and them Masters; and although it
be not so, let it be considcred, we are in stubordination to others in the
world, and we stand near, if not in the same Relation to our Supperiours and
Betters, that they do to us, let us then do to them what we would wish done to
our selves, were we in their circumstances, and treat them in some manner with
such usage as we expect those above us should demean with toward us, if not
with the same measure of Kindness we look for from them, yet with some degrees
of tenderness, which may prove very comfortable and encouraging to them, Quintg
Curt
and no way derogatory or disparraging to us. We find the great Allexander
carrying in his Arms one of his Soldiers frozen with cold, and feeding him
with his own Royal Hands. Trajan thought not the Golden Thread wherewith his
Diadem was wreathed about his head, too good to ty up the bleeding wounds of
one of his servants.

The most elequent Moralist of his Sect tells, Servi sunt imo hum^l^s amici non
Minister^^s sed moribus esti m^ndi Seneca.
We should look upon our Servants as our inferior Friends, and regard the
Virtuous Qualitys of their Minds more than the Circumstances of their Condition
and Fortune. Were we acted by generous principles of Reason, Honor, and
Justice, we would prize and commend Virtue in a Servant, without any partiality
upon account of his State, and condemn Vice, although it were in a Monarch
without fear or hesitation, because of his Place or Authority.

The Centurions behavior in behalf of his Servant, may put these insolent
Husbands, these cruel Parents, and tyr^nnical Masters to the Blush, who show
less concernedness for their respective Relatives, than a good Man according to
Solomon's Ethics shows to his very beast. Prove: 12.10.
And you may all be astonished at the Comparison: I wish the Application to any
Person here or in the City, were impertinent: I most freely say, these who are
not touched with the Sufferings, or molified with the miserys of other Mortals,
Rom: 1.13.
especially those under their own charge, are not only without Religious, but
without Natural Affection: And have more of Beasts, and that of the worst sort,
of Bears and Voolves: Yea I may say, they have more of incarnat Devils, than
of GOD or MAN.

Pity and Tenderness are the Companions of Great Souls, and ever lodged in
Generous Breasts they are far from Effeminacy or meaness, who are most subject
to the impressions of Humanity. The compassion of the Centurion is to me an
argument of his Valor and Gallantry, For as Fierceness and Cruelty are sure
indications of a Coward, so Gentleness and Mercy are inseparable from brave
Minds, and Noble Hearts. And for any thing I could ever learn from History, or
the small experience I have had in the World, I find there are none more cruel
than some timorous Cowards, or more treacherous than flattering Sycophants.
Stoics and Barbarians may look upon pity as a mean Quality, or Effeminate
Virtue, As Marcelus over Syracuse and Ve^pasian over Jerusalem
but the most Famous Conquerours of the World have wept over the Carcass^s of
their Enemies, bedewed their Triumphs with Tears, and Quelled the vain risings
of their hearts on the success of their Arms, with the commiserating sentiments
of their minds at the disasters of their Foes.

These who think pity and compassion a diminution of their Courage, or a
detraction from their Authority and Power, Molliffima corda humano generi dare
se natura fateturquae dedit and lacrvmas haec nostri pars optima sensus separat
hoc nos a grege mutorum Juvinal. sat. 15.
as if to shun the imputation of Effeminacy, they most assume the nature of
Tigers, and to acquire the Reputation of Valor, they must cease to be Men, and
be transformed ino Bruits or Devils, would do well to consider GOD Himself
disdaines not to illustrate the Compaffionatness of his Nature, by an Isa.
49.15.
allusion to the most affectionate Relation of the softer Sex, because
generally more sucriptive of, and more naturally disposed, to exerce these
sweet Tendernesses we owe the Distressed. Are not David and Jonathan instances,
that Martial prowess and a melting affectionatness needs not keep different
Quarters: These show us the eyes of Heroes are not of Adamant, nor their Hearts
of Brass, the Soveraegns of the Earth are never more Glorious than when they
show merey to the afflicted, afford relief to the distressed, and extend
elemency toward the guilty: By this, as an eloquent French Author has it,
Mounsieur du Boseque le honest femm.
they make near approaches in its Creating power to the Deity they represent,
and the Divinity they adore, only with this disparity, by their Clemency to
Criminals they give a being without a not being, a Resurrection without causing
them taste of Death, or working a Miracle in their behalf.

The second Christian Grace the Centurion is remarkable for, is his Humility,
he neither thought himself worthy to address so Great a Person as the Savior
of the World, or that he should honor his House with His Presence, (he says)
Lord trouble not Tby Self, Verse: 6.7.
for I am not worthy that Thou should enter under my roof, whefore neither
thought I my self worthy to come into Thee. By these steps of his self
abasement, or to speak with the Mysticks of his self annihilation, he opened a
door to receive Christ into his Heart, who delights to dwell with humble Souls,
Psalm 38.6. Magnum miraculum altus est Deus at dum te e^rigis, a te fugit
Augusti.
and beholds the proud a far off? It is strange pride by aspiring after an
undue Exaltation is cast down, by seeking to approach near GOD, is banished to
a greater distance, while Humility is the source of our Advancement draws the
Grace of GOD to our Hearts, and his Blessing to our Homes by keeping distance,
and rebounds toward Glory by descending to the abyss of misery.

His Humility is so much the more Conspicuous, that He is a Person in Power and
Authority, the voluntary debasement of such is the exaltation of this Virtue,
which in the eyes of the World suffers some prejudice in its reputation, when
Peasants and Mechanics, persons of mean birth or servile employ act its Part:
For the Humility of such is suspicious, and it may be presumed, they disparage
it, while they make but a Virtue of necessity: Indeed for one who is found
among straw and cob webs, as soon as he is dropped into the World, for one keept
under Hatehes by the Disadvantage of an Obscure Pedigree, a Sordid Education; a
Blunt Wit, a Narrow Fortune, a Rustic Society, and a Chain of Vnfavourable
Accidents, for such a one to be Humble and condescending is no matter of great
praise; But to see one poor in Spirit, in plenty of Riches, moderat in a
Fortune, ever upon increase, humble under the promising favor of the Prince,
the bewithching smiles of the Court, the hearty Applause of the People: This
sets a Crown of honor and a Diadem of Glory on the head of Humility. When
those whose Elevation seems to indispose them, whose temptations to the
contrary are so strong, that its Exercise becomes more difficult to themselves,
and less expected by others from them; when such in despite of all these
averting Seducements practice it: It makes it so much more acceptable to GOD,
and deserving of Praise among Men. For the Promise of Exaltation to these who
humble themselves, must needs be forthcoming to them in a peculiar manner,
commensurate to the degrees of their heights and falls of their Superiority and
Submissions.

Let this teach those whom a Happy Providence has raised beyond others, that
their Advancement does not exeem them from the Exercise of this Grace, all
CHRIST's Spiritual Injunctions, are very consistent with the several
Distinctions and Temporal Orders among Men. The Eminency of your State does so
much extol the Lowliness of your Mind, the heart and the Spiritual part is the
Region of Virtue, and it may be preserved and practiced in the highest
Elevation, the Prince may have more of it in his Chair of State, than the
Prostrat Supplicant before him has in his Knees; And he that gives Alms may be
as poor in Spirit as the Clamorous Petitioner that craves them with great
Importunity, and solemn Profession of his Wants, although the Circumstances of
such Men's Condition in the World, will not permit them to accomodat themselves
to all the Exterior Expressions of it.

Some Recluse Monk, who counts his Beads in stead of his Prayers, Sed and
Caesares credidis sent super Christo si aut Caesares non essent seculo
necessarii aut si and Christiani potuessent esse Caesares Ap^ cap: 21.
and makes his Fingers the Intelligencers of his Faith, may think the maxims
of Christianity incompatible with those of the Court or Camp: And Tertullian in
regard of the depraved manners and prevailing corruption of the Grandes of his
time, seems to Glance a little this way, when he says, if Christians could
have swayed the Seepters of Caesar's, or the Caesar's abundoned the World,
CHRIST's Harvest would have been greater, and his Conquest larger. Some may
think poorness of Spirit cannot sit under a company of State, or lodge within
Palaces of Ma^bel, that pureness of Heart cannot be preserved at Court, amidst
the Flames, the charms of some sparkling Conversations might there kindle: Or
in the Camp when the Beauties of the Country became Supplicants to, or part of
the Booty of the Conqueror. That Humility cannot keep Pace with Success and
Victory in the field: Or ascend the Throne when thousandsly prostrate at the
Footstool. That Hunger after Righteousness cannot consist with Thirst after
Kingdoms. That meekness of Temper to forgive Injuries, cannot sort with an
absolute power of Revenge. But there are upon Record some excellent Heroes, in
whom these have been so happily conjunct, without interferring: That may
convince the World, the Court and the Church, the Camp and the Cloister, are
not so opposite as the two Poles, or so distant as East and West.

There have been who counted nothing great but what was Just, nothing Glorious
but what was the Reward of Virtue, nothing Honorable but what was honestly
obtained, and enjoyed without remorse; There have been who never invaded
Kingdoms from ends of Ambition and Covetousness, but to subdue them to the
Cross of Christ: Who never made War but upon necessity, who have been humble in
the midst of a great confluence of Admirers of their Worth, And I may, say
Adorers of their Dignity, Who have retained their Innocence amidst all the
Tempting Vanities of the Court been chaste in despite of all the enticeing
Blandishments of Sense, mortified amidst appetizing delights, and possessed a
Spirit of Forgiveness and Long-suffering amidst all the Temptations which power
and Opportunity could Minister to fury and revenge; In short they have been
Proof against all the flattering Allurements, and persuasive Arts wherewith
Vice accosted them, and sought in all its Gayety and Bravery to inviegle and
betray them.

If others reconciled the Exercise of so many Virtues to such difficult, and I
may say contrary occasions, if the great and the Noble may, and should
transcribe the Centurions example of Humilty, how much more are these of
Inferior Rank to conform themselves to this Pattern whose order and state in
the World may faciliate the practice of this Virtue to them, you may plead
excuse for the Nonobservance of some other qualiues of your Betters, as their
Bounty, Hospitality and Charity, etc. You have not abilities proportionable to
the outward exercise of such and the like costly virtues: But what Shield or
Buckler of defense can you hold up, to blunt the force of their example, in
these or the like instances, for which your Low condition in the World does
capacitate and fit you? Your Nonconformity in this can admit no extenuation,
much less can you expect a tottal remission; yet is it much to be regrated,
that there are of both Sex some of obscure Parentage, and as contemptible
Education of small parts and low forune, who have more Pride and Vanity under
their course clothing, and mean dress than Solomon had in all his Glory, or
Quen Esther in all her Magnificence.

Let me raise your Devout Meditation a little higher, and offer your
consideration a more excellent, and I trust a more impressive and Operative
Pattern in this matter, I beseech you let the same mind be in you which was in
CHRIST, and hearken to his Proclaimation, Learn of Me for I am Meek and Lowly.
Matt. 12.29.
It is observable, although we be remitted to some creatures for instruction in
other particular instances relating to our duty, and conduct in the World: Yet
no less than the Creator Himself must be singled out to be our Precedent in
this affair. We are refered to the Pismire for industry, to the Lion for
Valor, to the Dove for Innocence, to the Serpent for Wisdom; But for Humility
GOD reserves the privelege to Himself, to be our Schoolmaster. It is too high
to be recommended to us by any infrior Doctor, and the peculiar concernedness
our Savior has for our conformity to this injunction makes him propose it to
us in his own person, as most likly to counterballance the indisposition of our
minds, the contrariety of our wills to its performance. It seems the contumacy
of our Nature could not be brought to comport with the appendant disgraces of
this Virtue in the oppinion of the World, by a less Powerful Teacher, of a less
illusterous model then the Son of GOD and his practice; And truly after such a
miraculous example of GOD's abasing himself to teach us this Lesson, we may cry
out with amazement what a contradition and an astonishing prodigy is it to see
a proud Christian and an Humble GOD: We must either Renounce the Name, or
Reform our Nature and Manners: What a Christian and yet Proud? What a
Christian, and yet Cruel? What a Christian, and yet unmercijul? These are such
unatural conjunctions as are betwixt Light and Darkness, betwixt CHRIST and
Belial.

It is truly great condescendence in the Son of GOD that he proposes himself a
Precedent to us in a matter so agreeable to our condition, and so easy to be
Transcribed by us, to which I may transferr, what Naamans servant said to him,
2 Kings. 5.13.
If the Prophets had bid thee do some great thing would thou not have done
it? How much more, when it is but to be Meek and Lowly, he does not seek to
puzle our knowledge by putting us on the Scrutiny of the M^stries of Grace or
Nature, Magister noster per quem sactasunt omnia vocatgenus humanum and di^^^
discite a me quia mitis sum and humilis cord forte putabus dicturum discite
quomodo Coelos seri and astra. Augustinus.
nor does he go about to baffle our Faith, by bidding us follow him on the
Waters with St. Peter; He does not attempt to strain our courage by ingadging
us with Martyrs and Confessors, to grapple with Bears and Lious, nor does he
aim to ^port himself with our weakness, and our power, by putting us on
impossible Fates, as to Creat the Heavens, order the Motion of the Stars, or
direct the influence of the Planets, etc. No, no, he would have us assuage our
anger, abate our pride, Master our malice, and mortify our Revenge; and so we
consult best the quiet of the Universe, as well as our own Comfort and Rest.

The third Grace remarkable in the Centurion is his Faith, he believed it would
cost CHRIST but a Word to save his Servant, Verse. 7.
sav but the Word, and my Servant shall be healed. He looked upon Sickness,
Diseases, Affictions and Troubles, as much in subjection to CHRIST's
Jurisdiction and Power, as his own Servants were to him: And we know there is
no controlling or disputing the Military Command, he believed as his Servants
came and went at his Call, so Diseales were at CHRIST' s Beck, to go and sease
on whom he gave Commission, and depart when He pleased. Upon this our Savior
breaks out in- that high Elogy of him, Verse. 9.
That he had not found so great Faith in Israel. This must not be taken
absolutely and in the largest extent, but only in comparison of the Generality
of the Common body of the Nation of the Jews, or these indigent Persons who
crowded about CHRIST for Help and Recovery. None of these exerced so heroic a
Faith, or relied upon Christ's bare Word with such aflyance. The two sisters of
Lazerus were short of him, the one thought the Power of CHRIST was precluded by
want of His Corporal Presence, John. 11.
when she said, Lord if thou had been here, he had not dyed. The other
thought it was prescrided by four days time, when she said, By this time he
stinketh. As if the Divine Omnipotency were confined to time and place, could
not subject these to his Pleasure, nor act beyond the ordinary Measures and
common Sphere of poor Mortals, or the critical period of Distempers in which
Physicians make greatest discovery of their Skill and Art, the S^rophenican
Woman although her Faith be applauded thought no less than a touch of our
Savior's Garment, Matthew: 9.
could do her turn. Jairus besought CHRIST to go to his house to cure his
Daughter. But the Centurion without any haesitation or dispute, Mark. 5.
concludes his bare Word warrant enough for the recovery of his Servant. say
but the Word, and my servant shall be healled.

The Centurion's Faith made him sharp sighted, he spyed the Divinity of CHRIST
through the Vail of his Humanity, and he considered that he who made the
stately Fabric of the Universe Jump from the Womb of nothing into being in
such Beauty and Order, with a Word could remove his Servants sickness by a Word
too, that He who by the sound of His Trumpet can loose the bands of Death,
unbolt the bars of the Grave, and set the Prisoners of Hope at Liberty, can by
His Word send a Pass-part of Health to his sickly Servant.

The Word of the Monarchs of the World is liable to frustration, change and
delusion: And can give no more security to the Faith or Hope of their
Dependants, than they themselves are Masters of, who are subject to all the
Fatalitys, that Impotence, Levity, and Imprudence can render them obnoxious to,
the Scepters that adorn their hands, the Diadems that Crown their Heads, the
Armies that guard their Persons, the Senators that advise, and the Officers
that execute their Commands, cannot put such Virtue and Stability in their
Edicts and Promises, as a Man can firmly build on them: But the GOD we adore
is exemp^ from these infirmities and casualitys, such imperfections occasion in
the Transactions of the Potentats of the Earth. Therefore we may rely on His
Word, Maugre all difficultys and opposition. His Power knows no check, His Will
knows no change, His Wisdom knows no error. Has the LORD said it, Numb: 23.19.
and shall he not do it? Or has he spaken and shall he not make it good? Has
the Word gone out of His Mouth and will it return without executing His
Commission? No, no, the Centurion's servant was healed by His Word, there is
Power and Life in His Word, there is sure Truth and Strength as well as Comfort
and Sweetness in His Promise, there is no fear it will miscarry either through
want of Power to perform, or of Wisdom to conduct, or of Good will to perfect
it.

Now these three are as a three fold cord to fasten our Faith to His Word where
there is Power, Skill, Eccles: ^.12.
and Will, to make it take effect, what more can be added to support our Faith,
if he have Power and want Skill, he may fail of Success: If he have Power and
Skill, and want Good Will, what are we then better: If he have Skill and Good
will, and want Power he cannot help us. The Levit wanted neither Ability or
Skill to unbind the Samaritan, but he wanted a Will, a Heart of Pity. But when
these concur and meet together in one Person, what can we desire more in him
that should engage our Faith and Affyance in him.

This may dissipate all doubts, dispell all fears, encourage the faint hearted,
and comfort the most miserable, and excite them to confide in GOD in their
greatest extremitys. There is an excellent passage in the Psalms to this
purpose, Trust in the LORD Jehovah and he will bring it to pass. Psalm: 37.5.
A curt abrupt Sentence, but very pithy and comprehensive, where in effect he
mentions All in naming nothing, and setting no bounds to his Power, not to our
difficultys, restricting neither his Promises, nor our exigences, he would seem
to permit us to extend our desires in proportion to the vast Circumferrence of
his infinite Power and Goodness, and our own needs, the indefinitness of the
Phrase leaves room to our thoughts to stretch themselves to all possibilitys,
and gives encouragement to our Hope in the worst perplexities And lest some
favors might be omitted in the ennumeration, chooses rather to be altogether
silent, than to forget any, or limit the Almighty Power or our Trust by the
rehearsal of a few Instances. Therefore he says in general without exception
of any difficulty or exclusion of any Case, Trust in the LORD, end he shall
bring it to pass.

Were there more of this Affyance in GODS Previdence among us, we would not
grudge to spare part of our store to pious purposes and charitable uses: which
is that in the fourth place, comes next under our consideration, for which the
Centurion is chiefly magnified, applauded, and set forth as a Pattern to our
imitation. Would GOD he and such Liberal Benefactors might have but a few
Followers of their Example among the many praisers of their Bounty. Now I have
arrived at that which I mainly intended to speak of, his Benificence which the
Elders, singled our as the main ground of the commendation they give him, for
he loves our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue; But my insisting so much
on his other Virtues, will necessitate me to more brevi^y on this head.

His Benifioence divids it self into two Branches, it extends to their
Spiritual and Temporal concerns, to their Church and State, he built them a
Synagogue, there his cate of their Religion and Worship; He loved their Nation,
there his Affection to their Civil Interests: You may see here as in a Table
the sum of the Law and Gospel, ^ro^ati^ dilectionis exb^b^tio operis. Greg. Mag.
and the substance of True Religion in his Love to GOD, and his Neighbor: his
works of piety and Acts of charity, vindicates his love from all suspicion
and jealousy. His Love to GOD appears in taking care to build a place for His
Worship, he built them a Synagogue.

I know not what that Godliness means which will be at no Cost for GOD, or
Expense for his Service, David, Solomon, and Nebemiah, and all the famous ies
of Old were strangers to that Cheap Piety and penurious Zeal, that makes People
so narrow hearted and closs fi^^ed to Religious Works. Yea, the glimmering
light which Nature communicated to the Heathen World, made them testify their
concernedness for the honor of their Gods, by Houses more magnifick and
starely than their own private Edifices. And when the Primitive Christans
emerged from the darkness of Paganism, from the scorn and contempt they and
their Profession were drowned under, they thought themselves oblidged in
proportion to the Majesty they adored, and his Munificence to them, to
consecrate some portion of the Effects of his Bounty to his Honor and Service,
they who knew nothing of our expensive Vices, were very sumptuous in those
splended Dwellings they set a part for God, but sparing for the Ornament of
their own Mansion Houses: While there are many now a days like those the
Prophet complained of; Haggai. 1.
Care not what come of the House of GOD, though it be no better than a Cottage,
if they go in Silks and purple, dwell in Palaces and live in Ease under their
ceiled Houses.

There is certainly a Pious Munificence and a Holy Liberality, comely and
commendable amongst Christians, whereby they give indication of their
affection, and expression of their devotion, in their bounty to GODS House and
charity to his members. Psalm. 50.
Not that GOD needs our wealth or riches, but that we need give such
discoveries of the sincerity of our Faith, and Affection, as are distinguishing
marks to our own comfort, and the confutation of others.

We know who pretended Charity to the Poor, John 12.4. and 5. Verse.
when he grudged the bounty that was showed to our Savior, it was Judas and
these who repine at what the Pious Liberality of some have devoted to maintain
the Worship of GOD, and would rob Churches and Ministers of their due, do too
much transcribe his fault, I pray GOD they do not follow his fate, indeed if we
measure Judas his care of the Poor, by his charity to his Master, as rationally
we may, he that was ill to the Head, cannot be concluded likely ty to value
much his Members. He that was cruel to the Master, will not be more merciful to
the servants. And he that is content to see the Church in Ruins, will not be
much moved to see the Poor in Rags, he that envys the Ministers little
Pittance, will not much regard the Poor Man's penury.

What a disgrace is it to Christianity, that Pagans took more care of the
Temples of their Idols, and of their Mock-priests, than we do of our Churches
and Pastors: We may exclaim with the Father, Tertullian:
O Melior Nationum in suos fides. How much more respective and affectionat are
Pagans and Papists to their Superstitious Churchmen, than we are to our Pious
and Learned Pastors. The Piety and Charity of former times made our
Predecessors more liberal Donators too, and Zealous Admirers of the lesser
Learning, and meaner parts of these days, then the conceited bigotry of this
Age, will permit them to treat the higher Seize of more eminent Men.
There are among us who will spend more on their Prde and Vanity, on their
Luxury and Riot on adrunken Club, or an expensive pastim, a Litigious Law suite
in a day, then they^le bestow all the year over, nay, may be all their life
time upon either pious works or charitable uses. And we often see misery and
Beggary succeed this uncharitable prodigality; I have seen in my time, what the
Virtuous industry of Parents laid up for their Children, converted into the
feuel of the Vanity of their Posterity: And what they earued with much toil, I
wish I could fay of them all with equal Honesty, and Integrity, Care and Pains,
squandred away upon Whoores and Hounds, Hauks, and Horses, while those that
bestowed some portions of their means for Honorable ends, and charitable
purposes, made GOD their debtor, the Nation their Protectress, and Posterity
the Honourer of their Memory, and preserver of their praise.

We see how careful the Centurion was of their Religious concerns in
encourageing their Worship, and by his pious Liberality providing them a
convenient place for their Devotion, for he built them a Synagogue: Let us
consider if his Zeal emptied it self wholly in this Channel, without reserving
any parts thereof for their secular interest, and we will find he was a
Stranger to that new Theology, which to the destruction of Religion and
dissolution of all Government, puts piety and Morality, Zeal and Humanity by
the Ears; No, no, his Benificence is not confined to their Spiritual
Ecclesiastic Affairs allanerly, he is an affectionate Promotter of the Common
Welfare of their Country; for so they declare, he loves our Nation. He knew
very well neither his long prayers in, nor his Expenses on the Synagogue, could
make compensation for injustice or oppression, or justify any thing of cruelty
or in Humanity: And that the fervor of his piety could not legittimate his
Devouring Widows Houses, usurping the Rights and properties of others,
therefore he applied himself to gain the Esteem, and retain their favor by all
the good offices of Charity and Benignity. He loves our Nation.

His Love was the Spring of his Beneficence, it was not in him an idle passion
or a passionate wish, but a vigorous active principle which carried him above
all Narrow designs, and selfish purposes to promote the Universal good of the
Nation, and the common benefit of the Country. Were all more influenced by
such a generous principle nothing could conduce more to the Beauty and Order,
Security and Profit of Christian Societies, which made the Prince of
Philosophers say, that Laws would be useless were Friendship Inthroned in men's
hearts; Lex venit in subsidium Amicitiae Aristotl:
Indeed Love is the Sovereign of all the virtues that conduce to our content or
interest, and that which sets them all a working, It is the Soul and Life of
all that is Amiable, Pleasant, Profitable, and Delightful in the World. What
the Light of the Sun is in HEAVEN and Earth, in Kingdoms and Empires, in
Palaces and Cottages, on Sea and Land, That Love is in Familys and Citys,
Communities and Societys, the Sweetness of Conversation, the Pleasantness of
Entertainment, Nune ades, aeterno complectens omnia nexu, Orerum mistique salus
concordia mun di; Et sacer orbis amor. Lucanus lib: 4.
the Comfortable Enjoyment of Friends, the mutual Assistance and Endearments of
Relations, the Felicity of Princes, the Stability of Thrones, the Happiness of
Subjects, and the Glory of Nations, the Security, Peace, and Welfare of the
World, are all maintained by Love. The Universe would crumble into pieces, were
not for This: It is the Cement of its Parts, the preserver of its Harmony: No
wonder it is the melody of Heaven, the exercise of its Inhabitants, the delight
of Angels, O Foelix hominum genus si vestros animos amor quo coelum regitur
Regat: Boethius lib: 2do.
the Employment of Seraphims. Were there more of it in this lower World, it
would make the Eatth an Image of Heaven, and us fit Candidats for these blessed
Regions above, where it rules so powerfully, and reigns so Triumphantly.

While I am speaking of the Centurion's Love, which was the Source of his
Beneficence. I cannot omit to tell you one of its Miracles, when it passes into
a Divine Affection, yea, it retains something of it while it stays in the
lower Valleys of Human Passion. And that is how it resembles the Divine Nature
(of which according to St. John, it is the purest representation) in this that
as nothing was the theater of GODS Omnipotency in the Creation of the World, so
the power of Love seems to be set off by nothing, when it makes not only what
we do, but what we do not, be taken off our hands, and registered as so many
Items, in GODS Book of Accounts, for which he becomes our Debtor, an
affectionat Ardour to impart what we have, yea, what we have not, for the
Benefit and Good of others, is reckoned by GOD no small debt on him, 2 Samuel: 7
and accordingly rewards it, this made David's purpose of building GOD a House,
as acceptable as Solomon's Performance. Luke. 21.
And the Widows Mite more valuable than all the Rich-Donations of the Opulent
Rulers. Here Love gave dimensions to the smalness of her Charity, beyond their
vast Oblations made it more bulky, and weigh more than all their tedious
prayers and sumptuous presents. The largeness of her Heart made Compensation
for the slenderness of her Gift: But mind, it was because the scantness of her
offering was the Effect of the narrowness of her Fortune. And let none of you
to whom GOD has given Talents, think that the Widows Mite is a Precedent for
the little pittances of your Charity, or that he will accept of your Good will
or faint endeavors, where there is Power and Ability to offer and do more.
When a Man is pinched in the exercise of his Charity, through the difficulty of
his circumstances, his Good will may be infinite, and the Restraint which
Necessity, Justice, or Prudence puts on him, will not mar him of the blessing
entailed on Bounty and Charity, yea the sorrowful troubled Resentment that a
Virtuous Man has, that he cannot do more Good, will be reckoned not the least
part of his present Charity, and will make up no small portion of his future
Glory.

The Centurion's Benificence makes him acceptable both to GOD and Man, we see
CHRIST and the Elders magnify his praise, there is something singular in this
Virtue to recommend it to us, whence it has such power in Heaven and Earth,
such sway over GOD and Man.

As all the graces how amiable soever they be, neither shine alike, nor speed
alike, and all the virtues how lovely soever they be affect us not all alike.
To this I may transfer that passage of the great Apostle of he Gentiles, there
is one Glory of the Sun, another Glory of the Moon, and another Glory of the
Stars, for one Star differs from another Star in Glory; So it is in the
constelation of virtues, each of them have their peculiar excellencies, and
proper Elogies, and how Fair soever they all appear, yet none of them shows
more magnificence and splender, none of them Shines with more Orient Luster, or
disperses more benigh influences, than Beneficence or Charity: Its
Sircumferrance is larger, its tayes spread further, its Efforts of more
universal extent, and common concern to mankind, While the exercise of other
virtues is confined to a narrower compass, runs in a straiter Channess, and
goes no further then a man's own or his Neighbors particular advantage, and as
its theater is more August, its Circle more Ample, its Beams more Radient and
Extensive; So of them all its most attractive of commendation and Respect, all
Men by a certain kind of of interest are easily inclined to extol such with
solmn acclaimations. None in all ages have been more honored, none in all
Nations have been more esteemed or beloved, none have had a more fragrant name
while they lived, or a more lasting Fame after they dyed, than such as
delighted in works of Mercy, and Acts of Bounty.

The policy of Princes may make them more dreaded abroad, then Revered at home,
the justice of Sovereigns may restrain the violence of the hands, without
rectifieing the Vennom of the hearts of their Subjects, the Temporance of
Anchorets may afford matter for eloquent Harangues on Abstinence and
Mortification to some Monasticks, without affecting their minds any more then
allaying their appetites; The Fortitude of Conquerours may secure for a time
the Crowns they have snathced, subdue the necks, bind up the Tongues of the
Enemies of the Glory of their Triumphs: And such are neither beloved in their
life, nor bemoaned at their death; but it is benificence which has appropriated
to it self the name of true and real goodness, it is this which by a welcome
violence, a Victorious sweetness, and a voluntary force convinces, the minds
Conquers the wills, and captivates the affections of men.

Power by its awful Sternes may bow the Knees of Men; Riches with the
Glitterings of silver and gold may dazzle the eyes of Men; Eloquence with its
charming Cadances may tickle the Ears of Men; Beauty with its Sparkling
Strictures may ravish the fancies, and inflame the passions of Men; Knowledge
and Learning may raise the Admiration of Men, but it is reserved to Benificence
to erect Trophies, and establish its Throne in the hearts of Men; It is rare to
find a nature so stubborn, a heart so brutish, a Soul so fierce as yields not
an inward Veneration to the very memory of Benefactors. Behold then the
succesful Art of winning Souls, and Vanquishing hearts, of begetting
Friendship, and conciliating favor of confirming Friends, and converting Foes,
of becoming the Darling of Heaven, and delight of Men: And of this our Text is
an instance, and the occasion of this days Solemnity, a Commentary upon, and a
Witness of it.

And that further, if you consider that in nothing we make nearer approaches to
the Deity we Revere then in Works of mercy, and acts of benificence. To be like
GOD was man's presumption from the beginning, and his Neck break to the Boot:
Yea and in the very abyss of misery into which his former vanity has now
precipitated him, he retains some smack of this arrogance, and though now he
resembles but the Rubbish of a stately Cathedral, and is no more than the ruins
of Innocent Man, that I may cry out, O! Quantum mutatus ab illo; Yet he affects
still to resemble his Maker, Behold then an honest way to content this
ambition, be benificent; what else is the importance of that phrase, Luke 6.36.
Be ye merciful as your Heavenly Father is merciful. In this you are in a
manner substituted to be as GOD to your Neighbor.

The common apprehension of mankind, and the practice of all times show this.
Since in all Ages, even most corrupt; Men have been ever apt to place the
statues of their Benefactors among those of their Gods, desiring that Love and
Veneration to them in some degree, which in perfection does appertain to the
supreme Benefactor of all.

We would all be like GOD, but not in grace and goodness, so much as in Wealth
and greatness, power and command, and that not to protect the Weak, or right
the Oppressed, or relieve the Needy, but to carry all like a torrent before us,
to crush every one that crosses our humor, that will not bow to our Nod, that
stands in the way of our ambitious projects, or covetous designs. We affect not
to be like GOD in these Attributes he has proposed himself as a precedent for
imitation, such as his Mercy, Goodness and Holiness, in aspiring after which,
we cannot become Criminal; But we covet to resemble and transcribe him in these
perfections, for which he is more to be adored by us, than followed: such as
his power and wisdom; The undue desire after which turned Angels into Devils,
and Adam out of Paradise. But there is no danger in endeavoring to be like GOD
in Charity and Benificence. Would GOD our Ambition ran more in this channel,
than in the other. There is no fear of sin and guilt, whatever Reins we please
givethis passion in this matter. Woes me that there should be so great a
contest among us for outward advantage, and so little Zeal for inward
Excellencies, such as grace and goodness, piety and charity. We would have no
man richer than our selves, no man greater than our selves, no man happier than
our selves, but any may be holier and better, any man may be more merciful and
humble, more charitable and bountiful, without Envy or Emulation.

We know Heaven will admit no guests but such as are pourtraicts of the Divine
Image, you see Benificence is as lively a draught of this, as any: The Picture
I have given you of the Noble Centurion; And the Works of the Worthy Herriot
the Religious Founder of this Rich and Stately Hospital, show they are copies
of this Divine Original, I pray GOD, that such as commend the Qualities and
Acts of those Excellent Patterns, may in some degree answerable to their state,
transcribe their practice, do good to the Church and Country, Prove. 3.9.
Honor the LORD with their substance, Adorn Religion by charity, so they will
lay up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that
they may lay hold on Eternal life. Which GOD give us Grace in our several
Capacities to perform, 1 Timothy 6.19.
according to our Abilities.

FINIS.

