A Modest ANSWER To a Printed Pamphlet, Entitled, A SPEECH Lately made by a
NOBLE PEER OF THE REALM.
JUst and Worthy (with all Commendations to be Recorded to Posterity) are the
endeavors of the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and many other true
Patriots, to deliver this, and succeeding Ages from that unsupportable Yoke of
Slavery, which that State Policy, called Popery imposes on all its Devoto's,

I do not at all question but this was the main Design of a Speech lately made
by a Noble Peer of the Realm: Yet if I endeavor to show that the means which
he advises are ineffectual to obtain this end, I hope I shall not be accounted
a Papist in Masquerade, or guilty of Scandalum magnatum, since the Noble Peer
has been pleased to make this Challenge, "If any can answer "or oppose Reason
to what I say, I beg they would do it: Wherefore, to gratify this Noble Peer's
desire, I (in all humility) offer to some of his Propositions a few modest
Answers.

Truly I think the Noble Peer is very unfortunate in the President of Hen. the
4th. (whom he is pleased to style a Wise and Magnanimous Prince;) and yet in
this Reign it was that Fire and Faggot were first used against Dissenters in
Religion: But however, the Chronicles we (of the meanest Rank) use, do not
afford this President. Baker indeed tells us, That he connived at the
Impeachment of the Dukes of A^marle and Exeter: The one was accused for
speaking against his Title to the Crown; the other for murdering his Father;
And he adds the Reason, Because he had professed Enemies enough, and had no
mind to make such of them, who (at the least) pretended to be his Friends.

But to grant what the Noble Peer desires:

Was there ever any Prince since the Conquest, that has oftener changed his
Ministers of State, than our present Gracious King? and this some men knew to
their sorrow, who when they were at the Helm, thought it very unreasonable that
every Month should produce new Statesmen; For by this method before any one
could understand the Areana Imperii, and able to give Counsel he shall be sent
discontented into the Country; and the ill consequences of discontented
Statesmen, who is ignorant of?

After our Noble Peer has past a very witty and smart Reflection on the Ladies
at Court, he passes to the next Paragraph, where we have these words, "We must
neither have Popish Wife -- nor any new Convert.

What is meant by the first I cannot guess, unless with our New-State-Officers
we are to have a new Model of Religion; If by new Converts be understood such,
who abominating the Superstition of the Church of: Rome, are come over to our
Church; I much wonder this Noble Peer, who is esteemed a great Patron of the
Protestant Religion, should forget: what great Influence Reputation, Honor,
and Rewards (in this Life) have upon the minds of men, and how hard a thing it
is to persuade a man to forsake these, though it was to embrace a true
Religion, where by one party he is disesteemed, disrespected by his Prince; by
the other party, be loaded (though fally) with the Ignominies of an Apostate,
Schismatic, and what not? Is this the way to gain Converts to the true.
Protestant Catholic Religion? That is, the Religion of the Church of England,
as at present it is Established by Law.

As to the Example of the Duke of Savoy, forbidding Ambassadors staying but
some few Weeks in his Country, it seems altogether impracticable by a Trading
Nation, as ours is; For if it cannot be supposed but our Ambassadors shall be
used as we use others, then I desire to know how we shall understand what
Designs of foreign Princes are? and how they stand in relation to our selves,
which is the main end of maintaining Ministers abroad.

And it is likewise worthy our Consideration, how prejudicial this advice is to
the Merchants; For if any injustice be done to them by Officers in Foreign
Ports, who shall represent their Case to the Prince or his Council? If they
themselves; How much Time, how much Money must be spent, before they get any
opportunity to be heard? And at last, it is more than probable, they shall be
forced to sit down by the wrong; Whereas a public Minister has more
Opportunities, more Friends, and can speak more boldly, and the Court shall be
more fearful of offending him, than of doing Justice to any private single
Person.

How the Premises of the next paragraph but one infer the conclusion that is
drawn from them, I do not understand, and therefore I shall pass on to the
next, which I shall consider, together with the Five after it.

In these two, the King is Accused of Neglect of his own Sacred Person, and of
Carelessness or Slowness, (which you will,) of Searching to the bottom of the
PLOT? What would this Noble Peer have His Majesty do? Would he have him be kept
up in his Chamber? There he is not Safe, for his own Family will have access to
him; and they we are told must be turned off; because not fit to be trusted?
Must he be Armed Capapee? But who must be trusted to put them on? Really I
cannot imagine what His Majesty can do more, either as to the one, or the
other, than he has already Graciously done.

Has he not issued out His Royal Proclamations, for the apprehending of all
that were accused, as parties in the Horrid and Damnable Popish Plot? Has he
not caused such as could be apprehended to be legally Tried? Has he Reprieved
any one that was Condemned? Has he refused any thing for the extirpating of
Popery, to which he is advised by his Parliament? Has he not taken into his
Protection, Granted Pardons, for all manner of Misdemeanors; and given large
Rewards to all those worthy Persons, who by their Discoveries, have (as much as
in them lay,) delivered us from the Danger of Popish Cruelty; So that we may
truly say, No Story affords a Parallel of him.

Next we are told the Transactions between him and his Brother, are
Incomprehensible, and so it will be but lost labor and folly, to search into
them; quickly after we have a smart observation, viz All Preferments were
bestowed by the Duke, Not a Bishop made without him.

But sure they will allow two or three to be made without his consent; But
these things I shall pass by, being wholly Ignorant of any ones promotion, as
well as of the causes of Prorogations, Dissolutions, or Assembling of
Parliaments.

Now let us consider, whether or no the Disinabling the Duke of York from
Inheriting the Crown of England and Ireland, be a sufficient Remedy to Unite
these Distracted Nations.

These Considerations move many to conclude in the Negative, viz. When our
Parliament have used their best endeavors, and the King Signed the Bill; yet
in all provability the Duke, if he out-lives the King, will be Crowned King of
Scotland; And if so, can we Imagine an Heroic and Wa^^^ke Prince, Strongly
Fortified with Alliances abroad, And if we believe this Speech, one that has
the Garrisons, the Arms, the ^mmunitions, the Seas, and Soldiers all in his
Friends hands can we believe, I say, that such a Prince as this will be a quiet
Neighbor, to that Nation which he is made to believe, have deprived of his
Birthright.

The Noble Peer having done with the Duke, takes the Money business into
consideration; and here we are told, that make what Laws you will, they will be
but blank Paper before Easter, if the Court have Money to set up for Popery and
Arbitrary Government; So that in short it is the best way to give none.

But is this the way to satisfy the King, that if he trusts the People, he
shall have any thing; Yes if we are satisfied with the terms on which we part
with our Money; How can this be? When you are assured by the Noble Peer, that
make what terms you will, they will be void before Easber.

There is a passage in the next Paragraph, which I dare not Transcribe, and
therefore shall conclude by protesting, that I mean well; and that if it be not
Reason, which I here offer to the Noble Peers Speech, I can at the worst be
accounted but an Impertinent Fool.

FINIS.

