PROPOSITIONS CONCERNING THE SUBJECT of BAPTISM AND CONSOCIATION of CHVRCHES,
Collected and Confirmed out of the WORD of GOD BY A SYNOD of ELDERS AND
MESSENGERS of the CHURCHES in Massachusets-Colony in New England. Assembled at
BOSTON, according to Appointment of the Honored GENERAL COURT, In the Year
1662.

At a GENERAL COURT held at Boston in New England the 8th. of October, 1662.

THe Court having Read over this Result of the Synod, judge meet to Commend the
same unto the Consideration of all the Churches and People of this
Jurisdiction; And for that end do Order the Printing thereof.

By the Court. Edward Rawson Secret'.

CAMBRIDGE: Printed by S. G. for Hezekiah Usher at Boston in New England. 1662.

THE PREFACE TO THE CHRISTIAN READER; And especially to the Churches of
Massachusets-Colony in NEW ENGLAND.
THat one end designed by God's All-disposing Providence, in leading so many of
his poor people into this Wilderness, was to lead them unto a distinct
discerning and practice of all the Ways and Ordinances of his House according
to Scripture-pattern, may seem an Observation not to be despised. That we are
fit or able for so great a service, the sense of our own feebleness forbids us
to think. But that we have large and great opportunity for it, none will deny.
For, besides the useful Labors and Contemplations of many of the Lords
Worthies in other places, and in former times, contributing to our Help, and
showing our Principles to be neither novell nor singular, the advantage of
Experience and Practice, and the occasion thereby given for daily searching
into the Rule, is considerable. And He that has made the path of the just as
the shining light, is wont still to give unto them further light, as the
progress of their path requires further practice, making his Word a Lanthorn to
their feet, to show them their way from step to step, though happily sometimes
they may not see far before them. It is matter of humbling to us, that we have
made no better improvement of our opportunities this way; but some Fruits God
has given, and is to be praised for.

In former years, and while sundry of the Lords eminent Servants, now at rest
from their labors, were yet with us, A Platform of Church Discipline,
comprizing the brief sum thereof, especially in reference to the Constitution
of Churches (which was our first work when we came into this Wilderness) was
agreed upon by a Synod held at Cambridge, and published to the world: From
which (as to the substance thereof) we yet see no cause to recede. Some few
particulars referring to the Continuation and Combination of Churches, needed
yet a more explicit stating and reducing unto practice. For though the
Principles thereof were included in what is already published, yet that there
has been a defect in practice (especially since of late years there was more
occasion for it) is too too apparent: For the rectifying whereof, a more
particular Explication of the Doctrine also about these things, is now
necessary.

In order hereunto, by the Care and Wisdom of our Honored General Court,
calling upon all the Churches of this Colony, to send their Elders and
Messengers, this Synod was assembled, who after earnest Supplications for
Divine Assistance, having consulted the holy Scriptures touching the Questions
proposed to them, have proceeded to the following Issue; hoping that if it
might seem meet to the Father of Lights to guide the Churches unto a right
Understanding and Practice of his Will in these things also, the beauty of
Christ's ways and Spiritual Kingdom among us would be seen in some more
compleatness then formerly. For that which was the prayer of Epaphras for the
Colossians, ought to be both the prayer and labor of us all; viz. that we
might stand perfect and complete in all the will of God: And we trust it is our
sincere desire, that his Will, all his Will, and nothing else but his Will,
might be done among us. To the Law and to the Testimony we do wholly refer
our selves, and if any thing in the following Conclusions be indeed found not
to speak according thereunto, let it be rejected.

We are not ignorant that this our Labor will by diverse be diversely censured;
some will account us too strict in the Point of Baptism, and others too laxe
and large: But let the Scriptures be Judge between us all, There are two
things, the Honor whereof is in a special manner dear to God, and which He
cannot endure to be wronged in; viz. His Holiness, and His Grace. The Scripture
is often putting us in mind how much the Lord loves Holiness, and that in his
House, and in the holy Ordinances thereof, and how he abhors the contrary,
Mal 2.11. Psalm. 93.5. and 2.6. Lev. 11.44, 45. Ezekiel. 22.26. and 44.7, 8. And
hence neither dare we admit those unto the holy Table of the Lord, that are
short of Scripture-qualifications for it; viz. Ability to examine themselves,
and discern the Lords body; Nor yet receive or retain those in Church Estate,
and own them as a part of the Lords holy People, that are visibly and
notoriously unholy, wicked and profane: such we are bidden to put away from
among us, 1. Cor. 5.13. and therefore ought not to continue among us. Neither
may we administer Baptism to those whose parents are not under any Church Power
or Government any where. To baptize such, would be to give the Title and Livery
to those that will not bear the yoke of Christ's Disciples, and to put the holy
Name of God upon them, touching whom we can have no tolerable security that
they will be educated in the ways of Holiness, or in the knowledge and
practice of Gods holy Will. Baptism, which is the Seal of Membership in the
Church the Body of Christ, and an engaging Sign, importing us to be the devoted
Subjects of Christ, and of all his holy Government, is not to be made a common
thing, nor to be given to those, between whom and the God-less licentious world
there is no visible difference: This would be a provocation and dishonor to
the Holy One of Israel.

On the other hand, we find in Scripture, that the Lord is very tender of his
Grace; that he delights to manifest and magnify the Riches of it, and that
he cannot endure any straitning or eclipsing whereof, which is both
deshonourable unto God, and injurious unto men, Gal. 2.21. Ephesians. 2.7. and 3.2,
6, 8. Rom 11.1, 5. Acts 15.10, 11. and 10.15 and 20.24, 26, 27. And in special
he is large in the Grace of his Covenant which he makes with his visible
Church and People, and tender of having the same straightened. Hence when he takes
any into Covenant, with himself, he will not only be their God, but the God of
their seed after them in their generations, Genes. 17.7, 9. And although the
apostate wicked parent (that rejects God and his Ways) do cut off both
himself and his Children after him, Exodus 20.5. and 34.7. Yet the Mercy and
Grace of the Covenant is extended to the faithful and their seed unto a
thousand generations, if the successive parents do but in the least degree show
themselves to be lovers of God, and keepers of his Covenant and Commandments,
so as that the Lord will never reject them till they reject him, Exodus 20.6.
Deuteronomy. 7.9. Psalm. 105.8, 9. Romans 11.16-22. Hence we dare not (with the
Antipaedobaptist) exclude the Infant-children of the faithful from the
Covenant, or from Membership in the visible Church, and consequently not from
Baptism the Seal thereof. Neither dare we exclude the same children from
Membership (or put them out of the Church) when they are grown up, while they
so walk and act, as to keep their standing in the Covenant, and do not reject
the same. God owns them still, and they do in some measure own him: God
rejects them not, and therefore neither may we; and consequently their children
also are not to be rejected. Should we reject or exclude any of these, we
should shorten and straiten the grace of God's Covenant, more then God himself
does, and be injurious to the Souls of men, by putting them from under those
Dispensations of Grace, which are stated upon the visible Church, whereby the
children of God's visible people are successively in their Generations to be
trained up for the Kingdom of Heaven, (whither the Elect number shall still be
brought in the way of such means) and wherein he has given unto Officers and
Churches a solemn charge to take care of, and train up such, as a part of his
flock, to that end; saying to them, as sometimes to Peter, If you love me, feed
my lambs. In obedience to which charge we hope it is, the we are willing and
desirous (though with the inference of no small labor and burden to our
selves) to commend these Truths to the Churches of Christ* that all the Flock,
even the Lambs thereof, being duly stated under Pastoral Power, we might after
a faithful discharge of our Duty to them, be able to give up our account
another day with joy and not with grief.

How hard it is to find and keep the right middle way of Truth in these
things, is known to all that are ought acquainted with the Controversies
there-about. As we have learned and believed, we have spoken; but not without
remembrance that we are poor feeble frail men, and therefore desire to be
conversant herein with much humility and fear before God and men. We are not
ignorant of variety of judgments concerning this Subject; which
notwithstanding, with all due reverence to Dissenters, after Religious search
of the Scriptures, we have here offered what seems to us to have the fullest
Evidence of Light from thence; if more may be added, and may be found contained
in the Word of God, this shall be no prejudice thereunto. Hence also we are
far from desiring that there should be any rigorous imposition of these
things (especially as to what is more narrow therein, and more controversal
among godly men.) If the Honored Court see meet so far to add their
countetenance and concurrence, as to commend a serious consideration hereof to
the Churches, and to secure those that can with clearness of judgment practice
accordingly, from disturbance, that in this case may be sufficient. To
tolerate, or to desire a Toleration of damnable Heresies, or of Subverters of
the Fundamenta's of Faith or Order, were an irreligious inconsistency with the
love of true Religion: But to bear one with another in lesser differences,
about matters of a more difficult and controversal nature, and more remote from
the Foundation, and wherein the godly-wise are not like-minded, is a Duty
necessary to the peace and welfare of Religion, while we are in the state of
infirmity. In such things let not him that practices despise him that
forbeareth, and let not him that forbeareth judge him that practices, for God
has received him.

But as we do not thus speak from doubting of the Truth here delivered ( Paul
knows where the Truth lies, and is persuaded of it, Romans 14.14. yet he can
lovingly bear a Dissenter, and in like manner should we). So we do in the
bowels of Christ Jesus command the consideration of these things unto our
Brethren in the several Churches. What is here offered is far from being any
declining from former Principles, it is rather a pursuance thereof; for it is
all included in, or deducible from what we unanimously professed and owned in
the forementioned Platform of Discipline, many years since. There it is
asserted, that Children are Church Members; That they have many privileges
which others (not Church Members) have not; and that they are under Discipline
in the Church, chap. 12. sect. 7. and that will infer the right of their
children, they continuing to walk orderly. And the other matter of
Consociation, or exercise of Communion of Churches, is largely held forth Chap.
15. and 16.

It may be an Objection lying in the minds of some, and which many may desire
a fuller Answer unto; That these things, or some of them, are Innovations in
our Church-wayes, and things which the Lord's Worthies in New England, who are
now with God, did never teach not hold, and therefore why should we now, after
so many years, fall upon new Opinions and Practices? Is not this a declining
from our first Purity, and a blameable Alteration? To this: Although it were a
sufficient Answer to say, That in matters of Religion, not so much what has
been held or practiced, as what should be, and what the Word of God prescribes,
ought to be our Enquiry and our Rule. The people in Nehemiah's time are
commended for doing as they found written in the Law, though from the days of
Joshua the son of Nun, unto that day, the children of Israel had not done so,
Nehem. 8.14, 17. See the like 2 Chronicles. 30.5, 26. 2 Kings 23.21, 22. they did
not tie themselves to former use and custom, but to the Rule of Gods written
Word, and so should we. It was Thyatira's praise, that their good works were
more at the last then at the first, Rev. 2.19. The Lord's humble and faithful
Servants are not went to be forward to think themselves perfect in their
seize, but desirous rather to make a progress in the knowledge and
practice of God's holy Will. If therefore the things here poopounded concerning
the children of Church Members, and the Consociation of Churches, be a part of
the Will of God contained in the Scriptures, (as we hope the Discourse ensuing
will show them to be) that does sufficiently bespeak their entertainment,
although they had not formerly been) held or heard of amongst us. Yet this must
not be granted, the contrary being the Truth, viz. that the Points herein which
may be most scrupled by some, are known to have been the judgment of the
generality of the Elders of these Churches for many years, and of those that
have been of most eminent esteem among us. As (besides what was before
mentioned from the Platform of Discipline) may appear by the following
Testimonies, from sundry Eminent and Worthy Ministers of Christ in New England,
who are now with God.

First, Touching the children of Church Members.

Mr. Cotton has this saying; The Covenant and Blessing of Abraham is that
which we plead for, which the Apostle says is come upon us Gentiles, Gal.
3.14. which admits the faithful and their Infant Seed, not during their
lives, in case their lives should grow up to Apostasy or open Scandal, but
during their infancy, and so long after as they shall continue in a visible
profession of the Covenant and Faith, and Religion of their fathers: otherwise,
if the children of the faithful grow up to Apostasy, or any open Scandal, ( as
Ishmael and Esau did) as they were then, so such like now are to be cast out of
the fellowship of the Covenant, and of the Seals thereof. Grounds and Ends of
Baptism of Children. p. 106. see also p. ^^.3^.34. Again, The seed of the
Israelites, though many of them were not sincerely godly, yet whilst they held
forth the public profession of God's people, Deuteronomy. 26.3-11. and continued
under the wing of the Covenant, and subjection to the Ordinances, they were
still accounted an holy seed, Ezra 9.2. and so their children were partakers of
Circumcision. Yea further, though themselves were sometimes kept from the Lords
Supper (the Passover) for some or other uncleanness, yet that debarred not
their children from Circumcision. Against this may it not seem vain to stand
upon a difference between the Church of Israel and our Churches of the
New Testament -- For the same Covenant which God made with the National Church
of Israel and their seed, it is the very same for substance, and none other,
which the Lord makes with any Congregational Church, and our seed. Quaery 9th
of Accommodation and Communion of Presbyt. and Congregal. Churches. And the
same for substance with those Quaeries, was delivered by him in 12.
Propositions, as Mr. Tho: Allen witnesses in Epist. to the Reader before
Treat. of Covenant and those Quaeries. Now in the 8th of those Propositions he
has these words: The children of Church Members with us though baptized in
their infancy, yet when they come to age they are not received to the Lords
Supper, nor admitted to fellowship of Voting in Admissions, Elections,
Censures, till they come to profess their Faith and Repentance, and to lay hold
of the Covenant of their parents before the Church; and yet they being not cast
out of the Church, nor from the Covenant thereof, their children as well as
themselves being within the Covenant, they may be partakers of the first Seal
of the Covenant. Lastly, speaking to that Objection, That the Baptism of
Infants overthrows and destroys the Body of Christ, the holy Temple of God; and
that in time it will come to consist of natural and carnal Members, and the
power of Government rest in the hands of the wicked. He Answers, That this puts
a fear where no fear is, or a causless fear. And in prosecution of his Answer
he has these words; Let the Primitive Practice be restored to its purity,
(viz. that due care be taken of baptized members of the Church for their
fitting for the Lords Table) and then there will be no more fear of pestering
Churches with a carnal generation of members baptized in their infancy, then of
admitting a carnal company of hypocrites confessing their Faith and Repentance
in the face of the Congregation. Either the Lord in the faithfulness of his
Covenant will sanctify the hearts of the baptized Infants to prepare them for
his Table, or else he will discover their hypocrisy and profaneness in the
presence of his Church before men and Angels, and so prevent the pollution of
the Lords Table, and corruption of the Discipline of the Church by their
partaking in them. Grounds and Ends of Baptism, etc. p. 161, 163. See also
Holiness of Church Members, p. 41, 51, 56, 57, 63, 87. Bloody Tenent washed, p.
44, 78.

Mr. Hooker says, Suppose a whole Congregation should consist of such who were
children to Parents now deceased who were confederate their children were true
members according to the Rules of the Gospel, by the profession of their
fathers Covenant, though they should not make any personal and vocal expression
of their engagement as the fathers did. Survey, part 1. p. 48. Again, We
maintain according to truth, that the believing parent covenants and confesses
for himself and his posterity, and this covenanting then and now is the same
for the kind of it. Part 3. p. 25. See p. 17, 18. and part 1. p. 69, 76, 77.
And in the Preface, fetting down sundry things, wherein he consents with Mr. R.
he expresses this for one, that Infants of visible Churches born of wicked
parents, being members of the Church, ought to be baptized. In these (says he)
and several other particulars, we fally accord with Mr. R. And Part 3. p. 11.
It is not then the Question, whether wicked members while they are tolerated
sinfully in the Church they and their children may partake of the Privileges?
for this is beyond question, nor do I know, nor yet ever heard it denied by any
of ours.

Mr. Philips, speaking of a people made partakers of Gods Covenant, and all the
privileges outwardly belonging thereto, he says, Themselves and all that ever
proceed from them, continue in the same state, parents and children
successively, so long as the Lord continues the course of his Dispensation; nor
can any alteration befall them, whereby this estate is dissolved, but some
apparent act of God breaking them off from him. Reply, p. 126. Again, speaking
of that Holiness, 1 Cor. 7.14. he says, I take it of foederal holiness,
whereby the children are with the believing parents taken by God to be his, and
by him put under his covenant, and so they continue when men of years, though
they never have any further grace wrought in them, nor have any other state
upon them, then what they had when they were born* Ibid. p 131. Again, a
company become or are a Church, either by conversion and initial constitution,
or by continuance of the same constituted Churches successively by propagation
of members, who all are born in the Church State, and under the covenant of
God, and belong unto the Church, and are a Church successively so long as God
shall continue his begun dispensation, even as well and as fully as the first.
Ibid. p. 145.

Mr. Shepard in Defense of the Nine Positions, p 143. has the expression,
Concerning the Infants of Church Members, they are subject to Censures
whenever they offend the Church, as others are, though so long as they live
innocently they need them not. And in the year 1649. not three months before
his Death, he wrots unto a friend a large Letter (yet extant under his own
Hand) concerning the Membership of Children, wherein he proves by sundry
Arguments that they are Members, and answers sundry Objections against it,
and shows at large what great good there is in children's Membership. In
which Discourses he asserteth, That as they are Members in their infancy, so
they continue Members when they are grown up, till for their wickedness they be
cast out; and that they being Members, their seed successively are Members
also, until by Dissolution or Excommunication they be unchurched: That though
they are Members, it follows not that they must come to the Lords Supper, but
they must first appear able to examine themselves, and discern the Lords Body:
That the children of godly parents, though they do not manifest faith in the
Gospel, yet they are to be accounted of Gods Church, until they positively
reject the Gospel, Romans 11. That this Membership of children has no tendency
in it to pollute the Church, no more then in the Old Testament, but is a means
rather of the contrary; And that there is as much danger (if not more) of the
degenerating and apostatizing of Churches gathered of professing Believers, as
of those that rise out of the seed of such.

Mr. Prudden in a Letter to a friend written in the year 1651. does plainly
express it to be his judgment, That the children of Church Members, are
Members, and so have right to have their children baptized though themselves be
not yet admitted to the Lords Supper. His words are these: Touching the desire
of such Members chidren as desire to have their children baptized, it is a
thing that I do not yet hear practiced in any of our Churches But for my own
part, I am inclined to think, that it cannot justly be denied, because their
next Parents (however not admitted to the Lords Supper) stand as complete
Members of the Church, within the Church Covenant, and so acknowledged that
they might have right to Baptism Now they being in Covenant, and standing
Members, their Children also are Members by virtue of their Parents Covenant
and Membership, as well as they themselves were by virtue of their Parents
Covenant and Membership; And they have not renounced that Covenant, nor are
justly censured for breach of that Covenant, but do own it and profess, it, and
by virtue of it claim the privilege of it to their Children. Then he puts this
his Argument into form thus: Those Children who are within the Covenant of the
Curch, and so Membe^s of it, Baptism cannot be denied unto. But the C^i^dren in
question are within the Covenant of the Church, and so Members of it. Therefore
Baptism cannot be denied unto them. The Assumption is proved thus: The Children
of such Parents as are within the Covenant of the Church, and so Members of the
Church, are themselves within the Covenant of the Church, and so Members of it.
But the Children in question are Children of such Parents as are in Covenant,
and so Members of the Church. Therefore they are so themselves. The Proposition
is clear, because the Parents Covenant for themselves, and for their Children,
Deuteronomy. 29.10,-16. Ezekiel. 16.8, 13. And God accepts both, Genesis 17.12, 13. the
whole Nation is foederally holy, Ezra 9.2. they are expressly said to be in
Covenant with their fathers, Deuteronomy 29. not partly or partially in Covenant, Romans
9.3, 4. Acts 2.39. and God styles himself their God as well as their fathers,
Genesis 17.7, 8, 9. and to have God to be our God, is to be in complete Church
Covenant with him. The Assumption is evident, because else such their Parents
had not had right to Baptism the Seal of the Covenant, but that they had right
unto, and so received it; and the same right that they had, their Children
have, who are included in their Covenant, as they were in their fathers -- and
are not less truly or less completely in Covenant.

Lastly, (to add no more) Mr. Nath. Rogers, in a Letter to a Friend, bearing
date 18.11. 1652. has these words: To the Question concerning the Children of
Church Members, I have nothing to oppose, and I wonder any ^ould deny them to
be Members. They are Members in censu Ecclesiastice; God so calls them, the
Church is so to account of them: And when they are adultae aetatis, though
having done no personal act, yet are to be in Charity judged Members still, and
till after due calling upon, they shall refuse or neglect to acknowledge and
own the Covenant of their Parents, and profess their belief of, and subjection
to the contents thereof -- ^ot Practice, I confess I account it our great
default, that we have made no more real distinction between these and others,
that they have been no more attended, as the lambs of the Flock of Christ: and
whether it be not the cause of the corruption and woeful defaction of our
youth, disquiri permittimus.

So that it was the judgment of these Worthies in their time, that the
children of Church Members are members of the Church as well as their parents,
and do not cease to be members by becoming adult, but do still continue in the
Church, until in some way of God they be cast out; and that they are subject
to Church Discipline, even as other members, and may have their children
baptized before themselves be received to the Lords Supper: and yet that in
this way there is no tendency to the corrupting of the Church by unworthy
members, or of the Ordinances by unworthy partakers. And in the Synod herd at
Cambridge in the year 1648. that particular point of Baptizing the children of
such as were admitted members in minority, but not yet in full communion, was
inserted in some of the draughts that were prepared for that Assembly, and was
then debated and confirmed by the like Arguments as we now use, and was
generally consented to; though because some few dissented, and there was not
the like urgency of occasion for present practice, it was not then put into the
Platform that was after Printed. We need not mention the Meeting of Elders at
Boston upon the Call of the Honored Court in the year 1657. where in Answer to
XXI. Questions, since Printed, this Point is particularly asserted. By all
which it appears, that these are not things lately devised, or before
unheard of, nor can they justly be censured as Innovations or Declensions from
the received Doctrine in New England. It is true, that in the beginning of
these Plantations, and the Infancy of these Churches, there was not so much
said touching these things as there has been since; and the reason is, Because
then there was not the like occasion as since has been: Few children of
Church Members being then adult, at least few that were then married, and had
children. Accordingly, when a Question was put about the privileges of Members
children, when come to years, these Churches then having been but of few years
standing, our Answer was, That by reason of the Infancy of these Churches, we
had then had no occasion to determine what to judge or practice in that matter.
Answer to the 5th. and 6th. of 32. Questions: which may satisfy as the Reason
why in our first beginnings there was no more said touching these Questions.
But afterward, when there was more cause for it, many of the Elders in these
Churches, both such as are now living, and sundry who are now deceased, did
declare their judgments as aforesaid, and this many years ago.

Secondly, Touching Consociation of Churches, take these few Testimonies, in
stead of many more that might be alleged.

Mr. Cotton, Keys, p. 54, 55. It is a safe and wholesome and holy. Ordinance of
Christ, for particular Churches to join together in holy Covenant, or Communion
and Consociation among themselves, to administer all their Church Affairs
(which are of weighty, and difficult and common concernment) not without common
consultation and consent of other Churches about them. And how it is so, he
there shows in all the particulars. See also p. 24, 25, 47 59.

Mr. Hooker, Survey, see part 4. p. 1, 2. and p. 45. And in the Preface he
professes his consent with Mr. R. That Consociation of Churches is not only
lawful, but in some cases necessary. That when causes are difficult, and
particular Churches want light and help they should crave the assistance of
such a Consociation. That Churches so meeting have right to Counsel, Rebuke,
etc. as the case does require. And in case any particular Church shall walk
pertinaciously, either in the profession of Error or sinful Practice, and will
not hear their counsel, they may and should renounce the right hand of
fellowship with them. And after he sets down this of Consociation of Churches
amongst other things, wherein he had leave to profess the joint Judgment of
all the Elders upon the River; of New Haven, Guilford, Milford, Stratford,
Fairfield, and most of the Elders in the Bay. By which it is clear, that this
point of Consociation of Churches is no new invention of these times, but was
taught and professed in New England many years ago, for so it was we see in
Mr. Hooker's time, and it is now above fifteen years since he departed this
life.

To these of our own Ministers, we shall only add a passage in the
Apologetical Narration of Dr. Goodwyn, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Sidrach Simpson, Mr.
Burroughes, and Mr. Bridge; wherein, besides much more to this purpose,
touching the Remedy provided in the Congregational-way for mal-Administrations,
or other miscarriages in Churches, p. 16-21. They set it down (in p. 27.) as
their past and present Profession, That it is the most to be abhorred Maxim
that any Religion has ever made profession of, and therefore of all other the
most contradictory and dishonorable unto that of Christianity* that a single
and particular Society of men, professing the Name of Christ, and pretending to
be endowed with a Power from Christ, to judge them that are of the same Body
and Society within themselves, should further arrogate unto themselves an
exemption from giving account, or being censurable by any other, either
Christian Magistrate above them, or Neighbour-Churches about them. See also Mr.
Burroughes Heart-Divis. page 43, 47.

Brethren, bear with us: Were it for our own: Sakes, or Names, or Interests, we
should not be sollicitous to beg Charity of you. With us it is a small thing to
be judged of man's day. But it is for your sakes, for your children's sake, and
for the Lord's sake, that we entreat for a charitable, candid, and considerate
Acceptance of our labor herein. It is that the Congregations of the Lord
might be established before Him in Truth and Peace, and that they might have
one heart and one way in the fear of God, for the good of them and of their
children after them. Do we herein seek our selves? our own advantage, ease or
glory? Surely we feel the contrary! What is it we desire, but that we might do
our utmost to carry your poor Children to Heaven; and that we might see these
Churches bound up together in the Bonds of Truth and Peace? Forgive us this
wrong. But should the Church-education of your children be by the want of your
hearty concurrence, rendered either unfeizible or ineffectual; should they live
as Lambs in a large place, for want of your agreement to own them of the Flock,
we beseech you to consider how uncomfortable the account hereof would be
another day. We pray with the Apostle, that you do no evil, not that we should
appear approved, but that you should do that which is good and right, though we
be rejected. For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth: and
this also we wish, even your perfection, 2 Cor. 13.7, 8, 9. However, we hope
after-ages will bear witness, that we have been in some measure faithful to the
Truth in these things, and to this part of Christ's Kingdom also in our
generation.

But we may not let pass this opportunity, without a word of Caution and
Exhortation to the Youth of the Country, the children of our Churches, whose
Interest we have here assorted. Be not you puffed up with Privileges, but
humbled rather, in the awful sense of the Engagement, Duty and Danger that does
attend them: It is an high favor to have a place in Bethel, in the house of
God, and in the gate of Heaven; but it is a Dreadful place: God will be
sanctified in all that come nigh him. A place nigh unto God (or among his
people who are near to him, Ps. 148.14) is a place of great fear, Psa. 89.7.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, when owned as the people of the Lord your
God, (Deuteronomy. 27.9, 10.) lest there should be among you any root that bears
gall and wormwood. Take heed that you do not with a spirit of pride and
haughtiness, or of vanity and slightness, either challenge or use any of your
Privileges. Think not to bear the Name of Christians, without bearing the Yoke
of Christ. Remember, that all Relations to God and to his people, do come
laden with Duty; and all Gospel-duty must be done in humility. The ways of
the Lord are right, and the humble and serious shall walk in them, but proud
Transgressors shall fall therein. Be not sons of Belial, that can bear no yoke:
Learn subjection to Christ's holy Government in all the parts and ways thereof.
Be subject to your godly Parents: Be subject to your spirtiual Fathers and
Pastors, and to all their instructions, Admonitions and Exhortations: Be
subject unto faithful Brethren, and to words of counsel and help from them: Ye
younger, submit your selves unto the elder; and to that end, be clothed with
humility. Lie under the Word and Will of Christ, as dispensed and conveyed to
you by all his appointed Instruments in their respective places. Break not in
upon the Lord's Table (or upon the Privileges of full Communion) without due
qualification, and orderly admission thereunto, lest you eat and drink your own
damnation Be ordered, and take not upon you to order the affairs of Gods
Family; that is not the place of those who are yet but in the state of
Initiation and Education in the Church of God. Carry it in all things with a
spirit of humility, modesty, sobriety and fear, that our souls may not weep in
secret for your pride, and that God may not resist and reject you as a
generation of his wrath. Oh that the Lord would pour out a spirit of
Humiliation and Repentance upon all the younger sort in the Country, (yea and
upon elder too, for our neglects) from Dan to Beersheba! Oh that we might meet
at Bochim, because so many Canaanues of unsubdued, yea growing corruptions are
found among us! Let it not be said, that when the first and best generation in
New England were gathered to their fathers, there arose another generation
after them that knew not the Lord. Behold, the Lord had a delight in your
fathers to love them, and he has chosen you their seed after them, to enjoy
these Liberties and Opportunities, as it is this day: Circumcise therefore the
foreskin of your hearts, and be no more stiff-necked, but yield your selves to
the Lord, and to the Order of His Sanctuary, to seek him, and wait on him in
all his ways with holy fear and trembling: for the Lord your God is gracious
and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if you return unto him;
if you seek him he will be found of you, but if* you forsake him, he will cast
you off for ever.

We shall conclude, when we have given the Reader a short account of the Work
ensuing. The Propositions in Answer to the first Question, were (after much
discussion and consideration from the Word of God) Voted and Concluded by the
Assembly in the particular terms as they are here expressed. The Arguments then
used for their Confirmation, being drawn up by some deputed thereunto, after
they had been several times read and considered in the Assembly, were Voted and
Consented to, as to the sum and substance thereof. The Answer to the second
Question is here given with great brevity, partly because so much is already
said there-about in the foresaid Platform of Discipline, and partly by reason
of great straits of time: But what is here presented was the joint conclusion
of the Synod. A Preface was desired by the Assembly to be prefixed by some
appointed thereunto, which is here accordingly by them performed.

Now the God of truth and peace guide us and all his people in the ways, and
give us the fruits thereof; help us to feed his flock and his lambs, and to be
fed by him as the sheep of his pasture, that when the chief-Shepherd shall
appear, we may receive together a Crown of glory that fades not away, and may
enter into the joy of our Lord, as those that have neither despised his little
ones, nor denied to be our Brother's keeper: But having faithfully endeavored
to promote the continuation of his Kingdom, and Communion of his people, may
Rest and Reign with all Saints in the kingdom of his glory. Unto whom be glory
in the Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages world without end.

THE ANSWER OF THE ELDERS AND OTHER MESSENGERS of the Churches, Assembled at
Boston in the Year 1662. TO The Questions Propounded to them by ORDER of the
Honored GENERAL COURT.
Quest, 1. WHo are the Subjects of Baptism?

Answ: The Answer may be given in the following propositions, briefly confirmed
from the Scriptures.

1 They that according to Scripture, are Members of the Visible Church, are the
subjects of Baptism.

2 The Members of the Visible Church according to scripture, are Confederate
visible Believers, in particular Churches, and their infant seed. i. e.
children in minority, whose next parents, one or both, are in Covenant.

3 The Infant Seed of confederate visible Believers, are members of the same
Church with their parents, and when grown up, are personally under the watch,
discipline and Government of that Church.

4 These Adult persons, are not therefore to be admitted to full Communion,
merely because they are and continue members, without such further
qualifications, as the Word of God requires thereunto.

5 Church Members who were admitted in minority, understanding the Doctrine of
Faith, and publicly professing their assent thereto; not scandalous in life,
and solemnly owning the Covenant before the Church, wherein they give up
themselves and their children to the Lord, and subject themselves to the
Government of Christ in the Church, their children are to be Baptized.

6 Such Church Members, who either by death, or some other extraordinary
Providence, have been inevitably hindered from public acting as aforesaid, yet
have given the Church cause in judgment of charity, to look at them as so
qualified, and such as had they been called thereunto, would have so acted,
their children are to be Baptized.

7 The members of Orthodox Churches, being found in the Faith, and not
scandalous in life, and presenting due testimony thereof; these occasionally
coming from one Church to another, may have their children Baptized in the
church wither they come, by virtue of communion of churches: but if they remove
their habitation, they ought orderly to covenant and subject themselves to the
Government of Christ in the church where they settle their abode, and so their
children to be Baptized. It being the churches duty to receive such unto
communion, so far as they are regularly fit for the same.

The Confirmation of these Propositions from the Scripture follows.

Proposition First.

They that according to Scripture are members of the visible Church, are the
subjects of Baptism.

The truth hereof may appear by the following evidences from the word of God.

1. When Christ says, Go ye therefore and teach, or (as the Greek is) disciple
all Nations, Baptising them, Mat. 28.19 he expresses the adequate subject of
Baptism, to be disciples, or discipled ones. But disciples there is the same
with members of the visible church:

For the visible Church is Christ's school, wherein all the members stand
related and subjected to him, as their Master and Teacher, and so are his
scholars or disciples, and under his teaching, as verse 20. And it is that
visible spiritual Kingdom of Christ, which he there from his Kingly power,
ver: 18. sends them to set up and administer in ver: 19. the subjects whereof
are under his Laws and Government: verse 20. Which subjects (or members of
that Kingdom i.e. of the visible church) are termed disciples verse 19. Also
in the Acts of the Apostles (the story of their accomplishment of that
commission) disciples are usually put for members of the visible church: Acts
1.15 In the mids of the disciples: who with others added to them, are called
the church, Acts 2: 47: The members whereof are again called disciples, Acts 6:
1, 2. Acts 9; 1, -- against the disciples of the Lord, i.e against the church
of God. 1 Cor. 15 9 Gal. 1.13 Acts 9 26 He assayed to join himself to the
disciples. The disciples at Lystra, Iconiem and Antioch, Acts 14 21* 22 are
called the church in each of those places verse 23 So the church verse 27 the
disciples verse 28. Acts 18.22 the church at Cesarea; Acts 21.16 the disciples
of Cesarea: So Acts 18 23 with chap. 15.41. and Gal. 1.2. Acts 18.27 and chap.
20 1 with verse 17.28. From all which it appears that disciples in Mat. 28.19
and members of the visible church, are terms equivalent: and disciples being
there by Christ himself made the subjects of Baptism, it follows that the
members of the visible Church are the subjects of baptism.

2. Baptism is the seal of first entrance or admission into the visible church;
as appears from those texts 1 Cor: 12: 13. Baptized into one body, i e. our
entrance into the body or church of Christ, is sealed by Baptism: and Rom; 6
3, 5 Gal. 3: 27. where it is showed that Baptism is the Sacrament of union or
of ingrafting into Christ the head, and consequently into the church his body
and from the Apostles constant practice in baptising persons upon their first
coming in, or first giving up themselves to the Lord and them. Acts 8.12. and
16.15, 33. and 18.8. and in Acts 2.41, 42. they were baptized at their first
adding to the church, or admission into the Apostles fellowship, wherein they
afterward continued. And from its answering unto circumcision, which was a seal
of initiation or admission into the church; Hence it belongs to all and only
those that are entered into, that are within, or that are members of the visible
church.

3. They that according to Scripture are members of the visible Church, they
are in Corenant. For it is the Covenant that constituteth the Church, Deuteronomy
29.12, 13. They must enter into covenant, that they might be established the
people or Church of God. Now the initiatory seal is affixed to the Covenant and
appointed to run parallel therewith, Genesis 17.7, 9, 10, 11. so circumcision was:
and hence called the covenant Genesis 17.13. Acts 7.8. and so Baptism is, being
in like manner annexed to the promise or Covenant, Acts 2.38, 39. and being the
seal that answers to circumcision; Col: 2.11, 12.

4. Christ does Sanctify and cleanse the Church by the washing of water, i e,
by Baptism Ephesians. 5.25.26 Therefore the whole Church and so all the members
thereof (who are also said in Scripture to be Sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1
Cor: 1.2.) are the subjects of Baptism: And although it is the invisible
church, unto the spiritual and eternal good whereof, this and all other
Ordinances lastly have respect, and which the place mentioned in Ephesians: 5. may in
a special man^er look unto, yet it is the visible Church that is the next and
immediate subject of the administration thereof.

For the subject of visible external ordinances to be administered by men, must
needs be visible. And so the Apostles Baptized sundry persons, who were of the
visible, but not of the invisible Church, as Simon Magus, Anamias and Sapphira,
and others.

And these are visibly Purchased and Sanctified by the blood of Christ, the
Blood of the covenant, Acts 2^.28. Heb 10.29. Therefore the visible seal of the
covenant and of cleansing by Christ's blood belongs to them.

5. The Circumcision is often put for the whole Jewish Church or for the
members of the visible Church under the Old Testament. Those within are
expressed by [the circumcised] and those without by [the uncircumcised.] Rom:
15.8. and 3.30. Ephesians: 2, 11. Judge: 14.3. and 15.18. 1 San: 14.6 and 17.26, 36.
Jer 9, 25, 26. Hence by proportion Baptism (which is our Gospel circumcision,
Col: 2.11.12.) belongs to the whole visible Church under the new Testament.
Actual and personal circumcision was indeed proper to the males of old, females
being but inclusively and virtually circumcised, and so counted of the
circumcision: but the Lord has taken away that difference now, and appointed
Baptism to be personally applied to both sexes: Act: 8.12. and 16.15. Gal: 3
28. So that every particular member of the visible Church is now a subject of
Baptism. We conclude therefore that Baptism pertaines to the whole visible
Church, and to all and every one therein, and to no other.

Proposition 2d.

The members of the visible Church according to Scripture, are confederate
visible believers, in particular Churches, and their infant seed, i, e,
children in minority, whose next parents, one or both, are in Covenant.

Sundry particulars are comprised in this proposition, which we may consider
and confirm distinctly.

Adult persons who are members of the visible Church, are by rule confederate
visible believers: Acts: 5.14. believers were added to the Lord The believing
Corinthians were members of the Church there Acts 18: 8 with 1 Cor 1.2. and
12.27. The inscriptions of the Epistles written to Churches, and calling the
members thereof Sants, and faithful, show the same thing, Ephesians 1.1. Phi 1.1.
Col, 1.2. And that consederation, i, e. covenanting explicit or implicit,
[the latter preserves the essence of confederation the former is duty and
most desirable) is necessary to make one a member of the visible Church,
appears. 1. Because the Church is constituted by Covenant: for there is between
Christ and the Church the mutual engagement and relation of King and subjects,
husband and spouse; this cannot be but by Covenant (internal, if you speak of
the invisible Church, external of the visible) a church is a company that can
say, God is our God and we are his people, this is from the covenant between
God and them. Deuteronomy 29, 12, 13, Ezekiel: 16, 8. 3. The church of the old Testament
was the church of God by covenant Gen 17, Deuteronomy 29 and was reformed still by
renewing of the covenant 2 chronicles 15, 12. and 23, 16: and 34, 31 32 Neh: 9 38:
Now the churches of the Gentiles under the new Testament stand upon the same
basis or root with the church of the Old Testament, and therefore are
constituted by Covenant, as that was Rom: 11.17.18. Ephesians: 2 11, 12, 19 and 3: 6.
Heb: 8: 10, 3. Baptism enters us into the Church Sacramentally, i, e, by
sealing the Covenant. The Covenant therefore is that which constitutes the
Church and inferrs membership, and is the Vow in Baptism commonly spoken of.

The members of the visible Church are such as are confederate in Particular
Churches. the Apostles and Evangelists did sometimes Baptize such, as were not
Members of any Particular Church, yet their extraordinary office, large Power
and commission renders them not imitable therein by ordinary Officers. For then
they might Baptize in private without the presence of a Christian assembly, as
Philip did the Eunuch. But that in ordinary dispensation the Members of the
visible Church according to Scripture, are such as are Members of some
particular Church, appears, 1. Because the visible believer that professedly
Covenants with God, does therein give up himself to wait on God in all his
ordinances. Deuteronomy 26: 17, 18. Math: 28, 19, 20. But all the Ordinances of God
are to be enjoyed only in a particular Church. For how often do we find in the
Scripture that they came together into one place (or met as a congregational
particular Church) for the observation and enjoyment of the Ordinances Acts: 2:
1, 44, 46. and 4, 31: and 11.26. and 20: 7. 1 Cor 5: 4. and 11.18.20: 33 and
14: 23. (...) 2. The Apostle in his Epistles writing to Saints or Believers,
writes to them as in particular Churches. 1 Cor 1: 2. Ephesians: 1. 1. Phil: ^: 1.
Col. 1.2. And when the story of the Acts speaks of Disciples other places show
that those are understood to be Members of particular Churches, Acts 18.23.
with Gal: 1: 2. Acts 21 16. with Chap 18: 22 Acts: 11.26. and 14: 22, 23,27,28.
All which shows that the Scripture acknowledges no settled orderly estate of
visible believers in Covenant with God, but only in particular Churches. 3.
The members of the visible Church are Disciples, as was above cleared: now
Disciples are under Discipline and liable to Church Censures: for they are
stated subjects of Christ's Laws and Government, Mar: 28.19, 20. but Church
Government and censures are extant now in ordinary dispensation, only in a
particular Church. Mat 18.17. 1. Cor: 5.4.

The Infant Seed of confederate visible believers are also members of the
visible Church,

1 The covenant of Abraham as to the substance thereof, viz, that whereby God
declares himself to be the God of the faithful and their seed, Gen: 17.7.
continues under the Gospel, as appears. 1 Because the Believing inchurched
Gentiles under the new Testament, do stand upon the same root of covenanting
Abraham; which the Jews were broken off from, Rom 11, 16, 17 18. 2 Because
Abraham in regard of that Covenant was made a Father of many nations, Gen:
17.4, 5. even of Gentiles as well as Jews, under New Testament as well as Old,
Rom: 4.16 17. Gal 3, 29, i, e, in Abraham as a pattern and root, God (not
only showed how he Justifies the believer, Gal: 3, 6, 9. Rom: 4. but also)
conveied that covenant to the faithful and their seed in all nations, Luk:
19.9. If a Son: of Abraham, then Salvation, i, e: the Covenant-dispensation of
Salvation is come to his house. 3. As that covenant was communicated to
proselyte Gentiles under the Old Testament, so its communication to the
inchurched Gentiles under the new Testament is clearly heldforth in diverse
places Gal: 3.14 the blessing of Abraham comprizeth both the internal benefits
of Justification by faith etc which the Apostle is there treating of; and the
external dispensation of Grace in the visible church to the faithful and their
seed, Gen: 28 4. but the whole Blessing of Abraham, and so the whole covenant)
is come upon the Genitles through Jesus Christ. Ephesians: 2.12, 19 They had been
strangers, but now were no more strangers from the covenants of promise i, e,
from the covenant of grace, which had been often renewed, especially with
Abraham and the house of Israel, and had been in the external dispensation of
it, their peculiar portion, so that the Ephesians, who were a far off, being
now called and made nigh, v. 13-17. they have the promise or the Covenant of
promise to them and to their Children, according to Acts: 2, 39. and so are
partakers of that Covenant of Abraham, that we are speaking of.

Ephesians: 3,6. The inchurched Gentiles are put into the same inheritance for
substance (both as to invisible and visible benefits according to their
respective conditions) are of the same body, and partakers of the same promise
with the Jews, the Children of Abraham, of old. The same may be gathered from
Gen: 9, 27. Mat 8 11, and 21, 43.4. Sundry Scriptures which extend to
Gospel Times do confirm the same interest to the seed of the faithful which is
held forth in the covenant of Abraham, and consequently do confirm the
continuance of that covenant: as Exodus: 20: 6. there in the sanction of a moral
and perpetual Commandment, and that respecting Ordinances, the portion of the
church, God declares himself to be a God of mercy, to them that love him, and
to their seed after them in their generations: consonant to Gen: 17.7. compare
herewith Psalm. 105.8, 9 and Deuteronomy. 7.9.

Deuteronomy. 30.6. The grace signified by circumcision is there promised to Parents
and children, importing the covenant to both, which circumcision sealed, Gen:
17. and that is a Gospel-promise, as the Apostles citing part of that context
as the voice of the Gospel, shows Rom: 10, 6-8. with Deuteronomy: 30, 11-14. and it
reaches to the Jews in the latter days, ver. 1-5.

Isay: 65 23. In the most Glorious Gospel-state of the church, ver. 17-19. the
blessing of the Lord is the promised portion of the offspring or Children, as
well as of the faithful parents so Isay: 44.3, 4. (...) Isai: 59.20, 21. Ezekiel:
37 25, 26. at the future calling of the Jews, which those texts have reference
to, ( Rom: 11.26. Ezekiel: 37.19-22, 23 24.) their Children shall be under the
promise or Covenant of special Grace to be conveyed to them in the Ordinances,
Isai: 59.21. and be subjects of David, i, e, Christ their King Ezekiel 37.25. and
have a portion in his Sanctuary, verse 26. and this according to the tenor of
the ancient covenant of Abraham, whereby God will be their God ( viz. both of
parents and Children) and they shall be his People, verse: 26,27. Now although
more abundant fruits of the Covenant may be seen in those times, and the Jews
then may have more abundant Grace given to the body of them to continue in the
Covenant, yet the tenor and frame of the Covenant itself is one and the same,
both to Jews, and Gentiles under the New Testament; Gal: 3.28, Coll: 3.11.
(...) Heb. 8.10. The house of Israel, i, e, the Church of God both among Jews
and Gentiles under the new Testament, have that Covenant made with them, the
sum whereof is, I will be their God and they shall be my people: which is a
renewing of that Covenant of Abraham in Gen 17. (as the same is very often over
in those terms renewed in Scripture, and is distinguished from the Law, Gal: 3
16, 17. Heb 8.9) wherein is implied Gods being a God to the seed as well as
parents, and taking both to be his People, though it be not expressed: even as
it is often plainly implied in that expression of the Covenant in other places
of Scripture: Deuteronomy. 29.13. Jer. 31.1. and 32.38, 39, and 24: 7. and 30 22, 20.
Ezekiel: 37.27, 25. Also the writing of the Law in the heart, in Heb: 8: 10. is
that heart circumcision which Deuteronomy: 30 6. extends both to parents and seed. And
the term, House of Israel, does according to Scripture-use fitly express and
take in (especially as to the external administration of the Covenant) both
parents and Children: among both which are found that elect and saved number,
that make up the invisible Israel compare Jer: 13.11. and 9.26. Isai. 5 7. Hos:
1.6 Ezk: 39.25. Neither may we exclude the least in age from the good of that
promise, Heb 8: 11, (they being sometimes pointed to by that phrase, from the
least to the greatest, Jer. 44.12. with verse 7.) no more then the least in
other respects; compare Isa. 54.13.

In Acts 2.39. at the passing of those Jews into New Testament Church estate,
the Lord is so far from repealing the Covenant Interest that was granted unto
children in the former Testament, or from making the children there losers by
their Parents faith, that he does expressly renew the old grant, and tells them
that the promise or covenant (for the promise and the covenant are terms that
do mutually infer each other; compare Acts 3.25. Gal. 3.16, 17, 18, 29. Romans
4.16. Heb. 6 17) is to them and to their children: and the same is asserted to
be the appointed portion of the far off Gentiles, when they should be called.
By all which it appears, that the covenant of Abraham, Genesis 17.7. whereby God
is the God of the faithful and their seed, continues under the Gospel.

Now if the seed of the faithful be still in the covenant of Abraham, then they
are members of the visible Church; 1. Because that covenant of Abraham, Genesis
17.7. was properly church covenant, or the covenant which God makes with his
visible church, i. e. the covenant of grace considered in the external
dispensation of it, and in the promises and privileges that belong to that
dispensation. For many were taken into that covenant, that were never of the
invisible church: and by that covenant, the family of Abraham, as also by the
renewing thereof, the house of Israel afterward were established the visible
church of God, Genesis 17. and Deuteronomy. 29 12, 13. and from that covenant men might
be broken off, Genesis 17: 14. Romans 11.17, 19. and to that covenant, Circumcision,
the badg of church membership, was annexed. Therefore the covenantees therein
were and are church members. 2. Because in that covenant, the seed are spoken
of in terms describing or inferring church membership, as well as their
parents: for they have God for their God, and are his people, as well as the
parents, Genesis 17 7, 8. with Deuteronomy: 29: 11, 13. They have the covenant made with
them, Deuteronomy 29: 14, 15. and the covenant is said to be between God and them (
between me and thee, and between thy seed after thee: so the Hebrew runs) Gen:
17: 7. They are also in that covenant appointed to be the subjects of the
initiatory seal of the covenant, the seal of membership, Genesis 17: 9, 10, 11.
Therefore the seed are according to that covenant, members of the visible
church, as well as their parents.

Such seed or children are federally holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. [holy] as applied to
any sort of persons, is never in Scripture used in a lower sense than for
federal or covenant-holiness, (the covenant-holiness of the visible Church;)
but very often in that sense, Ezra 9: 2. Deuteronomy: 7: 6. and 14: 2, 21: and 26: 19:
and 28: 9: Exodus: 19: 6: Dan: 8: 24: and 12: 7: Rom: 11: 16: So that to say they
are holy in this sense, viz. by covenant relation and separation to God in his
Church, is as much as to say, they are in the covenant of the visible church,
or members of it.

From Mark 10: 14, 15, 16: Mat 19: 14: Of such is the kingdom of heaven; and
so the kingdom of heaver, or of God, is not rarely used in other Scriptures to
express the visible church, or church estate, Mat. 25: 1: and 21: 43: and 8.11,
12: or it evidently follows from any other sense that can rationally be given
of the words. For those may not be denied a place and portion in the visible
church, whom Christ affirms to have a portion in the kingdom either of
invisible grace, or of eternal glory: Nor do any in ordinary course pass into
the Kingdom of Glory hereafter, but through the Kingdom of Grace in the
visible Church here. Add also, that Christ there graciously invites and calls
little children to him, is greatly displeased with those that would hinder
them, asserts them, notwithstanding their infancy, to be exemplary in receiving
the kingdom of God, embraces them in his arms, and blesses them: all which
shows Christ's dear affection to, and owning of the children of the Church, as
a part of his kingdom; whom we therefore may not disown, lest we incur his
displeasure, as the Disciples did.

Such seed or children are disciples according to Mat 28: 19: verse 18, 19, 20.
but such children are subjects of Christ's Kingdom, or of the kingdom of
heaven, Mat: 19: 14: In the discipling of all Nations intended in Mat. 28.19.
the kingdom of God, which had been the portion of the Jews, was communicated
to the Gentiles, according to Mat. 21.43. But in the kingdom of God these
children have an interest or portion, Mark 10.14. 2. The Apostles in
accomplishing that commission, Mat. 28.19. did disciple some children, viz. the
children of discipled parents, Acts 2.39. and 15.10. They are there called and
accounted disciples, whom the false teachers would have brought under the yoke
of circumcision after the manner of Moses, verse 1, 5. But many of those were
children; Exodus 12.48. Acts 21.21. Lydia and her household, the Jailer and all
his, were discipled and baptized, Acts 16.15, 31 33. Paul at Corinth took in
the children into the holy school of Christ, 1 Cor 7.14. 3. Such children
belong to Christ; for he calls them to him as his, to receive his blessing,
Mark 10.13-16. They are to be received in his Name, Mark 9.37. Luke 9 48. They
have a part in the Lord, Jost. 22.24.25. therefore they are disciples: for to
belong to Christ, is to be a disciple of Christ, Mark 9.41. with Mat. 10.42.
Now if they be disciples, then they are members of the visible church, as from
the equivalency of those terms was before showed.

The whole current and harmony of Scripture shows, that ever since there was a
visible church on earth, the children thereof have by the Lords appointment
been a part of it. So it was in the Old, and it is and shall be so in the New
Testament. Eve, the mother of all living, has a promise made Genesis 3.15. not
only of Christ the head-seed, but through him also of a Church-seed, to proceed
from her in a continued lineal succession, which should continually be at
visible enmity with, and stand at a distance, or be separated from the seed of
the Serpent. Under that promise made to Eve and her seed, the children of Adam
are born, and are a part of the Church in Adam's family: even Cain was so, Genesis
4.1, 3. till cast out of the presence of God therein, verse 14. being now
manifestly one of the seed of the Serpent, 1 John 3.12. and so becoming the
father of a wicked unchurched race. Burden God appointed unto Eve another,
viz: Seth, in whom to continue the line of her Church-seed, Gen 4.25. How it
did continue in his seed in their generations, Genes: 5th shows. Hence the
children of the Church are called Sons of God, (which is as much as members of
the visible Church) in contradistinction to the daughters of men, Genesis 6 2. If
righteous Noah be taken into the Ark (then the only preserving place of the
Church) his children are taken in with him, Genesis 7.1. though one of them, viz.
Ham, after proved degenerate and wicked; but till he so appears, he is
continued in the Church with his Brethren: So Genesis 9.25, 26, 27. as the race of
Ham or his son Canaan (parent and children) are cursed; so Shem (parent and
children) is blessed, and continued in the place of blessing, the Church: As
Japhet also, or Iaphet's posterity (still parent and children) shall in time be
brought in. The holy line mentioned in Genesis 11.10-26 shows how the Church
continued in the seed of Shem from him unto Abraham. When that race grew
degenerate, Josh. 24.2. then God called Abraham out of his country, and from
his kindred, and established his covenant with him, which still took in parents
and children, Genesis 17.7, 9. So it did after in the house of Israel, Deuteronomy.
29.11, 12, 13. and when any eminent restoration or establishment is promised
to the Church, the children thereof are still taken in, as sharers in the same,
Psalm 102.16, 28. and 69.35, 36. Jerem; 32: 38, 39 Isa: 65: 18, 19, 23. Now when
Christ comes to set up the Gospel-administration of his Church in the New
Testament, under the term of the kingdom of heaven, Mat: 3: 2. and 11.11. he
is so far from taking away children's portion and membership therein, that
himself asserts it, Mat: 19: 14. The children of the Gentile, but now believing
Corinthians, are holy, 1 Cor: 7: 14. The Apostle writing to the Churches of
Ephesus and Colosse, speaks to children, as a part thereof, Ephesians: 6: 1. Col. 3:
20. The inchurched Romans, and other Gentiles, stand on the root of covenanting
Abraham, and in the Olive or visible Church, they and their children, till
broken off (as the Jews were) by positive unbelief or rejection of Christ, his
Truth or Government, Romans 11 13, 16, 17,-22. The children of the Jews, when
they shall be called, shall be as aforetime in Church Estate, Ie: 30.20. with
31.1 Ezekiel 37 25-28 From all which it appears, that the series or whole frame
and current of Scripture-expressions does hold forth the continuance of
childrens membership in the visible church from the beginning to the end of the
world.

The seed or children who become members together with their Parents, i.e. by
means of their parents covenanting) are children in minority. This appears, 1.
Because such children are holy by their parents covenanting, who would else be
unclean, 1 Cor. 7.14 but they would not else necessarily be unclean, if they
were adult; for then they might act for themselves, and so be holy by their
personal covenanting: Neither on the other hand would they necessarily be holy,
if adult, (as he asserts the children there to be) for they might continue
Pagans: Therefore the Apostle intends only infants or children in minority. 2.
It is a principle that carries evidence of light and reason with it, as to all
transactions, Civil and Ecclesiastical, that if a man be of age he should
answer for himself, John 9.21. They that are come to years of discretion, so as
to have knowledge and understanding, fit to act in a matter of that nature, are
to covenant by their own personal act, Neh. 10.28, 29. Isa. 44 5, 3. They that
are regularly taken in with their parents, are reputed to be visible
entertainers of the covenant, and avouchers of God to be their God, Deuteronomy: 26.7,
18. with Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12 But if adult children should, without regard to their
own personal act, be taken in with their parents, then some might be reputed
entertainers, that are manifest rejecters of the covenant: for so an adult son
or daughter of a godly parent may be.

It is requisite to the membership of children, that the next parents, one or
both, be in covenant. For although after-generations have no small benefit by
their pious Ancestors, who derive federal holiness to their succeeding
generations, in case they keep their standing in the covenant, and be not
apostates from it; yet the piety of Ancestors suffices not, unless the next
parent continue in covenant, Romans 11 22. 1. Because if the next parent be cut
or broken off, the following seed are broken off also, Exodus: 20.5. Romans 11 17,
19, 20. as the Gentile believing parents and children were taken in; so the
Jews, parents and children, were then broken off. 2. One of the parents must be
a believer, or else the children are unclean, 1 Cor. 7 14.3. If children may be
accounted members and baptized, though the next parents be not in covenant,
then the Church should be bound to baptize those, whom she can have no power
over, nor hope concerning, to see them brought up in the true Christian
Religion, and under the Ordinances: For the next parents being wicked, and not
in covenant, may carry away, and bring up their children to serve other Gods.
4. If we stop not at the next parent, but grant that Ancestors may,
notwithstanding the apostasy of the next parents, convey membership unto
children, then we should want a ground where to stop, and then all the children
on earth should have right to membership and Baptism.

Proposition 3d.

The Infant Seed of confederate visible Believers, are members of the same
Church with their parents, and when grown up, are personally under the Watch,
Discipline and Government of that Church.

1. That they are members of the same Church with their parents, appears; 1.
Because so were Isaac and Ishmael of Abraham's Family-church, and the children
of Jews and Proselytes of Isreal's National Church: and there is the same reason
for children now to be of the same Congregational Church with their parents.
Christ's care for children, and the scope of the Covenant, as to obligation
unto Order and Government, is as great now, as then. 2. Either they are members
of the same Church with their parents, or of some other Church, or Non-members:
But neither of the latter; therefore the former. That they are not Non-members,
was before proved in Propos. 2. Partic. 3. and if not members of the same
Church with their parents, then of no other. For if there be not reason
sufficient to state them members of that Church where their parents have
covenanted for them, and where ordinarily they are baptized and do inhabit,
then much less is there reason to make them members of any other: and so they
will be members of no particular Church at all; and it was before showed, that
there is no ordinary and orderly standing estate of Church Members, but in some
particular Church. 3. The same covenant-act is accounted the act of parent
and-childe: but the parents covenanting rendered himself a member of this
particular Church; Therefore so it renders the child also. How can children
come in with and by their parents, and yet come into a Church, wherein and
whereof their parents are not, so as that they should be of one Church, and the
parents of another? 4. Children are in an orderly and regular state: for they
are in that state, wherein the order of Gods Covenant, and his institution
therein, has placed them; they being members by virtue of the Covenant of God.
To say their standing is disorderly, would be to impute disorder to the order
of Gods Covenant, or irregularity to the Rule. Now all will grant it to be most
orderly and regular, that every Christian be a member in some particular
Church, and in that particular Church, where his regular habitation is; which
to children usually is, where their parents are. If the Rule call them to
remove, then their membership ought orderly to be translated to the Church,
whither they remove. Again, order requires that the child, and the power of
government over the child, should go together. It would bring shame and
confusion for the child to be from under government, Prove. 29.15. and Parental
and Ecclesiastical government concurring, do mutually help and strengthen each
other. Hence the parent and the child must be members of the same Church;
unless the child be by some special providence so removed, as that some other
person has the power over him.

2. That when these children are grown up, they are personally under the Watch,
Discipline and Government of that Church, is manifest: for, 1. Children were
under Patriarchal and Mosaical discipline of old, Genesis 18 19. and 21.9, 10, 12.
Gal. 5.3. and therefore under Congregational discipline now. 2. They are within
the Church, or members thereof, (as has been, and after will be further
proved) and therefore subject to Church-judicature, 1 Cor. 5.12. 3. They are
disciples, and therefore under discipline in Christ's school, Matthew. 28.19, 20.
4. They are in Church Covenant, therefore subject to Church Power, Gen: 17.7.
with Chap. 18.19. 5. They are subjects of the kingdom of Christ, and therefore
under the laws and government of his Kingdom, Ezekiel. 37.25, 26. 6. Baptism
leaves the baptized (of which number these children are) in a state of
subjection to the authoritative teaching of Christ's Ministers, and to the
observation of all his commandments, Mat. 28.19, 20. and therefore in a state
of subjection unto Discipline. 7. Elders are charged to take heed unto, and to
feed ( i. e. both to teach and rule, compare Ezekiel. 34.3, 4.) all the flock or
Church, over which the holy Ghost has made them overseers, Acts 20.28. That
children are a part of the flock, was before proved: and so Paul accounts them,
writing to the same flock or Church of Ephesus, Ephesians 6.1. 8. Otherwise
Irreligion and Apostasy would inevitably break into Churches, and no Church Way
left by Christ to prevent or heal the same: which would also bring many
Church Members under that dreadful judgment of being let alone in their
wickedness, Hosea 4.16, 17.

Proposition. 4th.

These Adult persons are not therefore to be admitted to full Communion, merely
because they are and continue members, without such further qualifications, as
the Word of God requires thereunto.

The truth hereof is plain, 1. From 1 Cor. 11.28, 29. where it is required,
that such as come to the Lords Supper, be able to examine themselves, and to
discern the Lords body; else they will eat and drink unworthily, and eat and
drink damnation, or judgment, to themselves, when they partake of this
Ordinance. But mere membership is separable from such ability to examine one's
self, and discern the Lords body: as in the children of the covenant that grow
up to years is too often seen. 2. In the Old Testament, though men did continue
members of the Church, yet for ceremonial uncleanness they were to be kept from
full communion in the holy things, Levit. 7, 20, 21. Numb. 9.6, 7. and 19.13,
20. yea and the Priests and Porters in the Old Testament had special charge
committed to them, that men should not partake in all the holy things, unless
duly qualified for the same, notwithstanding their membership, 2 Chronicles. 23.19.
Ezekiel 22.26. and 44.7, 8, 9, 23. and therefore much more in these times,
where moral funess and spiritual qualifications are wanting, membership alone
is not sufficient for full communion. More was required to adult persons eating
the Passover, then mere membership: therefore so there is now to the Lords
Supper. For they were to eat to the Lord, Exodus 12.14. which is expounded in 2 Chronicles. 30. where, keeping the Passover to the Lord, verse 5. imports and
requires exercising Repentance, verse 6, 7. their actual giving up themselves
to the Lord, verse 8. heart-preparation for it, verse 19. and holy rejoicing
before the Lord, verse 21, 25. See the like in Ezra 6.21, 22. 3. Though all
members of the Church are subjects of Baptism, they and their children, yet all
members may not partake of the Lords Supper, as is further manifest from the
different nature of Baptism and the Lords Supper. Baptism firstly and properly
seals covenant-holiness, as circumcision did, Genesis 17. Church Membership, Rom:
15.8. planting into Christ, Romans 6. and so members, as such, are the subjects
of Baptism, Matthew. 28.19. But the Lords Supper is the Sacrament of growth in
Christ, and of special communion with him, 1 Cor. 10.16. which supposes a
special renewing and exercise of Faith and Repentance in those that partake of
that Ordinance. Now if persons, even when adult, may be and continue members,
and yet be debarred from the Lords Supper, until meet qualifications for the
same do appear in them; then may they also (until like qualifications) be
debarred from that power of Voting in the Church, which pertains to Males in
full communion. It seems not rational, that those who are not themselves fit
for all Ordinances, should have such an influence referring to all Ordinances,
as Voting in Election of Officers, Admission and Censures of Members, does
import. For how can they who are not able to examine and judge themselves, be
thought able and fit to discern and judge in the weighty affairs of the house
of God? 1 Cor. 11.28, 31. with 1 Cor. 5. 12.

Proposition 5th.

Church Members who were admitted in minority, understanding the Doctrine of
Faith, and publicly professing their assent thereto; not scandalous in life,
and solemnly owning the Covenant before the Church, wherein they give up
themselves and their children to the Lord, and subject themselves to the
Government of Christ in the Church, their children are to be Baptized.

This is evident from the Arguments following.

These children are partakers of that which is the main ground of baptizing any
children whatsoever, and neither the parents nor the children do put in any
bar to hinder it.

1. That they partake of that which is the main ground of baptizing any, is
clear; Because interest in the Covenant is the main ground of title to Baptism,
and this these children have. 1. Interest in the covenant is the main ground of
title to Baptism; for so in the Old Testament this was the ground of title to
Circumcision, Gen 17.7, 9, 10, 11. to which Baptism now answers, Col. 2.11, 12.
and in Acts 2.38, 39 they are on this ground exhorted to be baptized, because
the promise or covenant was to them and to their children. That a member, or
one in covenant, as such, is the subject of Baptism, was further cleared before
in Propos. 1.2. That these children have interest in the covenant, appears;
Because if the parent be in covenant, the child is also: for the covenant is
to parents and their seed in their generations, Gen: 17.7, 9. The promise is to
you and to your children, Acts 2.39. If the parent stand, in the Church, so
does the child, among the Gentiles now, as well as among the jews of old, Rom:
11.16, 20, 21, 22. It is unheard of in Scripture, that the progress of the
covenant stops at the infant child. But the parents in question are in
covenant, as appears. 1. Because they were once in covenant, and never since
discovenanted. If they had not once been in covenant, they had not warrantably
been baptized; and they are so still, except in some way of God they have been
discovenanted, cast out, or cut off from their covenant relation, which these
have not been: neither are persons once in covenant, broken off from it
according to Scripture, save for notorious sin, and incorrigibleness therein,
Rom 11.20. which is not the case of these parents. 2 Because the tenor of the
covenant is to the faithful and their seed after them in their generations,
Gen: 17.7 even to a thousand generations, i. e. conditionally, provided that
the parents successively do continue to be keepers of the covenant, Exodus: 20.6
Deuteronomy: 7:9, 11 Psalm 105:8. which the parents in question are, because they are
not (in Scripture account in this case) forsakers or rejecters of the God and
Covenant of their fathers: see Deuteronomy: 29.25, 26. 2 Kings 17: 15-20. 2 Chronicles: 7:
22 Deuteronomy: 7: 10.

2. That these parents in question do not put in any bar to hinder their
children from Baptism, is plain from the words of the Proposition, wherein they
are described to be such as understand the doctrine of Faith, and publicly
profess their assent thereto: therefore they put not in any bar of gross
Ignorance, Atheism, Heresy or Infidelity: Also they are not scandalous in
life, but solemnly own the covenant before the Church; therefore they put not
in any bar of Profaneness, or Wickedness, or Apostasy from the covenant,
whereinto they entered in minority. That the infant-children in question do
themselves put in any bar, none will imagine.

The children of the parents in question are either children of the covenant,
or strangers from the covenant, Ephesians: 2: 12. either holy or unclean, 1 Cor: 7:
14. either within the Church or without, 1 Cor: 5: 12, either such as have God
for their God, or without God in the world, Ephesians: 2: 12. But he that considers
the Proposition, will not affirm the latter concerning these children: and the
form, being granted, infers their right to Baptism.

To deny the Proposition, Jer: 30: 20. Ezekiel 37: 25, 26. 3. To deny the
application of the initiatory Seal to such as regularly stand in the Church and
Covenant, to whom the Mosaical dispensation, nay the first institution in the
covenant of Abraham, appointed it to be applied, Gen: 17: 9, 10. John 7.22, 23.
4. To break Gods covenant by denying the initiatory Seal to those that are in
covenant, Gen: 17: 9, 10, 14.

Confederate visible Believers, though but in the lowest degree such, are to
have their children baptized; witness the practice of John Baptist, and the
Aposiles, who baptized persons upon the first beginning of their Christianity.
But the parents in question are confederate visible Believers, at least in some
degree: For, 1. Charity may observe in them sundry positive Arguments for it;
witness the terms of the Proposition, and nothing evident against it. 2.
Children of the godly qualified but as the persons in the Proposition, are said
to be faithful, Tit: 1.6. 3. Children of the Covenant as the Parents in
question are) have frequently the beginning of grace wrought in them in younger
years, as Scripture and experience shows: Instance, Joseph, Samuel David,
Solomon, Abijah Josiah, Daniel, John Baptist and Timothy. Hence this sort of
persons showing nothing to the contrary, are in charity, or to Ecclesiastical
reputation, visible Believers. 4. They that are regularly in the Church (as the
Parents in question be) are visible Saints in the account of Scripture (which
is the account of truth:) for the Church is, in Scripture-account, a company of
Saints, 1 Cor: 14: 33. and 1.2. 5. Being in covenant and baptized, they have
Faith and Repentance indefinitely given to them in the Promise, and sealed up
in Baptism, Deuteronomy. 30: 6. which continues valid, and so a valid testimony for
them, while they do not reject it. Yet it does not necessarily follow, that
these persons are immediately fit for the Lords Supper; because though they are
in a latitude of expression to be accounted visible Believers, or in numero
fidelium, as even infants in covenant are, yet they may want that ability to
examine themselves, and that special exercise of Faith, which is requisite to
that Ordinance; as was said upon Propos 4th.

The denial of Baptism to the children in question, has a dangerous tendency
to Irreligion and Apostasy; because it denies them, and so the children of the
Church successively, to have any part in the Lord; which is the way to make
them cease from fearing the Lord, Josh 22.24, 25, 27. For if they have a part
in the Lord, i. e. a portion in Israel, and so in the Lord the God of Israel,
then they are in the Church, or members of it, and so to be baptized, according
to Propos. 1. The owning of the children of those that successively continue in
covenant to be a part of the Church, is so far from being destructive to the
purity and prosperity of the Church, and of Religion therein, (as some
conceive) that this imputation belongs to the contrary Tenet. To seek to be
more pure then the Rule, will ever end in impurity in the issue. God has so
framed his covenant, and consequently the constitution of his Church thereby,
as to design a continuation and propagation of his Kingdom therein, from one
generation to another. Hence the covenant runs to us and to our seed after us
in their generations. To keep in the line, and under the influence and efficacy
of this covenant of God, is the true way to the Churches glory: To cut it off
and disavow it, cuts off the prosperity of Sion, and hinders it from being (as
in the most glorious times it shall be) an eternal excellency, and the joy of
many generations. This progress of the covenant establishes the Church, Deuteronomy.
29 13. Jer. 30.20. The contrary therefore does disestablish it. This obliges
and advantageth to the conveyance of Religion down to after-generations; the
care whereof is strictly commanded, and highly approved by the Lord, Psalm:
78.4, 5, 6, 7. Genesis 18.19. This continues a nursery still in Christ's Orchard
or Vineyard, Isa. 5.1, 7. the contrary neglects that, and so lets the whole run
to ruin. Surely God was an holy God, and loved the purity and glory of the
Church in the Old Testament: but then he went in this way of a successive
progress of the covenant to that end, Jer. 13.11. If some did then, or do now
decline to unbelief and apostasy, that does not make the faith of God in his
covenant of none effect, or the advantage of interest therein inconsiderable:
yea the more holy, reforming and glorious that the times are or shall be, the
more eminently is a successive continuation and propagation of the Church
therein designed, promised and intended, Isa 60.15. and 59.21. Ezekiel. 37.25 -28.
Ps. 102.16-28. Jer. 32.39.

The parents in question are personal, immediate, and yet-continuing members of
the Church.

1. That they are personal members, or members in their own persons, appears,
1. Because they are personally holy, 1 Co. 7 14. not parents only, but [your
children] are holy. 2. They are personally baptized, or have had Baptism, the
seal of membership, applied to their own persons: which being regularly done,
is a divine testimony that they are in their own persons members of the Church.
3 They are personally under discipline, and liable to Church Censures in their
own persons; vide Propos. 3. 4. They are personally (by means of the covenant)
in a visible state of salvation. To say they are not members in their own
persons, but in their parents, would be as if one should say, They are saved in
their parents, and not in their own persons. 5. When they commit iniquity, they
personally break the covenant; therefore are personally in it, Jer. 11.2, 10.
Ezekiel. 16.

2. By the like Reasons it appears that children are immediate members, as to
the essence of membership, ( i. e. that they themselves in their own persons
are the immediate subjects of this adjunct of Church Membership) though they
come to it by means of their parents covenanting. For as touching that
distinction of mediate and immediate, as applied to membership (which some
urge) we are to distinguish 1. between the efficient and the essence of
membership: 2. between the instrumental efficient or means thereof, which is
the parents profession and covenanting; and the principal efficient, which is
divine Institution. They may be said to be mediate (or rather mediately)
members, as they become members by means of their parents covenanting, as an
instrumental cause thereof: but that does nothing vary or diminish the essence
of their membership. For divine Institution gives or grants a real and
personal membership unto them, as well as unto their parents, and makes the
parent a public person, and so his act theirs to that end. Hence the essence
of membership, i. e. Covenant Interest, or a place and p^^tion within the
visible Church, is really, properly, personally and immediately the portion of
the child by divine gift and grant. Josh. 22 25, 27. their children have a
part in the Lord, as well as themselves. A part in the Lord there, and
Church Membership (or membership in Israel) are terms equivalent. Now the
children there, and a part in the Lord, are Subject and Adjunct, which nothing
comes between, so as to sever the Adjunct from the Subject; therefore they are
immediate subjects of that Adjunct, or immediate members. Again, their visible
ingraffing into Christ the head, and so into the Church his body, is sealed in
their Baptism: but in ingraffing nothing comes between the graft and the stock:
Their union is immediate; hence they are immediately inserted into the visible
Church, or immediate members thereof. The little children in Deuteronomy 29.11. were
personally and immediately a part of the people of God, or members of the
Church of Israel, as well as the parents. To be in covenant, or to be a
covenantee, is the formalis ratio of a Churchmember. If one come to be in
covenant one way, and another in another, but both are in covenant or
covenantees, ( i. e. parties with whom the covenant is made, and whom God takes
into covenant) as the children here are, Genesis 17.7.8. then both are in their
own persons the immediate subjects of the formalis ratio of membership, and so
immediate members. To act in covenanting, is but the instrumental means of
membership and yet children are not without this neither. For the act of the
parent (their public person) is accounted theirs, and they are said to enter
into covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12. So that what is it that Children want unto an
actual, complete, proper, absolute and immediate membership? (so far as these
terms may with any propriety or pertine^cy be applied to the matter in hand.)
Is it Covenant Interest, which is the formalis ratio of membership? No, they
are in covenant. Is it divine grant and institution, which is the principal
efficient? No: he has clearly declared himself, that he grants unto to the
children of his people a portion in his Church, and appoints them to be members
thereof. Is it an act of covenanting, which is the instrumental means? No: they
have this also reputatively by divine appointment, making the parent a publik
person, and accounting them to covenant in his covenanting A different manner
and means of conveying the covenant to us, or of making us members, does not
make a different sort of membership We now are as truly, personally and
immediately members of the body of fallen mankind, and by nature heirs of the
condemnation pertaining thereto, as Adam was, though he came to be so by is own
personal act, and we by the act of our public person. If a Prince give such
Lands to a man and his heirs successively, while they continue loyal; the
following heir is a true and immediate owner of that Land, and may be
personally dis inherited, if disloyal, as well as his father before him. A
member is one that is according to Rule (or according to divine Institution)
within the visible Church. Thus the child is properly, and personally or
immediately. Paul easts all men into two sorts, those within, and those
without, i.e. members, and non-members, 1 Cor. 5.12. It seems he knew of no
such distinction of mediate and immediate; as puts a medium between these two.
Object. If children be complete and immediate members as their parents are,
then they shall immediately have all Church Priviledges, as their parents have
without any further act or qualification Ans. It follows not. All privileges
that belong to members, as such, do belong to the children as well as the
parents: But all Church Priviledges do not so. A member as such, (or all
members) may not partake of all privileges; but they are to make progress both
in memberly duties and privileges, as their age, capacity and qualifications
do fit them for the same.

3. That their membership still continues in adult age, and cease not with
their infancy, appears, 1. Because in Scripture persons are broken off, only
for notorious sin or incorrigible impenitency and unbelief, not for growing up
to adult age, Romans 11.20. 2. The Jew children circumcised did not cease to be
members by growing up, but continued in the Church, and were by virtue of their
membership received in infancy, bound unto various duties, and in special unto
those solemn personal professions that pertained to adult members, not as then
entering into a new membership, but as making a progress in memberly duties,
Deuteronomy. 26.2-10. and 16.16, 17 with Gal. 5.3. 3. Those relations of born-servants
and subjects, which the Scripture makes use of to set forth the state of
children in the Church by, Lev. 25 41 42. Ezekiel 37.25 do not, (as all men know)
cease with infancy but continue in adult age. Whence also it follows, that one
special end of membership received in infancy, is to leave persons under
engagement to service and subjection to Christ in his Church, when grown up,
when they are fittest for it, and have most need of it. 4. There is no ordinary
way of cessation of membership but by Death, Dismission, Excommunication, or
Dissolution of the Society: none of which is the case of the persons in
question. 5. Either they are when adult, members or non-members: if
non-members, then a person admiteed a member and sealed by Baptism, not cast
out, nor deserving so to be, may (the Church whereof he was still remaining)
become a non-member and out of the Church, and of the unclean world; which the
Scripture acknowledges not; Now if the parent stand member of the Church, the
child is a member also; For now the root is holy, therefore so are the
branches, Romans 11.16. 1 Cor. 7.14. The parent is in covenant, therefore so is
the child, Genesis 17.7. and if the child be a member of the visible Church,
then he is a subject of Baptism, according to Propos. 1.

Proposition 6t.

Such Church Members, who either by death, or some other extraordinary
Providence, have been inevitably hindered from public acting as aforesaid, yet
have given the Church cause in judgment of charity, to look at them as so
qualified, and such as had they been called thereunto, would have so acted,
their children are to be Baptized.

This is manifest. 1. Because the main foundation of the right of the child to
privilege remains, viz: Gods institution, and the force of his covenant
carrying it to the generations of such as continue keepers of the covenant, i.
e. not visibly breakers of it. By virtue of which institution and covenant, the
children in question are members, and their membership being distinct from the
parents membership, cease not, but continues notwithstanding the parents
decease or necessary absence: and if members, then subjects of Baptism. 2.
Because the parents not doing what is required in the fifth Proposition, is
through want of oppotunity; which is not to be imputed as their guilt so as to
be a bar to the childs privilege. 3. God reckons that is done in his
service to which there was manifest desire and endeavor, albeit the acting of
it were hindered; as in David to build the Temple, 1 Kings8. 18, 19 in Abraham
to sacrifice his Son, Heb. 11. 17. according to that in 2 Cor. 8.12. Where
there is a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man has, and not
according to what he has not: which is true of this Church-duty, as well as of
that of Alms. It is an usual phrase with the Ancients to style such and such
Martyrs in voto, and baptized in voto, because there was no want of desire that
way, though their desire was not actually accomplished 4. The terms of the
Proposition import that in charity, that is here done interpretatively, which
is mentioned to be done in the fifth proposition expressly.

Proposition 7th.

The members of Orthodox Churches, being sound in the Faith, and not scandalous
in life, and presenting due testimony thereof; these occasionally coming from
one Church to another, may have their children Baptized in the church whither
they come, by virtue of Communion of Churches: but if they remove their
habitation, they ought orderly to covenant and subject themselves to the
Government of Christ in the Church where they settle their abode, and so their
children to be Baptized. It being the churches duty to receive such unto
comminion, so far as they are regularly fit for the same.

1. Such members of other Churches as are here described, occasionally coming
from one Church to another, their children are to be baptized in the Church
whither they come, by virtue of Communion of Churches: 1. Because he that is
regularly a member of a true particular Church, is a subject of Baptism,
according to Propos. 1st. and 2d. But the children of the parents here
described are such, according to Proposition 5th. and 6th. therefore they are
meet and lawful subjects of Baptism, or have right to be baptized. And
Communion of Churches infers such acts as this is, viz: to baptize a fit
subject of Baptism, though a member of another Church, when the same is orderly
desired. (See Platform of Discipline, chap. 15. sect. 4.) For look as every
Church has a double consideration, viz. 1. Of its own constitution and
communion within it self; 2. Of that communion which it holds and ought to
maintain with other Churches: So the Officer (the Pastor or Teacher) thereof,
is there set, 1. To administer to this Church constantly; 2. To do acts of
Communion occasionally, ( viz: such as belong to his Office, as Baptizing does)
respecting the members of other Churches, with whom this Church holds or ought
to hold communion. 2. To refuse communion with a true Church in lawful and
pious actions, is unlawful, and justly accounted Schismatical. For if the
Church be true, Christ holds some communion with it; therefore so must we:
but if we will not have communion with it in those acts that are good and
pious, then in none at all. Total separation from a true Church, is unlawful:
But to deny communion in good actions, is to make a total separation. Now to
baptize a fit subject, as is the child in question, is a lawful and pious
action, and therefore by virtue of Communion of Churches, in the case mentioned
to be attended. And if Baptism lawfully administered, may and ought to be
received by us for our children in another true Church, where Providence so
casts us, as that we cannot have it in our own, (as doubtless it may and ought
to be:) then also we may and ought in like case to dispense Baptism, when
desired, to a man and lawful subject, being a member of another Church. To
deny or refuse either of these, would be an unjustifiable refusing of Communion
of Churches, and tending to sinful separation.

2. Such as remove their habitation, ought orderly to covenant and subject
themselves to the Government of Christ in the Church, where they setlle their
abode, and so their children to be baptized; 1. Because the regularly baptized
are disciples, and under the Discipline and Government of Christ: But they that
are absolutely removed from the Church whereof they were, so as to be incapable
of being under Discipline there, shall be under it no where, if not in the
Church where they inhabit. They that would have Church Priviledges, ought to be
under Church Power: But these will be under no Church Power, but as lambs in a
large place, if not under it there where their settled abode is. 2. Every
Christian ought to covenant for himself and his children, or professedly to
give up himself and his to the Lord and than in the way of his Ordinances,
Deuteronomy. 26 17. and 12.5. and explicit covenanting is a duty, especially where we
are called to it, and have opportunity for it: nor can they well be said to
covenant implicitly, that do explicitly refuse a professed covenanting, when
called thereunto And especially this covenanting is a duty, when we would
partake of such a Church-priviledge, as Baptism for our children is. But the
parents in question will now be professed covenanters no where, if not in the
Church where their fixed habitation is. Therefore they ought orderly to
covenant there, and so their children to be baptized. 3. To refuse covenanting
and subjection to Christ's Government in the Church where they live, being so
removed, as to be utterly incapable of it elsewhere, would be a walking
disorderly, and would too much favor of profaneness and separation; and hence
to administer Baptism to the children of such as stand in that way, would be to
administer Christ's Ordinances to such as are in a way of sin and disorder;
which ought not to be, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. 1 Chronicles. 15.13. and would be contrary to
that Rule, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and in order.

Quest. II. Whether according to the Word of God there ought to be a
Consociation of Churches, and what should be the manner of it?

Answ. The Answer may be briefly given in the Propositions following.

1. Every Church or particular Congregation of visible Saints in Gospel Order,
being furnished with a Presbytery, at least with a Teaching Elder, and walking
together in truth and peace, has received from the Lord Jesus full power and
authority Ecclesiastical within it self, regularly to administer all the
Ordinances of Christ, and is not under any other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
whatsoever. For to such a Church Christ has given the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, that what they bind or loose on earth, shall be bound or loosed in
heaven, Matt. 16.19. and 18.17, 18. Elders are ordained in every Church. Acts
14.23. Tit. 1.5. and are therein authorized officially to administer in the
Word, Prayer, Sacraments and Censures, Mat. 28* 19, 20. Acts 6.4. 1 Cor. 4.1.
and 5.4, 12. Acts 20.28. 1 Timothy 5.17. and 3.5. The reproving of the Church of
Corinth. and of the Asian Churches severally, imports they had power, each of
them within themselves, to reform the abuses that were amongst them, 1 Cor. 5.
Rev. 2 14, 20. Hence it follows, that Consociation of Churches is not to hinder
the exercise of this power, but by counsel from the Word of God to direct and
strengthen the same upon all just occasions.

2. The Churches of Christ do stand in a sisterly relation each to other, Cant.
8.8 being united in the same Faith and Order, Ephesians. 4.5. Col. 2.5. to walk by
the same Rule, Phil. 3.16: in the exercise of the same Ordinances for the same
ends, Ephesians. 4 11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 16.1. under one and the same political Head,
the Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and 4.5. Rev. 2.1. Which Union infers a
Communion suitable thereunto.

3. Communion of Churches is the faithful improvement of the gifts of Christ
bestowed upon them for his service and glory, and their mutual good and
edification, according to capacity and opportunity. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. 1 Cor.
12.4, 7. and 10.24. 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. Cantic 8.9. Rom 1.15. Gal. 6.10.

4. Acts of Communion of Churches are such as these: 1. Hearty Care and Prayer
one for another, 2 Cor. 11.28. Cant. 8.8 Romans 1.9. Coloss. 1.9. Ephesians. 6.18. 2.
To afford Relief by communication of their Gifts in Temporal or Spiritual
necessities, Romans 15.26, 27. Acts 11.22, 29. 2 Cor. 8.1, 4, 14. 3. To maintain
Unity and Peace, by giving account one to another of their public actions,
when it is orderly desired, Acts 11.2, 3, 4-18. Josh. 22.13* 21, 30. 1 Cor. 10
32. and to strengthen one another in their regular Administrations; as in
special by a concurrent testimony against persons justly censured, Acts 15.41.
and 16.4, 5. 2 Timothy 4.15. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. 4. To seek and accept Help from, and
give Help unto each other: 1. In case of Divisions and Contentions, whereby the
peace of any Church is disturbed, Acts 15.2. 2. In matters of more then
ordinary importance, [Prov. 24.6. and 15.22] as Ordination. Translation, and
Deposition of Elders, and such like, 1 Timothy 5.22. 3 In doubtful and difficult
Questions and Controversies, Doctrinal or Practical, that may arise, Acts 15 2,
6. 4. For the rectifying of mal-Administrations, and healing of Errors and
Scandals, that are unhealed among themselves, 3 John ver: 9, 10. 2 Cor. 2.6-11.
1 Cor. 15. Rev: 2: 14, 15 16. 2 Cor. 12.20, 21. and 13 2. Churches now have
need of help in like cases, as well as Churches then. Christ's care is still
for whole Churches, as well as for particular persons; and Apostles being now
ceased, there remains the duty of brotherly love, and mutual care and
helpfulness incumbent upon Churches, especially Elders for that end. 5. In love
and faithfulness to take notice of the Troubles and Difficulties, Errors and
Scandals of another Church, and to administer help (when the case manifestly
calls for it) though they should so neglect their own good and duty, as not to
seek it, Exodus 23.4, 5. Prove. 24.11, 12. 6. To Admonish one another when there
is need and cause for it: and ofter due means with patience used, to withdraw
from a Church or peccant party therein, obstinately persisting in Error or
Scandal; as in the Platform of Discipline ( chap. 15. sect. 2. partic. 3.) is
more at large declared: Gal. 2.11-14. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. Romans 16.17.



5. Consociation of Churches, is their mutual and solemn Agreement to exercise
communion in such acts, as aforesaid, amongst themselves, with special
reference to those Churches, which by providence are planted in a convenient
vicinity, though with liberty reserved without offense, to make use of others,
as the nature of the case, or the advantage of opportunity may lead thereunto.

6. The Churches of Christ in this Country having so good opportunity for it,
it is meet to be commended to them, as their duty thus to consociate. For 1.
Communion of Churches being commanded, and Consociation being but an Agreement
to practice it, this must needs be a duty also, Psalm. 119.106. Nehem. ^0.28,
29. 2. Paul an Apostle sought with much labor the conference, concurrence and
right hand of fellowship of other Apostles: and ordinary Elders and Churches
have not less need each of other, to prevent their running in vain, Gal. 2.2,
6, 9. 3. Those general Scripture-rules touching the need and use of counsel and
help in weighty cases, concern all Societies and Polities, Ecclesiastical as
well as Civil, Prove. 11.14. and 15.22. and 20 18. and 24.6. Eccles. 4.9, 10,
12. 4. The pattern in Acts 15 holds forth a warrant for Councils, which may be
greater or lesser, as the matter shall require. 5. Concurrence and Communion of
Churches in Gospel times, is not obscurely held forth in Isa. 19.23, 24, 25.
Zeph 3.9. 1 Cor. 11.16. and 14.32, 36. 6. There has constantly been in these
Churches a profession of Communion, in giving the right hand of fellowship at
the gathering of Churches, and Ordination of Elders: Which imports a
Consociation, and obliges to the practice thereof. Without which we should
also want an expedient and sufficient Cure for emergent Church-difficulties and
Differences: with the want whereof our Way is charged, but unjustly, if this
part of the Doctrine thereof were duly practiced.

7. The manner of the Churches agreement herein, or entering into this
Consociation, may be by each Church's open consenting unto the things here
declared in Answer to this 2d. Question, as also to what is said thereabout in
chap. 15. and 16. of the Platform of Discipline, with reference to other
Churches in this Colony and Country, as in Propos. 5th. is before expressed.

8. The manner of exercising and practicing that Communion, which this consent
or agreement specially tends unto, may be, by making use occasionally of
Elders or able Brethren of other Churches; or by the more solemn Meetings of
both Elders and Messengers in lesser or greater Councils, as the matter shall
require.

FINIS.

