Mr. Croftons Case SOBERLY CONSIDERED, plainly Stated, and humbly submitted to
the consideration of JUST and PRVDENT Men. MADE PUBLIC To Silence Clamor,
Correct Mistake, and Acquit him from the Charge of High Treason. Urged by Tho.
Tomkins Fellow of All Souls Oxon. and others in their Frivolous, Scurrillous
and Invective Pamphlets.

Eccles. 8.14. There is a vanity done upon the earth; that there be Just men,
unto whom it happens after the work of the wicked. Isaiah 59.15, 16. Truth
fails; and he that departs from evil makes himself a prey; and the Lord
saw it, and it displeased him that there was NO JUDGMENT, and he saw that
there was NO MAN, and wondered that there was NO INTERCESSOR. LONDON, Printed
for the Authors, 1661.

TO THE Right Honorable EDWARD EARL OF CLARENDON, Lord High Chancellor of
ENGLAND.
May it please your Honor,
ALthough the Confinement of Mr. Crofton, seems to pass with the least
regard, we cannot but with grief observe, it has not the least reflection on
the Justice and Honor of his Majesty's Government; The person being known to
have asserted and adhered unto his Majesty's Just Interest in the worst of
times, under, and against the late Usurpers, and their base Complyants and
Confederates, unto the loss of his Estate and Liberty, and Hazard of his Life;
nor is any Defection in his Loyalty visible to men, who can see no cause for
his present Bonds, save the Casuistical debate of the Oath, the Providence of
God had brought on this Kingdom, and that before it was interdicted by any Law.

We cannot but be afflicted to consider the insultation of his Majesty's known
enemies, in the sufferings of this man, his Majesty's known Faithful and Loyal
Subject, who observing him to suffer with them, and more then the most of them,
according to their Blasphemous Argumentation from providence, conclude (not
without reproach to his Majesty) that his present bonds, is Gods punishment for
his active endeavors for his Majesty's most happy restoration, reputing his
zeal therein, to have been his most grievous sin, which notwithstanding we are
well assured, his heart does abide most upright and sincere toward his Majesty.

We have in silence long expected some Ebedmelech, in the Kings Court, to
procure his discharge from his Dungeon: and conceived some by the duty of their
place bound, and better capacitated then are poor we, would have appeared by
way of Apology for his innocence, but have been therein failed; least
therefore God should say, and wonder there was no Intercessor, we have presumed
to break silence, and make Public our apprehensions of his Cause and Case,
submitting the same to the censure of Just and Prudent men.

It has (Right Honorable) been suggested to us, nor have we been void of
fear, that this Apology for our Friend might prejudice him, and endanger us,
though we confess we can conceive no cause thereof, save that irrationalitie
and injustice which judges Truth to be treason, which we dare not but think is
a stranger at, and kept at a distance from our Kings Court; we profess our
deliberate thoughts conclude Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right shall be
as soon violated, and the Prisoners humble demand of an Habeas Corpus be
determined a crime, as this plain naked representation, be reflected to his
damage, or charged on us as an offense; We observe the Quakers and others, do
with much boldness publish their Cases without Control, and we cannot suppose
this course more offensive in Loyal, and sober Presbyterians, nor can reason
condemn us for vindicating him, by that way whereby Tomkins and others have
defamed him.

We are not much acquainted with the Laws, nor do we understand how far some
late Laws may extend; but we profess our selves men of Conscience, and fly to
Your Honor as Judge of Equity: We have indeed considered our Friends Case, as
it has been represented by Vulgar Clamor, and Scurrillous Pamphlets, because
we can know it by no other means, no Accuser, or Accusation having appeared
against Him; which if there ever do, we shall leave Him to Answer, and do not
doubt but He will fully acquit himself; Our Consideration is such, as we fear
not to Tender to Your most serious Scrutinie, with an assureance of a most Wise
and Just Decree upon it, so far as Your Honors Power does extend.

We want not matter of Clamorous complaint, concerning the hard Usage of our
Friend in this close Imprisonment; Where by perdidit patriam, domum, familiam,
imo and ecclesiam, cultumque Dei publicum; A manifest Bondage: the Illegal
disposing of his Church, immediately on his Confinement, to the depriving of
him of all possible means of Subsistence to himself, and numerous Family, and
that without allowing him the maintenance, he ought by Law to enjoy whilst His
Majesty's Prisoner: And the many tedious chargeable, and (what (...) worse)
bootless applications by humble Addresses, and ^^any Submiss Petitions never
Answered: But these we ^^ve, being unwilling to reflect on Persons or Personal
(...) and convinced Our Friend suffers by mistake, (...) ^pprehension of what
he is, and what he has written; the which being hereby made manifest, we most
humbly pray it may, and cannot doubt but it will obtain Your Honors most
Favorable Mediation to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, for the discharge of
his long Imprisonment.

We will not further trouble Your Honor, save to beg Your Pardon for this
over bold Address, constrained by compassion to our Friend, and Conscience
toward our Righteous God.

May it please Your Honor, We are Your Honors most Humble Servants, Hugh
Griffith. Henry Hall. James Green. Thomas Eaton.


Mr. Croftons Case Soberly Considered, plainly Stated, and humbly propounded to
the Consideration of Just and prudent men.
MR. Zechariah Crofton, Minister of Botolphs Algate, London, now is, and ever
since the twenty third day of March 1660. has been a close Prisoner in the
Tower of London, not permitted pen, ink and paper, nor any other way or means
whereby to plead his own cause, or vindicate himself from the calumnies cast
upon him, by the tongues and pens of violent and unreasonable men; we therefore
conceiving our selves as fellow subjects interested in his restraint: And as
men and Christians bound to Plead the cause of the oppressed, and to do as we
would be done unto; and observing that trembling, stupendous and God-amazing
silence, which has seized upon such (who in point of duty and ability) are
more capacitated, Isaiah, 59.16.
and charged to plead the cause of the poor, then are we our selves, have
presumed to enquire into, and represent to others his case and condition, in
reference to the cause of his present sufferings, which we are convinced are
continued upon him through misapprehension, he being reported and concluded to
be, what indeed he is not.

Although every tongue and pen can now call him by no other name but Traitor,
such as have known the man, his principles and practices, yea and suffering;
and observed from what persons, and for what cause he received the same, cannot
but know he was Conscientiously loyal, and constantly faithful to the Kings
Majesty and his Interest in these Kingooms; he having manifested the same
(beyond all possibility of denial by any) by his retaining his Loyalty and
adhaering to the Exiled King, as his only liege Lord, in the very worst of
times, under our late Usurpers; in his place and to his power opposing them,
disowning their Authority, denying to subscribe the Engagement of fidelity to
them, and declaring against it as sinful; dissenting from, and many times
expostulating with his complying Brethren, and ever refusing to concur in any
Addresle or Application to them: by his Sequestrations, and many sufferings he
received from them, for no other cause, then his Loyalty unto his Majesty (then
in a low Estate: 1649:
) by his Sermons preached at Namptwich, at West-chester, at Caherine Coleman
and Peter's Church in Cornhill London, 1659. Vid. Prospring profaness, and his
letter to a Member of the Rump-Parliament.
rebuking the barbarous murder of his late; Rebellion and defection from his
now Majesty, and persuading a penitential return of Allegiance to him our
lawful Sovereign; the which he enforced with many Pathetical and pregnant
persuasive Admonitions, publicly Printed; and the same is made the more
legible by the joy of such by whom he formerly suffered, and with whom he now
suffers, who now tauntingly insult over his present sufferings, and upbraid
him with his past adherency to his Majesty, saying, Nothing but a King would
serve his turn, we hope he has King enough now; we well knew they who were so
zealous for the King, would fare no better, then those that were against him.
These and the like Evidences of his sincere Loyalty are so notorious, that we
should labor without cause and to no purpose, to specify particular proofs,
his very enemies, not being able to deny them; That this man retained the same
affection to his Majesty after his happy Restoration, we need not inquire into
his domestic Expressions of Joy, and daily praises to God, as evidences
thereof; the same having been amply testified by his Public Ministry, and the
doctrine of Obedience and subjection to the King which he Preached at St.
Antholines Church London, from 1 Pet. 2.13.14.15.16. and the doctrine of
Thanksgiving to God for so great a Mercy Preached on May 10. and June 28. 1660.
at Buttolphs Algate immediately before, and after his Majesty's happy return,
from that Text, 2 Samuel 22.48, 49, 50, 51. And by the Doctrine of humiliation
for the horrid Regicide the barbarous murder of his late Majesty, which he
preached from 2 Samuel 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. On the 30th of Jan. the same
year, all which (were they not too tedious for a discourse of this Nature) we
had thought to have inserted in these papers six out of those book notes which
we took from his own mouth, when he preached the same; Thus much we will be
bold to say, that the expressions of his Loyalty in those Sermons, were such as
might vie with those who enjoy the most of his Majesty's favor, and administer
to all that know the man, matter of amazement and admiration, that he is
resolved into such sufferings under pretense of Treason and disloyalty, which
must needs be the result of mistake, or unkindness.

We cannot but admire with what honesty or modesty, men do confound Mr. Crofton
with those (because professedly the same with him in Ecclesiastics, As does
Mr. Tomkins in his Strictures.
) who acted or irritated open Rebellion against his late or present Majesty,
(which his Soul ever abhorred,) or who did basely comply under our late sinful,
shameful revolutions: with what face can men reflect the odium of these things,
upon the person who acquitted his Conscience and Credit, by a constant and
public disavowing the one and the other, and in his place declaring the
sinfulness of both, and whereof his writings do very plainly show his dislike
and detestation, making it his business to vindicate the Solemn League; and
Covenant from the least causality of so sad effects, affirming these to have
been the perjurious violation of that. We wish the Serious Reader, willing to
be satisfied in this particular, to review his Analepsis, pa. 7, 8, 15, 16.
Analepsis An elepthe, pa. 17, 18, etc. Berith Anti-baal, pa. 51, 52. When we
consider Mr. Croftons constant Loyalty, and confessed vigor, and activity in
bringing back the hearts of his Majesty's Subjects, and reflect on his present
sufferings, We must confess we are not without fear, that the envious
Observation of some of his Majesty's enemies, may cloud the honor of our most
Gracious King, with the Oblivion of Joash toward Zechariah the Son of
Jehoidah, or the unkindnesse of Queen Mary toward Mr. Dobs, and the Gospellers
of Norsock and Suffock, whom she Imprisoned and Pillored for only minding her
of her promise to them passed, for the clearing her passage to the Crown.

The only matter our best enquiry will give us to understand, or our selves can
rationally conj^cture, as an offense chargeable on Mr. Crofton, is, the
Affirmation of the Obliging force of the ^olemne League and Covenant, and in
order thereunto observing and arguing the Legislative power of the two Houses
of Parliament without the King; These two we confess are Legible in those
writings, which bearing his Name in the World, are reputed his; These Books we
have heard were Objected to him (without any specification of any thing or word
Offensive or Traiterous,) when he was Committed Prisoner to the Tower;
Concerning these Assertions we humbly offer these things to be observed, which
we conceive to be worthy a due and serious consideration.

1. First, Mr. Croftons Affirmation, or rather Argumentation of these
principles, was, before the same was Interdicted by ay Law or Authority, and
(if without offense we may observe it,) when it was a duty imposed on all his
Majesty's good Subjects (required to use their utmost endeavors to promote the
ends of the Covenant, and that as an evidence of their Fidelity to God and
their King) by his Majesty's Royal Declaration, transmitted out of Scotland,
and (which we have heard) was delivered to Mr. Crofton by a Colonel in his
Majesty's Army, marching to Worcester, with an express charge to believe and
pursue it as his Majesty's express Pleasure: We are sensible the affirmation
of these principles is now forbidden by a Law, and is punishable by a Praemunire
in such who shall affirm them, or either of them after the 24th of June, 1661.
But in Mr. Croftons Case we cannot but observe, his Act was in August,
September and October, many months before the Law which does forbid it; What
is a Praemunire, by the Laws we conceive could be no Treason before the Law was
made; Where there is no Law there is no Transgression; it is an advise worthy a
King so just, and wise, as was King James his Majesty's Grandfather, and to be
ever Remembered by all Princes and Ministers of Justice; Proceed judicially and
spare none where you see cause to punish; But let your proceedings be according
to Law, and remember Laws have their eyes in their forehead, not in their
neck, for the moral reason for the punishment of vices in all Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, is, because of the breach of the Laws standing in force, Speech
in Parliament, 1621. the 19 of his Reign.
for none can be punished for the breach of Laws by Predestination, before
they were made: That Mr. Crofton was committed to Prison for this Cause, might
be reputed an Act of Prudence; but that he is nor enlarged, now that his Spirit
and Principles are under the Restriction of a Law, seems to us something hard
and unpolitique; the rather for that a Royal command is fairly pretended to
have engaged him in this contest, and that he did it before the bring o^ that
Law, according to which Justice must acquit him if he had been a Transgressor
thereof, more then the time thereby directed for prosecution having passed
between his Act and Commitment, and more then twice as much since he was
confined, and yet no legal process has past against him.

2. Mr. Crofton has as a Divine Disputant and Casuist, affirmed these
Principles as Weighty and Importart, but doubtful and undetermined by any good
and Just Authority; He therefore having used the freedom and confidence of a
disputant in his discourse, does conclude his Argumentation with this
profession; See the conclusion of his fetters.
Might my poor weak papers provoke more serious Casuists, (in good earnest as
before God, and in the dread of an Oath,) to state and by right Religious
Reason, resolve this case of conscience (though in the negative) I had obtained
my desire, and (if I know mine own heart) none shall he more ready then my self
to fall down and worship, and confess God is in you of a truth.

We have not known that in any well-governd Commonwealths, nor can our reason
conceive that Logical Dispute and Casuistical Debate* (of things weighty,
doubtful and not prohibited) was, or could be Judged any crime, much less a
crimen laesae Majestatis; We hope we may without offense observe, that the
earnest opponents of the divorce of King Henry the 8th, and the Title of
Renouned Queen Elizabeth to the Crown of England, or any of them were not for
the same Apprehended or Imprisoned as Offenders, until after that the Law, (the
mature and deliberate debates by both Universities, all the Casuists in
Christendom and the Estates of Parliament, having first cleared and concluded
the question disputed,) had duly interdicted the further debates concerning
those matters; The Obligation of an Oath, (in which God is immediately
concerned,) we think we may say with confidence) is not inferior to the most
weighty of these cases; and no man can or will deny Disputation is directed by
God and nature, and used and allowed by all Men and Nations (the Barbarous
Turk, and in cases of Religion only excepted,) as the only ready and rational
means to discover truth, and disperse such clouds as darken the same;
Confutations of fury and false witness are registered Comments on the ignorance
and impiety of Stephens Antagonists; and of fire and force is the high
dishonor of Queen Mary's Reign, the same better beseeming the wilful,
malicious, obdurate Jew, and blind, bloody Papist, then the Rational Religious
Christian, and reforming Protestant: whose only Honorable warfare, has been
ever managed (unto good success) by Argumentation, enforced by Prayers, and
Tears as their only Weapons.

3. Mr. Crofton did not first begin and set on foot this Dispute: This
controversy was provoked by the Reverend Bishop of Excester Dr. John Gauden;
his Analysis sounded the Alarm, and challenged all men (who feared an Oath,
sacred in its nature, and the only security of humane Order and Society)
especially Ministers (the Guardians of truth, and guides to duty) to appear
unto the defense of the (since condemned) Covenant; Mr. Crofton indeed (forward
in zeal, and having improved this Oath to the advantage of his Majesty's happy
return) did first step forth, and with all sobriety receive, and repel the
Bishops first assault; the which the Dr. enforcing a second and third time, he
resisted with more Logical and Theological strength, taking the Principles from
Grotius the Civilian; the learned Sanderson now Bishop of Lincoln the Casuist,
and Sir Thomas Smith, Horn and Fortescue the Lawyers, best acquainted with the
constitution of the Government of this Kingdom; the which he uses as his
Medium, by which to conclude his Argument: So that it is visible to all men
that Mr. Crofton is defensive in this whole debate; and is no further criminal,
then in suffering his Reason to infer, and relate the conclusion, which the
principles approved by all men, and asserted by approved Authors do enforce:
Civilians do conclude defensive, to be the most (if not only) lawfal War: Our
Law and Reason does conclude in all Quarrels, the offense is in him who gave
the first blow, and began the Fray, no man was ever found guilty of Murder* or
Treason, for killing a man se defendendo; the heat of the Chase, and chance of
Hunting, acquitted Sr. William Tyrrel from the guilt of Treason or Murder,
though he slew King William the second; and men of Ingenuity will acknowledge
it to be a most fair, candid and clear conquest, which is obtained by the Sword
of Goliath, the enemies own weapons; whilst premises stand approved, other men
will not want Mr. Croftons reason to infer the conclusion, nor can they think
this common Act could be in him a Capital crime: We cannot but acknowledge the
Wisdom and justice of our late Martyred Lord, King Charles the first, who
determining to silence the Arminian Controversy (which then disturbed the
peace of the Church) did first by his Royal Proclamation call in the Book
Appello Caesarem published by Dr. Montagne Bishop of Chichester, as that which
was the first cause, and gave occasion to those Disputes and Differences which
troubled the quiet of the Church: We dare be bold to avouch it, that if Dr.
Gauden had not appeared against, Mr. Crofton had not (in this way) appeared for
the (now condemned consumed) League and Covenant, and we hope we shall not have
cause to think the Bishops Analysts was let loose, to Ducquoy the sober,
serious, conscientious, and sincerely Loyal Covenanter, into a snare of
Destruction, by a Disputation of a matter so weighty, and undetermined.

4. Although Mr. Crafton may in this Dispute have strained toward one extreme,
and seems to have attributed more to Parliaments, then what does appertain
unto them, (which is the ordinary infortunium of a Dispute) yet he has not in
these wrightings uttered any expressions of Disloyalty, or disrespect to the
Kings Majesty, or of advise and provocation, unto tumult and disorder in the
people, whereby his Majesty's Person, Crown or Dignity, could be endangered, or
the Peace of the Kingdoms be disturbed: But on the contrary, they contain (in
the general scope of these writings, besides many particular expressions
thereunto conducing) the greatest evidence, and security of Loyalty to the
King, and peace unto his people that can possibly be given; as an evidence
hereof we pray it may be observed.

1. Mr. Crofton is so far from abetting, approving, or defending the Rebellion
against and usage of his late Majesty, that he does expressly disown, and damn
the resistance of his Authoriry, and violence upon his Royal Person, as a most
horrid and execrable Rebellion, a most base and Barbarous Regicide, See his
Analepsis, p. 8.15, 16. Analepsis, Analepthe. p. 105. Berith Anti-Baal, page
52, 53.
a most odious and perjurious breach of the Covenant: Which he vindicateth from
the odium thereof, and affirms to have been so far from being the cause or
accessorie occasion thereof, that it is in it self the most full security and
strength unto the contrary, that ever was or could be given: and observes the
same to have been slighted, as an Almanac out of date, before that violence
could be acted, or advised, which he determines to have been a full and formal
violation of this Oath by the perjured pack who did pursue and effect the same.

2. This man is so far from detracting from the Kings Sovereign Power and
Prerogative: that in these very writings he acknowledges the Kings Supremacy,
in every particular, and in the greatest latitude thereof, ever challenged by
any English Prince, and he does therefore urge the Covenant as consistant with,
and enforcing to the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy: He affirms the
Subjects Duty and Allegiance to be absolute, Analeps, Analepthe. p. 98
99.103.142.144.
and due without any condition of their own prescription, or indenture; and
without any respect to the quality or disposition of the King, good or bad,
pious or impious; founded in and directed by simple, naked relation: And he
asserteth the Kings Prerogative and Sovereign power to be such, as does exempt
his Royal Person, from all imposition of conditions, and from all coaction to
accomplishment (of what he condescendeth to assume upon himself) by his
Subjects, or any humane Power whatsoever; and therefore this very man does
blame the Scots for indiscretion, and over much boldness, who being Subjects
could dare to take the advantage of a strait condition, to put such terms (as
they did) upon his Majesty.

3. Mr. Crofton is in these writings so far from a Seditious Spirit, and
provoking any preposterous, heady, and seditious attempts, and endeavors, that
he binds all men in the performance of the Covenant unto just and lawful
endeavors, and that within their places and callings, and therefore he
allows no weapons against Majesty, save Ministerial Rebukes and Admonitions
in the Name of God the King of Kings; Parliamentory advice, proposal and
Remonstrance, in the name of his Subjects, or the Collective Body of his
Kingdom; and vulgar Petitions and supplications from and by themselves, in
reference to their vulgar concernments: Analeps. pa. 35. Analeps. Analep page
36 66, 67, 68, 69, 100
He disowneth and disalloweth all popular Tumults, and disorderiall
Insurrections, and insolences in the Subject; binding unto passive obedience,
and quiet submission, all who cannot yield active obedience to the
establishments decreed by the King, in Church and Commonwealth; whenever he
does (as he durst do no other) observe the Wisdom, Justice and Sovereign Power
of Almighty God, in permitting, or disposing, the Irruptions and Insurrections
of the natural, against, and upon the political Power, or the heady,
disorderly, Tumultuous, and Seditious Agitations of the people against their
Princes, he passes not his Observations, without a Notation of the sinfulness
thereof; and a manifest expression of his own dislike of such ways, and
courses: If this man must be branded as a Preacher of Sedition, we must confess
our selves at a loss, how Truth shall be declared with due respect unto, and
careful preservation of Order.

5. The Affirmation of these Principles, and the Disputation in these Books
managed, do very rationally profess Loyalty, to be the Center (at least a
chief part thereof) from which they sprang, and to which they are returned: Mr.
Crofton argues Loyalty as the impulsive cause thereof, Analeps. Analepthe*
page 10, 11.
and pleads it from such evidences which no sober Christian can, or will
deny: We shall not conclude Declarations published under the distress of Royal
Affairs, do exactly oblige the Kings accomplishment; yet cannot but conceive
them to be the Subjects Appologie, and justification for his pursuit of the
Royal Command thereby signified, and not any other way countermanded: We cannot
but observe the chief of Mr. Croftons Books (objected against him as his only
Crime) were written before His Majesty's Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs was published: This man owneth no sense of the Covenant, but what is
truly Loyal, and fully securing to the Kings Interest and Prerogative: It is
very well known he had in Press, and Pulpit, improved this very Principle of
the Covenant, to bring back the hearts of the people, to the happy Restoration
of His Sacred Majesty; and then he found Acceptance, Approbation, and Applause,
from those very persons who now reproach him, and rage against him for no
reason, save reasoning the same Principles: We confess, we stand amazed, and
cannot conceive with what color of Justice, that which was an eminent Act of
Loyalty, April, 1660. could be reputed, represented, and charged to be an Act
of High Treason in September following; no new Law intervening to interdict and
so alter the nature of the Act, yet we know tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur
ab illis; only we conceive a temporizing weathercock humor must direct, or
the dictates of new made Laws must drive men into the change of Act, and
estate: Mr. Crofton does often protest Loyalty to be his end in this debate
(which now seems to be his error) and we have cause to believe it did really
affect his heart, whence we find no disloyal Act, or expression to have
sprung; and this most Loyal profession, does not a little demonstrate the
sincerity thereof. Analeps. page 35.
I confess we allow unto his most Sacred Majesty all humble submission, active
or passive, whatsoever shall be by Royal Authority established in the Church
(though never so corrupt yet) whilst consistent with Salvation; it may occasion
unto me suffering, and a suspense of my Ministry, but it shall not effect in
me; or such on whom I have Influence, Schism from the Church, or resistance of
His Majesty's Right and Authority: and in the further, and more fervent
enforcement of this debate, this man declares, He had rather never put pen to
paper, then that his writings should disturb the Peace of these two long
distracted Nations. Analepsis Analep. p. 2.


Mr. Crofton may (we confess) have taken into his judgment, some of those
errors in polity, which the unhappy breach between his late Majesty and the
late long Parliament did foment; yet we humbly conceive malice it self cannot
charge these writings (written with so legible a line of Loyalty, and love to
peace and order) with Treason or Sedition: Certainly this breath is too sweet
to come from ulcered lungs; These Principles and Professions could never
proceed from a Traiterous Heart; and all Just men will acknowledge Actus non
facit reum nisi men's sit rea: nor can they be charitably suspected of
dissimulation, when things antecedent Concomitant and consequent, speak the
sincerity of a Loyal breast, or when it is observed that these writings exactly
square with that constant Loyalty he retained and expressed in the worst of
times, from the first moment of his Majesty's Reign, and never stained with the
least of action, affirmation, or compliance when almost all men made defection:
Yea this man is so well known to us, that we dare affirm and will be bound to
produce good demonstration thereof (whenever he be brought out of his present
bonds) he retains to this very moment the same Loyal Spirit and Resolution,
although the wisest of Kings has in his experiences made this observation,
oppression will make a wise man mad.

We have read all those writings which bear Mr. Croftons Name, with as strict
and acurate Observation, as we are capable of, and we grant, that in some of
them, we sometimes meet with a Political Argumentation, which we could not but
judge somewhat excentrical, and out of his sphere as a Divine; did we not
consider all Arts and Sciences are handmaids to Divinity; and not only useful,
but necessary unto a Casuist, who must weigh circumstances before he can give a
right, clear and convincing Judgment to satisfy the Conscience: and we find
this man to urge the same Casuistically, and in answer to the Objection of
those, against whom he does dispute; we hope it is not more out of Mr. Croftons
way to Answer, then out of his Antagonists way to Argue from Principles in
Politiques, or the political constitution of the Kingdom: If his fault be that
he stepped out of his place, we only pray it may be observed, he was drawn out by
the pursuit of his Adversary, and martial Law will allow the man to pursue
beyond his bounds, (provided he retreat in time) who may be justly punished, if
he leave his place to assault the enemy, and yet,

The matter of Mr. Croftons Political Arguments has been proposed to the
Consideration of the Learned in the Law, and they see not any Crime or Capital
Offense to be in them, any of them, or all of them put together; much less can
they charge it to be Treason, the which the prohibition does only punish with a
Praemunire since the 24th of June, 1661.

Our ears have been alarumd with the loud clamours of Mr. Croftons Treason,
every scurrilous Pamphleter can better Proclaim, then prove him a Traitor;
Every simple Calculator of the Almanac Observations, can more easily calender
his commitment for High Treason, then give the least convincing evidence of his
guilt: We have bestowed our money upon these Pamplets, which insult over him in
this day of his Affliction, and confess we find in them big words, ( preterea
nihil,) venting themselves with the highest malice and greatest rage (the event
as yet excepted,) that ever was expressed (against a man so innocent,) since
the stoning of Stephen: Insomuch that we cannot but suspect it to spring from
the same root, and to be an effect of the same Cause, the rather because when
we would know the particular matter of his Treason, we find his violent
accusers are not agreed among themselves: all indeed place it in words, for
which the learned say there is no warrant, (unless in some special opinions
relating to the Pope, determined by some special statutes,) but they are
divided as to words.

Some tell us his Treason is for saying, the Parliament had a Legislation
without the King, but this is only punishable by a Praemunire since the Law was
made, which makes it criminal: Lestrange fixes his Treason in these words,
The Lords and Commons were a lawful Authority, yet we find no Law which has
determined a crime in this position, much less a Treason; we find Mr. Croftons
Assertion thereof to be very cautious, and so well grounded that we can
scarcely yet believe the same will be Judged an error by any sober, serious
Englishman: being verified by the daily practice and usage of Pa^liament: for
our parts we must confess we dare not deny the Solemn League and Covenant to
have been burned by a lawful Authority, and yet we do not know any Act of
Parliament with a full, formal assent of the Kings Majesty which did direct
the same: And we fear, if we should yet presume to disobey any Resolve, Vote or
Order of one or both Houses of Parliament, or condemn and resist the execution
thereof by any other; this plea such Vote or Order was defective as to lawful
Avthority, (not coming in the formality of an Act of Parliament, and a full Law
with a Le Roy Le ve ult) would not acquit us from the contempt of the Authority
of Parliament: And yet we cannot but observe Mr. Croftons Assertions concerning
the Authority of Parliament, to be no more then this, that it was lawful and
sufficient, not full and complete, without the express Royal Assent, Analeps.
Analepth. Page 113.
and that also under these two express qualifications, a Parliament rightly
constituted, and during their Session: he never Judged any self-constituted
assembly, or convention packed by a usurping Tyrant, to be a Parliament, nor
any Vote, Resolve, or order of Parliament to have in it any thing of the nature
of Law, or Authority, (save to desend what was executed by virtue thereof the
Parliament sitting,) when the Parliament is Dissolved: his words are these, A
Parliament duly Summoned, regularly elected and returned, rightly constituted
and readily embraced by King and Kingdom; Analeps. Analepth. Page 116.
can any true Englishman in any measure acquainted with the constitution of
this Kingdom, or the Authority of the High Court of Parliament deny these to
be a Just and Lawful Authority, to resolve, order, and enjoin, yea and to
execute their resolves, orders and injunctions during the being of their Power,
though not to establish Laws to be executed when they are dissolved and gone:
And in every of his Books we find him often deny the two Houses to be full and
complete, though he affirm them a lawful and sufficient Authority: Sure Mr.
Lestrange will not deny Lawful Authority to be a Subject capable of majus and
minus, and such as may admit of degrees; if Mr. Crofton be in this point in an
error let any man by good demonstration correct him, we will undertake he shall
not by obstinacy appear an Heretic in Politiques, but if his confutation must
be only rage and violence, we desire Mr. Lestrange will let us know that
English Law, which has determined Treason for any man to think, say, or write
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament are a Lawful Authority, and then
we may be convinced Mr. Crofton suffers as an evil doer, but till then we
must let him know railing is no reason, not does it become a man.

Mr. Tomkins who at length appears to rescue the Oxford Reasons from the
force of Mr. Croftons Arguments; does leave the Learned Authors thereof under
their observed defects in Logic, History, Politiques, and Divinity, and as one
whose pinched reason breaks into passion, (in heat of anger) provokes a more
severe and bloody moderation then his Antagonist has yet met with, crying out,
Mr. Croftons saying that the Parliament ever retained a Jurisdiction over
Church and Crown in short is High Treason.

How much the Universitie of Oxford are engaged to this their Valiant, Learned
Defendant, we leave themselves to Judge: how much he has bettered the cause
under contest let sober men Judge: with what ingenuity, candor and clearness he
has taken up and confuted Mr. Croftons Arguments, let any Sophomore, yea
Fresh-man or ordinary Logician Judge: and how fair an Adversary he is, that
alarumeth the hand of Justice against his Antagonist, let Just and Wise men
Judge: we are not now to Animadvert his animadversions, but to Apologize for
our oppressed, defamed Friend, who cannot do it for himself: and herein

We would give this confident Gentleman hearty thanks to clear his charge of
High Treason, for we would not plead for it if we knew it, or could perceive
it; But we yet think this is but one Doctors opinion, more visible to a Fellow
of All-Soules in Oxford, then a Barrister or Bencher in the Temple, near
London. This Fellow professes himself a Reader of Cooks Institutes, and that
Learned Lawyer tells us there is no Treason but what is determined by the
Statute of the 25th of Edward the 3d, and we find not this assertion forbidden
therein, nor any Opinion determined, and Declared by that Statute to be
Treason: This learned lawyer concludes that Treason must be Factum not Dictum,
words may make an Heritique but not a Traitor, we must confess Oxford
Disputants have Determined Heresy in their Opponents, he is the first of that
learned University, who has presumed to declare Treason.

We are sure these words make no immediate, and direct assault upon his
Majesty's Person, Crown, or Dignity; and the Lord Cook abandons all Glosses,
Inferences, Interpretations, and consequences to be made by Judge or Counsel,
in Cases of Treason.

Judge Jenkins guides the Judgment of Treason by the very Letter of the Law,
for that in Criminibus a verbo Legis non est recedendum: And we cannot conceive
how an Observation of past Acts, can be Treason in the Logical, or Historical
Observer: Mr. Crofton notes the Parliament retained in times past; He does
note the Fact without any determination of the jus and right of such retention;
we would advise this Fellow to repair to All Souls, and reflect on his own
Thoughts; and resolve us, that the Treason is not more in his own fancy and
imagination, then in Mr. Crofton his expressions; we find he does throughout
his Book mistake the Person, which makes us suspicious he misunderstandeth the
position: on this man he reflecteth the odium of the violence of the Visitors
in Oxford whom Mr. Crofton knew not, and it is disputable, whether he was then
in England: The defection and complyances under Queen Richard and other
Usurpers, which Mr. Crofton ever denied, resisted, and detested, when some who
then were, and now are most zealous complyers urged him, with this convincing
argument these times affords few Martyrs: and the purchase of Church Lands
whilst Mr. Crofton would not take when he might, a living out of which he knew
any man to have been Sequestered: He whose heat of Passion does engage him to
misread the Person, may well misinterpret his words, as indeed we observe he
does, understanding King by Crown, and Sovereign coercive, destructive power by
jurisdiction: it is no hard matter to make a Traitor, if envy may interpret a
man's words; we hope Mr. Tomkins will not take it unkindly; if he be excepted
against, as to his being Judge, or Jury which shall pass upon Mr. Crofton.

That we may not run into the error we rebuke in any other, we shall not
presume to give our apprehension of the loyal sense of these words, so
positively charged to be High Treason; but shall make bold to present you with
Mr. Croftons own exposition of them declared in a Letter written to some
Friends, who desired to understand his sense and meaning therein: All men will
allow him Waterford Law as the best and only expositor of his own words,
subject to misconstruction.

These words [ the Parliament ever retained in themselves a Jurisdiction over
Church and Crown] are so far from Treason; that they will not be found an error
in politiques; if that rule be true which cannot be denied, generalia
generaliter sunt intelligenda: I fear you mistake the sense of every word in
this short Sentence, and that you conceive Crown does signify the King, as if
these two were not seperable; and so known to be in our Laws: And Jurisdiction
does signify coaction, as if Coronae jus dicere did necessarily signify
Coronatum cogere per asperte; the which is a Sense inconsistent with, and
contrary unto the Kings immunity from all humane coaction, which I have
expressly asserted in this very Treatise; You here understand Parliament, to
signify the Lords and Commons abstracted from the King; which sense this place
and case does not necessitate, though I do sometimes so use that term: For
Parliament here is opposed to Pope, and is noted to be the Subject of full and
complete Legislation (which I never do attribute unto, but do always deny, the
two houses) unto the extendiag the prerogative of the Crown by the statute 1.
Elizabeth: or restraint thereof by the Statute 17. Carol. in both which the
King was a part of the Parliament: Learned men should expound the Text by the
context; and in Reading a Treatise make one part expound another, and know, no
Author is to be judged by the sound, much less by the seeming consequence of a
single sentence: And now Mr. Tomkins where is Mr. Croftons High Treason? And
yet we will not fear to let you know that admitting your sense of the term
Parliament, abstracted from the King there is nothing clearer in the political
Constitution, and Administration of our Kingdom, then their retained
jurisdiction over the Crown; We do not, nor did Mr. Crofton say over the King,
the Subject of the Crown; we will not run you for proof hereof into the
Histories of Foreign Countries, or our own Saxon times, in which we find this
Jurisdiction larger then Mr. Crofton does assert it; but nearer home and hand
be pleased to consider,

1. King John yielded by consent of the Barrons (says the Record) the Crown of
England unto the Pope of Rome to hold it from, and under him; who often
demanded the Surrender of it, but was answered the Parliament must give it; In
Anno. 40. of King Edward the third, upon the Popes demand of the Crown of this
Realm, the King appealed to his Parliament, who judicially determined it was
not in the power of King John, nor any other King of England to dispose the
Crown; but in the sole power of Parliament.

2. The claim to the Crown made by Richard Duke of York, against King Henry the
sixth, having reigned twenty eight Years, was by both parties, submitted by
appeal, unto the Judgment of Parliament; who determined for the Duke; yet
continued the Crown to the King, during his life, on condition of good
behavior toward the Duke, and in either case the Duke or his heir to possess
it.

3. The several Successors in the strife between York and Lancaster, submitted
the success of their Sword, to the censure of Parliament, as their only
security to the Crown; the Acts of one Parliament binding until discharged by
another, hence it is that the Statutes of that Age recorded in Speeds Chronicle
do teach us this Doctrine: the Court of Parliament is of such Authority, and
the people of this Land of such nature and disposition, (as experience
teaches) that the Declaration or Manifestation of any Truth or Right by the
three Estates (Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons says the Statute)
assembled in Parliament, and by authority thereof, makes before all things
most Faith, and certain quieting to men's winds, and removing all doubts.

4. The Parliament did Bastardize and Legitimate the Children of King Henry the
eighth, and they by their Authority enabled him to dispose the Crown to, or
from his Children, with and under what conditions he pleased, adjudging any his
Children assuming the Crown, otherwise then by this Authority, to loose their
Right, and be judged Traitors to the Realm, whence it came to pass that Edward
the sixth, Queen Mary, and Elizabeth did hold and enjoy the Crown, by Authority
of Parliament, and the Title of the last being questioned, produced the Statute
13. Elizabeth, which made it Treason during the Queens life, and loss of goods
after her Death, for any man to deny the Authority of Parliament to direct,
dispose, limit, or restrain the Crown.

5. Statutes of Recognition have ever been reputed the only riveting security
to the Crown; and certainly these signify more then a State Complement, and
although they pass in the same Royal Formality, with other Laws, which concern
the Subject; yet it must be confessed they receive strength by an Authority in
this respect abstracted from the King, as do the Statutes providing moneys the
only support of the Crown.

6. If we should ask Mr. Tomkins who in the defect of Heirs has Jurisdiction
over the Crown, would he not dare for fear of Treason to say the Parliament,
Bishop Bilson says it in express terms; and that not only for our own
Kingdom, but all others also.

7. Before Mr. Crofton be condemned as a Traitor for saying the Parliament ever
retained in themselves a jurisdiction over the Crown, we hope the conclusion of
our late Martyred Sovereign King Charles the first (who well knew the
constitution of this Kingdom, His Answer to the 19. Propositions.
and the extent of Royal Prerogative) will be denied, for he affirmed the Power
legally placed in both Houses is more then sufficient to prevent and restrain
Tyranny, which must needs import a large Jurisdiction over the Crown.

8. When we consider the Courts of Judicature, in Westminster Hall, do conclude
judicially against his Majesty, in many Suits brought by him in Right of the
Crown, against the Subject; and by the Subject against him: We cannot imagine
it Treason to say the happy constitution of Englands Government is such that
the Courts of Justice have a Jurisdiction over the Crown, much less to say the
High Court of Parliament has it.

If an Observation of Fact, without any assertion of Right; If the Sound of a
Sentence capable of a most Loyal Sense; If a Position proved by constant
Practice be Treason, we must leave Mr. Tomkins on the Bench, and Mr. Crofton at
the Bar to receive his doom, but cannot deny our assent unto the Observation of
the Statute, 1. Mariae, discharging the Laws which made words Treason: Those
Laws are grievous which are so made, that not only the Rude, Ignorant and
Unlearned, but also the learned and expert people minding honesty are often and
many times trapped for words only, without other fact, or deed.

We have with the most exact diligence we are capable of, Enquired and observed
the reports of men, that we might be satisfied what is the great matter which
causes this man to be kept in so severe a durance, and some tell us he was
ever Turbulent, and not quiet under any power: unto which we answer,

We presume his Turbulency, under our late Usurpers (being the Act of his
Loyalty to his King, restlessely endeavoring his happy Restoration) is not
now supposed his crime, or any agravation thereof; The men who do now condemn
him, did account it is duty, and honor when others were sinfully quiet, and we
see not any difference between this in him, and Jehoiadas endeavors against
A^haliah, and for King Joash, save the one enjoyed the Comfort, Peace and
Liberty of the effect, whereof the other was and is deprived: His Turbulency
has ever had Sin for its Object, Ministerial rebuke preaching or writing for
its only Act and Expression; Which of the Prophets or Apostles were not? What
Faithful Minister of the Gospel is not? can or dare be otherwise then thus
Turbulant? This is not only Lawful, within his place and calling; But the
Indespensable duty thereof: Elijahs must thus trouble Israel, and Amos Alarm
the Kings Court, cost what it will or can: If he have ever appeared in,
advised, or abetted, any Seditious Tumult, Rebellions Insurrection, or
Traiterous Conspiracy, we leave him to himself: But Tertullus himself is not
able herein to charge him, and other Acts of Turbulency, will subject them to
trouble from the Lord, who do therefore trouble him, as a thing most righteous.

Some clamor against our Friend as Seditious, and Treasonable because against
Episcopacy, and relying on that maxim, no Bishop no King: Conclude he cannot be
a Friend to the King, who is an enemy to the Bishops, to which we answer.

Such as know him, and have read his Writings, will find if is clamor is not
true, for he professes for Episcopal Degree which is much as our sober
Reformers ever challenged, or our Learned Usher approved; He is indeed against
Papal Hierarchy, and that Episcopacy which was the step and seems the
support of the man of sin, but suppose the utmost, his Opposition is purely
Argumentative, and is but ill resisted with Rage and Violence.

No Bishop no King may be a maxim of State, but we have not known it to be a
Principle in our Law, we have not heard of any Statute which has so conjoined
the Mitre to the Crown, as that a dis-respect to that, must needs be reputed,
and punished as a Treason against this; We hope we shall not offend if we say
that is a sad Government which pretends to Divine Right, and yet has no
uphold or guard but Violence and Oppression of Reason, urged against it, and
cannot silence a Disputing Antagonist, otherwise then by a close Prison.

We have heard a third cry, Mr. Crofton Preached against the Bishops, and
provoked the opposition of them by fire and blood; to this we answer,

We heard the last Sermons this math did Preach, and can give the true account
thereof, wherein we desire it may be noted,

1. He went not out of his way to fly in the faces of the Bishops; He had
purposed a full exposition of the first Epistle of Peter in his Lectures at
Antholins London, in pursuit whereof, he proceeded so far as to the last words
of the second Chapter; And observed the Lord Jesus was the Shepherd and Bishop
of our Souls: In the Explication of this Position, he enquired how? and by whom
the Lord Jesus Christ did Execute this his Pastoral charge, and Episcopal
Office, in and toward his Church? And Resolved and Asserted, the Lord does
execute this Pastoral charge and Episcopal Office by his Ministers, all,
equally Authorized, and without any such Order or standing function of an
Episcopus Episcoporum; The which having demonstrated by considerable evidence,
and answers to Objections, he did press on his people, as a truth considerable
to be understood, as relating to Christ's Royalty, as King of his Church, and
closed with this Observations in these express Terms, There seems unto me an
Emphasis in those words, Rev. 11.7. Relating to the two Witnesses, when they
shall have finished their Testimony: These words seem to relate no less to the
matter, then the time of these witnesses Prophecy, (viz.) That they must bear
witness to the last punctilio of Christ's Pastoral charge, and Episcopal Office,
before they were slain: we all know this Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, to
work out our Salvation by his threefold Office of Prophet, Priest and King: And
I cannot but observe each of those (besides the general assault and opposition
of the whole) has had a particular and special conflict in the World, and has
constrained an open and Public Testimony, from Christ's Church in the fire and
with their blood:

In the first Age of Christianity the great and special Question was concerning
Christ's Prophetical Office, whether the Scriptures or the Oracles of Apollo,
Traditions of the Jews, and Delusions of Impostors and Haeretiques should be
received obeyed? and we well know in what fiery Trials and with what fearful
sufferings the Sheep of Christ did hear his voice, decline strangers, and
witness against them: this Office was no sooner rescued from violence, and
established in the World by the blood of the Primitive Martyrs; but Christ's
Priestly Office was by the working of the man of sin denied and darkened, the
great controversy in the Catholic Church concerned the one Mediator, and High
Priest, the one Sacrifice once only offered; or others made coequal with him,
if not preferred before him, and how long and bloody conflicts were under-gone
in the same the Histories of our Progenitors and Smithfield Flames do plainly
show: this Office was scarcely rescued from violence before Christ's Kingly
Office comes on the Stage, and calls for the Testimony of the Saints that
the Government is on his shoulders administered by his own Officers, and
Ordinances; and this must be attested in the greatest Tribulation; saddest
Sufferings in fire and blood that can befall us.

In this whole Discourse Mr. Crofton mentioned not fire and blood, in any sense
but passive, as does the Apostle, Ye have not resisted unto blood, Heb. 11.4.
and disowned all actions unto fire and blood, which at any time were or should
be attempted on the pretense of Christ's Kingly Office, declaring his
detestation of that Mad, Treasonable Rebellion of Fenner and his Fellow real
Phanatiques, which had lately passed to the scandal of the true Religion: these
things our ears heard, and therefore do we testify the same, yea and some of
us wrote the same from his mouth (in characters) as they were by him spoken.
Had Pagan or Popish Priests heard this Doctrine, and cried out Treason or
Heresy, it had not been strange; but the outcry of Christian, and Protestant
Bishops does make us admire, and stand amazed.

These things considered, we humbly offer it to the consideration of Just and
Prudent men sincerely affected to his Majesty's Government, whether Mr. Crofton
(what ever has been suggested or clamored against him) has done any thing
worthy of death, or of bonds? and whether his enlargement, and restitution will
not much more conduce unto the honor of his Majesty's Government, then the
continuance of him in bonds, to the undoing of himself, wife, and seven small
children, by the expense of his poor Estate already wasted; and the real
prejudice of his health, and ruin of many souls which might be saved by his
Ministry? the liberty of the Subject being fully secured by many Ancient and
later Laws.

FINIS.

