A Modest Account OF THE Present POSTVRE of AFFAIRS IN ENGLAND, With
Particular Reference to the Earl of Shaftsbury's CASE: And a VINDICATION of HIM
from Two Pretended Letters OF A Noble Peer.

By a Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, MDCLXXXII.

A Modest Account OF THE Present Posture of AFFAIRS IN ENGLAND, With
particular Reference to the EARL of SHAFTSBVRIES CASE; And a VINDICATION of HIM
from two Pretended LETTERS of a Noble Peer.
My Lord,
I Received yours, in Print by the Penny-Post and expected the Date from R.
Abbey, and not from New Market, but I understand your Lordship has given your
Agents in this Town the Lie, and not retired to your Country House, upon the
Dukes coming; but have rather Posted down to New Market, with the new Hosanna,
of O Duke live for ever; which was some Years since, O King live for ever. I
find your Lordship is no good Judge of Styles, for I can assure you the Letter
was not the Earl of S -- s, and therefore you do ill to take this occasion of
railing at him, unless you are resolved to save charges, and do that in your
own Person, which others are so unsuccessfully hired to. It is a notorious
false Testimony to say that Earl was raised from a mean Fortune, when it is well
known his father in 1630 long before the troubles had a revenue between 8 and
9000 l. per annum: And I have heard him often say, he would yield himself to be
the worst man alive, if he in the Kings service got his maintenance, or did
lay up above half his Paternal Revenue, and I think so able a man may be
allowed at least, to be maintained in so great employments; Neither do I
understand that malicious hint of merited severity, it was never applied to any
man that had one of the chief hands in restoring a Prince to his Kingdom; as I
know he had and without whose courage and dexterity, some men the most highly
rewarded, had done otherwise then they did; therefore I have heard him say
often, that the Act of Oblivion was an Act of the Kings honor and Justice, as
well as his Mercy? it being a Treaty, and Agreement, much more sacred then any
Act of Parliament can be, and I must tell your Lordship, and your Friends the
Papists; that if you consider what Promises, Declarations, and Engagements the
Dissenting Protestants had; both of his Majesty, his Lords, and his Bishops, at
the time of his coming over; and how they have been since used, and with what
submission and Loyalty they have carried themselves; you will not find a
Parallel Instance.

But your Lordships business is, to keep your Hounds in full cry, against the
pretended Association, for since you cannot find one really in being; a
red-herring from your own Kitching, must be hunted and trail'd through the
Kingdom, to make a noise.

The malice is more then the wit in the matter. You have broken down your Gates
in the Chase, and made so many -- Gaps in your own hedges, that your Cattle are
broke out and come to the Pound; and what sort of Beast you trade in will be
discovered. It Is an Impudence beyond the Jesuits, to say that nothing was more
exactly proved, nothing more unquestionable and free from disputes, then that
the Association was seized in the Earls Closer; Gwyn himself neither does nor
dare positively swear it, and it is Judged in that great case of Monsieur
Fouquet, that a man is not answerable for Papers seized when he is refused to
deliver them upon Inventory. Fouquets enemies were not more bloody and
invetterate then the Earls, nor the concern of State against him higher: And
yet the Law of Nature and Reason, can never subject a man to so unreasonable a
danger. Besides was it ever heard that ever any man was questioned for a loose
Paper, without any hand to it, found in his Study, that cannot be proved to
this day, nor ever will, that he ever saw, read, or conferred with any about
it; Neither is it to be proved notwithstanding all this Popish Clamor and
Abhorrours that ever any one man did ever Sign, or Act upon it; or any thing
like it. But your Lordship is very plain in the matter, and would have the
Parliament men in the House of Commons who promoted the Association; have their
heads advanced to the house top. I do not doubt but your Lordship and your
friends the PAPISTS are of that mind; but it is for some other Votes they then
made of declaring Enemies to the King and Kingdom, for otherwise your Lordship
and some of your friends, are as much guilty, as any of the house of Commons,
of the Association. It being to be proved that the Association, and the
banishing the Duke for ever, was your Lordships proposition in the Lords house
in the last Westminster Parliament. The first utterly disliked by the Earl of
Shaftsbury as no expedient they could trust in, since your Lordship and others
of your make, could not be kept from being in the head of it. But those eminent
and Worthy Persons of the Earl of Shaftsbury's Jury must be railed at, at any
Rate: Yet where your Lordship found that Two of the Jury should say; This is
the same with that which we saw produced and promoted in the House of COMMONS,
I cannot tell, I am sure there is no such Expressions in the Proceedings at the
Old Baily, Published by Authority: But between the Veracity of a Condemned
Jesuit in Newgate, and that of a Statesman, marked out by a Vote of the House
of Commons for an Enemy to the King and Kingdom, I see here is no great odds.
Your Lordship has great Reason to be angry, for I confess they spoiled the
best Design was ever laid, by a damned Popish Party: The Government which you
call according to Law, with the Help of Irish Witnesses, and well chosen
Juries, should have delivered you from all the honest, worthy and considerable
Protestants of England, for it is plainly confessed by your Lordship how far you
meant to go; it is a Thousand pities that the City-Charter were not gone, and
that your Lordship, might not have the Naming of Sheriffs for London and
Middlesex, and then it is plain what Justice we should have for our Lives and
Fortune: The Masters of the Companies would then be Hanged with the
Journey-men. And Sheriff Pilkinton's Conscientious Surry-Jury would be found at
every Assizes; Eight hundred pound Damages given to such a Fellow, that proved
not a Penny Damage received or possible to be received by it.

But since your Lordship has had so great and good a Design spoiled, I cannot
blame you to be angry; but I would very fain guess what you would next be at,
or whether your Patience will hold out till the City-Charter be taken away,
which I assure my self will be long before it be done, I fear you will resort
to back the Pattern in the Mount: And follow the President of your Bloody
Predecessors, before that CHARTER be taken away) the Gueses in FRANCE, Cut Our
throats and condemn us after; since we will not quietly be condemned first and
hanged after; I am sure this is the next step can reasonably be expected from
Men of your Conscience, and from the Principles and Interest you are carrying
on: Neither let any one blame me for minding you of it, for I believe it has
been long in your mind and often in your thoughts, and therefore I thought it
more necessary to warn others of what you are most likely to do. And since you
talk so much of Loyalty and Love to Your Prince, I pray God preserve the KING;
and keep him out of your and all Papists bloody Hands. --

I beg to know to what purpose your Lordship recites, That my Lord Shaftsbury
was Lord Chancellor, do you quarrel at any of His Decrees or Actions then, or
wherein did he not execute that Office as a Great and Good Man should, and what
does your Lordship mean by the certain strict Test for the Discovery of Popery,
opposed by that Lord in Parliament, the Test that was passed against Popery
(which every Officer is obliged to take) is notoriously known was principally
promoted by Him: If your Lordship mean the other Bill of the Test which He
opposed, it is the same with what Somebody has passed lately Somewhere, and is
a Great Step to the Destruction of the Protestant Religion. The Truth is there
are so many of these downright Popish Touches in your Paper, That I sometimes
doubt, whether it be Your Lordships or no? since You are but a young Convert,
and yet they say young Proselytes are the fiercest; But this Paper must come
from a PAPIST or Voted Enemy to the King and Kingdom, since you tell us, that
you would have the Days of DISSOLVING the Two last Parliaments kept Festival
Anniversarily, in Commemoration of your Deliverance from those Great and
Apparent Dangers, wherewith you were encompassed, whilst they were in SESSION;
None but such Fellows and their Faction being then in Danger.

But I find your Lordship extreme angry at the Word FACTION; since you will
please to have it, that your Worthy ABHORRERS and ADDRESSORS are not a FACTION,
but the Total of the Kings Subjects, who Conscientiously respect their own Duty
and the General Welfare; pray, my Lord, let us examine this Excellent Position
of your Lordships setting aside your Heat and Railing. Does your Lordship think
that the choice of SHERIFFS, the great care in returning select Men for Grand
Juries; The Arts that were used to draw many of them into these Abhorrences,
are not well known to All the Nation; We never doubt but you have choice of
Gentlemen to make SHERIFFS fit for your TURN, and they, if they prove ill MEN,
may find Rogues to make Under-Sheriffs in every County: Neither is it doubted
that Seventeen or Eighteen Men may be found in most Counties, for your Turn;
although in some (and those great Counties too) you could not find above
Thirteen, and in several other Counties you have failed absolutely, and yet all
this will not speak your PARTY The Hundred Part of the Nation. Has your
Lordship found out another way to make a Distinction between the SENSE of the
Nation, and that of a Dangerous PARTY, than that of the House of Commons? Will
you tell Me, That a PARLIAMENT chosen against all the Opposition, Industry,
Power and Money of the COURT, is not the SENSE of Greatest Part of the NATION?
Will your Lordship affirm, That this is a FACTION, and your Lordship the
PAPISTS, the D. of Y. and his Creatures, are the only Loyal Subjects to the
King and Government. And what fort of People these make up may be guessed by
what you prosess your self for: A Government infinitely worse than that in
Turkey; wherein the Law shall be of no other Use, (if it may be as your
Lordship would have it,) but as a Mask to the Princes worst Actions and
Tyranny. Our Religion, Estates, Lives and Liberties, your Lordship would have
to be Subjected to the Will of the Prince, who being a Man is as capable and
liable to be extremely Ill as any other, tho blessed be God, for our Good King;
besides what Law you allow to this King (who is an Excellent and the Best of
PRINCES) as your King, must be allowed to the next, though He be the worst in
Nature: And yet You will find out a Way, Your self to Name to the KING Judges,
Sheriffs, and JURIES, and so then all things shall certainly go as the Court
and Great Men order; it is already so complete in S --, where the Proverb is,
Show me the Man and I will tell you the Cause. This is a Way that no Sober, or
honest Men were ever for in any Country. The Zeal of your Lordship to preserve
the Greatness of your Duke, his Zeal to get a Crown, and of the PAPISTS to
introduce their Religion, has out-gone by many Degrees, all that ever went
before you.

I Acknowledge it the Kings Prerogative to CALL Parliaments, but Edward the III.
tells us He was sworn by his Coronation Oath to provide Remedy in Parliament
upon Great Emergencies. And our Laws have been very careful to Fix the
Frequency of them: And it is that only COURT that can keep all the rest useful
to the King and People: They are brave Spirits indeed, and blessed with a Torish
Humility, or rather stupid Folly, if not wicked, Villainous Designs, that are
unconcerned when a PARLIAMENT should be called, and leave it to the PRINCE,
whether He please to have any or no without affording Him their Advice.

The LAW has given us a Right (nay it is our chiefest Birthright, and without
which we have nothing left us, but are mere slaves) to PARLIAMENTS within such
a distance of Time: The Prince has the Prerogative of appointing the Day; and
Dissolving when the Business is done: But the Prince (some think) is obliged
that we have Parliaments within our Time, and continued so as may be of effect
to provide Remedies for the Emergent Evils. His Prerogative of Appointing the
Day, we hope, will not deprive us of our Right of having them in such a Time,
Neither will His Power to DISSOLVE them, we hope, Render them USELESS to Us.

I am heartily sorry your Lordship is so ill instructed in the Protestant
Religion, That you ask what it is? but you profess, That Your self and your
Fellow-Addressors and Abhorrers are zealous for the Religion by LAW Established
in the Church of ENGLAND, so then you do not know the Protestant Religion, but
Religion by LAW Established you are very well acquainted with. What security
will your Lordship give, That when your Army is completed, and your Militia
Abhorrers and Addressors Mustered, That you will not tell Us, The Religion
Established by LAW in the Church of England is the Old Popish Religion settled
by Magna Charta, which is not Repealable by any future Act. For this Good Old
Cause, your Lordship and Friends has nursed up the King of France to this
height, He is now in Christendom, and all Europe is abundantly in your Debt for
it.

Quantum Religio potuit suadere Malorum! I Own my self a Friend to the
Dissenting Protestants, until your Lordship can find out an Infallible decider
of points of FAITH. -- I can give men leave to differ from me in opinion,
whilst they live soberly and honestly by me. -- There are none I know so
inconsistent with Government as the PAPIST; who owns a Foreign Jurisdiction,
and disolves all Natural Religion to introduce his Own. -- And though your
Lordship is pleased to add the word Rebel to the Name PROTESTANT; yet it will
agree much better with the Papists, whose Religion is Rebellion; and it is
impossible to find one true Subject of them in the World, (to any but the Pope)
if they believe their own Religion.

I find your Lordship is very kin^ to Court Converts, and will very freely pass
over the Blackness of all their former Tiansactions; and you have great Reason,
since you are so lately One your self: But be not deluded, the Papists think
not as you think; they never forgive Past Offenses. -- Argile cannot be
forgiven the being his Fathers Son. -- Nor the Duke of L -- will not be
forgiven the having brought the COVENANT into England. -- Tw -- will find
hereafter that 'twill be remembered he sat in Olivers Parliaments. And I should
tell your Lordship, that you may suffer hereafter by a string of some bodies
providing; but that my skill in Astrology has told me, a Garter of your own
useing etc. -- The jealous Churchmen that Govern the Popish Interest never
forgive, especially Men capable of thinking and judging other things, then they
would have them.

Your Lordship is extremely out, when you tell us that the Associations in
Queen ELIZABETH'S time, were entered into with her Consent and Privity; when the
Queen her self, in her Speech to the PARLIAMENT, in the twenty eight year of
her Reign: Did protest before God, that she never heard or thought of such
matter, being wholly ignorant of it till a great number of Hands, with many
Obligations were shown her at Hampton Court, signed and subscribed with the
Hands and Seals of the greatest in this Land. -- But you are pleased to call
the several PARLIAMENTS, that about that time, so extremely opposed the
SUCCESSION of Mary, Queen of Scots a PURITAN GANG, and have found out a Clergy,
Nobility, and Gentry, in the Clouds, that were of another opinion, no question
there were some and great store of PAPISTS in those days, but I am sure the
PARLIAMENT were violently against her Succession, as appears in the Rolls: nay*
and against her life too; for it was then daily experienced, that the Queen was
not safe, whilst the Head of so desperate and bloody a Religion as the PAPISTS
was in being* --

Pray, My Lord, let me ask you freely, is not this the very Case now? 'Twas the
Opinion of our PARLIAMENTS, and the truth appears every day more and more. Pray
let us hear your Lordship make a difference between the Case of Queen
ELIZABETH, and her POPISH SUCCESSOR, Mary Queen of Scots: (which your self have
so wisely Instanced in and brought upon the Stage) and our Case at this present
juncture. Have the PAPISTS appeared less Bloody in their designs since that
time? Have they less Passion for introducing their Religion? Did the Queen of
Scots discover more Ambition for the Crown of England, than -- (...)* She was a
Prisoner in the Queens hands and in custody, and had not the (...) of the
opportunity -- has, whose French (...), possess many of the Governments*
(...) To say no more; but Some bodies Loyalty is not to be disputed* Though I
remember the ti^e when -- but hold! I must not run the Parallel too far, least
by making too great a Resemblance, I provoke -- I could else say much more, but
leave it to your LORDSHIP to make it out.

But now let us have one Word about the D.

We are all Witnesses of the KINGS Marriage by the Advice (as was reported) of
the Dukes Father in Law, to a LADY of great Birth, but such as (it is said) the
Spanish Ambassador then undertook to prove could have no CHILDREN: And
immediately upon this Marriage, we are all Witnesses to our unspeakable sorrow,
what followed, which I will not here Perticularize; His unparrallel'd love to
his Prince, appears in all this, and in nothing more then the Civil Treatment
the KING at this hour receives from him and his Party, the throngs that tend
the one, whilst the Other walks the streets with two or three Pages of his
backstayres: Our KING is the first instance that ever I read off, that has by
those about him, been persuaded to be so willing to settle indubitably the
TITLE of his Presumptive Heir; But undoubtedly his MAJESTY has better Reasons
for it then we know of; Our King is not only an excellent well bred Gentleman,
but a man of great Abilities and Courage, Three things One that looks High
wants: When ever the King desires it He will not want Hundreds of Thousands to
dye at his Feet: Multitudes do adore him that hate and fear the Religion and
Temper of -- * Pray God bless the King, and give him yet more and more the
Spirit of discerning his Interest and Friends, and the Courage to deliver
himself from the hands of all unworthy base TRAITORS, as would encompass Him,
Shall ever be the hearty Prayers of.

Yours, etc.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
ONE Thing I had almost forgot, which is this, that it shows, in my Opinion,
very mean and degrading for a Person in your Lordships Station, to be
continually troubling the Press with little Pamphlets, as if your Lordship had
nothing to do, but to vent every conceit and quaint Notion that comes into your
Head in Letters to your Friend: The General Conduit-pipe that conveys VVhim and
Fancy now a days through the Nation. That many Great Statesmen have been famous
for cherishing and encouraging the Fomenters of Distraction and Dissentions, as
their several Interests by affect them the Stories of their Lives declare;
however then they always stood behind the Curtain, and played least in fight
themselves: But for your Lordship to turn Paperwaster, and thrust your self
among the Throng of Town-S^ble^s, shows an eagerness of appearing among the
Rabble, mis-becoming your Grand^. It looks like Nero among the Fiddlers. But
your Lordship gives some Reason for your Condescension. For it is plain from
your Writings, That your Counsels have been (...), that is no say, have proved
unfortunate; therefore in point of HONOR you can do no less than defend the
Natural Issue of your Brain, and therefore it is, that you cannot choose but
fume and fret to see a PLOT so well laid prove so ineffectual.

But whether you have done either politickly, or prudently to lay your self
open to the World, by venting your Peaks and dissatisfaction against the
Darlings of all true English Men, that value their Lives and Liberties, I mean
JURYMEN of Integrity and Conscience, your Lo^dship best knows. However your
Lordship's Moral Philosophy seems to fail you very much, since your Lordship
cannot but know how odly and capriciously Fortune behaves her self in this
World. The Mischief o^t is, and that which grieves me most, that your Lordship,
the only Eminent Lord in England for putting Pen to Paper, unless the Lord
Castlemain, should be no less unfortunate in your Argument than in your
Counsel, by Undertaking to Cavil with Conscience, which let your Lordship say
what you can is that which must Govern the Peace and Tranquillity of this unruly
Sublunary Spot. Had it been a Thesis in Philosophy concerning the Ebbing and
Flowing of the Sea, or in Mathematics, concerning the Probability of the
Flying Engine, it had been but manners to have granted your Lordship the point.
But where the National Concerns of Life and Liberty are at stake, we cannot
bate your Lordship an Ace. Your Lordship would do well to consider that you
Live in an Abbey; and therefore if You do not like it, you had better sell it,
than sit contriving ways to have it taken away. Certainly Ambition was never at
a greater height than now, while men aspire not only to Outwit one another, but
to Outwit themselves; the Impulse of Jesuitical Sublimity putting them upon the
fond Toil of Endeavoring to surpass Humanity, and to spin out the Thread of
Politics to that Invisibility, till it snap with its own Fineness. These are
the Snares, which the cunning Jesuits have laid for Us Englishmen, whose
duller. Apprehensions, as they believe, not being able to reach their Seraphick
Acuteness, they laugh to think what sport they shall have to vapor over out
unwary Politicians, when hampered in the Vulcans Nets of their own framing. But
if your Lordship, who has the applause of being a Divine as well as a
Politician, would but consider how easily Tricks and Subtleties are obviated by
a Noble, Generous, and Magnanimous honesty, the best of all Policies in the
world we might then by your good Counsel, hope to see a siting Parliament
again, which is only dreadful to the conscious, like General Councels to the
Pope, where your Lordship might sit safe for what your Virtues, not your
Failings deserve.

FINIS

