A Modest Inquiry Into the Carriage of Some of the Dissenting Bishops; With
Reflections upon the late B. of E. LETTER, Compared with their own Vindication.
Licensed according to Order.

We read in the Sacred Writings, That the Children of Israel, when in any
Extraordinary Danger or Trouble seemed to be mightily concerned, under it, and
to make strong Resolutions against those (...) that had procured it, to cry
earnestly to God for ^^trance therefrom, and withal to use all Lawful (...) in
order to their Recovery from it. But no soon^^ the Storm over, but they forgot
what God had (...) for them, and returned with the Dog to his Vo^^^. This was
the Temper of the Generality of the ^^le of Israel: And 'twere to be wished that
the same (...) of Spirit were not too visible in some of the ^est Character of
our Church-Guides, who no less (...) that People have forgot the wonderful
Deliver^^ God has wrought for us, and too daringly tempt (...) and turn back in
their Hearts to Egypt. It is not (...) years ago that some at least of these
very persons ^^ed to stand up mightily to stem the Flood of Po^^ which then
(had not God in his Mercy prevented it) had undoubtedly over-flown our Land; so
as they would not give their Concurrence to any thing that might in the least
weaken the Protestant Interest, and therefore rather than they would have any
hand in reading the late K. James's Declaration, in order to have the Penal
Laws and Test Repealed (which yet might have been done in a Parliamentary way
without Sin, and shows that they themselves would deny Obedience to the Civil
Power in some things not forbidden in the Word of God, when so doing was found
to be for the general good, as well as those the; have exposed for so doing as
the worst of men) they chose to undergo what Penalties the Law could inflict
upon them for their Refusal. And it is not unknown how much this Action has been
magnified, not only by themselves, but by their great Admirers, who have
frequently extolled it even above what was fitting, when some persons Zealously
affected toward Their Present Majesty's seemed to show their displeasure at
their refusing the Oaths, by telling them, Had it not been for them what had
become of us and our Religion ere now? But how those Reverend persons can
reconcile that Action with their Carriage and Deportment since is justly the
Admiration of any thinking Man. The Protestant Religion we all know was in no
small danger then, and they did run well, who has hindered them since? But
should they carry their designs now so as to bring their Friend Mr. Redding (as
the Canting Letter terms the late King) back, and resettle him, I would gladly
know whether the Protestant Religion would not be in infinitely worse
Circumstances than it could possibly have been in then, even tho the Penal Laws
and Test had been actually Repealed. For then we had not made our Address to
the Protestants abroad, which considering our Innate strength at home, and the
Assarance we had of their Assistance for the common Safety was a terror to our
Enemies. But now we have already had help from them, and it has pleased God to
bless it so far that our Liberties were in no Reign so well settled as now they
are; and had it not been for those Reverend persons and the Party influenced by
them we had ere now been the Terror of our Enemies. But should the late King
be restored, no rational Security could be proposed for us. For that turn of
Affairs here, would undoubtedly be of Fatal Influence on all the Protestant
Princes and States abroad, so that we could not ^^pect the least Assistance
from them, whom the pe^^diousness of some of us would destroy with our selves;
the Country here is mightily Impoverished by reason of the prolonging of the
War; and it is not to be supposed but that the Flower of our Nobility and
Gentry, with the best of our Commons will Sacrifice their Lives for the
Religion and Liberty of their Country, rather than come again under the
Clutches of one who has showed himself so implicitly abandoned to the Council
of the Jesuits: And if it should please God to punish us so far for our Sins as
to permit him to prevail over us, 'twould be no hard matter for him with his
French and Irish Soldiers poured in upon us to guide the rest as he pleased.
All which plainly shows what great Friends to the Protestant Religion, some at
least, of those Holy Confessors, those Golden Candlesticks have been, who
pretended to stand up for it, when it was nothing near in so great Danger, and
yet would betray it in its greatest Exigency, and that upon such slender
Pretenses that a Child would even be ashamed to mention.

How mightily the English World has wondered after those Dissenting Gentlemen
needs not be insisted upon, nor how strong a Party of easy short-sighted men
have been brought over by their means, to King James's side, notwithstanding
their fair Pretense in their own Vindication, That they would always by Gods
Grace make it their daily practice to study to be quiet, to bear their Cross
patiently, and to s^ek the good of their Native Country.

It has been the Admiration of not a few, that the Publisher of the Modest
Enquiry, was so severely threatened, since it was done from so great a Zeal for
their Majesty's Government, and to awaken people from their sluggish Security
in a time of so great a danger a^ that was, merely because they seemed to
expose in their own Colors those dissenting Prelates, who eve^ in their own
Vindication (however it was by some of their Admirers ready to be entertained
with, T^^ Voice of a God and not of a Man) make so superficial a^ Defense, that
in the Judgment of all Impartial Readers rather bewrays their Guilt than any
way evinces their Innocence. As if Romish-like the Protestant Religion and
Government should be Sacrificed to the Caprice of a few sullen Prelates. But
now it has pleased God of his Infinite Mercy to give us a plain Evidence of the
Integrity of at least some of them; one of whom (as is reported by his
Admirers) is now go^^ over to France to prevent that Arbitrary E^wer (as he
with the rest have it in the common Vindication) from coming upon us and
prevailing ov^r us; or rather (...) prevent its too late coming among us, (as
his Lette^^ imports.) A few Remarks upon which comparing it with their
Vindication, I shall here subjoyn.

But before I begin it may not be amiss to say some what as to the Reality of
the matter of Fact, viz. that it is not a Fiction on purpose to asperse so holy
a^ Man's Name; and this is plain enough if we consider that these Two Letters
were seized among the re^^ that were sent over to France by my Lord Prest^^
(...) the rest, and known to be his by undoubted Evidence. But besides, it is
further confirmed by this, that it is (...) to be supposed that any thing less
than a Consciousness of Guilt could Induce this Reverend Person (...) withdraw
himself at this Juncture, even though he might be sensible enough that the
Government is so m^^ that though his crime was of a Crimson dye, yet no further
rigor would have been used against him, tha^ to keep him from betraying that
Church which he pretends so great a Zeal for, (but in Truth, it s^^^ never
designed to serve her, but his own Interest a^^ Ambition.) And whether he may
not be reckon^^ amongst the Hireling Shepherds, who when he (...) brought some
of his Votaries as near destruction (...) may be, forsakes them, I leave to the
World to ju^^^ It might have been thought that one that would (...) renounce
his Hopes of Heaven (absit blasphemia!) is (...) would swerve in the least from
K. James' s Interest, w^^^ not have thus betrayed it by a cowardly flight,
esr^^^ ally when standing to it, and laying down his Life (...) so good a Cause
would have been of such mighty Inf^^ence on all his Votaries, who now when
their (...) leader has thus faintly turned back, can do no o^^ than follow his
Example. But I will now proceed^ the Letter; which is penned in the same
fulsom^ that dropped from the Mouths of those that (...) preaching people into
that Slavery that was to (...) in Popery.

Though the Bearer will do us the Justice [Observe^ quietly soever the Holy Man
protests before Go^ live, in his Vindication, yet he would not be so^^
represented to his most Gracious Sovereign Ja^^ just] to assure you that we are
as full of Duly, etc. as (...) self could wish. [This speaks the Gentleman's
meaning plainly enough; Now look to your se^ves you that spoke so much in the
favors of the Dissenting -- sticks, that though they had some insuperable
Scruples upon their Consciences, which hindered them from appearing Zealous for
this Government, yet they were so devoted to the Protestant Religion, that they
nor any one of them would ^ever act so much to its prejudice as to carry on
Plots to introduce the late King.] And his next words do more fully explain his
meaning; Yet this Gentleman has undertaken you will forgive the Presumption
[wards expressing the deepest sense of Devotion, that they must be as senseless
as Stones that do not see what a Zeal for the cause these words import] If I
give my self the honor to give you this fresh assurance in a few words which
owe (...) by cur, Actions: [The old flattering Language of Eighty three, Eighty
four, Eighty five. And we see by the word Actions, how little difference there
is between the solemn Protestations before Almighty God made by them in their
Vindication, and that of the Order of the Name Jesus. But it is true since their
designs now jump so together, it is no wonder if the measures to accomplish them
be much the same. And they are mightily biased or shallow-pated that are not
sensible, that what the Jesuits are in the Romish, that a parcel of High-flown
Tantivy-men are in the Protestant Church. It Is not unknown to the World how
this Party has inveighed against Dissenters as the worst of men (so that their
Admirers to this very day reckon them worse than Roman Catholics) and Moderate
Churchmen, upon a Presence of their being of so Seditious Principles, who have
both notwithstanding, not only here but in the Neighboring Kingdom, showed as
much Zeal for Their Present Majesty's Government as ever Subjects did. And it
may deserve our Consideration, whether Persons be more desirable in a Kingdom;
those whose Loyaly is showed only to Princes, who in modest speaking are
Princes neither of Religion nor Honesty, and who by their Flatteries and
Counsels hurry those Princes to commit more Extravagancies than possibly their
Natures would prompt 'em to; but when Princes of undoubted Religion and Honesty
come to the Throne, pretend I do not know not what Conscience against it (more
like one acted by the Prince of Darkness, than the Father of Light:) Or those
who though they seem not to give much countenance to bad Princes, yet follow
after Judgment when returned unto Righteousness, whom that Kingly Prophet
declares to be right-hearted men. But how much credit soever has been given to
that sort of Men, when out of a malicious design calumniating their Fellow
Subjects, for ought can be rationally concluded from either of their I
Practices men of much more Religion and Integrity than themselves, I hope they
will not gain such ground as they have formerly with men at leaft of any
Morals, since not only from their carriage in the latter end of the Reign of K.
Charles II. and the beginning of the late King's, it is easy to know what they
are, but from their demeanor now it will be obvious enough to any to reply to
their Calumnies, Quis tuler it Gracchos de seditione querentes?

But left we should think this the Sentiments only o^ one Non-Con-Prelate (as
if he were using We By virtue of his Apostolical Function) he plainly solves
the riddle himself by telling us; I speak in the P^ur^^ Number, because I write
my Elder Brothers sentiments as we^^ as my own, and the rest of my Family.
[What he means by his Eldest Brother is obvious enough, and by the rest of his
Family, nothing else can be meant bu^ the rest of the Dissenting Tribe, for
it is easily suppose able that his Domestic Family could do but little Service
to the Cause. And if he speaks Truth (as we are bound to believe a Gentleman of
his Function) then there is never a Barrel better Herring.]

He tells us next, Though lessened in Numb^r [Which suppose refers to the Two
Worthy Prelates, who a^ they ftood up for the Protestant Religion (not in
pretense, but) really; so they have persevered in s^ good a Work, by emproving
all their Interest t^ support Their Present Majesty's, with whom (...) must now
suffer the same Fate, and another, wh^^ had sucked in those Principles with his
Mothers Mill^ sometimes since deceast, but whose Intercessions for the good of
the Cause, no doubt they expect] yet (...) we are not mightily out in our
Accounts [which we hope they shall to their own Confusion; for the Prover says.
They that reckon before their Host, must count twic^ We are growing in our
Interests, that is, in Yours. [Th^ former is too true to be denied, and is too
sad (...) Indication what hollow-hearted Protestants we have amongst us. And by
the Letter we plainly see wh^^ Confessors they are for the Protestant Interest,
King James's Interest (which he has plainly declared to the World was to
advance the Romish Id^latries) and theirs is become one and the same. -- was
indeed the Jealousy of not a few, that the would never have stood it out so
much as they d^ and it seems they thought they had done too much and therefore
resolved to make amends for the ^^ture.

The Conclusion of this Letter is much the sa^^ with the rest of it; and
therefore I pass it.

That to Mrs. Redding (the late Queen) though it much to the same purpose with
the former, yet I sh^^ briefly take notice of it.

And first, As it is impossible for me to express that ^^traordinary
satisfaction it gave me this time twelve mo^^ to receive that Mark of your
Favor and Goodness u^^ your own hand: [This is a plain Indication that (...)
Holy Father is not a Plotter of yesterday: Other^ it is not probable that the
late Queen would h^^ vouchsafed such a special Favor as to write to (...) with
her own hand.] So I have lived in some pai^ an Opportunity to write to you my
Humble Acknowledgments, and Truest Duty: [It had been much more becoming his
Coat to have traveled in pain to discharge the duty he lay under to his great
Master, in feeding the Flock committed to his Inspection, which if he had been
so faithful in as became a Bishop, he would have been very indifferent of
paying his Duty to the late Queen.] From which (by the Grace of God) I am no
more capable of swerving than of Renouncing my Hopes of Heaven. [I thought this
Reverend Prelate had been a great Opposer of the Impossibility of the Elects
final Apostasy; but the confident Language he expresses himself by, would
induce us to believe that he is turned over to Infallibility. I wish his Hopes
of Heaven be well grounded: But I am afraid that if they had been such as he
pretends, he would never have put them in the balance with his pretended
Allegiance to Her.] I say this in behalf of my Elder Brother -- You may
entirely depend upon us, not only for a constant Adherence to so well chosen a
Principle [the (...), Jure Divinity of Succession, Non-Resistance, with all its
Appurtenances, which has been sufficiently lasht these two years; and this
Beast has received more Wounds than ever his Apost -- ship will be able to
heal] But for our utmost Activity to promote your Interests, which are
inseparably our own. [This with a Witness is a Discovery of the Candor and
Ingenuity (to say nothing of his Brethren whom he makes as Guilty as himself)
of his Solemn Protestations (in the Common Vindication) as in the presence of
Almighty God, that he knew of no Plot against the Government! What greater
Dissimulation with God Alty could the most perfidious Jesuit have been guilty
of, than for him to protest there, that he knew of no Plot, when yet he himself
was promoting K. James's Interest with his greatest activity? For we have no
reason to believe that he has changed his mind in the least since. Nay, their
Vindication it self shows they have no great affection to their present
Majesty's; for while they pray for all sorts of Subjects, they have not a good
wish to spare for Their Majesty's, whom the Apostle Ranked first, and they
themselves (...) times, and would now, had they a King accordin^ (...) their
own hearts.

He concludes, Our Young Master has all our (...) Wishes [Similes habent sua
labra Lactucas; a Spur^^^ Prelate and Prince. How great a Friend is this
Gent^^man to the Succession he so much pretends to, wh^^ he would thrust by the
Genuine Issue, and bring (...) Race no Body knows of what Extract? Since it is
o^^tain that for all the noise has been made about (...) proving of his
Legitimacy, no Legal Proof could (...) adduced, nor ever will: And whatever
Presumption there might be of his Legitimacy, which are fear (...) probable,
'twould be very unfair dealing to pre^^^ him to them, whose Legitimacy is
unquestionab^^^ Had there not been Imposture in the case, it is no^ (...) be
supposed any thing would have been omitted (...) might have contributed to the
Legal proof of it N^^^ believe there are some persons can justify that (...)
Prelate has sometimes been of another Opinion (...) any Body rather than Their
Present Majesty's shall (...) our Holy Prelates Young Master: And good rea^^^
why: for His Majesty shall never be forgiven his ^^ving the Royal Assent to the
Act for suspending (...) Laws against Protestant Dissenters: Which K. Charles
(...) of Blessed Memory, a Man according to God's o^^ heart would have been
very loath to have done. (...) no wonder then that they can be no Well wish^^^ a
Government that takes their sting from them (...) da^ly gains more Friends, and
We get ground of hi^ ^^versaries. [How confident soever he is of the (...) of
his Party, yet blessed be God we have odds en^^^^ nor are we dissatisfied at
it, since thereby we (...) only lost those men, whose being for any (...) would
make a Man of any Integrity to suspect (...) Gentlemen, for the generality of
them, that have (...) little either Religion or Morality, as the Two L^^^
Horses, and take away those two sorts of Men (...) of them commonly called K --
and F -- the Philosopher might Light a Candle to find another M^^^ and lose his
labor.

London, Printed for J. K. 1691.


