The Banders disbanded Or AN ACCURAT DISCOURSE Solidly and plainly
Demonstrating How Inconvenient, scandalous and sinful it is, in the present
Circumstances of the Church of Scotland, For Ministers of Christ there, that
they may obtain a pretended Liberty to Preach and Administer the Sacraments, in
such and such particular Paroches, To give Bond to their present Rulers, That
they shall live peaceably: Or For others, in their name and behalf, to Bind to
the said Rulers for their peace^ble living, and to present them when calle^ so
to do, and in case of faillzie to underly a great penalty: And so Discovering
clearly the great unfaithfulness of The Affirmative Vote, of the late Meeting
of Ministers at Edinburgh, (Anno 1679.) concerning the Lawfullness of giving
the Bond then presented by the Council: AS ALSO Occasionally holding forth
many considerable Truths very necessary to be known and pondered in these dark
and difficult Times.

Printed Anno M. DC. LXXXI.

A LETTER Concerning the Bond, tendered by the Council of Scotland, to some
Presbyterians there, in the Year 1679.
SIR
I Find now too certain what was reported, of that Meeting of Ministers at
Edinburgh, their allowing by Vote the Peoples giving that Bond of surety for
the Minister, required in the Proclamation, and have also got a double of the
Bond it self. I hear the Meeting had several communings and tampernigs, with
the Members of the Council, anent this busniess, by some of their number, whom
they appointed to wait upon them from time to time for that purpose. What was
the matter of their Communing, or to what end, I cannot well tell; However when
at last the Brethren, who were appointed, returned, the meeting after some sort
of Conference among themselves upon the present Favor (as they term it)
granted by his Maj. bearing a liberty for Presbyterian Ministers to exercise
their Ministry, did generally Conclude (and that ere ever they had seen the
Bond) That they found no Reason why the People might not give security at this
time for a Ministers peaceable behavior. And upon an other day afterward, it
is again Concluded as follows: The meeting having considered the bond o^
security as now presented by the Council, find nothing therein to alter their
former determination affirmative. I hear there were several and these of the
most eminent who endeavored to prevent this determination and were for the
negative when ti ^ame to be voted. Sir, my charity toward many of these
Brethern would scarce suffer me to believe, That ever they would have tabled
such a question to be debated in so public a Meeting, far less affirmatively
determined it. But finding it now (as I said) too certain; and this being the
thing wherein you desire advice, I have the more fre^dom to return an answer,
when I have first told you that the news of these two Votes was so surprising,
that I was made a little to sit down as one astonished at the Report, yea and my
grieved soul is so overprest, that I am in a strait whether to say any thing or
be altogether silent, and what or how to express my self if I say any thing.
Alas! is it come to this in the Church of Scotland? That so many wise men, and
who by Office are seers to the Church, did see no reason why such a Bond might
not be given to these who now require it, and that as a sign of the Churches
subjection to that power which they have assumed over it; yea and at such a
juncture when the Cry of the Souls under the Altar, who were slain ^or the word
of God and the Testimony which they held, was so much increased by reason of
their blood which these had recently shed. O! where is now that single eye
wherwi^h our former Seers saw of old, who found valid and convincing Reasons
for refusing bonds of far less import to the Cause and Churches prejudice? O!
where is the discerning of some of these same Reverend Brethren, who have
perceaved snares more covertly hid then now they are, when the snare is so
openly spread i^ the sight of the bird? Did so many Brethren, conveened in a
general Meeting, find no Reason why such a Bond as this ought not to be given?
Was there no evil, nay, nor so much as the appearance of evil to be found in
i^? Was there no ground, nor so much as an occasion of offense in it? Was there
nothing in it, that might occasion a new breach; and also widen and ^ender the
former more incurable? Was there nothing in it, that might be supposed would
grieve the hearts of many of their dear Brethren, and many others dear to God;
the grieving of whom ought not to have been despised? Could these Brethren
suppose, that the passing such a Vote would indeed satisfy all the rest of the
Non-conform Ministers and Church of Scotland? or that their determination
affirmative would (or ought) also determine all the rest? Was there nothing to
be found, in yielding to give this Bond, that might occasion both Ministers and
Ministry ^o become yet more vile, and contemptible in the eyes of this evil
generation? Was there nothing in it of a dangerous preparative, of wreathing
and continuing a yoke of bondage, upon the necks of Christ's free Ambassadors,
unto the generations to come; and a bad copy to all other Magistrates to impose
the like Bond, upon faithful Ministers of the Gospel. Was there nothing to be
found therein, that might prove a probable, yea unavoydable temptation to
Ministers their being unfaithful in delivering the whole of their Masters
message, and declaring all the Counsel of God? Was there nothing in it, to
scarr and deter, both Ministers and people (or so much as to put them in some
demurre) from giving a Bond, upon such an account, as the like thereof was
scarce ever required, far less yielded to by any Church or Churchmen to this
day? Ah alas! That ever the Ministers of Scotland should have been the first,
that ever trod in this strange and unt^oden path! Was there no hazard of
confirming, and encouraging the Rulers, in all their iniquous Impositions of
this nature? Yea was there nothing in it, that might at least be interpreted a
direct condemning many Worthies, both Ministers and others, as being ignorant
sc^uplers and preposterously zeallous for undergoing the outmost of sufferings,
ere they would engage in the like bonds? Ah! whither have we not caused o^r
shame to go? O! if it were possible to prevent or stop the spreading of this
Report, for preventing what further disgrace is like to be cast upon al^ the
Ministers of Scotland; for whoever hears of this will coun^ all alike, seeing
the thing was both publicly voted by a Meeting of Ministers, assuming to
themselves the name of a General Assembly; yea and of the Representative of
the Church of Scotland. As also no public dissent or Protestation entered
against the same. In the mean while I am not a little refreshed by this, that it
is not as you and I heard at first, That few Ministers in Scotland would be
against that Vote; for after trial there will be found, I hope, rather few to
approve thereof, yea some of themselv^ who then aggreed, do already wish that it
had never been tabled in that Meeting. And before I proceed, I must tell you
that several wanted not their fears, that not a few of that Meeting, as it
was then constitute, would be ready enouugh to declare themselves for such a
Bond, whenever they should have occasion for that effect; and there was too
good ground for this, Considering 1. How we have provoked the Lord, by our
former cedings and unfaithfulnes, to give us up to walk in connsells of our
own. 2. How Ministers and their Ministry have been brought under so much
subjection, to the Civil Magistrate already, by closing with and embracing the
two first Indulgences. 3. That so many Ministers in Scotland had laid
themselves aside, from the public exercise of their Ministry declining and
shifting to preach under the Cross, these many years past. 4. What secret
grudgings, emulations and whisperings, now and then vented by some, in sharp
and bitter Invectives against their Brethren, for supplying the desolate parts
of our Church, by transient visits, in this disturbed state; being neither
willing to labor themselves, or that others (though upon their peril) should
supply their defect; but rather with the Common Enemy despising and reproaching
their persecuted Brethren, as dis-orderly walkers fosterers of the people in an
ignorant zeall, leaders of them into separation and fomenters of division; and
too often decrying, extenuating and undervaluing all the glorious and signal
appearances of the power of God, at these meetings, and the singular blessed
effects, which were produced by the right arm of the Lord in the Ministry of
their Brethren, who were despised in the eyes of the world, and too much also
in theirs. 5. How these general Meetings were called together since the late
doolfull and sorrowful dispensation, which was at first by a few, and these
such as had little concerned themselves in the desolations of the Church, during
the time of the bypast persecution, till the late Proclamation for this new
liberty or Indulgence. 6. How the leaven of the two first Indulgences has
wrought till it had near leavened our whole lump, that several who professed
once to be clear and peremptory against it, and some who then had the offer,
and refused to accept, of late were become favorers of and pleaders for it. 7.
What eager longing too many had after some new Indulgence, as has been
manifest from the expressions and carriage of some, which did clearly show
their readiness to embrace the first offer that might come in their way. Lastly
if we consider the Constitution of the late meeting who past this Vote, That it
was for the most part made up of Indulged, avowed Applauders of the Indulgence,
or underhand Approvers and favorers of the same: yea and some of them
vigorous Contenders for these old public Resolutions, which was a signal step
of the Church of Scotlands declining, and who were active persecuters of their
dissenting Brethren at the time of that temptation. I say an impartial
Reflection upon these and the like Considerations may make it seem less
strange, that such a Vote did so easily pass at that Meeting. But seeing you
desire to have an account of my Thoughts anent this new Liberty, and the method
prescrived to Ministers for entering to Congregations by petitioning the
Council and giving this Bond of surety, And whither the people may concur in
calling Ministers who will enter this way, I dare not shun to communicate what
light I have therein, though most unfit of many, and as averse as any from
entering into a Contest wherein I am necessitat to differ from so many Reverend
Brethren, whom I highly honor in the Lord, and who have deservedly been
esteemed in the Church; yet I cannot but bear my Testimony against what sin and
snare I see in this, as I would not partake of other men's sin; And shall in
obedience to your Desire (if it may be of any use for futher information to you
or others who are careful to keep themselves from the Contagion of this
current Defection) speak alitle to this sad subject, and hold forth what
Reasons do at present occurr to me against the giving or allowing to give that
Bond for Ministers to obtain this new Indulgence: And in order thereto, I shall
propose this method; 1. I shall lay down some Generals previously to be
considered; 2. a word to the Liberty granted to Ministers by the Civil
Magistra^. 3. Some things by way Explication of the Bond. 4. Propose the state
of the Question, and draw forth some Reasons for the negative. 5. Answer
briefly to some Objections. And lastly for obviating Mistakes, I shall point at
some of our Principles anent the Civil Government.

As to the First, I shall touch only upon such general Considerations as are
most conducible to my present scope of arguing against giving this Bond in the
present Case. And 1. Let us reflect upon some Positions of the Reformed
Government of our Church called Presbyterian, as: (1) This Government is not of
a temporal or Civil nature, but purely spiritual, and to be exercised modo
spiri^uali; and consequently, (2) It is a Government specifically distinct from
and independent upon the Civil Government, and neither to be confounded
therewith nor subordinat thereto, either in the power or exercise of the power.
(3) This Government is not Monarchical, save only in the Head Christ; Not
Hierarchicall, or prelaticall; not Democraticall; not Magistraticall, nor
Magisterial; but Ministerial, and to be exercised in an immediate
subordination to Christ as sole Head, King and supreme Governor of the Church
and Instituter of this Government. (4) That this Government of the Church is to
be exercised by a plurality of Compresbyters, or as we use to say Communi
consilio and consensu Presbyterorum, not by any single person (it is ^iven
Unitati non uni) nor at all by the Civil Magistrate. (5) That the trial and
judging of the Qualifications and fittedness of men for the Ministry, as also
the power of Conveying a License to Preach, or the potestative Mission to the
Ministerial function (being acts of Ecclesiastic order and Jurisdiction)
belong only to Church Officers in their Classical or Synodicall Meetings. (6)
As the trial and judgin^ of a Persons sittedness for the Ministry in general,
so the trial and judging of Ministers Qualifications and sittedness for the
exercise of their Ministry, to the best edification, in such or such a
particular Charge or Congregation belongs only to these Church Officers. And
therefore (7) the power of transplanting or loosing Ministers from one
particular Charge and fixing them in another, is proper only to Church Officers
as an intrinsic act of the power. (8) As the power or office of the Ministry
is given authoritatively from jesus Christ alone, who ascended on high and gave
gifts to men, and this great gift of the Ministry unto the Church, to be
conveyed by the Presbytery; so by the same Conveyance, he gives them the
exercise and liberty to the exercise of the Ministry, (for it is frivolous in
this case to distinguish between the Exercise and Liberty to the exercise, at
least as to their Rise and Conveyance, as some do) and therefore neither the
office, nor the exercise of the Office, nor liberty of the exercise thereof
depends upon, and so are not subordinat to, nor to be begged from the Civil
Magistrate. (9) That the Magistrate has not a power or right to prescribe to, or
impose upon Ministers (who are the Ambassadors only of Christ) Instructions,
Rules, Restrictions or limitations, to regulate them in the exercise of their
Ministry, especially when these Impositions proceed only from, and are founded
upon the Magistrates assumed power and supremacy in Church Matters, and have no
other ground or reason whereupon they can challenge Ministers their obedience
and subjection thereto. And therefore (10) That Ministers are not accountable
to the Civil Magistrate in the exercise of their ministerial function, or in
the administration of affairs purely spiritual and ecclesiastic, formally
and prima instantia.

A II. General consideration we may reflect upon, is: The supervenient
Engagements and Obligations to God which ly and specially upon us of the Church
of Scotland, by our solemnly sworn Covenants, for the maintenance and defense
of this Presbyterian Government, and the rest of the work of Reformation in all
the principles thereof; And, that we shall without respect of Persons endeavor
the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy etc. and whatsoever is contrary to ^ound
doctrine and the power of Godliness; And that we shall assist and de^end all
these that enter in to this Covenant, in the maintaining and persuing thereof,
and shall not suffer ourselves directly nor indirectly, by what soever
Combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided or withdrawn from this blessed
Union; but shall all the days of our li^e zeallously and constantly continue
therein, against all opposition; and promote the same according to our power
against all letts and impediments whatsoever; and what we are no able our
selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveall and make known, that it may
be timely prevented or removed: etc. All which we shall do as in the sight of
God. Which Covenant has frequently been renewed in this Church, and the breach
thereof often publicly acknowledged, and we solemnly engaged again to the
duties therein contained; as may be seen particularly in that Paper called A
solemn Acknowledgment of sins and Engagment to duties, wherein we are
expressly engaged, amongst other Errors, against Schism, Scepticisme and
Erastianisme.

A III. General to be Considered, is: The manifold Encroachments, Invasions
and Usurpations made by the Civil Magistrate upon the Royal prerogatives of
Christ, the Intrinsic previledges of his Church and the just freedom of his
Ambassadors, by many iniquous Laws, Acts and Edicts, especially of late,
together with all their vigorous endeavors by open force and subtle
Insinuations, to putt these laws in execution, and to advance this design of
bringing the whole Ordinances of Christ, and Officers of his House in
subordination unto, and under the Check, Censure and Regulation of the Civil
Magistrate, and so put themselves in actual possession of what is assumed and
settled by law. Many Instances of their endeavors to this effect might here be
given, especialy these late years by past; and of their too successful
prevailling by Church-mens ceding thereto, whereof I shall for present only give
these following: the First relating to the Prelates^ as (1) their altering of
the Church Government from what it was by Christ's Institution and the practice
of the pure primitive times into a Government of Humane Invent^on and Lordly
domination over the Lords Inheritance contrary to the word of God. (2) The
Prelates were set up and established, and the power of Ordination is conveyed
unto them from the King, as having right by his Royal Office to all the
external Government of the Church. (3) The Kings giving them their Pa^ents
impowering them to exercise that pretended Church-Office, making them
accountable in all their Ecclesiastic Administrations to himself as supreme
Governor of the Church. A Second Instance we have in reference to Presbyterian
Ministers, as: (1) Turning them out of their particular Charges for not taking
Presentation from the Patron and Collation from the Prelates: and for this
Cause by Act of Parliament declaring their Churches to be ipso jure vacant. (2)
Discharging them absolutely to exercise any part of their Ministerial function
within this Church. (3) Raising and dissipating all their Church-Iudicatories
of Presbytries Synods and Genesis As^emblies. (4) In the matter of the two Late
Indulgences to Presbyterian Ministers, wher^in we may take notice of several
grievous encroachments upon Christ's prerogative and his Churches privileges,
as: (1), this Indulgence is granted and deduced from the Kings supremacy in
Church-affaires, and conveyed by the Council; as is clear from his Maj. Letter
to the Council whereupon the Indulgence is founded, and as the Narrative of the
Warants given to the first Indulged, do bear in these words, In pursuance of
his Maj. Commands signified by his Letter of the 7 of June 1669, etc. (2.) The
King by his Conncill does nominat and elect according to his sovereign pleasure
certain of the outed Ministers, as were judged by them most fitted and
qualified, to be appointed, or readmitted to the exercise of their Ministry,
and by that same power and pleasure excluding or passing by the rest as
unworthy and unqualified for receiving that power or warrant, interdicting them
any exercise thereof under all highest pain. (3) By this Indulgence he fixes or
admitts them to exercise the function of their Ministry in what particular
flock and paroch he pleases to assign^, though under the notion of a
Confinement. (4) He restricts them in the exercise of their Ministry to these
particular Paroches, inhibiting them to preach else where in the Church. (5)
With these Restrictions he gives them also several Canons or Rules, to
regulate and direct them in exercising their Ministerial office. (6) All this
is done without either advice or consent of the Church, or any of her Lawful
Officers, but at his Maj. sole pleasure as supreme in all Causes. (7) The
Indulged Ministers have been frequently called and conveened before the
Council, to give an account, How they had observed these Injunctions which
they had received from them, and severely rebuked, yea and some of them
sentenced, by being silenced and deposed for alleged disobedience to, or
non-observance of the same; And this is done according to the tenor of the
foresaid Letter, as in these words To turn them immediately out in case etc. A
Third Instance we have in all these severe acts and cruel Executions following
thereupon, against many other Ministers, for presuming to exercise their
Ministry (though in a case of so urgent necessity, and upon so earnest Calls of
the People) without that license or warrant which was granted to the Indulged.

A IV. General previously to be considered, is: The faithful, zealous,
laborious and constant wrestlings and contendings, by manifold Testimonies,
Protestations, Declarations etc. of our faithful and worthy Predecessors, in
defense of their foresaid Principles of Presb. Government, and their peremptory
withstanding any thing which they perceived might in the least tend to bring
the Government or Ministry under a subordination or accountablenes to the
Civil Magistrate, faithfully and courageously witnessing their resentment of
any attempts tending that way, by their frequent dissentings and protestations
against any acts or Conclusions insinuating such Attempts in Corrupt
Assemblies, and against the very Constitution of some of them upon that
account; and by their frequent presenting of Grievances to ^he King^ Council
and Parliament, yea and sometimes entering Protestation at the Cross of
Edinburgh against proclamations declaring the King to be supreme Judge in
Church Matters, and that none should appeall from him and his Council. Many
such Instances may be produced: Neither have we wanted witnesses in our own
time, both at the breaking up of the last Reformation from Prelacy, and also
since the late Revolution and overturning of the work of Reformation, who have
protested and given testimony against all such encroachments and usurpations:
And though alas! we cannot produce any joint Testimony under our hands, against
all the horrid Invasions made upon our Royal Masters prerogative and his
Churches Righ^s, since the last overturning; yet some have adventured to
witness practically and pa^icularly against these usurpations and testified
their maintaining of their Ministerial freedom, who with blessed success under
manifold hazards and hardships, have often ventured upon the public exercise
of their Ministry both in houses and fields, contrary to all these
Law-Interdictions, without any licenses or Indulgences from the Civil
Magistrate, or coming under bonds to him; not out of any contempt o^ his
authority, but merely out of the conscience they had o^ an indispensable duty,
That they might make full proof of their Ministry, in such a crying necessity
of the Church, and that thereby they might also witness they held their
Ministry from Jesus Christ alone their only Lord and Master, and their
dependence only on him, both as to their office, ex^rcise of the office, and
liberty to the exercise thereof.

Thus having laid down these few Considerations, to be reflected on; it would
seem to me, that any who would be at pains duly to ponder the same, needed no
further argument to make the very name and notion of whatsoever Bond of surety
required b^ the present Rulers (and tha^ as a Condition of admitting Ministers
unto the exe^cise of their Ministry) most odious and detestable at the first
view; and ye^ mo^e odious, to engage in such a Bond as is now required; and
most of all, ^h^t the giving of such a Bond should be decided and decla^ed by a
public vote of M^^isters to be lawful and warantable. But now a word to the
liberty.

As for Liberty i^ general, which Ministers have granted unto them by the
Civil Magistra^ ^or the exercise of their Ministry, it may be considered
either abstractly in it is own nature, o^ relatively. 1. Abstractly or
absolut^ly, it may be taken either positively o^ negatively. Positively I
understand i^, whereby the ^ivill Magistrate (by virtue of his Magistraticall
authori^y) does C^mmand and al^ow all the Ministers within his Dominions freely
to exercise their Mi^istry according to the word of God, for the edifica^ion of
his subjects. Negatively as it is a bare permission, or rather a not-hinde^ing
of Ministers to exercise their Ministry. 2. This liberty may be considered
relatively; And that 1. as it relates to the laws made against it. 2. To the
Magistrate who grants it. 3. To the persons of the Ministers who accept it. 4.
To the places of their Ministry. 5. To the Ministry it self, And 6. as it
relates to this present Bond.

1. Then, as this liberty relates to the laws made against it, it may be
considered in a threefold sense: (1) as it is the total removing and taking
off of a Lawrestraint, that is, a rescinding and quite annulling such laws and
Edicts as are made in prejudice of it. (2) As it is only a suspending of the
Execution of these Laws (which is indeed a removal of the legal restraint
pro tempore) and that during the pleasure of the lawgiver. (3) As it is simply
a not executing of these laws, which may be either out of neg^igence or
Connivence; for instance the liberty which many Ministers have had (or rather
taken) to preach since this ^ate Indulgence, and yet have not given up their
names to the Council, nor found Surety according to the Proclamation: which
three sorts of liberty may and ought (in so far as it is a liberty) to be
embraced and emproved by any Minister of the Gospel.

2. This libe^ty may be considered with respect to the Magistrate who grants it,
who (1) may either be an open and avowed Enemy to the work and people of God,
or a professed friend thereto; If ane avowed Enemy, then the liberty granted is
the more to be suspect, but cannot upon that only account be rejected, if in
itself sinless: Or (2) may either have a good and honest design in granting
such a liberty, or a wicked design therein: If an honest design, then the
Minister to whom it is granted, ought to be so far from refusing the same, that
the Granters good design (though the Granter otherwise be but corrupt) should
rather be a motive to him to accept of it, the liberty being in it self
lawful. But if the Granter have a bad design and prejudicall to the Gospel in
tendering this liberty, then either this wicked design is made known to the
Accepter (whether the granter discover the same by his words, or declare it by
his practice) or it is not: If the former, then either the effectuating of that
evil design has a necessary and inseparable Connection with the accepting of
the liberty, or the evil design thereof is such as may be prevented or removed
by the Accepters: If the former, then I cannot see how such a liberty can
without sin be embraced or bargained for, though otherwise never so warantable,
and a protestation in this case would be but contraria facto: If the latter,
then I conceive that the Accepter's protestation against that evil design,
together with a practical endeavor to defeat it, might in such a Case be a
sufficient salvo to the Accepter's Conscience, the liberty being othewise
lawful. But if this wicked design of the Magistrate (the Imposer) be hid and
latent to the Accepter, then I see not how he can refuse a liberty (otherwise
sinless) upon this only account, That the Magistrate who grants it is suspected
to have some evil design in granting it, when no such design is made apparent;
for in such a Case I suppose it sufficient, that the Accepter endeavor what in
him lies to obviat and dissappoint whatsoever wicked design can be pretended or
supposed, and particularly that which the Granrer is suspected to have in
granting it.

3. As this liberty relates to the Persons of the Ministers, it may be
Considered either as it is extended to all without exception, or as it is
denied to some: If it be denied to some (as in our case it is to many) and
these too who have been most faithful, useful and successful in the work of
the Ministry in the Church, and upon which very account they are deprived of
it, because they have been such; then I humbly apprehend that the tampering
for, or accepting of it would be an active concurring with the wicked design of
the Excepters, in debarring such useful Instruments (though never so few in
themselves, or despicable in the eyes of others) from the free exercise of
their Ministry to the manifest detriment of the Gospel, and consequently
sinful: an active concurring I say, because an active consenting to a bargain
made up of such sinful Conditions, whereof this is one That so many Eminent
Ministers must be debar^ed from the foresaid Liberty; and it is to be judged an
active consenting, in so far as the terms and conditions are accepted, the
bargain actually complied with and acquiesced in by the Accepter, without any
Protestation against the depriving of others of this liberty, and the evil
design thereby intended (which yet would seem to be but a Protestation
contradicting the practice, 1. Because all these sinful Conditions and
Restrictions are inseparably interwoven with the liberty granted in the
Proclamation, unto which the Bond must be conform. 2. Because there is no
obtaining of this present Liberty, but as it is tendered by the Council, that
is, as it is complex of all these sinful Restrictions, of which the
forementioned is one) for in this case he is to be holden a Consenter that is
not a Contradicter, as is clear from the like Numb. 30:14. Where the Husband
confirms his wise's vows by holding his peace, or not contradicting and
protesting against them. If this Liberty be extended to all the Ministers
alike, then let it be considered

4. As it relates to Places; and thus it is either extended to all and every
place within the Magistrates Dominions, or it is restricted to some only: If to
some only, then it is clear that it ought upon ^his very account to be refused,
in as much as the good of the whole, though attended with some external hazard
and Inconveniences (as in our cafe) is always to be preferred to the good of a
part only, which may be obtained without that hazard or inconvenience. If
extended to all places alike, then it is either with a confinment of evry
Minister to a particular parishonall charge, or it is without such a
Confinement; If with this confinement, then it is sinful to accept of it, and
that for two Reasons chiefly: (1) Because although all the faithful Ministers
in Scotland (and Licentiates too) were every one of them fixed and restricted
to a paroch, I suppose that notwithstanding thereof, many paroches should be
vacant of such pastors. (2) Because thereby Ministers would be utterly debarred
from the exercise of Church Discipline by Presbyteries and Synods, as also
incapacitat for ordaining a succeeding Ministry. If this liberty be extended to
all places without any such Confinement, Then

5. If we Consider this liberty with refere^ce to the Ministry it self, It is
either granted with some sinful Impositions (and tha^ either as to Doctrine or
Discipline) or it is not: If the former, then such a Liberty cannot be accepted
without sin especially when these sinful Impositions do immediately concern
and qualify the doctrine of the Ministry, as in our case.

6. This liberty man be considered as it relates to the present Bond the giving
of which is the very Condition of obtaining the same: And thus we are to look
upon it as a Complex business i. e. as it is complicat with all these evils and
Inconveniences that are either expressed or employed in the Bond it self and the
proclamation whereon it is founded and to which it is said to be conform; and
so it must be most sinful to embrace the same, as shall afterward be made out.
And whether a Liberty in this last sense ought not more properly to be termed a
slavery, and bondage then true Liberty, let the un-prejudicat determine from
what has been already, and shall afterward be said.

I come now to speak of this particular Bond for Ministers which is required by
the Council, and allowed and voted to be lawful by the late Convocation of
Ministers. (But by the way I cannot pass, how that it has been by several
observed (not without Reason) That the Imposers of these Bonds do scarce let
one year pass without imposing some engagments or other upon the presbyterians,
sometimes they are more obviously gross, sometimes more seemingly smooth,
sometimes they are tendered more generally through the Kingdom, sometimes
imposed upon particular shires; And all this is carried on sometimes by Craft
and cunning, sometimes by force and Cruelty: Doubtless it is not the least part
of their design, hereby to make Oaths and Bonds become a trivial and common
thing, and by frequent renewing of them to make the presbyterians, men of as
capacious Consciences as themselves; And it is sadly to be feared, or rather
regrated, that they have gained too much of this design already) And lest there
may arise any mistake about the terms thereof or that it should be represented
either to the better or to the worse, I have thought fit to give you here the
just and genuine double of it, which is as follows.

We -- for as much as upon an humble petition given in to his Maj. Privy
Council by -- they have granted to them -- to preach and administer the
Sacraments in the Paroch, of -- conform to his Maj. Proclamation of the 29. of
June last; and a Line under his Royal hand upon the 11 of July last Upon their
giving Caution to the effect underwritten That is to say We -- bind and oblige
us conjunctly and severally our Heirs and successors that the said -- shall
live peaceably. And in order thereto we bind and oblige us to present him
before his Majesty's Privy Council when we shall be called so to do And in
case of failzy in not presenting him we shall be liable to the sum of six
thousand merks.

There are other Copies also of this Bond, which in stead of the term granted
(that is here used in this copy) some of them have allowed, some given License;
and withal they make mention of the Proclamation as gracious, which how truly
it may be termed so, may justly be doubted, if there be any truth in the
received maxim, That Bonum oritur ex integra Causa malum vero ex minimo quoque
defectu. But seeing this which I have here inserted is the just double of that
which was presented to the Ministers at the foresaid late Assembling, and upon
which the Vote did pass I shall hold my self by it.

This Bond may be taken up in these two 1. The Narrative, 2. The Obligatory
part. In the Narrative are mentioned 1. an humble petition given in to the
Council by the parishoners for such a Minister as they have called to such a
paroch. 2. The Councill's Granting of the said petition, which Grant consists
of these five. (1.) they grant the Minister. (2.) to preach and administer the
Sacraments. (3.) in such a particular paroch. (4) conform to his Majesty's
proclamation and Letter. (5) upon their finding of Caution, etc.

As for the Petition, it seems chiefly to import 1. That the people's calling
of the Minister, their petitioning of the Presbytery, and their obtaining him
from them, is hereby counted insufficient for his being admitted to the
exercise of his Ministry, until the Magistrate first be supplicated for it,
and his Consent obtained thereto; And therefore. 2. That the way they took
forme^ly to invite and call Ministers (at least since Ministers were outed)
has been irregular and dis-orderly. 3. That they ought not henceforth (seeing
they look upon this new mode of calling Ministers as their present duty) so
long as matters continue thus ci^cu^stan^ia^ To receive or permit such
Ministers to exercise their Ministry among them as do not enter by this De
novo damus. As to the 2. Part of the Narrative which is the Councills granting
the petition, whereby I. They grant such a Minister, it imports (1) That
Granting or authoritative giving of Minis^ers to the Church, and investing them
with power to exercise their Ministerial office, does not belong properly
primarly and solely to Christ as being the alone Head of the Church, nor to a
Church-Iudicatory in subordination to him, nor to be conveyed to the Ministers
in an Ecclesiastic way, But must immediately be conveyed to him from the Civil
Magistrate, and that in a Civil way. (2) That it supposes, yea and gives to
the granter an au^hori^ative and definitive power to cognosce upon, judge and
determine, and that prima instantia who are worthy and qualified, and who
unqualified for being admitted to the exercise of the Ministry. (3) It
yeelde^h to the Civil Magistrate a power both Accumula^ive and p^ivative in
matters purely Ecclesiastic, viz. a power ^o grant or not to grant (as he
pleases) such Ministers a License to exercise their Ministry, as are both
qualified for, and also already ordained in that Function. II. To preach and
administer the Sacraments: which yields to the Magistrate (beside what we have
observed in the former) a power to separate and divide the Essential parts of
the Ministerial function, and enjoin the Ministers so to do; for by the
Proclamation and Councill's act, the Ministers who accept of this Indulgence,
have License only to preach and administer the Sacraments, so that what they
would seem liberally to give with the one hand, they sacrilegiously robb with
the other. III. In the paroch of etc. which supposes (1) That the Minister has
no power nor legal right to exercise his Ministry save in that particular
Congregation to which he is assigned by the Council. (2) That the Magistrate
ha^h power to dissolve and annihilate the old ^y and relation betwixt Pastor
and Flock, and to make up a new one at his pleasure; and conseq. (3) That the
power of fixing, planting and transplanting of Ministers is not the proper and
inherent Right of Church-Iudicatories. IV. Conform to his Maj. Proclamation
etc. Whence it is manifest That as the Councill's Grant or License, so the
Parishoners petition, the Cautioners bonding for the Minister, as also the
Ministers accepting of the Liberty thereupon must be conform to, and so a
complying with and acquiescing in all these evils (in so far as the terms are
thus proposed by the Granter, and without any reluctance, or Protestation,
accepted by the Receiver) that are inseparably connected with the said
proclamation, such as: (1) The many bitter invectives against field Meetings in
the Narrative thereof, and a positive Condemning all such as Rendezvouzes of
Rebellion etc. (2) Ane absolute Interdicting of any such Meetings for the
future under highest pain. (3) Restricting the faithful Ministry of Scotland
to the south side of Tay only, excluding many other places also within the said
bounds from this liberty. (4) Excluding all these Ministers who are suspected
by the Council to have been at the late Rising in arms. (5) All these also
who shall afterward be admitted by non-conforme Ministers. (6) No liberty
granted for the exercise of Church Discipline, or ordaining others to the work
of the Ministry etc. V. Upon finding caution etc. Where observe (1) That the
Council looks upon the Ministers as persons so naughty or infamous, that they
are not worthy to transact with in this affair, at least immediately and in
their own Persons, but they must have others of more credit and Respect to
represent them, undertake for them, and make up the bargain in their name and
favors. (2) That the Ministers are men of so pernicious and profligat
principles, That they will make no C^nscience to perform their duty to their
superiors (such as peaceable living is acknowledged to be both by the Giver
and Receiver of this Liberty) unless they be either allured thereto, partly by
the benefice of a set stipend from the paroch, partly by the promise of
external peace and protection from the Council; or else overawed thereto,
either by the ^e^ror of the Council, or ^ear of hazarding the Cautioners
paying the penalty.

In the Obligatory part of this Bond, I find the Cautioner is obliged to four
things in reference to the Minister: 1. That he shall live peaceably: 2. In
order thereto, he shall present him to the Council when called so to do: 3. In
case he failzie, he shall be liable to 6000 Merks: And 4. he obliges (with
himself) his Heirs and successors to all these. In all which we may observe
this in general, That there is here not only a real or virtuall, but a
formal, yea explicit Compact or Transaction between the Magistrate on the one
hand, and the Minister and his Cautioner on the other; each of the two Parties
to perform something to the other, but with this difference, that what the
Magistrate is to perform, he pretends to do it out of mere condescendence or
indulgence to the other party; and therefore challenges to have the terms of
the bargain in his own framing and proposing; whereas the Minister and his
Cautioner being subjects to the Magistrate, are presumed to perform their part
as a duty, which they owe to their Magistrate, and are bound by the word of God
to perfo^me antecedaneously to this, or any other supervenient bonds of this
nature: The Magistrate on his part, grants to the Minister a liberty or license
to preach, and that upon such and such Conditions as himself is pleased to
propose; the Minister again on his part (or the Cautioner ^or him) engages to
fulfill these conditions: And so the bargain is aggreed upon and concluded by
them both, and a Record thereof taken, and put up in the council books to be
keept ad futuram rei memoriam.

The First thing then that the Cautioner is obliged to by this Bond, is, That
the Minister shall live peaceably, or (as it is expressed in the proclamation to
which the Bond is said to be conform) That he shall not preach Rebellion,
schism nor Heresy. Now though the te^mes seem very smooth and plausible, and if
some ought to be believed, are so plain, obvious and unquestionable, that they
can hardly be liable to mistake, or exponed in a sinistrous sense; yet after a
little inquiry it will appear that they are most ambiguous, and co^sequen^ly
fallacious when so generally and indefinitly proposed (as in this Bond:) for
peace or peaceable living may be considered either, (1) In it is nature and
quality: and thus it is many ways distinguishable, as: Peaceable living in a
natural or Moral sense; Civil or Ecclesiastic; Spiritual or Carnal etc.
And so according to every particular state or condition that a man can be in,
may peaceable living be distinguished.

Or 2. As it relates to it is Objects, which may be either (1) Persons, as God,
Angels, men, devils, superiors, Inferiors, Equalls^ saints, sinners, ourselves
or others etc. Or (2) Actions: Or (3) Things; and both, either good or ill; all
which to number were infinite.

Or 3. it may be Considered with reference to it is Rule, which may be either
the Word of God^ Light of Nature, Laws of the Land, prescript of Reason,
pleasure of the Rulers, Common Custom etc.

Or 4. With respect to it is Circumstances of Time, place, persons etc.

Or 5 With reference to it is native Consequents or Concomitants, which may be
either in general the edification of the Church and Propagation of the
Gospel, or the prejudice and dis-advantage of both; or in particular, may be
either the Confirming of the Godly, Convincing and reclaiming of the wicked, or
the grieving and offending of the ^odly, and hardening of the wicked etc.

Or 6. In al^ or any of these Respects it may be either Universal and
Absolute, or Restricted and definite; And accordingly either lawful or sinful.

I shall not at present insist to make a particular application of these, or
the like distinctions to our present case, but this only in short, that
peacea^le living ought to be considered with respect to the whole Complex state
of affairs wherein it is required. However in general Peaceable living imports
in it something Positive, and something Negative: Posi^ively, it may be
described thus; submissively to acquiesce in, and rest satisf^ed with that
(whether it be persons, courses or things etc) about which it is to be
exercised. Negatively, it imports this, no ways to contend with, oppose or
testify dislike, or abhorrence at that or these Persons, Courses, things etc.
about which it is to be exercised. And now as to our present Case, let us
enquire what sort of peaceable living it is which is required in this Bond? 1.
It must either be General and indefinite, and so abstracted from all, and
restricted to no particular and determinat sense. Or 2. it must be Universal
and Absolute, and so comprehensive of all and every sense that the terms are
capable of. Or 3. It must be understood in some particular, determinat and
limited sense. The first it cannot be, Because To live praceably is here
enjoined in such a sense, as therein it is possible to give obedience; but it is
altogether impossible to live peaceably abstractly from, and without having a
respect to some particular sense or other; Therefore to live peaceably is not
enjoined by the Council in such a general, indefinit and metaphysicall sense
as excludes all and every particular sense. If the 2. then, besides that it is
sinful to engage in such a Bond (as afterward is proven Arg. 4. of the 1 Head)
it is ridiculous and absurd to enjoin peaceable living in such a sense, and as
absurd to engage thereto in that sense; Because the terms thus taken are
capable of, and liable to senses, both contrary to, and utterly inconsistent
with one another. But 3. If this peaceable living be enjoined in some
particular, determinat and limited sense (as it must needs be, if it be not
nonsense) then our next enquiry is to know what is that particular and
determinat sense of the Council or Imposer: and this we may easily know by
their sense of Rebellion, Schism and Heresy (for the terms are equivalent,
viz. not to preach Rebellion, Schism nor Heresy, as in the Proclamation, and
to live peaceably, as is expressed in the Bond; this being a compendious positive
of the other negative) which they have a^lways declared, both by their public
Acts and Proclamations, and also by the whole series of their procedour against
the Presbyterians, to be such as thereby they directly condemn many points to
be Rebellion, Schism and Heresy which the Pres^yterians hold to be necessary
Duty, and sound doctrine, such as these: 1 To preach the iniquity of the
Parliaments Declaration and other the like Bonds imposed upon Presbyterians, or
to assert the perpetual obligation of the Covenant, and the breach thereof to
be perjury in the highest degree both against God and man. 2. That we are bound
every one of us in our capacity and station to adhere to, and defend all the
Articles and heads of these Covenants. 3. To assert the divine right of Presb.
Government, and the unlawfullnes of prelaticall and Erastian. 4. That the
prelates and their Curats are manifest Intruders, and tyrannically obtruded upon
other faithful men's labors without the Churches advice or Consent. 5. That
it is lawful and a necessary duty for outed Ministers to continue in the
exercise of their Ministry, and that it is the peoples duty to hear and own
them for their only lawful pastors, and that notwithstanding of all the
Law-Interdictions to the contrary. 6. That Jesus Christ is the alone Head and
absolutely supreme Governor over the Church in all causes spiritual and
Ecclesiastick^ and that it is an high Usurpation and insolent Invasion upon his
Royal Prerogative, for any man or mortal to arrogate unto himself either
title or office of the same. 7. That all the persecution which has been
inflicted upon the presbyterian Ministers and Professors these 17 or 18 years,
for witnessing their adherence to the work of Reformation and refusing to
comply with or subject themselves to Prelacy or the usurped Supremacy over the
Church, has been a heinous sin against God, and horrid cruelty against his
people: And many more of this nature. In short, I take peaceable living, or not
to preach Rebellion Schism nor Heresy, as it is now required and imposed by the
Council, to be upon the matter this viz. To refrain from reproving, testifying
against, or any ways opposing such Courses (whether sinful or lawful) as are
authorized or allowed by the Laws o^ Example of our present Rulers^ or the
persons (whether supreme or subordinat) who carry on the same. And consequently
to be altogether silent as to the avowing such duties, or rep^oving such sins
as are in controversy between the Presbyterians and the present Erastian
Papistico-prelatick Party, such as these Presbyterian points above-me^tioned.

But it is like some will say, That his Maj. and Council allowing Presb.
Ministers liberty to preach, does eo ipso tolerat and allow them to preach and
pro^esse their Presb. Principles, and consequently That the Councill's sense of
peaceable living is not to be interpreted according to their former Acts and
Proc^amati^ns against Convent^cles which are n^w dispensed with, but accor^ing
to the presbyterians own sense thereof. The st^ength of this objection seems to
consist chie^ly in these Two: 1. Because the laws of the land are as directly
and expressly against House-meetings simpliciter as they are against the
Covenant and other controverte^ Truths preached at these Meetings, so that a
dispensation for the one (viz. House Meetings) does necessarly import and
infer a dispensing with the other, viz. preaching of these controverted
T^uths. 2. Because it is scarce imaginable that the Rulers or any rational man
should impose a Bond (and that by way of favor) upon Presbyterian Ministers,
the terms whereof are known to be contrary to their Presb. Principles (which
this Bond would certainly be if understood according to tho foresaid acts) at
least that they could in reason expect that the Presbyterians should ingadge in
such a Bond, and yet continue true Presbyterians.

Answer 1. If this Consequence be valide^ The Magistrate allowing Presbyteria^
Ministers liberty to preach, does eo ipso allow them to preach their
Presby^erian Principles; then this must be as valide. The Magistrate granting
liberty to Presbyterian Ministers to exercise their Ministry, does eo ipso
grant them liberty to exercise their Presbyterian Government, and ordain
Presbyterian preache^s (both which are essential parts of that function)
which is false; for they have no liberty or allowance, either by the
proclamation or Bond to exercise these two parts of the Ministry, and if they
get leave to exercise them, it is rather by Connivence then Allowance. 2. As to
the Acts made against Presbyterian House-meetings, there is ane express
suspending of the execution of them, and that by virtue, of a power reserved to
his Maj. by 5. Act. sess: 2. Parl. 2. Whereas touching other acts made against
many of the Presbyterian Principles or preaching of them, there is no such
suspension as yet obtained, neither does any of them reserve to the King such a
power, and so he cannot in law do it without a parliament. But 3. I suppose
what may be said here as to Presbyterian Ministers their liberty to preach
their Presbyterian Principles, the same might have been said also of the
Liberty g^anted by the former Indulgence; But it is well known, That some
Presby^erian Ministers then Indulged were processed as Rebels and Traitors
for preaching their Presbyterian Principles, particularly Mr. William Weir, who
for asserting the obligation of the Covenant, and preaching against the
supremacy, was turned out by the Councill's Order. 4. Since the proclamation
for this new Indulgence, there comes forth another July 27. containing ane
Indemnity to these who were at the late Rise; In which proclamation (after many
exceptions from the said Indemnity) it is enjoined as ane expresss Condition of
enjoying the benefit of the said Indemni^y. That if ever they shall be at any
field Conventicle (though the necessity were never so urgent, as probably it
may be) the said Indemnity shall not be useful to such Transgressors any
manner of way. In the same proclamation also it is expressly Commanded, To
pursue and punish with all the severity that law can allow all such as shall
afterward threaten or abuse the Orthodoxe (i. e. the Corrupt) Clergy; And i^'s
very probable, that hereby they no less discharge Ministers to threaten them by
denounceing God's just judgment against them then any other persons to threate^
or abuse them by external violence nor murmur against their Iudicatures or
Officers (and if but Murmuring must be so severely punished, how much sharper
punishment must be inflicted upon them who publickely preach against these and
testify against their enormities?) Or shall make, publish, print^ or disperse
libells or pasquills, these being the fore runners of all Rebellions; Now by
these libells and pasquills we cannot but understand chiefly such Presbyterian
Principles as are emitted to the public against Prelacy, Perjury, Erastianisme
etc. so that hereby the preaching of Presbyterian Principles in opposition to
these will not be allowed nor tolerate. But 5. and chiefly I would gladly
understand in what sense Schism (which Ministers by this bond are ingadged not
to preach) is to be taken, if thereby be not meaned a separating, or keeping
our selves a distinct body from the prelatick and Erastian party then which
nothing is more consonant to presbyterian principles; For that by this Schism
is understood a separating from popery or any other sect ^nconsistent with the
protestant Religion the Imposers themselves will not affirm, unless with the
same breath they ^ffirme also that they are no friends to the protestant Cause
and Interest. To the 2. Reason of this Objection, It is scarce imaginabile etc.
I Answer 1. Whither it be imaginabile or not to some who are biased or blinded
with self-interest or prejudice, yet it is very palpable to the most seeing and
serious That the terms of this Bond as imposed by the Council is contrary to
Presbyterian Principles, as shall afterward at more length appear. 2. Although
he Magistrate when he imposes this Bond, does not expressly declare that his
sense of the terms thereof is contrary to Presbyterian Principles, or that he
requires obedience in that sense; yet it is true and undeniable, that the
terms thereof do admit of, and are commonly taken in a sense contrary to
Presb. Principles, as also that that sense is the sense of the Magistrate
(though not declared by him to be such at the imposing of the Bond, yet alibi
it is, as might be made out particularly by produceing such acts and
proclamations as have been made against the presbyterians, and are not as yet
legally suspended) yea, and that that sinful sense of the Imposer is also the
sense of the Ingadger, as shall further appear in the Arguments adduced against
this Bond And therefore 3. The Imposers of this Bond do coutch and cover the
same under such general and ambiguous terms as may admit of a sound eneugh
sense even according to the Presbyterians themselves; whereas if they had
roundly declared their own sinful sense thereof at the imposing of it, it is
probable that the Presbyterians had more universally startled at it: And herein
the meanest Capacity may ea^ily discover the deceitful design both of the
Imposer and Ingadger; o^ the Imposer, to lead the poor Presbyterians into a
snare, by the generality and ambiguity of the terms, and by a bait busked up
with smooth and plausibe words make them swallow down hook and all; and of the
Ingadger, in that whenever he is justly impeatched, as relinquishing his
Presbyterian Principles by this Bonding, he may be always ready to make his
Retreat to this (viz. that the terms are general and admitts of a sense
consonant enough with his Presbyterian Principles, and that he hes ingadged
only in that sense) as a Refuge and Cloak to cover his Anti-presbyterian
Compliance.

Having thus cleared what the Councill's sense of peaceable living and of
Rebellion Schism and Heresy in reference to the Presbyterians, is; as also that
that sense of theirs is to be known by such Acts and Edicts against the
presbyterians as are not legally suspended, I shall endeavor nixt to make it
appear that the terms of this Bond are to be understood only in the Conncill's
sense, and shall for present satisfy my self with this one Argument: Rebellion
Schism and Heresy (and on the contrare peaceable living) which Ministers by
this Bond are ingadged not to preach, is to be understood in that sense wherein
the Ministers have formerly been guilty thereof; But only in the Councill's (or
Magistrat's) sense have the Ministers been formerly guilty of Rebellion Schism
and Heresy; Therefore only in the Councill's sense is Rebellion, schism, Heresy
and peaceable living to be understood; and by Consequence, this Bond does
oblige the Ministers to live peaceably, or not to preach Rebellion Schism or
Heresy only in the Councill's sense, of which more afterward Arg. 7. of the 1
Head.

The 2 thing in the Obligatory part is the Cautioners binding him self in order
to the Ministers peaceable living. That he shall present him when called so to
do: Where we see 1 That he binds absolutely for the Ministers peaceable
living, for in order thereto he obliges himself to present him when called,
which is nothing else but to give the Council full assurance That he shall
live peaceably. 2. That he is bound to deliver up the Minister to the Council
when called so to do, though the Minister live never so peaceably; for it does
not run thus. That he shall present him when it shall be verified that he ha^h
lived unpeaceably, but thus That he shall present him when called so to do. 3.
That this obligation is imposed by the Council on the Cautioner as a terror
and aw-band both to Cautioner and Minister; for the Council will easily
suppose That ere the Cautioner should be isntrumental in persecuting his
Minister by presenting him or before that the Minister putt himself in hazard
of falling into their hands, both Cautioner and Minister will rather do all
they can to live peaceably according to the Bond, and so prevent the Councill's
displeasure and their own paying of the penalty.

The 3 thing in the Obligatory part of this Bond is, That the Cautioner shall
be liable to the payment of the soume of 6000 Merkes in case he failzie and not
present the Minister when called for. Where observe That the two last
obligations are corroborative of the first: 1 The Cautioner is absolutely
ingadged that the Minister shall live peaceably. 2 In order thereto (or for
corroborating thereof) shall present him when called. And 3. in case of failzie
(or in Certification that he shall no^ faill, but shall certainly present him
when called) he shall be liable to 6000 merkes. As for Instance, If the
Magistrate should require me to ingadge to perform some Civil duty unto him
which I am bound in my station and capacity to do, I thereupon offer my self
absolutely ^o ingadge upon my honest word to perform it (I suppone also that
the Magistrat's defigne is to have me absolutely ingadged thereto) But because
he lays no weight upon, nor gives any credit to my bare word and promise
(having possibly offended him formerly by alleged delinquencies) and so
apprehends that he has no security or assurance that I shall perform the said
duty (which duty he will by no means dispense with my nonperformance of)
Therefore in order thereto that I may not cheat him, but perform what I Am so
absolutely ingadged to, for a Corroborative and Assurance thereof, he enjoynes
this for a Certification, That in case I failzie (or lest I faill and not
perform my Ingadgement) I shall be liable to a great penalty. Will any Lawyer
or Divine call this ane Alterna^ive Bond? So in out present Case. If it be said
that the Cases are not parallel, because in the one the principal obligation
is lawful, in the other (viz. to present ^he Minister to be persecute, or to
ingadge to live peaceably in the Councill's sinful sense) i^ is not; I Answer
1. It is both lawful and a duty of the Ingadger as to the Imposer, and he
imposes it as such, and so it is not Alternative as to him, nor imposed by him
as such. 2. If the Ingadger look upon it as unlawful and alternative, then (1)
he does at best but juggle wi^h the Imposer and cheat him. (2) He thereby
confesses That he takes ane Alternative Bond whereof one of the Alternatives is
unlawful; both which to be sinful shall afterward be proven. If it be further
said; That the Cautioner does not oblige himself by ane absolute Ingadgement
that he shall pay the 6000 Merkes, and consequently That this is ane
Alternative Ingadgment, whereof both the Alternatives are put in his power (to
wit either to present the Minister or pay the penalty) which of them he pleases
to choose. Answer 1. That the Cautioner does not oblige himself absolutely to
pay the penalty, I grant; but that Therefore this Ingadgement, to pay the
penalty is Alternative, I deny: Because, it is neither properly Absolute nor
Alternative, but merely Conditional, as the very terms In Case (or on
Condition) he failzie etc. do hold forth. And it is one thing to say, I
ingadge either to perform this Or that, and another to say, I ingadge to
perform such a thing, and in case of not performing it, to underly a penalty
or punishment: for in the fo^mer both the Alternatives are put in the Binders
choice, and left arbitrary to him, and the one Alternative is no more
determinatly enjoined by the Imposer then the other: But in the Latter (for
instance when the Cautioner ingadges to present the Minister, and in case of
failzie to be liable to 6000 Merks) the penal part of the Obligation is
imposed upon him as a punishment for not performing the P^incipall part thereof,
and is only a secundary and subordinate obligation in respect of the
principal, and to have place only upon Condition of the breach thereof; whereas
Alternatives as such are not subordinate the one to the other, but both equally
proposed by the Imposer, neither is the one imposed as a punishment for
nonperformance or breach of the other. But 2. Howsoever it may be supposed
That to present the Minister or pay the penalty is Alternative upon this
account, That the Cautioner by performing of the one is thereby free from the
obligation of the other; yet (besides that it is questionable in our present
Case, whither the Cautioner by paying the penalty, shall be eo ipso liberate
from his obligation for the Ministers peaceable living and presenting of him
when called) sure I am that this Bond is not proposed formally and explicitly
in Alternative terms (and so not to he understood such, nor ingadged unto as
such) if w^ but consider the true nature and definition of Alternative promises
(or Ingadgements) that is given by Lawyers, which is: Alternativa promissio
est, cum duo vel plura sub disjunctione (v. g. cum dicitur aut hoc aut illud)
promittuntur cujus natura haec est, ut utrumque sit in obligatione, quamvis
solutione unius tollatur tota Obligatio: that is, Ane Alternative promise (or
engadgement) is, when two or more things for instance when it is said Either
this or that are disjunctively (or severally) promised, the nature of which is
this, that both (to wit the Alternative parts) are in the obligation, although
by performance of either, the whole obligation cease.

The 4. and last thing to be noticed in the obligatory part of this Bond is,
That the Cautioner does bind his Heirs and Successors together with himself to
the fulfilling of all these 3 parts already mentioned and explained. The
Inconveniences of which I shall afterward only touch in the 8. Arg. of the 3.
Head.

The terms of the Bond being some way explained in so for as is conducible to
the purpose in hand, I shall nixt in prosecution of my Method propose the state
of the Question thus: Whither in the present Circumstances of the Church of
Scotland, it be lawful and a necessary duty for the faithful Ministers of
Christ there to give bond to their present Rulers, in order to obtain liberty
to preach and administer the Sacraments in such and such particular paroches,
That they shall live peaceably; Or for others in their name and behalf to bind
to the said Rulers, for their peaceable living, presenting them when called so
to do and in case of failzie to underly a great penalty? Or shorter thus:
Whither Ministers (or Cautioners in their behalf) may lawfully give the present
Bond required by the Council? And the Negative I sustain, and shall endeavor
to evince by Reasons taken from a threefold Head (with all due reverence and
respect to these who concluded they found no Reason why it might not be given)
1. From it is more direct and immediate Sinfulnessesse, 2. From it is
Scandallousnes. 3. From it is native and necessary Inconveniences.

First therefore from it is Sinfulnes I may argue thus.
THat Bond cannot be given or allowed to be given with a good Conscience which
is Vinculum Iniquitatis, a Bond of Iniquity, or a sinful Bond. But this is
such a Bond: Therefore it cannot be given or allowed to be given, with a good
Conscience. That a sinful oriniquous Bond may be given with a good Conscience,
no Conscientious man will affirm: But that this Bond is ane iniquous and
sinful Bond, may appear from the Reasons following.

And 1 (not to make a repetition now of what evils we have already detected in
Explication of the Narrative of this Bond, which the Obligatory part has so
near a relation to and close Connection with, as above) That Bond which
presupposes, yea necessarly prae-requireth (for without previous petitioning
there is no access for bonding in our case) the making of a sinful Adress to
the Council, must be sinful; this I suppose none, either in Reason or
Conscience can deny: But that it is a sinful Address which is prae-requisite
to this Bonding, I prove: 1 To supplicat the Council for that which otherwise
may be had with more advantage to the Church and advancement of the Gospel, is
to make a sinful Address: But that to supplicat the Council for this new
liberty, is to supplicate for that which may otherwise etc. I prove. If greater
liberty (both extensively considered in reference to places and intensively to
Truths preached) then what is yet tendered by the Council may be had without
supplicating the Council, Then etc. But the former is palpable from the daily
experience of all these Ministers who with out any warant from, or dependence
upon the Council, have hitherto and yet do exercise their Ministry (though I
grant not without some seeming external hazard and Inconveniences, which yet
are not comparable to the manifold Inconveniences which attend this way of
bonding, these being sinful (as is afterward proven at large) and the Minister
active in bringing him self into them, in those it is not so) either in Town or
Country, or wherever in providence they are called, and who have therein had
such signal proofs of God's contenancing their Labors, and protecting their
persons (some of them to the astonishment of all) from the harm and fury of
the Oppressor and such as thirst after their blood, that even a very reflection
thereupon may be sufficient to frighten any Man o^ Minister of the Church of
Scotland ^^om such untroden and in^rapping paths. 2. If the Councill's Grant of
this Liberty upon the giving of this Bond, be many ways manck and mutilate, as
also implicate with many sinful Restrictions and Impositions^ then it is
sinful to supplicate the Council for the benefit (or rather bondage) of such
a grant^, And the reason is, because it is ^infull o supplicate for that which
is sinful. But the^ Co^ncill's Grant is sinful (as is cleared above in
Explication of the Narra^^ve) Ergo etc. 3. Such a petition as putts the Civil
Magistrate not only in the place of the Presbytery, but above all
Church-Iudicatories, and that in Church Matters, is sinful: But the petition
praerequisite to this Bond is such: Prob. A petition that yields to the Civil
Magistrate the power of imposing upon Ministers Instructions and limitations
prejudicial to the Church and propagating of the Gospel, a power to cognosce
and authori^atively judge of Ministerial Qualifications, as also a power to
censure, silence or depose them at their pleasure, and that prima instantia,
such a petition, I say, does put the Civil Magistrate not only in the place of,
but above all Church-Iudicatures. But this petition is such (as is partly
already and partly afterward shall be cleared) Ergo it is sinful.

2. If the Councill's Act or Grant, the parishoners petition for that Grant be
sinful, then the giving of this Bond (which is the very accomplishment of both
^hese, and the immediate end for which both Grant and petition are calculate)
must be much more sinful: But both the Councills Grant and parishoners
petition is sinful, as is already proven: Therefore the giving of this Bond
must be much more sinful.

3. It is sinful for any Man to oblige himself to do that which is impossible
for him to perform: But the Cautioner by this Bond obliges himself to do
that which is impossible from him to perform; Therefore it is sinful for him
so to oblige himself. That the Cautioner by this Bond obliges himself to that
which is impossible or impracticable to him, is clear from the terms of the
Bond, which is, That the Minister shall live peaceably. Now seeing every Man is
Master only of his own proper, personal and voluntary acts (such as to live
peaceably is to the Minister in this case) How can the Cautioner oblige himself
for the Ministers peaceable living, with out obliging himself to that which is
impossible for him to perform, seeing the Minister is neither under the
Cautioners dynamis no^ exu^ia; i. e. the Cautioner can neither constrain him by
force, nor command him by authority, but at most can only deal with him by
moral swasion or entreaty to live peaceably, which the Minister may either do
or not do as he pleases to determine, or thinks convenient.

^. It is a sin to ingadge in a Bond, wherein the matter ingadged unto is held
forth in such general and ambiguous terms as admitts of various, yea and
contrary senses: But that this Bond is held forth in such terms, is cleared
already in the Explication, and is obvious to the meanest capacity. And
therefore it is a sin to ingadge in such a Bond. Now for a man to ingadge in a
Bond, the terms whereof (as they are proposed) are liable to a sense contrary
to and inconsistent with the known sense of the Imposer, and yet not to signify
to the Imposer in what determinat sense he ingadges, or that he does not
ingadge in a sense inconsistent with that of the Imposer, what is it else but
to juggle and deceive? But more particularly.

5. Seeing the terms of this Bond ( to live peaceably) are acknowledged to be
so general and liable to various and contrary interpretations, then he who
thus ingadges, does either ingadge to live peaceably in a general, abstracted
and metaphysicall sense, or to live peaceably in some particular and determinat
sense. The former it cannot be, for that is not intelligible, yea altogether
impossible, viz. to live peaceably abstractly from any particular Consideration
of, or respect to particular persons, Actions, manner of peaceable living and
other Circumstances. If the Latter (as indeed it must be, seeing a determinate
sense of words is the very soul and substance of words) then by this Bond he is
either obliged to live peaceably in the Imposers which is the sinful sense (as
is formerly cleared) or in another sense inconsistent with that of the Imposer
If the former, then questionless it is sinful to ingadge in such a Bond: If
the Latter, then it must be deep dissimulation (and consequently sinful) in
him who thus ingadgeth and a manifest abusing of the Imposer with his
dis-ingenuity, in as much as the Imposer requires one thing by this Bond, and
the Binder does oblige himself to the quite contrary of what is required of
him, and in effect binds himself to nothing at least as to that which the
Imposer requires of him.

6. If it be sinful to give Bond for Absolute and universal peaceable living
with any man, then to give this Bond is a sin: But that the former is true, I
prove: That which is proper and due unto God only, cannot ( jure) be given to
any man or mortal; But a Bond for absolute paceable living is proper and due
to God only: Prob. If absolute obedience, or ane absolute Ingadgement to such
obedience be proper and due to God only, then absolute peaceable living, or
absolutely ingadging thereto (which is a part of that absolute obedience which
is due only to God) is proper and due unto God only. That absolute Ingadgements
or absolute obedience are proper and due to God only, is hence evident, Because
he and he only is the absolute and supreme Authority, and whose law only can
be our absolute and infallibile Rule. And if this argument be valide against
giving Bond for absolute peaceable living with any mortal because fallibile
and subordinat to the absolute and sole supreme authority; much more then must
it militate against the giving of such a Bond to these who are stated and
avowed Enemies to Christ's royal prerogative, to his people and work of
Reformation; yea would not such a Bond be rather ane Association and Combination
against the Lord? That this Bond (as it is proposed) ingadgeth the Minister to
live peaceably in ane universal and absolute sense is clear from the
indefinitnes of the terms To live peaceably And it is known, that ane
indefinite, general and illimited proposition is aequivalent, to ane
universal or absolute.

7. It is a sin to give such a Bond as by virtue of the obligation thereof
tends to bring the Ministry of the Gospel and Ministers doctrine immediately
and prima instantia to be cognosced and judged formally and authoritatively by
the Civil Magistrate; and the reason hereof is, because it belongs properly
to the Ministerial function, formally and authoritatively (though
ministerially) to judge and determine, and that prima instantia (i. e.
previously to any determination of the Magistrate or any otheir Judicature
thereanent) by the Scripture, of which Ministers are the only Interpreters ex
Officio, what is Orthodoxe or Heterodoxe, what is Schism or Heresy, these
being matters purely spiritual and ecclesiastic, and so determinable only
from the Scriptures. But that this Bond is such as by virtue of etc. I prove 1,
If by this Bond the Binder does make the Magistrate the Immediate, yea sole and
supreme Arb^ter and decisor of what is Schism and Heresy in the Ministers
doctrine, then the obligation of this Bond tends to bring the Ministers
doctrine immediately, formally and authoritatively to be cognosced and judged by
the Civil Magistrate. But the former is true, thus: If the obligation of this
Bond ingadgeth the Binder for the Ministers not preaching of Schism and Heresy
only and immediately in the Magistrat's sense, then by this Bond the Binder does
make the Magistrate the Imme^iate, sole and supreme Arbiter and decisor of what
is Schism and Heresy in the Ministers doctrine. But that the former is clear^
I prove (1) By this Bond the Binder does oblige himself for the Ministe^s not
preaching of Schism and Heresy only and immediately in such a sense as
thereupon he cannot be called in question by the Civil Magistrate for the
Ministers preachi^g of Schism and Heresy (else to what purpose does he bind?)
But only and immediately by binding in the Magigistrat's sense of Schism and
Heresy can he expect ^ot to be called in question by the Ma^istrate for the
Ministers preaching Schism and Heresy (for in no other sense can the Binder
promise himself security) Ergo by this Bond the Binder obliges himself for the
Ministers not preaching of Schism or Heresy only and immediately in the
Magistrat's (or Imposers) sense. (2) If by this Bond the Cautioner is obliged
to produce the Minister or pay the penalty only and immediately for his
preaching of Schism or Heresy in the Magistrat's sense: then the Cautioner is
bound ^or the Minister's not preaching of Schi^me or Heresy only and immediately
in the Magistrates sense: But the former is true: Therefore. The 2. Arg. whereby
I prove that the obligation of this Bond tends to bring the doctrine of the
Ministry immediately and soldly under the Magistrat's Cognizance and decision,
is this: These must be acknowledged by this Bond to have the sole immediate and
supreme determination of what is Schism or Heresy in the Ministers doctrine,
who have the sole immediate and supreme decision of what is properly a
violation of the Ministers ingadgement by this Bond. But only the Civil
Magistrate hes (or rather assumes to himse^f) the sole immediate and supreme
decision of what is properly a violation of the Ministers ingadgement by this
Bond. Ergo the Civil Magistrate must according to this Bond have the sole,
immediate and supreme etc. 3. It is well known that the non-conform Ministers
are not allowed by law to keep any Church-Iudicatories whereby such mat^ers as
Schism or Heresy might judicially be decided. 4. Nor does the Council refer
the determination of these to the Prelaticall Courts or any other Ecclesiastic
Judicature, so far as we know. From all which we gather That the Civil
Magistrate (the Imposer) must according to this Bond be the sole, Immediate and
supreme Arbiter and decisor of what is Schism and Heresy in the Minister's
doctrine.

8. That which tends to the prejudice of the Church of Scotland in general,
ought to be avoided as a sin (for no private or particular advantage ought to
interferre with the public good, and that either in Church or Common Wealth)
But that this way of bonding or fixing by Bond to a particular Congregation,
tends to the prejudice of our Church in ge^erall^ I prove: That which tends
only to the advantage of the farleast part of the Church, and not to the
edification of the whole, ^endeth to the prejudice of the Church in general,
and so must be sinful. But this way of Bonding tends only etc. Ergo. That
this way of bonding tends only to the advantage of the far least part of the
Church (or rather to the dis-advantage of the whole) is clear: 1 The one half
of Scotland to wit from Tay northward which is the very part which stands
most in need of a faithful Ministry is debarred and in a manner excommunicate
from having this liberty^ beside some of the most considerable Towns and places
particularly excepted thereform. 2 All the Ministers who are suspected by the
Council to have been at the late rising in arms. 3 All these Ministers who
shall afterward be ordained by non-c^nforme Mini^ters 4 All these Ministers who
are not clear in their Conscience for giving or allowing such a Bond, who we
hope are not a few. 5 All these Ministers who possibly cannot get any to be
Surety for their peaceable behavior, though themselves were ^lear for the
thing. 6 All these Ministers Bonders who shall not actually fullfull, or shall
contraveen (whither designedly or inadvertently) the Conditions of ^he Bond. 7
All the Ministers who shall not coram present themselves to the Council in
order to receive their Licenses upon this Bond, and so pass their Trials
before them. 8 All these paroches which either are not able to undergo the
penalty of 6000. merks or are not w^lling to hazard the same, whereof there may
be not a few. And 9 in a word, only such Ministers are hereby allowed and
authorized to preach and administer the Sacraments, as will formally ingadge
and actually perform the terms of this Ingadgement, which in charity we hope
will be found a very inconsiderable number. And then let any conjecture what a
small part of the Church of Scotland would be supplied with Presbyte^ian
Ministers, if none should preach but such as are thus licensed.

9. That ought not to be done with out the advice and Consent of the whol^
Church which is of the great concernment of the whole Church at least ought not
to be determined, concluded and complied with, without first he^ring and
pondering the Reasons of dis-sentients against it. But in a publ^ck Meeting of
Ministers that which was of the concernment of the whole Church (viz. their
voting for the lawfullnes of this Bonding, and some of them their actual
Comp^i^g with it) was done and concluded to be done not only without the advice
and consent o^ the whole Church but without so much as hearing and pondering
the Reasons of dis-sentients against it, yea contrary to the mind of several
present who declared themselves against ^o sudden a determining of such a
Question at that time. Therefore the giving or allowing this Bond ought not ^o
be done, and so is sinful.

10. That Bond is sinful which may be interpreted contrary to our former
lawful and solemnly sworn Bonds and Covenants: But this Bond is such: By our
former solemn Ingadgements we are bound (and more speci^lly Mini^^ers of the
Gospel) by all lawful means to wrestle and contend for the main^enance and
defense of the work of Reformation in all the points and principles thereof, and
to oppose every thing that may be prejudicial to the said work; and that we
shall continue constant all the days of our li^e in this defense and
opposition. But by this Bond we oblige our selves not to con^^nd strive or
wrestle any more for the defense of the wo^k of Reformation (at least no^ to
oppose and with stand every thing that may be prejudicial to the said work,
and such as are professed Enemies thereto) seeing by this Bond we ingadge to live
peaceably with these, who we know are in actual opposition against that
blessed work: for these two are contrary to and inconsistent the one with the
other: And therefore this Bond may be interpreted directly contra^e to our
former lawful Ingadgements, and so most sinful, and a manifest breach of our
solemn Vows to God in most of the articles thereof. And no doubt such as now
engage in this Bond would have been looked upon as Enemies to the main ends of
the Covenant if they had subscribed or allowed such a Bond to be given when
required by the avowed Enemes of that Covenant in these days, when our Church
was most vigorous in their zeal and faithfulness for the defense of that work of
Reformation according to these Covenants; And that it can be any less sinful
now seeing we ly as strictly under the vows of God now as then, and that these
to whom this Bond is given are as vigorous in opposing that same work and
Covenant as ever they were since the beginning, I cannot see: And we may
refer it to the Consciences of these who are now so forward in gi^ing and
allowing this Bond, in their most solitary retirements^ when they ^i^t
themselves immediately before God who weighs actions and compares this deed
most impartially with their so strict and peremptory Vows to him in that
Covenant, and our Churches formerzeall and tenderness in observing the same.

11. It is a sin to give such a Bond as mak^th my nighbour who is a free man,
especially a Minister who is a free Ambassador of Christ, to be a prisoner at
the will and pleasure of such as will make him ane offender ^ven for a word:
But such a Bond is this now required: Therefore ^infull. And if it ought to be
refused upon this account that it brings the Minister in Bonds, much more
then is it to be refused with all detestation, that it brings the Ministry it
self and Gospel in to bondage.

12. It is sinful to ingadge either by ane Absolute or Alternative Bond to be
active or isntrumental in persecuting any (but especially Christ's
Ambassadors) for saying or doing that which is their unquestionable duty: But
by this Bond the Cautioner ingadgeth (at least alternatively) to be active and
isntrumental in persecu^ing the Minister, (viz. by presenting him when called
for by the Council) for that which is really his duty, and acknowledged both
by Minister and Cautioner to be such; for instance when the Minister preaches
the perpetual obligation of the Covenant, or plainly testifyes against the
crying sins and corrupt Courses of the time (as he is bound in point of
faithfullnes and Loyalty unto his great Master to do) especially these carried
on by our Rulers or their authority, and thereupon is called in question, and
persecuted as a preacher of Rebellion etc. Ergo It is ^infull thus to ingadge.
The like may be said also against the Cautioner his binding himself to pay the
6000 Merks in case he failzie and present not the Minister; for thereby he
obliges himself (alternatively at least) to be active in persecuting and
punishing himself for that which is not his fault, and so to that which is
sinful. But lest any should imagine That because the terms of this Bond a^e
Alternative (the contrare of which is already made out) therefore they may
lawfully ingadge, viz. alternatively, though some of the Alternatives be really
sinfull^ Wherefore

13. Giving by supposition, but no^ granting, that the terms of this Bond were
indeed as Alternative as some would have, or any could wish them; yet I say that
it is sinful to ingadge therein, 1 Because all and every one of the
Alternatives of this present Bond are sinful, as is proven above. 2 Though but
one of the Alternatives were sinful and the rest lawful, yet it is a sin to
ingadge in such a Bond, and that because it is sinful to ingadge to that which
is sinful either absolutely or alternatively; For as we cannot without sin
bind our selves to that Conditionally which upon no Condition we can without
sin perform, so neither can we without sin bind o^rselves to that
alternatively which in no case can come under our choice; and where their can
be no choice (as of sin or sinful Alternatives as such their can be none,
seeing choice or election is to have place only where the thing is some way or
other eligible, which sin or a sinful Alternative can never be) there ought to
be no deliberation, and conseq. far less ought their to be Bonding.

14 That Bond is sinful whereby the Ministers ingadged wherein are by the
Imposers, 1 Restricted in the exercise of the key of Doctrine. 2. Robbed of the
key of Discipline, for this is witheld in the Councill's Grant. 3. Are debarred
from perpetuating the succession of a faithful Ministry by ordaining others
thereto; at least by this bonding they taci^ely approve and virtually consent (
Consentit enim qui non con^radicit) to these sinful Re^^rictions.

15. If the giving of this Bond be more unwarantable then imbraceing of the
former Indulgence, then this bonding is a sin, yea a greater sin then that of
the former Indulgence (at least to these who look upon the former Indulgence as
a sin) But that it is more unwarantable, is hence manifest: That by the former
Indulgence the Accepter thereof does restrict his Ministry mostly as ^o the
exercise of it in such a particular paroch, whereas by this Bond (or Latter
Indulgence) the Ministry is qualified and restricted also as to the exercise of
it simpliciter, i. e. as to the very doctrine it self, as is clear from what is
already said: In which sense it seems to surpass even Prelacy it self for
grossness, viz. in so far as Prelates (as such) requires of their Ministers the
Curates that they be subject to them only as to the exercise and manadgement of
the external Government of the Church; But by this Bond the Council requires
the bond^d Ministers to be subject to and censurable by them in the very
Essentialls and most intrinsic acts of their Ministry, namely the doctrinall
part thereof, and the Cautioner and Minister by their bonding do ipso facto
yield and consent thereto; and the more considerable this is, That Prelates
pretend to be a sort of Ecclesiastic persons, and Prelacy ane Ecclesiastic
order (though both corrupt and unwarantable) whereas the Civil Magistrate or
the Council as such cannot pre^end to any such thing.

16. If it be a sin for any Person or people absolutely to ingadge to their
Rulers (especially such as do now require this Bond) not to resist or oppose
them by ex^ernall force in any case whatsoever, Then much more is it sinful
for Ministers to bring themselves under such ane absolute Ingadgment in
reference to the intrinsic acts of their Ministry. But that it is a sin for
any person or people absolutely to engage etc. is so obvious and palpable both
from the light of nature, principles of Reason and Religion, as also from the
testimony of pious and judicious Politicians and Divines, yea even from the
Concessions of some of these who are accounted the greast Royalists, That I
forbear at large to prove it, and referres such as doubt thereof to the writings
of these who have treated upon that or the like subject. The Connection of the
former proposition is clear (1) Because a Mini^ter as a Minister (or
Ambassador of Christ) is not a servant or subject to any mortal Prince or
Potentate, and so may not with ou^ laese Majesty to his sole Sovereign Christ
(whose alone servant he is) make such absolu^e ingadgements in things relating
to his Ministerial function, as Others may in matters of their Civil^
Liberties and Concerns. (2) Because, by ^ow much the more indispensable the
exercise of the spir^tuall sword is then tha^ of the temporal, by so much the
more sinful is it for Ministers absolutely to ingadge to live peaceably (i. e.
not to lift up their spiritua^l and mini^teriall arms, such as public
Reproving, testifying or protesting against the sinful^ Co^rses of the Rulers
and these that are in authority) then the people so to do in order not to lift
their carnal and temporal arms against the same Rulers: And though we are
more prone by nature to flee to the Carnal sword for our bodily defense, when
occasion calls thereto, yet the use of the spiritual is both much more
necessary and indispensable in it self, and also much more expressly enjoined
by God in his word to these whom he has empowered and authorized to exercise
it ex officio. But to proceed.

Secondly from the Scandallousnes of this Bond, I may Reason thus.
A Bond that is justly scandallous or gives just ground of scandal or
stumbling (not that the ground of Scandal can be just and warantable i. e,
that any ground of Scandal can justify the Scandal or warant any person to
stumble; but that such a Bond as this does give just ground to repute the
giving of it a real Scandal, and that which hes a real and direct tendency
to stumble and offend) ought not to be given or allowed to be given: But this
Bond for Mini^ters peaceable living (as it is now required) is such: Therefore
it ought not to be given or allowed. That this B^nd is Scandallous, and that
upon many accounts, may appear.

1 It is scandallous to give such a Bond as puts a tash and disgrace upon the
Ministers of the Gospel: But ^ha^ this is such a Bond, I prove: 1, A Bond that
imports and (tacitly at least yet really) praesupposes the faithful Ministers
of the Gosp^ll to have been formerly turbulent, unpeaceable or rebellious, puts
a disgrace upon the Ministers of the Gospel: But this Bond is such, as is
clear from the words of the proclamation, viz. But to the end that none whom we
may justly Suspect shall under the color of this favor CONTINUE to preach
Rebellion etc. For it is certain that Bonds of this nature, especially these
imposed by Superiors upon their In^eriours, or Rulers upon their Subjects, do
presuppose that these of whom the said Bonds are required, have either been
formerly guilty of^ or else have a propensity to do the contrare of what is
required of them by these Bonds: Therefore etc. 2. That Bond which imports and
presupposes the Ministers to be either incapable or unworthy to bind immediately
for their own peaceable behavior, or that they will make no Conscience of
their duty (such as to live peaceably) except others of more Credit and
Respect bind for them, or that even others their binding for them is not
sufficient to keep them in order except for ane aw-band they oblige themselves
also to present them, and that under a great penalty, such a B^nd I say putts a
great stain and disgrace upon the Ministers of the Gospel: But such is this
Bond now required: Ergo very scandallous. But

2. It is scandallous to give a Bond that not only puts disgrace upon the
Ministers but also tends natively to bring the Ministry under Contemp? That
this is such a Bond is evident, Because it is scarce imaginable That such a
man's Ministry (who hes ingadged in this Bond) can have any weight, authority or
respect with the people under his Charge so long as he is looked upon as ane
Infamous Offender or Malefactor, and one who is neither a good Subject nor a
good Christian; not a good Subject, because as he has been given to rebellious
Courses formerly, so he is still ready to break out into the same dis-orders
(for both these does this Bond import, as above) except he be chained up by
another man's binding for his peaceable behavior, who hes (as it were) the
rope f^stened about the Ministers neck, That so soon as in the least he
trespasses, he may be ready to be drawn forth, if it were even to a gibbet: nor
is he looked upon as a good Christian, either by the more tender and zeallous,
because he ha^h purchased external Liberty to exercise his Ministry in so
foull and unwarantable a way; or by others, because he makes no Conscience of
his duty ( to live peaceably) except he be either bribed or overawed thereto.
What esteem then of, or reverence to such a Man's Ministry can the people have,
or what au^hority and weight can such a Ministers reproving of sin or scandal
in others (and particularly these under his own oversight) have, while he is by
them looked upon to be such a Man as we have now described.

3. It is scandallous to give such a Bond as thereby the Cautioner appears to
the Imposers as a man who has no scruple of Conscience to deliver up his
Minister to be persecuted (and who can tell how deep it may draw with him?)
when called so to do: But this Bond is such Therefore scandallous; for though
the terms (to pre^ent the Minister or pay the penalty) were never so formally
alternative, yet seeing the Cautioner at his bonding does not expressly
d^clare to the Imposer which of the two Alternatives he chooses, or that he
chooses not that which binds him to deliver up the Minister (which is the more
sinful and scandallous) the Imposer hes just ground to judge that it is more
probable the Cautioner will rather deliver up the Minister when called thereto,
then that he will be so lavish of his money as to venture so great a sum for
not presenting him: for as one said very pertinently (speaking of this subject)
when one temptation prevails with him (viz. the Ca^tioner) to bind for the
Minister, another may persuade him to lead him to the Gibbet.

4. It is a scandal for Presbyterians to give a Bond that natively tends to
the weakening and dividing of the Presbyterian Church of Scotland, and makes
the Bonders ipso jure the true Separatists and Fomentors of Division: But this
is such a Bond: Ergo. That the giving of this Bond (or the allowing of it by a
public Vote of Ministers) does really yea natively tend to the divi^ing and
breaking of the Presbyterian Church of Scotland is too palpable by doolfull
experience, that it should be den^ed or questioned: Likewise That the Givers
and allowers of this Bond are (theri^) the only true Separatists from their
dissenting Brethren, and so the only C^eators of new divisions and fomentors
of the former, is manifest from these two: 1. That they did coram Consult and
Assembly-wayes Conclude the Lawfulnes of this Bonding yea and some of them did
actually accept of the Liberty granted the^eby, and preached thereupon, without
first hearing and pondering of what dissenting Brethren had to offer against
it. 2 Their Brethren who dissented from them herin, do as yet continue in
statu quo prius, in the same state and posture they were in before yea and in
that same judgment and practice anent this Bond, which our Church was formerly
of when most resplendent for Reformation) that is, they preach and hear upon
their peril as they have formerly, for refusing to give such homage and
subjection to ane Invading Adversary in the matters of God and of his Church,
as by this bondadging Bond they would certainly be obliged to give; whereas the
Bonders have fallen upon a new and un^roden path, which is altogether unknown
and a by-road to the Reformed Church of Scotland either as to her Principles or
practices. And this leads me to the nixt.

5. It is a Scandal for any Minister or Professor of the Church of Scotland to
give such a Bond for obtaining external liberty to Ministers to preach, as
never has been given in any Church (so far as we know) far less in a Reformed
Church, and least of all in so pure a Reform^d Church, as Scotland, till now:
But this is such a Bond as never (let but one parallel instance be produced to
disprove it) was given etc. Ergo. We read I confess in our Church-Records That
in the year 1596. there was a Bond imposed by the King and his Council to be
subscribed by every one of ^he Ministry, under the pain of losing their
stipends; whereby they were to Confess That the King was their sovereign judge
to them and every one of them in all Causes of Sedition and Treason, and other
Civil and Criminal matters, and to all their speehes which might import the
said Crimes, albeit uttered by any of them in pulpit or any other place etc.
Which Bond they jointly and unanimously refused to subscribe (though otherwise
they mostly granted upon the matter what was required of them, as in their
Explication of Mr. David Black's Declinature and else where they insinuate) and
that for XI Reasons which they gave then against the same, as may be seen in
the History.

6. It is a scandallous Bond that is tendered, and when tendered is accepted by
the Tenderers as the special sign and Test of Mi^isters their now at length
succumbing under and yielding up the Cause which hes been so much controver^ed,
and so long con^ended for; and so a virtu^ll (at least) Ingadging no more to
oppose nor Contend against, but peaceably to rest satisfied with all the past
and future overturnings of the work of Reformation, but specially with the
manifold Invasions made upon Christ's Prerogative and the Churches Privileges.
Bu^ etc. Ergo.

7. To ingadge in a Bond the terms whereof do not only admit of, but are
commonly taken in a sinful^ and scandal^ous sense (suppone that the Ingadger
should really not ingadge in that sense) and yet not to declare, that he does
not ingadge in that sinful and scanda^lous sense, is both sinful and
scandallous; for in such Cases (as al^o in most, if no^ all Cases of Scandal
as such) I conceive that Idem est esse and apparere, as to these to whom the
scandal is given: B^t so it is in this business of the Bond: Ergo exce^ding
scandallous. That the terms of this Bond are both liable to, and also commonly
taken in a sinful and scandallous sen^e (at least by the more tenderly
zeal^ous and judicious) in our ^ayes, and as matters now stand is undeniable
from experience. 2 That the sense of the Imposers is also sinful and
scandallous is manifest from what is already said in Explication of the Bond.
And 3 That such as have already ingadged in this Bond, have not as yet
declared, to the Imposers at least, that ^hey have not or would not ingadge in
that sinful and scandallous sense, is likewise manifest from matter of fact.
The like may be said of the Ingadgers not protesting publickely against all or
any of the innumerable evils, that are either employed, expressed in, yea or
commonly supposed to be inseparably connected with this bonding. Hence

8. It is scandallous for Presbyterian Ministers to ingadge in a Bond which is
commonly suspected by most of the pious, faithful, tender and judici^us in the
Land (yea and by Strangers also and men of other Principles) ^o be inconsistent
with Presbyterian Principles, and yet not to assert and vindicate either by
Word or Write their Presb. Principles (which are exposed to so much Reproach
and Igno^iny by such Bondings) or testify against that Usurped power by which
they are so much invaded, and from which the imposing of such Bonds does
natively proceed as from their genuine source and fo^ntain; Thus I say to
ingadge, is very scandallous: But Presb. Ministers have ingadged in such a
Bond, and yet have not etc. Ergo. Yea give me leave to say, How scandallous and
reproachful is it even to the dis-sentient and true hearted Presbyterians in
Scotland, not to have either by Word, or Write, entered jointly, a faithfull^
free, positive, public and plain Protestation (whither in the face of the late
Assemblers who voted for the lawfulnes of this Bond, or otherwise) against this
anti-presbyterian (to say no worse) and divisive Bond; that so a standing
witness might have been preserved and perpetuate to Posterity against this as
one of the most gross steps of our defection and that the mouths of many both
at home and abroad might be stopped, who stand not to say and hear said That the
whole Ministry of Scotland are for the lawfullnes of this Bond, at least few or
none avowedl^ or publickely against it.

9. It is scandallous to give a Bond that hes but the appearance of our Ceding
from Contending any more for Christ's undoubted Preroga^ives, the Churches
intrinsic Priviledges^ just freedom of his Ambassadors etc. 2 Hes the
appearance of Condemning all our own and ou^ Predecessors wrestlings and
Contendings for these and their peremptory refusing and protesting against all
Bonds of this or the like nature. 3 Of dis-couradging the heart and weakening
the hands of all such as have hitherto, or are as yet endeavoring to keep a
distance from all such Ingadgements as having the appearance of evil. 4 Of
hardening and confirming open Adversaries in all their wicked Invasions,
particularly their sinful and sacrilegious Supremacy, and encouraging them by
such bondings to advance the same higher and higher as they do. 5 Of being
weary of the Cross of Christ and mistrusting of Gods faithfulness to deliver
from, o^ carry us cleanly through this dangerous difficulty, as he hes done
through many of the like nature. But 6 more particularly the giving of this Bond
has at least the appearance of (if it be not a downright) condemning the
practice and peremptoriness of some tender and zeallous among the people of
late, who by choice^ have suffered the most opprobrious of deaths, ere ^hey
would so much as Consent, to take a Bond by many degrees more plausible and
tolerable then this of the Ministers, and attended also with incomparably
stronger Temptations.

10. It is Scandallous (and more specially for Ministers of the Gospel) to
ingadge in a Bond, which as imposed is either contrary to, or al^oge^her
without express Scripturall Qualifications, when the matter thereof is enjoined
in the Scripture only with these Qualifications: But by giving of this Bond the
Binder ingadgeth in such a Bond: Ergo. That the matter of this Bond (viz to
live peaceably) is enjoined in the Scripture always with some annexed
qualifications and restrictions is manifest from many Instances, which for
brevity I omit now to cite, but shall touch some of them afterward in
answering to Objections. 2 That this Bond is imposed by the Council and
accepted by the Bonders without express mention of these scripturall
qualifications, is undenyably evident from matter of fact. 3 That the terms
thereof are commonly now taken and also to be understood in ane Anti-Scripturall
or sinful sense, is already proven.

11. The matter ingadged unto in this Bond is either 1 Clear and Indispensable
duty (I say Clear, because he that doubts is damned, and what soever is not
of faith is sin; and Indispensable, because otherwise they shall never prove it
to be free of sin, it being attended with so much scandal) in the present
Circumstance of affairs: Or 2. it is a clear and manifest sin: Or 3 it is a
matter merely Indifferent: Or 4 it has more appearance of duty then sin: Or 5
more appearance of sin then duty. That it is not the 1, and that it is the 2,
is already sufficiently made out. The 3 it cannot be, seeing it is a matter of
so much weight and importance to the whole Church of Scotland. And that it is
not the 4, but the 5 may appear (beside from what is already said) from this.
That the Bonders themselves, and the Allowers thereof are more taken up and
exercised how to excogitate Defenses (or rather pre^ences) for clearing this
their bonding not to be a sin then to adduce invincible Arguments (which cannot
be had) for proving it positively to be a necessary duty, or the refusing
thereof to be a manifest sin; which shows plainly that they have a sort of
doubting and diffidency in defending this business, as being some way
apprehensive or afraid ne lateat anguis in her^a least there be some thing
really sinful in it (being so much cried out against and abhorred of the most
Godly, tender and zeallous in the Land) and because it must first appear not to
be a sin, before it can appear to be a positive and unquestionable duty,
therefore they find themselves more conce^ned, how to take off (if possible)
the appearance or visage of sin from it, then to give it the splendour and
color of a clear and indispensable duty. Witness this, their Vote for the
giving of this Bond, which they thought fittest to express in negative terms.

12. I would in all humility and sobernes inquire^ What is the main motive and
Impulse that drives these Ministers now to this Bonding; Either it must be the
desire they have of external ease and quietness, temporal advantage and
accommodation, the Courts favor and protection, applause of men, or some such
carnal end; Or else their great motive and design must be the advancement and
propagation of the Gospel, and so the edification of the Church. If the
former, then they thereby declare themse^ves to be perfect Hirelings and
worldlings, which we will be loath to assert of them. If the latter, then it is
either the edification and advantage of ou^ Church in general, or of some
particular Congregations therein: the former by giveing and observing of this
Bond cannot be had, as is already proven in the 8 Arg. of the 1 Head: If the
latter, then it is either the good of a few Congregations as conducible to the
good of the whole^ or as inconsistent therewith: The former cannot be, as is
clear from the forecited arg. And the latter ought no^ to be, Because (as is
already said) no particular advantage ought to interferre with the public
good; Besides, Christ is said to have given ^o his Church, Past^rs, Teachers
etc. for edifying of the BODY (to wit of his Church) and not for edifying some
petty particular members thereof only.

Thirdly from the many Inconveniences wherewith this Bond is loaded and
attended, we may argue against the same as follows.
THat Bond which has exceeding great and many Inconveniences attending or
following the giving of it, ought not to be given, unless it had also as many
and great advantages as might preponderat these Inconveniences or disadvantages
(which it ha^h not as may be manifest from what is above said, but shall
farther more particularly appear:) But this Bond required of Ministers has
etc. Ergo.

For 1 the giving of this Bond brings the Minister into a great strait: 1
Either to conceall some part of the whole Counsel of God, which may readily be
interpreted by the Council, a breach of his peaceable Living, and so by his
unfaithfulness and sin^ull silence offend both God and the godly; or else by
declaring the whole Counsel of God, and boldly preaching his presbyterian
principles irrita^e the Anti-presbyterian Rulers, and so endanger both his
Liberty to be forfaulted and his person to be punished. 2 Either to present
himself when called for by the Council and Cautioner, or else to hazard the
Cautioners paying of the penalty for non-compearance, and so dis-oblige him who
has done him such a kindness as to procure him the external liberty to
exercise his Ministry, by binding for him under so great a sum, and instigat
also the Magistrate against him, and so purchase to himself the name of a
perfidious and Contumacious person. 3 If he present himself and compear, then
either to decline the Council as Competent Judges in the matter of his
Doctrine (which may cost him no less then his Head) or o^herwise silently to
suffer them go on in cognoscing, judging or condemning his Doctrine of Scisme
etc. (And so yield to the Civil Magistrate a power to judge immediately and
authoritatively of Ministers Doctrine) or Censuring by silencing, deposing, or
otherwise punishing him, as they shall please to determine his alleged
unpeaceable living does demerite.

2. It is Inconvenient on this account; That it becomes a great temptation to
the Cautioner to persecute the Minister by presenting of him; especially if he
apprehend that the Minister has needlessely done or spoken that thing or word,
for which he may be charged by the Council as ane unpeaceable liver (which may
very readily fall out) or if he be unable to pay the sum, or if he be so
wickedly set, that he will rather venture the Ministers neck then to pay such
a penalty himself for not presenting of him, or if he be in some hopes and
expectation to bring the Minister fair off though he present him etc. I say
this is very Inconvenient, and therefore ought to be avoided.

3. Hereby is occasion given (if not a real ground laid down) not only for the
Cautioner or Council to persecute the Minister, but also for any malevolous
person who carries the Minister or his Cautioner at ill will, to pitch a
quarrel with him, by gathering either from his Doctrine, deportement, or
ordinary discourse, any thing which may have the least shadow in law That he
has broken the peace whereto he is ingadged, or though they can catch nothing
in the Ministers carriage whereat they can carp, yet they may either out of
their own malice, or by the bribery persuasion or instigation of others swear
to his prejudice, and so by delating him get him delivered up to the lust of
these whose tender mercies are cruelty, or else the Cautioner to pay the
penalty.

4. The giving of this Bond is a bad preparative and exemple for encouraging
all Magistrates both at home and abroad, present and to come, either to require
and receive the like Bond from Ministers, when ever they take up the least
jealousy or prejudice against them (though probably without any ground) or else
to put them from the peaceable exercise of their Ministry, and to debarr others
also (not admitted) from access to the exercise thereof, until such a Bond of
surety be found and given for them.

5. That Bond is very Inconvenient whereby the Binder does inevitably bring
upon himself or others either sin, scandal or suffering: But by this Bond the
Binder does incur the necessity of bringing some or all of these upon himself
or others, as may be particularly evinced from what is above said: Ergo such a
Bond is most Inconvenient.

6. This bonding will at least occasion other Ministers, who either cannot find
clearnes in their Conscience to give, allow, or suffer any such Bond to be
given for them, or who possibly cannot get any who will venture to bind for
them (fearing perhaps they may be too rackless ( alias too faithful) in their
preaching) or these who are particularly exempted in the proclamation from this
Liberty; It occasions, I say, all such Ministers to be exposed as the only butt
of the malice and persecution of the Rulers, if they shall presume to preach
without their warant and License.

7. This Bonding is very Inconvenient, That thereby the Cautioner and
Parishoners are tempted to give to their Minister carnal and sinful advice (
viz. that he utter nothing which may irritate the Rulers, or may be interpreted
unpeaceable Living etc.) the Cautioner out of fear, least he be put by the
Council to present him, or else pay the penalty; the People, lest they be
deprived of their Minister: and thus the edification both of people and
Cautioner is marred and obstructed: But this is such a Bond: Therefore.

8. It is Inconvenient also upon this account, That the Cautioner does bind his
Heirs and Successors together with himself: for 1 they may be either Children
or fools. 2 They may be unable to underly so great a sum. 3 They may be of an
other or contrary Judgment anent this Bond. 4 Though they be once of the
opinion that there is no sin in it, yet they may afterward (as also may the
Cautioner himself) alter their judgment and see the evil thereof, and be made
to smart for it, as many have done in the like cases, for doing things of far
less import, and having less appearance of evil then the giving of this Bond.
But the truth is, it is as impossible to make a full enumeration of all the
evils and Inconveniences that are either wrapped up in, or may follow upon
this way of bonding, as it is to number or foretell all the particular
occurrents and circumstances that shall afterward come to pass in reference
thereto.

In a word, it is Sinful, Scandallous and Inconvenient to do or allow to be
done that which hes but the appearance of evil in it, which this Bonding
cannot be denied to have.

I shall now endeavor to obviat or remove what some do allege in defense of
the lawfulnes of giving this Bond; as.

1. That the Scripture expressly commands what is required by this Bond. viz.
to live peaceably; as may beseen particularly in these Romans 12:18. Heb. 12:14.
Ps. 34:14. 1. Pet. 3:11. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. ^ Tim. 2:1, 2. Romans 14:19. Jer. 29:7.
etc. Therefore such a Bond ought to be given when required. Answer 1, Either
these Scriptures do command absolute peaceable living, and illimitedly as to
times, places persons etc. or they do not: If they do, then how shall that
Scripture hold (for the Scriptures here adduced command us to live peaceably
not so much with Magistrates as with men in general) Eccles. 3:8. There is a
time of war and a time of peace; or that, Luke 22:36. He that has no sword let
him sell his garment and buy one; and the like? If they do not, either then
they say nothing to the purpose in hand, or else the Objectors are holden to
prove that they are parallel to, and so conclusive in our present
circumstantiate Case. 2. suppose that these forecited Scriptures (commanding to
live peaceably) were held forth in as general and indefinite terms as this
present Bond (which is manifestly false as shall presently appear) will it yet
follow, That therefore such Scriptures were absolutely and universally
concludent, and ought not to admit of any exceptions or restrictions
whatsoever, because held forth in such terms? If you will affirm that in such a
case they ought not, because where the Scripture makes no difference nor
restriction, we ought not to dinstinguish nor ^estrict; I answer, by the same
Reason then I may argue from Matthew. 5:39- Resist not evil, and infe^re
therefrom;^ That therefore we ought not to resist any manner of evil (for the
terms are generally and indefini^ely expressed) and consequently not to resist
sin nor Satan; to which if you should answer, that such a laxe consequence
were very inconsequent, because (say you) it is not the evil of sin that there
we are discharged to resist, but the evil of punishment, or private and
personal injuries, might not I (according to your own way of reasoning) reply,
that the terms of this prohibition Resist not evil, are general, illimited
and indefinite, and therefore universally conclusive and where the Scripture
distinguishes not nor qualifies and restricts we ought not; and then what is
become of your argument? But if you should answer here That though that
particular passage of scripture does not characterize nor discriminate what
sort of evil we are to resist and what not, yet many other parallel places
do: Even so say I, that although one particular passage of Scripture may
command peaceable living in general absolute and indefinite terms, yet other
parallel scriptures do expressly qualify and restrict the same; so that the
former axiom will not always hold unless it run after this manner where the
Scripture (viz Complexely considered as to the whole, and collatively as to
particular passages thereof)^ neither^ expressly distinguishes, nor gives any
ground for distinguishing, we ought not to distinguish; which I take to be very
true. But 3 Though none of the foreci^ed Scriptures made any mention of the
qualifications and Conditions of peaceable living, yea suppose all the
Scriptures of the Bible relating to peaceable living (except one particular
passage) were so generally and indefinitly expressed, as that indeed they seemed
to command absolute peaceable living without any limitation; yet though there
were but one passage in the whole Scripture, that either expressly mentions, or
so insinua^es these qualifications and restrictions of peaceable living, as
thereupon we have good ground to qualify and restrict the same, I say that even
that one passage is to be the rule and standard by which all the rest
(indefinitly so expressed) are to be interpreted and understood in reference to
peaceable living; not contrariwise. 4. It is not so much the generality and
Indefinitnes of the terms (to live peaceably) that makes us hate and abhor
this Bond, as it is the sinful and sinistrous sense that the Council hes put
upon it; neither will it follow, That because the Magistrate does not
expressly declare in the Bond it self, or at the imposing of it, his sinful
sense thereof, therefore no where else has he declared it, or that the Bond is
left arbitrary to our sensing; no more then it will fol^ow That because the
Scripture in one or more particular passages does not expressly mention the
Conditions and Limitations of peaceable living, therefore other parallel places,
or the Scripture complexely taken makes no mention of them, nor insinua^s any
ground for them or that they are left arbitrary to any man's frameing o^ coining
5. Though the terms of this Bond were never so sound in thesi and as they are
proposed, Nay (which is more) although they were never so expressly
Scripturall, yet when once the right sense and meaning thereof comes under
debate, or a sinistrous is suspected to be either ^atent or declared, I say
that we ought not ingadge even in such a Bond without protesting (at least in
general) against any sinful or sinistrous sense that can be put upon it, or
in particular that which is suspect to be latent in the terms thereof; Which
yet is to be received with caution according to what is said above in
Explication of the nature of Liberty. But 6. Even these very Scriptures adduced
against the Refusers of this Bond are so far from commanding us to live
peaceably in such a general and indefinite sense as is insinuate by the
Objectors, or in such a sinful sense as required by the Imposers, that on the
contrare the express qualifications and Conditions mentioned in these
Scriptures (both in ^he Text and Context) do exceedingly favor the Refusers,
yea and which may serve as so many Arguments for them against the Objectors, as
may appear thus: Romans 12:18. If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live
peaceably with all men; from which we may gather That if it be not possible for
us simply, or if not possible with a good Conscience (as in our case it is not)
we are not to live peaceably etc. So Heb. 12:14. it is commanded that we follow
peace with all men (but remember what is connected with it) and holiness. Ergo
we are commanded to follow peace only in so far as holiness goes along with it.
Also Ps. 34:14. and 1 Pet. 3:11. we are commanded to seek peace and pursue it
(but what says the former part of the same verse) depart from evil and do
good. Likewise 1 Timothy 2:1, 2. I exhort therefore -- that we may lead a quiet
and peaceable life (but how must it be qualified?) in all godliness and
honesty: The Reason therefore why we are to pray for Kings etc. is not that we
may lead a quiet and peaceable life simply, but that we may lead it in all
godliness and honesty; and so by consequence it is not lawful for us to bind
our selves to lead a quiet and peaceable life simply or absolutely, but thus
q^alified. Likewise Romans 14:19. Let us therefore follow after the things which
make for peace (but stay take the other half a long) and things wherewith one
may edify another. As for the other place 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. I see not how it makes
for the present purpose, it is true it is there said, That ye study to be quiet
etc. but consider also what follows in the beginning of the nixt verse, That
ye walk honestly etc. So likewise 2 Kings 20:19. Is it not good says Hezekiah)
that peace and truth ( Ergo not good that peace alone) be in my days. And
Zech. 8:19. Love the truth and peace. And many mo^ the like. From all which it
is more then manifest, That we are not commanded to live peaceably, seek peace,
love peace etc. (far less to bind our selves thereto) absolutely and simply,
but only in so far as that peace or peac^able living is consistent and
accompanied with godliness, truth, edification, holiness, honesty etc. As for
that Scripture objected from Ier. 29.7. where the people of the Jews are
bidden seek the peace of the City (even of Babylon ( whither they were carried
Captives; I answer (1) Let the Objector make the parity between the two Cases,
and then I shall consider how to make ane answer to the Objection. But (2) to
make the dis-parity appear, the scope of this Command is to intimate to them,
that it was the determinate purpose of God, that they should continue in their
Captivity for a long time viz. 70. years; and therefore that they should
quietly submit to, and rest satisfied with their captivate lot till the time
appointed, and in the mean while to build houses, plant vineyards take wives
etc that they might be increased there; and so they are to seek the common
peace and preservation of the City or Incorporation where they lived, and
whereof by Gods dispensation they were made members. Hence (3) the Reason why
they were to seek the peace of that City is, not because they were thereto
Commanded or required by the King of Babylon or his Council (as it is in our
Case) but the Reason thereof is given to be this, for in the peace thereof (says
he) shall ye have peace; and so they did no less then what the^ Law of mutual
and self-preservation did oblige them previously to this positive Command: But
I question much if the same Reason that is there subjoyned to this Command will
have place with us; that is, I much doubt if it may be said in our Case, That
in the peace of the Prelatists (or Imposers of this Bond) shall ye (viz.
Presbyterians) have peace; or at least, That the Presbyterians peace is so
inseparably connected with, and bound up in theirs, as the Jews their peace
was in the peace of the City where they were Captives. (4) From this Command I
cannot see how the Jews were obliged to give Bond ^or absolute peaceable
living, though it had been required of them by the King of Babylon or his
Council their then Superiors (far less that it can be therefrom inferred That
we are bound to give this Bond) because such a Bond would directly have
condemned the same prophet Jeremiah who allows the Inhabitants of Zion to
pray. That the violence done unto them and their flesh might be upon Babylon;
and the Psalmist Ps. 137. v. last, who prays for a bloody day upon these
Babylonians; yea and pronounces them blessed who should dash their little ones
against the stones: And when they refused so much as to sing the songs of the
Lord at their bidding, lest they should seem to have forgott the quarrel of
Jerusalem and the Injuries done to their God, their Temple and Religion etc.
How can any man imagine, or Divine affirm, that they ought to have given such
a Bond unto such? Would they not rather that their tongue had cleaved to the
roof of their mouth then to have Consented, and their right hand to forget her
cunnig then to have subscribed such a Bond? (5) If this were a good way of
Reasoning, then Lot who was a member of Sodom's Incorporation (and so bound to
seek the preservation thereof for his own preservations sake) had been obliged
if thereto required by the Sodomites, to bind for absolute peaceable living
with them, and then how should this have consisted with his daily contending
with them for their vile abominations, and his endeavoring to restrain them
therefrom? I know some are pleased also to Object Prove. 23:23. Buy the Truth
and sell it not and so it is not only lawful (say they) but also commendable
in them, who, ere they be deprived or made destitute of a pure and peaceable
dispensation of the Gospel preached by Christ's sent Ambassadors, they will
rather tran^act with the Magistrate and ingadge for the Ministers peaceable
behavior, and presenting of him under the pain of paying a great sum of
money; To which I Answer (if such ane Objection may be counted worth the
answering) (1) That the Cautioners paying the 6000 Merkes is so far from
procuring the peaceable preaching of the Gospel, or being accepted by the
Magistrate as the price of the Liberty granted by him for the same (far less as
the price of the Truth it self which they have not to sell) That on the
contrare the paying thereof is not only a punishment inflicted on him for breach
of his ingadgement, but a certain evidence that he has forfaulted that Liberty
so bargained for. (2) It is one thing to buy the Truth and not to sell it, and
quite another to buy external peace and protect^on by selling the Truth or any
part of it, which may justly be charged upon the Bonders, as appears from what
is already said. But (3) It is a question whither we may so formally bargain
and transact with the Civil Magistrate (especially one who hes usurped all
Church Power in Church Matters and by Church-mens Ceding to such bondings and
barganings takes occasion and encouragement to advance his sinful Supremacy)
as to offer him a sum of money for obtaining Liberty to preach the Gospel in
his Dominions; which Liberty he is so indispensably obliged to grant previously
to, and without any such Tran^action.

2. Ministers ^re subjects as well as others Therefore they cannot refuse to
give or allow this Bond for their peaceable living. Answer 1, I easily grant
with all our Protestant Divines, that Ministers are subjects as they are men
and members of the Common Wealth; I am no Papist to deny subjection of
Clergymen to the Civil Magistrate in things Civil, But 2 I deny that
Ministers as Ministers, or Ministers in discharging their Ministerial
function, are subject or accountable (at least prima instantia) to the Civil
Magistrate: But this Bond is required of Ministers not only as subjects (for
then how comes it that it is not also imposed upon all the rest of the
subjects;) but mainly as Ministers, because (1) it is required of them as the
Condition without which they cannot be admitted to the exercise of their
Ministry. (2) Because thereby they are qualified and restricted not only in the
external exercise but also in the very Essentialls of their Ministry. 3, I
deny that either Ministers or other subjects ought to give Bond for peaceable
living in such absolute terms as this Bond is held forth in.

3. Peaceable behavior is necessarily included in the Oath of Allegiance as a
part thereof. Answer 1, I concede that subjects, and Ministers as subjects, are
under the ty of Allegiance to their Civil Magistrate, whither they come under
a formal, explicit and personal Oath or not, and that they are bound to live
peaceably in all dutiful subjection and obedience. But 2 if by the Oath of
Allegiance be understood a Bond without Condition or Limitation, obliging
absolutely to peaceable living, then I deny that the Magistrate may require, or
that the subjects ought to ingadge in such a Bond; otherwise I deny this Bond
(as now it is imposed) to be a part of, or included in the Oath of Allegiance.

4. Any subject may require of his fellow subject Law-borrows, and get him
obliged to keep the peace; Therefore much more may the King and Council
require, and subjects ought when required, to give a B^nd for peaceable living.
Answer Though the Cases aggree thus far, that both are Bonds to keep the peace,
yet the disparity is very considerable, as: 1 In the one Case the King and
Council, as they challenge to have the only power of framing whatsoever Bonds
they impose upon their subjects, so by that same power they put what sense and
exposition upon these Bonds (for ejusdem est exponere cujus est imponere) they
please, and require obedience only in that sense, and judge of obedience or
dis-obedience according thereto; in the other Case between Subject and
fellow-subject it is not so. 2. In the one, the Magistrate is both Judge and
Party; in the other, neither of the parties is Judge to the other, but the
Magistrate is ane indifferent Judge to both. 3. The King and Council have
declared their sense of the terms of this Bond to be so sinful and
sinistrous, that no Presbyterian can engadge therein without impeaching his
presbyterian principles; in the other, it signifies nothing what be the sense
of him who requires the Law borrows, as to any prejudice his fellow-subject can
sustain thereby, seeing he has neither the terms in his own framing or
sensing, nor is the other bound to give obedience in his sense any further then
as it is the sense of the Magistrate. 4 Law-borrowes are ordinarily (at least
ought to be) expressed in so full, plain and particular terms as both parties
may easily understand in what derterminate sense obedience is required; in our
Case it is far otherwise as to this Bond. 5, Ministers being the subjects and
servants of a King who is above all mor^all Kings, may not take such a latitude
in matters relating to their Ministerial function and freedom, as others may
in reference to their personal or Civil Concerns. 6, To ingadge to live
peaceably in that sense the Law-borrowes requires is very just and lawful in
it self, which is only to do no harm or injury to our nighbour either by word
or deed; But as to our present Bond the terms thereof as they are sensed by the
Magistrate (in whose sense only the Bonder must ingadge, as above) are most
sinful and scandallous, as is already proven at large. 7, If the Subject who
requires the Law-borrows have declared some evil or hurtful design against
his fellow^subject (as in our case the Council has against the Presbyterians
and Presbyterian Cause, by their declaredly sinistrous and anti-presbyterian
sense of the terms of this Bond) by requiring them, Then I deny that that
fellow-subject ought to ingadge in these Law-borrowes, till first he secure
himself against the evil of that design.

5. I^ young men (as some do say) entered to the Ministry by giving a Bond to
live peaceably in Oliver Cromwell's time without any scruple; Ergo the giving
of such a Bond to our Lawful Magistrate ought far less to be scrupled at.
Answer 1 Though this were true (as is most false, as it is alleged) yet it is
no good argument a facto ad jus; such a thing has been done, therefore it
ought to be done 2. I must say, whosoever dare affirm That such a Bond was
given (yea or required) by all the Intrants at that time, is a grievous
Calumniator, and until he make out what he a^^irmes, let him be accounted by
all a Traducer of the Brethren and a Complyer (in so far) with the Enemies of
our Reformation, whose malice and despite has ever run chiefly out against
these many worthy and successful Ministers who entered since the year 1649. 3
If some very few of those Intrans got Testificats from Ministers (nominat in
the paper called the Ordinance) of their lawful admission to such a kirk, and
of their pious and peaceable behavior, before they could uplift their
stipends, I shall not contradict; but what is that for a ground to affirm that
either all these Intrans did so, or that any of them did give such a Bond as is
now required, far less thereby to purchase their entry to the Ministry,
whereunto they were already entered, in the actual exercise thereof? 4 It is
also well known, that this way of testificating by that Ordinance was rejected,
by all the Ministers of Sco^land nominat therein (some very few excepted) who
only gave these testificats to a very few also, as abovesaid; yea the
generality of the Intrants themselves would not so much as require that
Testificat for obtaining their stipends from the Council at that time, far
less would they ever have condescended to give such a Bond as is now required
for obtaining the external liberty of exercising their Ministry.

6^ To refuse a Bond for peaceable living, when required by our Magistrate, were
very scandallous, and that which we could not justify before the Churches
abroad. Answer. 1 Though the contrary of what is here objected be more then
sufficiently made out above, in the arguments of the 2 Head, yet let me say, I
wish they who are pleased thus to object had been as tender of giving scandal
and offense, some of them by deserting the work of their Ministry (though so
urgent a necessity was laid upon them, by their Call and Admission to that
sacred function, by the great scarcity of the means of spiritual Life, by the
earnest Invitations of the poor famishing Flocks etc.) and rendering themselves
in a manner useless and idle in their Church and generation; Others by their
sinful silence or ambiguous speaking, as to a plain, seasonable, faithful and
peremptory testifying against the horrid defection of the Land, and by their
many other scandallous cedings and complyings with the iniquous Laws and
Commands of men, to shun and shi^t the Cross of Christ, and purchase to
themselves so scandallous a way of living peaceably under the yock of bondage;
I say, I wish they h^d been as tender in giving scandal these ways as they
pretend to be in this. 2 If this be scandallous to abstain from all appearance
of evil, whither of sin or scandal, and particularly from this Bond, as
having at least the appearance of both (as is evident from what is above said)
then I confess that tenderness and care to avoid and stand aloof from scandal,
must be scandallous; for on this very account is the Bond refused. 3, Neither
will I deny, but refusing to give this Bond may indeed displease and irritate
such as challenge to themselves a brutall submission to, compliance with, and
acquiescence in what soever sense they are pleased to put upon it; as also
these who are so headstrong and hardy ^or bringing themselves and their
Ministry into bondage by this Bond, that do Rulers what they li^t against
Christ, his Church and Gospel^, yet they are resolved to obtain and enjoy their
Liberty (such as it is) by it, though they should even compear and publicly
pass their trials before the Council in order thereto. But 4 I would fain know
what Foreign Reformed Divines (acquainted any ways with the state of our
affairs and Controversy with Prelates, Papists and Erastians) are or will be
scandallized at the refusing of a Bond so scandallous: Alas! the contrary is
too too apparent, yea palpable, as is hinted above, and a little time will more
fully manifest.

7. But the Magistrate has conceived jealousy of Ministers (at least some of
them) who are to have this Liberty, viz. that they are turbulent, factious,
disorderly and unpeaceable; And therefore for removing such a jealousy, this
Bond ought to be given now since it is required. Answer. 1, Though I am fully
persuaded that both this Bond and the Proclamation whereon it is founded do
indeed insinuate and suppose that the Presbyterian Ministers, are not only
guilty of factious and rebellious Courses formerly, but that they are also
still propense to break out into the same disorders and irregularities, unless
they be chained up by such fettering and foul-fac'd favoures, as now are
tendered (upon which account it is already proven to be at least scandallous)
yet I say, there is either just ground for this jealousy, or there is not: If
not, I doubt if they be obliged to remove a groundles jealousy, any further
then by clea^ing to all, that there is no ground for it; and by their walking
so circumspectly and irreprehensibly, as they may have a Conscience void of
offense both toward God and man; and that they patiently bear such groundless
jealousies and reproaches flowing therefrom as the Reproaches of Christ. If
there be any just ground for the said jealousy and suspicion, then this must
either be given from their principles or practices. That there is just ground
to suspect their Presbyterian principles, no true Presbyterian will affirm;
and the contrary is well known from their public Confessions, Catechismes and
Covenants: If from any thing in their practice this jealousy proceed, then let
this be particularly instructed against them, which we hope cannot against the
Presbyterian Ministers of Scotland; except it be said That Ministers in
following their necessary duty, by preaching in houses and fields, without or
against the Rulers License, their testifying and protesting against their
iniquous Laws and persecution, and the Common defection of the Land etc, have
thereby given just ground of jealousy to the Magistrate; which none dare
affirm, unless they dare also reflect upon the practice of Christ, his
Apostles and all his faithful Ambassadors in times of defection and
persecution. But if any will yet allege, That some have given at least too
just occasion of such jealousy in our time, Let them charge it on them, and let
them answer for it, for the Presbyterian Ministers in Scotland who refuse to
enter by this Bond, will not take with the Challenge or Charge, either as to
their principles or practices, but do dis-own, yea detest it as most injurious
and calumnious to both.

But lest (not withstanding of all that hes been hitherto said) I or any
others, who object against the giving of this Bond for Ministers peaceable
Living, should be mistaken or misrepresented as dis-loyall, seditious, or
disaffected to the Civil Government and Magistracy; as ordinarily all such
(who peremptorly plead for the Interest and Rights of Christ and his Kingdom,
and upon that account find themselves often under a necessity of obeying God
rather then men) have been in all generations, and as much this day as ever,
are branded with these aspersions; though we are most willing to render first
and chiefly unto God the things that are Gods, and secundarly to Caesar the
things that are Caesar`s; I say, lest our objecting against this Bond should be
thus mistaken^ I shall set down a few of these Principles or Positions which
true Presbyterians, and Objectors against this Bond, do conscientiously hold,
in reference to the Magistrate, as

I That God who is the God of order has institut and ordained Magistracy in
the Commonwealth, for the common good of Humane and Christian society.

II That the Magistrate is the Minister of God for good to them that do good,
and a Revenger to execute wrath on him that does evil.

III. That the Authority or power which God has given him for encouragement to
good works and a terror to evil, is not to be resisted.

IV. That all persons within the Magistrat's dominions, of whatsoever station,
quality or employment, are to be subject to this Authority, and give obedience
thereto according to the word of God, not only in respect of the matter
commanded, but also with respect to the Authority commanding.

V. That the Magistrate is Custos ac Vindex utriusque Tabulae, the Keeper and
Avenger of both Tables of the Law. And that as in general he is to command all
within his dominons to worship God according to his own Word and do that which
is just and equal; so in particular, he is to command and see every one
perform the duties of their respective functions and sta^ions; and
consequently Ministers also and Church Officers to do the duties of their
particular places, and that under the pain of Civil Censures and punishment.

VI. That the Magistrat's power is neither subject nor subordinat to the
Ecclesiastic, no^ to be confounded with it; but is specifically disti^ct from
it, and coordinat therewith: yet the Magistrate as a Christian and member of the
Church, is subject to the Ministry; as also the Minister as a member of the
Common Wealth, is subject to Magistracy; that is (as our Divines express it) A
Coordination of Powers and a (mutual) Subordination of Persons. But

VII. Though these Powers be Coordinat, yet they are not properly Collateral
or Coequall; because they are neither of the same nature, extent, nor external
eminency, neither are they derived formally from the same fountain, the one
being from God as Creator and Governor of the world, the other from Jesus
Christ as Mediator and sole Supreme Head of his Church.

VIII. As there is no action how Civil or secular soever (providing it be done
by a Churchmember) but as it relates to Observance toward God, it comes under
the cognizance of the Eccle^iastick Jurisdiction; so there is no cause, action
or thing so sacred or Ecclesiastic, but as it respects the external peace of
humane society, belongs to the Civil Jurisdiction: the same individual action
then (though in diverse respects) may fall under the cognizance both of the
Ecclesiastic and Civil Court; as for instance Adultery or the like, may be
the object of Church Censures, as also of Civil punishment; in the one, sub
ratione Scandali; in the other, sub ratione Criminis.

IX. That the Magistrate may and ought to add his Civil sanction and
Confirmation to such Canons and Constitutions as are ministerially cleared and
concluded by Church-Iudicatories: Neither is ^e ^o do this implicita fide, but
may judge of them, not only judicio apprehen^ivo and discretivo, by
understanding and discerning these Canons in themselves, but also discursivo
and deliberativo, by cognoscing, if they be agreeable to the Word of God and
sound Reason^; in which case he does (as a learned Divine says) judicare, but
not Iudicem ager^: But of these Canons and Conclusions he has not power to
cognosce and determine judicio definitivo, decisivo or legislatorio, except
only in reference to his own Act of ratifying and corroborating them by his
civil sanction.

X. This power of the Magistrate as to Church-affaires is Cumulative, not
privative; defensive, not destructive; Imperative and Coactive, not Elicitive;
Objective, not formal; Corroborative not Abrogative; Sancitive, not
L^gislative; not sacra properly, or in Sacris, but CIRCA SACRA; He is a Nursing
father to the Church not a step-father etc.

XI. That the Magistrat's power in ratifying Church-decrees, and commanding
obedience thereto, is not servile (though in some respect it may be called
subservient, viz, to Christ the great Lawgiver of his Church who declares his
will by his Ministers) nor merely executive as the Churches servant but
imperative, princely, and s^preame.

XII, That, as when the Magistrate goes beyond his sphaere in judging and
cognoscing Causes purely spiritual and Ecclesiastic, he may in so far be
declined, and appealed from to the Ecclesiastic Iudicatory; so when
Church^Officers exceed the limits of their Jurisdiction, by judging and
determining in Civil affairs, they may justly be declined and appealled from
to the Civil Court; and both or any of them, in cases of manifest Injury and
oppression (though acting in their own proper sphere) may be appealled from
unto the righteous and great God (as the absolute supreme Judge to whom both
are accountable) and to him only.

XIII. As it is one thing to decline the Judge, and an other to appeall from
the sentence: so when the Magistrate unjustly determines in any Civil affair,
his sentence may be appealled from, but he cannot for that be declined as a
Judge in these affairs: the like may be said of Church Officers.

XIV. Although we refuse not to yield obedience to the Magistrat's Commands
except we be convinced in our Conscience of the unlawfulnes of them; yet we
acknowledge and assert that the Word of God alone and not the dictates of
Conscience is the adaequate and infallible Rule both of Obedience and
Dis-obedience.

XV. As the Magistrate may command all acts of Divine worship which are
according to the Word of God under the pain of Civil punishment; so he may
inflict civil punishment for disobeying these Commands.

XVI. That there is a great difference betwixt a Royal Command enjoining
obedience to Church-Canons, and a nomothetick power to make Church-Canons; the
Magistrate has the former not the latter: there is a difference also between a
formal Rescinding of Church-decrees, and a Civil command not to give
obedience to these decrees; the Magistrate has the latter not the former.

XVII. As extraordinary Evils require extraordinary Helps, so the Magi^trat
may do many things in a time of the Churches gathering, backsliding or
Corruption which he cannot do so long as the Church is in a well Constitut and
Reformed Condition: But from this to infer, That he may demolish the
established order and fabric of a right Constitut and Reformed Church, on
purpose to give a proof of his extraordinary power, by reduceing the same into
order again; Or that he may make use of this extraordinary power, when the
ordinary and appointed means are to be had, and also in case to effectuate the
Cure; to infer this (I say) were both impious and incongruous.

XVIII. That the End of Civil Government is not only to obtain a quiet and
peaceable Life but also to encourage Godliness and hones^y; nay, that the end of
Mininistry is not so much a quie^ and (externally) peaceable life^ as the end
of Magistra^y is godliness and honesty^

XIX. That the supreme Magistrate is the politic Head of the persons who make
up the visible Church ( viz. as they are members of the Commonwealth) but is
not their Head as they are members of the visible Church, i. e. he is not Head
of the visible Church; because the Head and members are of the same nature, but
the supreme Magistrate as such and the Church as such are of very different
natures.

XX. That what ever Liberty the Magistrate may lawfully grant to the Church, the
Church may not only lawfully accept thereof, but may also lawfully supplicate
(if need so require) the magistrate for it: Though I dare not say that such a
Magistrate as does usurp all Church Power ought to be supplicat in matters
concerning the Church, even for that which otherwise may be lawfully granted
and which he ought to grant, at least without ane express protestation against
that power which he has unlawfully assumed; nor that any person ought formally
to bargain with, or bribe any Magistrate with a sum of money for the grant
thereof; far less to condescend to sinful or scandallous Conditions in order to
obtain it.

XXI. Albeit the Magistrate ought to restore to the Church what ever right or
Liberty he has unjustly taken from the Church; yet hence it will not follow,
That because the Magistrate has injuriously thrust Ministers out from their
particular Charges Therefore he ought to restore with restriction a certain
number of them to these Charges again. My reason is chiefly 1 Because in this
case the Magistrate does not restore the same Liberty which he has injuriously
taken, nor to the same number from which he took it. 2 Though he may restore to
them a part of their former Liberty and they may accept of it ( viz in order to
obtain the whole) yet he cannot restrict them to a part of it, nor ought they
to receive it upon such terms. 3 The Liberty which before they enjoyed did not
consist in being confined to particular paroches (which is all that the
Magistrate now grants and that to a very few) but in having free access to
preach in these paroches, or elsewhere as the good of the whole Church should
require.

XXII. It is much betwixt Magistrates and Ministers in dispensing of spiritual
and Church affairs (as one does neatly illustrate) as betwixt the Will and the
Understanding; for Quamvis Voluntas imperat Intellectui quoad exercitium actus,
determinatur tamen per Intellectum quoad ejus specificationem: that is,
Although the Will does command the Understanding as to the exercise of the act^
yet it is determined by the understanding as to the specificall kind thereof.
And Magistracy may say to Ministry (in matters spiritual and Eccle^iastick)
as Moses said to Hobab Numb. 10:31. Thou may be to us in stead of eyes. But,
as the eye cannot say unto the hand, so neither can Ministry say to Magistracy
I have no need of thee. 1 Cor. 12, 21.

XXIII. As it is a matter of great moment and difficulty to fix the just
limits and landmarks of the Magistrat's power and prerogative, and of the
Subjects Rights and privileges as to the exe^cise of either pro ^ic and nunc:
So it is of no less difficulty and import to condescend upon the most proper
and effectual means hic and nunc, for keeping both within the limits of
their proper orb, or curing the extravagances of either; or to give a just and
impartial decision when either is invaded by the other.

XXIV. That in some cases many things may be granted by the People even to a
tyrannous Magistrate (for instance levyes of men, money, arms etc,) for
maintaining him in his civil pomp and grandour (even though he should
alienate the true use and end of these things by employing them for further
strengthening and confirming himself in his tyrannical or usurped power) which
cannot with a good Conscience be granted unto him or any Magistrate whatsoever
when he has expressly declared (whither at, or before the imposing or
requiring of these things) some pernicious and destructive design, either
against Religion, the Lives or Liberties of his Subjects, which design he
resolves, and would be capacitate by the Granters, to effectuate by such a
Grant.

XXV. As every escape, error, or act of unfaithfulnes (even known and continued
in) whether in a Ministers entry to the Ministry, or in his Doctrine or
deportment, does not non-minister him, nor give sufficient ground to withdraw
from, or reject him as a Minister of Christ: So neither does every enormity,
mis-demeanure or act of Tyranny, Injustice, perfidy or profanity etc. in the
Civil Magistrate, whither as to his way of entry to that Office, or in the
execution of it, or in his private and personal behavior, denominate him a
Tyrant or ane Usurper, or give sufficient ground to divest him of his
Magistraticall power, and reject him as the lawful Magistrate.

XXVI. Though such a Minister may lawfully be withdrawn from and dis-owned as a
Minister of Christ's mission and institution, who either enters to the Ministry
by the window ( i. e. in a way unwaranted or condemned in the Word of God)
preaches erroneous and damnable Doctrine, is grossly scandalous and vicious
in his conversation, or is utterly insufficient for such a sacred Function: Yet
the case may be, and often hes been (and whither or no it be ours now, is not
mine to determine) that a People may and ought to submit themselves to the
Government even of such a Magistrate who either has injuriously usurped that
Office, or has so malevers'd in the exercise thereof (by violating the main and
most of the Conditions upon which he was admitted to it) that his Government is
degenerat into a manifest Tyranny and Irreligion, and so hes ( de jure)
forfaulted his right to rule as a Magistrate: I say the case of a People may be
so circumstantiate, that they ought to subject themselves even to such a
Tyrant; till the Lord clearly point forth to them a way, either from his
written Word, or some extraordinary impulse and influence upon their spirits,
or from indubitable grounds and persuasives of sound moral principles, or such
like, whereby they may emerge from under that yock. Hereby I do not yield nor
assert, That it is lawful to give obedience to any unlawful Commands, or that
it is no ways lawful for a People to shake off the yock of ane unlawful and
tyrannical Government: But only, That there may be some cases wherein it is
lawful for a People to yield subjection to a lawless Tyrant, and wherein it may
be unlawful for them to perpetrate or attempt their own liberation by
external force (which abstractly from those Circumstances might be both
lawful, laudable and a necessary duty) viz. when the thing attempted is either
altogether impracticable, the means or manner of effectuating it dubious or
unwarantable, the timeing of it inexpedient and unseasonable, or the necessary
Concomitans or Consequents of the Cure more hurtful or dangerous then the
disease; or the like: Neither do I affirm, that under a tyrannical
Government it is always or absolutely lawful for the people to give passive
obedience (if such a form of phrase may be admitted which many explode as
unaccurate and incongruous) but only that there is a time which may be called
the proper season of suffering, that is, when suffering (in opposition to
acting or resisting) is a necessary and indispensable duty.

XXVII. As a man's subjecting himself to a private Robber assaulting and
prevailing against him, is no solid proof of his approving or acknowledging
the injury and violence committed by the Robber; so in many cases a people or
person's yielding subjection ( viz^ in matters civil and external, for I
always exeem Conscience and Religion from subjection to any creature
whatsoever) to a Tyrant i. e. a public Robber, does not argue their
acknowledging or approving his tyranny and oppression.

XXVIII. As it is one thing to be subject to the Magistrate for Conscience sake
and a far other to subject our Conscience to the Magistrate, that is, to be
subject for his pleasure sake: So although we may lawfully submitt our bodies
and estates to the Civil Magistrate, and in many cases also to a Tyrant; yet
in no case can it be lawful for us to subject our Conscience or Religion to
any Magistrate or mortal, God himself being the immediate, and sole Sovereign
Lord of both.

XXIX. Although this great and fundamental truth, that Christ is a King, yea
and the only King and Head of his Church, be such as at no time or before no
Persons is to be denied or dis-owned, but freely and faithfully to be asserted,
when the circumstances of the Case calls for a Confe^sion: yet Whither or no
Caesar be a King, or has any right to reign as Supreme in matters civil?
(even upon suppotion that he is ( jure) no King, but a Tyrant and ane Usurper)
or such Law-questions as these relating to Civil Government, seems to me not
to be of such import or consequence in Religion, as that we are always bound
in Conscience positively to declare our judgment when interrogat theranent,
especially when such Quaestions are put to us with a manifest design to entrap
our Lives or entangle our Conscience. We have Christ's own practice for a
pattern of such prudence and Christian Caution. But yet I would be loath to
condemn, or rigidly to censure such as out of a pious principle of zeal to God
and conscience of duty, do freely and positively declare their judgment (when
posed with such Questions) though to the manifest detriment of their Lives,
they conscientiously looking upon it as a case of Confession.

XXX. We cheerfully acknowledge, that it is the duty both of Ministers and
People and of every Subject to pray for Magistrates (whither Supreme or
subordinate) and all whom the Lord has set in authority over us; and that not
only so long as they continue to rule for the Lord or good of the Land, but
even when they become open Tyrants, pe^secutors etc. and continues such: I say,
we ought to pray for the Conversion and salvation even of such; except the Lord
should either expressly discharge the same, or by some infallible
demonstration declare that he hes rejected them (which I humbly think we cannot
be infallibly ascertained of^ especially as to particular persons, without
divine Revelation) or else give such clear and sensible ^ignifications of his
refusing to hear any prayers for them, and of his displeasure thereat, that we
dare not adventure to put up such suits without fearing to offend him, and
procure his dis-countenance in other things that we find clearnes and freedom
to pray for; or the like.

Thus, Sir, I have given you some account, not only of mine own, but of ^he
judgment of diverse others deservedly esteemed in the Church, with whom I have
communicate in the matter of this new Indulgence and way of bonding for
^b^aining the same: wherein (with some serious desires to the Lord for light and
leading) I have endeavored to deal as ^ingly and impar^ially (though in a
plain and simple way) as I can, and studied also to guard against giving
occasion of offense o^ irritation to any who are otherwise minded. By all which
you may likewise perceive what is our judgment in answer to your other
Qu^stion, ^iz. Whether the People ought to concur in calling Ministers who
will enter by this Bond? That not only we cannot advise, but are clea^ and
determined to dissuade (as we find access and convenience) all ^o beware of
Calling or Inviting of Ministers according to the pattern and plat-forme that
is laid down by this new Indulgence, as they would show themselves tender of
the Concerns of Christ's Crown and Kingdom, as they would not list themselves
among the Obstructe^s and Opposers of the free Course of his Gospel, as they
would not be counted Enemies to the Ministerial freedom and faithfulness of his
Ambassadors; and in a word, as they would not be found accessory to, and
guilty of all these innumerable Evils of Sin, Scandal and Inconveniency
(whereof we have mentioned several in the preceding discourse) that are either
employed in, or do natively follow upon this way of pactioning. It is Likewise
thought fit, That the same be communicate by you to others as you shall see
needful and convenient: And though we have no pleasure in contending, far less
in divulging our Diffe^ences, yet it is found necessary to make this known at
this time, for ^hese (among many other) urgent Reasons 1 The clear Co^viction,
we have of the many Evi^ls and sad ^endency of complying with this new device,
as you may see in the above w^itten Arguments. 2 That this is a time wherein, as
there has been, so there is still a continued and impetuous torren^ of
infecting Defection, and many alas! already, and more yet like to be carried
down with it. 3 The firm persuasion we have of that excellent and clear
(though now much controverted and contradicted) truth, that Jesus Christ the
Mediator is the alone King and supreme Governor in and over his own House and
Ordinances. 4 The sense we have, and ought to have, o^ the many and grievous
I^croachments and. Invasions which have been made upon this his Royal
Prerogative, and ou^ so ready cedings to, and silence thereat. 5 In particular,
the multiplied experiences we have already had of the bad fruits and fatal
effects of closing with the two-for^er Indulgences, too much approving of and
conniving at the ^ame; and our not endeavoring to the furthest length of du^y
to have prevented Compliance therewith by a seasonable, plain and public
Protestation against it. 6, That such as will not despise, may yet have timeous
warning to hold off from involving themselves in this, or any other the like
snares for the future. 7, That the fur^her offending of the already offended
and afflicted Remnant (through our sinful silence and more sinful compliance
with such Courses) may be prevented so far as in us lies. 8, That this poor
Mi^e may be added to all the preceding Testimonies of the Lords servants, and
a witness continued in this Church against such steps or Courses of Defection. 9
Because most of the dissentient Brethren were not present at the passing of
the forementioned Vote (being either off the town at that time, or even these
who were in it not so much as advertised that such a Vote was intended, which
upon what account was neglected, is best known to the Assembler^) but were
altogether surprised with it. And since we have (I know not by what sort of
preposterous P^udence) so unhappily le^ slip the most proper and pertinent
season of entering a Verbal joint Testimony against that Vote and Bond, and
have not keep't such a proportion betwixt our dissentings and their vo^ings and
bondings, as should have been equivalent to a withstanding them to their face
wherein they were to be blamed; Therefore now we find our selves the more
nece^sitat to give some publi^k signification of our Resentment of ^his step of
Defection by (at least) a paper-Testimony, for rubbing off (so far as is
possible) the Reproach that we have procured to be cast upon us, through our so
long forbearance of, and flinching from so laudable and necessary a duty. 10,
And so much the rather That some h^ve taken the Confidence to publish several
Arguments whereby they essayed to prove this Bonding not only to be lawful but
a laudable duty, yea and expressly commanded by God in his Word, as may be seen
in a Paper called Plea's for peaceable living; There is also ane invective and
sarcastick paper, or rather a scurrile and ^colding pamphlet (pardon the
picquantnes of the phrase since it is extorted and the thing deserves a ^harper
stigma) compound of Quae^ies containing some^hing to this purpose, but in
effect is ^carse worth the naming or noticing, being a piece wherein the
clamorous and carping Qu^^rier (the Author) has bewrayed so much passion,
pedantry and (if we may tell the truth as it is) manifest mendacity, by
fastening groundless calumnies and nottour falsehoods upon his ad^erse Party,
That I am persuaded his own Associates and greatest pleade^s for ^he Bond, will
(if they consult the advantage of their Cause) be ashamed to own such a
shameless and slanderous Satyr, which seeing it is for most part stuffed with
private and personal reflections, I leave to be cognosced by these who find
themselves most concerned to answer it. II. Because there is such a hideous
Clamor and ou^-cry against all these who (by adhering to their sworn Presb.
principles and the known p^^ctice of our worthy and zeallous Ancestors in
times of such backsliding and Corruption) do testify their dissent from this
Bond and the Late Vote for the same, as b^ing Separatists Authors and Fomentors
of division, heady, self-willed, malcontents, implacable, blind zelotes,
Ignorant Scruplers, and ^ven such as CANNOT GIVE A REASON for dissenting from
their banded brether in this business; and that although these Voting Brethren
in plain terms declared they FOUND NO REASON why people might not give this
Bond for Ministers, yet they may now see and know that their dissenting
Brethren found so much Reason against it as not only does fully clear and
satisfyingly convince their own Consciences of the sinfulnes thereof, but may be
sufficient also to render the same justly to be dis-liked, yea detested by
every honest and true hearted Presbyterian and Covenanted Son of the Reformed
Church of Scotland. 12. Several other means were used and essayed for
dis-suading and reclaiming the voting and Bonding Brethren from ingageing or
continuing in these divided and dividing practices, but have not proven
effectual. 13, Because of the imminent danger we are now in of being
overwhelmed again with Antichristian darkness, and redacted to that old
Babylonish bondage and superstition (out of which our zeallous and Renowned
Reformers had wrestled through so many difficulties and discouragements, who not
only pe^emptorly refused to bring their Ministry into such bondage as by this
Bond is requisite of the Bonders, bu^ also faithfully and plainly protested
against the least appearance or sign of subjection that the Enemy required of
them in the matters of their Ministry) by the blood-thirsty Papists, who take
no li^le encouragement by these divisive degenerate and un-presby^erian like
practices (which they ^ee so many formerly zeallous Presby^e^ians fallen upon)
to carry on their hell-hatch't and pernicious Plotts against all who will not
worship the Beast and receive his mark. And though some of the Pleaders for,
and Favorites of this new pretended ill-favored favor are plea^ed ^o turn
this Consideration into a Motive and argument to unite with them in these
by-ways of theirs for strengthening us against that Common Enemy, and that our
refusing to comply therewith is the very way to weaken both our Cause and Party;
yet how incontrovertibly true is the contrare (both from what has been already
said, and will (we fear) be more sadly and shamefully discovered by the event)
if there be any truth in that, Prove. 10:29. The way of the Lord is strength to
the upright or in that, Job. 17:9. he that has clean hands (how weak soever or
witless ^e be accounted by the Wits of this world) shall be stronger and
stronger or in the Connection betwixt these two 1 Thessalonians. 5:21, 21. to hold fast
that which is good, and to Abstain from all appearance of evil. And though we
should be esteemed in this to be weak yet are we strong; Nay, when we are
(thus) weak, then are we strong. 14, That it seems now evident, the Lord is at
hand and comes out of his place to plead the long dependent Controversy of
Zion, to punish the Inhabitants of the Earth for their iniquity, to avenge the
quarrel of his broken and burnt Covenant, to make inquisition for the blood of
his Martyrs, and to call all of us to give ane Account of our ways, and
particularly what has been our carriage in reference to owning or disowning of
him or his Interests, during all the time of this dismal and growing Defection,
when our min^ings, excusings, shiftings, subtle or supple Evasions and
partial palliatings will be of little value or significancy towaird off the
strokes of our highly offended and jeallous God. And Lastly, That at least we
may hereby in some measure exoner and discharge our own Consciences before God
and the World by thus testifying our dis-like and dissatisfaction with these
and the like Courses^ and more particularly, against this divisive Defection,
driven on by these doleful Indulgences and may obtain mercy in the Day of the
Lords fierce and fast-approaching wrath.

I shall shut all up only with a few Scriptures worthy to be pondered and
improven in our practice this day, when upon the one hand there is so little
regard to the grieving and offending of the Little Ones, and on the other, such
readiness ^o stumble and be offended when occasion is given. First then, for
guarding against giving of Offense, let these few Scriptures be Considered:
Matthew. 18:7. Woe unto the world because of Offenses; yea, woe unto that man by
whom the Offense comes. 1 Cor. 10:32. Give none of^ence, neither to the Jews,
nor to the Gentiles nor to the Church of God. Romans 14.13, 21. Let us not
therefore judge one another any more, but judge this rather, That no man put a
stumbling block or ane occasion to fall in his brother's way. It is good
neither to eat flesh nor to drink wine nor ANY THING whereby thy brother
stumbleth, or is offended, ^r is made weak 2 Cor. 6:3 4 Giving no offense (let
Ministers hearken to this, for it chiefly concerns them) that the Ministry be
not blamed, but in all things approving our selves (read but the following
verses of that Chapter, and ponder the particulars wherein Ministers ought to
approve themselves) as the Ministers of God etc. 1 Cor. 8^9. But take heed
least by any means this Liberty of yours (even though abstractedly from
scandal it were sinless, as this spoken of in the Text is, which the Liberty
granted both in the former and latter Indulgence is not, as above) become a
stumbling block to these that are weak and verse. 12. But when ye sin against
the brethren and wound their weak Conscience, ye sin against Christ. And to
this purpose I would recommend that Rule of Amesius de Consc. Lib. 5. Cap 11.
Quaest. 6. Resp, 3. To prevent scandallizing of the Little ones (says he) all
these things ought to be done or ^orborn which may be done or forborne without
sin. Secondly, for guarding against stumbling or being offended, though
occasion thereto be given, I shall only add these following Ps. 119:165. Great
peace have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. Hos 4:15.
Though thou Israel play the Harlot, yet, let not Judah offend, or transgress.
Matthew. 11:6. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me: yea, it
is given as the Character of him who received the seed into stony places (Matthew
13:21) i.e. of a fruitless and temporary professor, that when tribulation or
persecution arises because of the word, by and by he is offended. Prove. 10 9.
He that walks upr^gh^ly walks surely; that is, he shall not stumble or be
offended, or as it is chap. 28:18. he shall be saved. Prove. 13:6. Righteousness
keeps him that is upright in the way. and Chap. 15:19. The way of the
Righteous is made plain. Job. 17:9. The Righteous also shall ^old on his way,
and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. And in order
h^reto Trust in the Lord with all t^^ne ^^a^^, and lean not to thine own
Understanding Prove. 3:5. and verse 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he
shall ^irect thy paths. Keep sound wisdom and discretion Prove. 3:21.23. then
shall thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble. For yet a
little while (Heb. 10:37, 38.) and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry. Now the just shall live by Faith^ but if any man shall draw-back, my
soul shall have no pleasure him. Rev. 16.15 Echold I come as a thief, blessed
is he that keeps his garments, least he walk naked, and they s^e his shame.
And Rev. 22:20. He which testifyeth these things, says, surely I come quickly
Amen. Ev^n so come Lord Jesus.

Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling and present you faultlesse
before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy, To the only wise God our
Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and for ever, Amen.
Jud. verse 24, 25.

Diligite homines, interficite errores; sine superbia de veritate praesumite,
sine soevitia pro veritate c^rtate: Orate pro eis quos redarguitis and
convincitis. Augustine. Lib. 1. Contra Epist. Petiliani. Nullus est pudor ad
meliora transire. Ambros ad Valentinianum Imper. Epist. 31. Et satius est (ut
ait Lucianus) recurrere quam male currere. Non est Levitas a cognito and
damnato Errore discedere; sed ingenue fatendum, aliud putavi, deceptus sum:
haec vero superb^^ stultitia perseverantiae est, quod semel dixi (vel feci)
qualecunque est, fixum ratumque sit. Seneca Lib. 4. de Benef. cap. 38. Melius
est pro pietate Dissidium quam Concordia fucata. Nazianzenus Orat. 1. de
Concordia Si autem de Veritate sumitur scandalum, utilius est ut scandalum
oriatur, quam veritas relinquatur. Bernard. ex Greg. Mag. hom. in Ezech.
Praestantius est pro veritate pati supplicium, quam pro adulatione far
beneficium^ P. Voet. Jurisprud. sacra Ut Atagen a^ias vocalis, captus
obmutescit; ita quibusdam servitus adimit voce^ qui liber^ loquebantur libere
Erasm. Simil. Remedia quamvis statim mordeant vel offendant, postea tamen
salutem conferunt ac voluptatem; ita salubria monita mitio sunt nonnihil amara,
postea Correct^ jucundissima. Plutarchus. Errata.
P: 1. l. 19. r. it. p. 6. l. 11. r. way o^ p. 7. l. 13. r. ly specially. p.
14. l. 27. r. ^w to p. 15. l. 32. r. peaceably. p. 18, l. 16. r. as true. p.
21. l. 3. r. far. p. 23. l, 2. r. to. p. 25. l. 24. r. solely. p. 26, l. 29. r.
Complying. p, 28. l. 7 and 8. their. r. there. l. 12, r. therein. p. 29, l. 1.
r. greatest p. 31. l. 35. r. speeches^ p. 33. l. 41. r. herba

In some of the Copyes

48^ l. 9. or ^uffering. r. of suffering


