A MODEST VINDICATION OF Oliver Cromwell From the Unjust ACCUSATIONS OF
Lieutenant General LVDLOW IN HIS MEMOIRS.

Together with some Observations on the MEMOIRS in general.

LONDON:

Printed in the Year School.

The PREFACE.
WHere the Policy of the Republicans lay, to expose, as they have done, their
Embitterment against Monarchy at such a time as this, for it is to be supposed
that Ludlow is now Spokesman for 'em all, is a thing so unaccountable, that
none but a Saffold can unfold it. Nor is it less difficult to understand why
Oliver's Manes should be disturbed after a deep Sleep of so many Years, for no
End that generally men propose to themselves upon such Occasions. For if 'twere
to revive the Embers of their Faction, what signified the rekindling a Fire
that wanted Fuel to maintain it? If it were to defame the Memory of the Dead,
it was a Mean and Unworthy Act. We will therefore judge more favorably of 'em,
and believe it was only to get Money. For it was imagined the World would
believe that such a Man as Ludlow would have brought to light strange Mysteries
and hidden Secrets, never known before. But it is pleasant to think how they
were cheated; the Purchasers had nothing for their Money, but the Rags and
Tatters of Old Stories, worn as Threadbare as a Usurers Cloak. As for Ludlow,
he had not a Genius nor an Elocution to do Oliver any great harm, especially
considering the Method he took. Oliver was a Great Man, let his Detractors say
what they please. We read but of Two in the Roman Story that raised themselves
by Intestine Wars, Sylla and Caesar; and I look upon Cromwell to have bin as
great as either. He fought with Caesar's Fortune, vanquished Pompey in England;
subdued Petreius and Afranius, at Dunbar and Preston; the Sons of Pompey at
Worcester, and Scipio and Cato in Ireland. Caesar once fought for his Life,
which Cromwell never did; he never was in danger of a Foil: And if he ascended
by the Steps that others built for him, it is no more then what many others who
had they had the same Temptations, would have done. Lastly, Caesar by usurping
the Roman Commonwealth, was in many things beneficial to the Public; so is
Cromwell allowed to have done as many things for the Good of the English
Commonwealth. I do not undertake to defend all Cromwell's Actions, but only
such as Ludlow's Book, and Disgusts against him, assume a Liberty to condemn.
And then I may justly hope the world will take it for a Piece of Generosity to
undeceive Posterity, and prevent their being misguided by the False Relations
and Reflections of Passion and Prejudice.

A Modest Vindication of Oliver Cromwell, from the Unjust Aspersions of
Lieutenant General Ludlow, in his Memoirs, etc.
COnsidering how Lieutenant General Ludlow has stated the Grounds and Reasons
of his Disgust against Oliver Cromwell, the Question, as to Ludlow's
particular, is not so much whether Oliver's Actions were just and laudable, or
no; but whether the Lieutenant General, who as it plainly appears was a Person
swayed by a violent Bigotry to his own Party, were a competent Judge of the
Goodness or Badness of those Actions which he so vehemently reproaches in
Cromwell. As for his own Personal Parts, he was never looked upon to be a Man
of such an Extraordinary Headpiece, as to render him eminently distinguished in
the Management of Civil Affairs. Neither did his Military Employments ever rear
him up those Monuments to his Glory, which Others raised themselves by their
Prowess and Conduct. And then for these Memoirs of his, They likewise were writ
in the Decline of his Years, when Age had riveted into his Mind those
Sentiments of past Transactions, which younger Discontents and Animosities had
imprinted in his Thoughts, and now had made the Objects of a half crazed
Judgment to make such Reflections on, as are usually the effects of morose and
sour Misunderstandings. For when Blood was in his Prime of Action, and sent
over to Geneva by a Party then meditating Disturbance of the Government, as
believing Ludlow the most proper Person to Head and Command 'em, that Man of a
quick and penetrating Judgment, brought over but a very slender Account of that
Great Lieutenant General of Horse. For Blood's Report, which he often upon
other occasions signified to others, was, That he found him very unable for
such an Employment; only that he was writing a History, as he called it, which
as he told the Colonel would be as True as the Gospel; and which in all
probability were these Two Volumes of Memoirs now lately printed. Nor indeed
did the Character which then he gave his little Embrio of a History, show him
to be other then what the Colonel spoke him. But perhaps the
Lieutenant General thought it necessary for him to believe himself Inspired,
when he was defending and writing the History of the Sacred R U M P. However,
as certain as these Memoirs are, there is one Truth more which must be added to
the rest, That his Truths are of very little value; such minute Stories, the
greatest part of 'em that concern himself, of his Military Performances in
Wardour-Castle, and other parts of Wiltshire, that all of 'em put together
would never have procured him so much as a petty Ovation in Old Rome.
Nevertheless he seems to have crowded 'em together on purpose to make out his
extraordinary Devotion to the Rump, and his Sincerity to the Cause; and from
thence takes an occasion to insinuate his own high Deserts, and Oliver's
Contempt and Slight of those that were most zealous for the Public Good, by
which he means the Republican Interest, the peculiar Darling of his most Ardent
Affections. Though all this while I can discover nothing so much through the
whole Contexture of these Memoirs, as a continued Prosecution of Envy and
Revenge, ripened into Invective by the Sullenness of his Age: Yet such a sort
of Envy, that I could not have expected to have found in a Man of
Lieutenant General Ludlow's Principles; that repines more at the Merits of
Cromwell's Actions, then the Glory of his Trophies: As if the High Commands and
Power which he was deemed worthy of, and for which he was culled out by those
that knew not where else to supply their pressing Wants of such another, had
been the Acquisitions of his Ambitious Industry and overreaching Politics,
rather then conferred upon him for the sensible Benefits of his continued
Victories and Successes. This seems to imply, that L. G. Ludlow was willing
enough that the Republiccan Party should have enjoyed the Fruits of Cromwell's
unweari'd Labors, no less then Grandeur equal to Royal, and Supreme Authority;
but in the height of his Gratitude, the L. G. of the Horse would have had 'em
kicked down the Instrument of their Glorious Fruitions, when they were out of
Danger. He complains that his petty Skirmishes at Wardour Castle, and in other
parts of Wiltshire, where Fortune was as frequently unkind as gracious to him,
and suffered him to be taken Prisoner, were never sufficiently recompensed: But
he mentions with Regret a Donative of Four or Five Thousand a Year given to
Cromwell, for the Conquest of Three Kingdoms, and saving the Common Cause from
utter Downfall. Such a sort of Envy as this it was, that plagued the Famed
Polonian Tarnovius, of whom Thumus reports, that after he had subdued the
Moldavians and Russians, and freed his Country from the frequent Incursions of
the Tartars, it was incredible how he was envied at home by those that
suspected the very Name of General, which he had merited by his great
Achievements. But there are a great many people of the Lieutenant-General's
Humor, whatever is above their own Merit displeases 'em; tho there are not
many so inadvertent to show it with so much formal Sincerity as the
Lieutenant General has done. When such people behold an extraordinary Merit in
any person, they look upon it as an Object that reproaches their Imperfections,
an Object that affronts 'em, and renders 'em so much the more Contemptible.
These are the true reasons that kindled the Lieutenant-General's Anger against
Cromwell; so that after long Meditation, he at length found out the usual way
of laying hold upon the common pretenses of Justice and Equity to condemn him
according to the motions of his own passion.

His desire of Revenge is no less apparent, and very unbecoming a Soldier;
whose part it is to Combat his Enemy living, and if he can, to Kill him fairly
in the Field; but thus to assail and quarrel with a dead Man in his Tomb, to
Stigmatize the Fame of one Deceased, for only having been more fortunate in the
same Cause, which his own Sword had weakly Defended, is an Act of Malice so
much the more unworthy and misbecoming a Man of Honor, by how much it is
altogether insignificant, and gratifies only an inveterate and ignorant
Passion, condemned by all magnanimous and heroic spirits. For I can never
believe that ever they who took up Cromwell's Carcass, to hang it ignominiously
upon the Gallows, and poorly insulted over the Bones of a Man who had so often
Vanquished 'em in Battle, gained any great Honor by such a Pusillanimous Act;
much less did it become our L. G. to rake into the Ashes of One who had never
been his Enemy, but by his own Confession had given him such a Character in
Public, as raised him to his highest Preferment; however, the
Lieutenant General was pleased to put an ill interpretation upon it. But Men of
his Maligning Temper have many times this Misfortune attending 'em, That while
they are laboring and delving to the Prejudice of others, they do themselves
the greatest harm. For assuredly when the world shall observe him so frequently
interlacing his own Murmurs and Discontents, with his disgusts against
Cromwell, for only disappointing the Party which himself had so nearly
espoused, never blaming him for Fighting against his Sovereign, nor bringing
him to the Block; it must be thought that his Memoirs must smell very strong of
the Garlic of SelfInterest, which will very much enervate the credit of his
Recriminations upon Cromwell, especially in the Sentiments of remoter
Posterity, that will judge of those Transactions with a more sincere
Impartiality. And here the Question may not be unseasonably put, What the Aim
and Design of Publishing these Memoirs could be? For if it were to gratify the
expiring Remains of that same Party, against whom Cromwell Fought with such
Success; What favor can our Lieutenant General of the Horse in Ireland, gain
among them, by telling 'em a long Story of Cromwell's Dismounting the
Rumponians from the Saddles of their Authority? Who had they been sent to the
Crows some years before, that Party would not have repined at it: rather he
merits their severest Indignation, for justifying and approving Cromwell all
the while he contributed to the Downfall of their Martyr, and Reproaching him
for so much as offering to Treat with him. On the other side, if these
Relations were set forth to endear the Memory of the Lieutenant General to his
own Party, What kindness can it be to them, to be revived for a Company of
Fools that could not keep the Government, when they had it in their own hands,
but suffered themselves to be baffled, outwitted, and turned out of doors by
their own Underling and Servant, as they called him? But what cared the
Lieutenant General and Commander in Chief of the Forces in Ireland? for so he
could but inculcate into the world a bad Opinion of Cromwell and his Actions,
though it were to the Disgrace of his own Party, he values not to what Censures
and Sarcasms he exposes the fondlings of his Devotion: Which being the main
drift of his Memoirs, they cannot choose but be infinitely beholding to him for
it. He pretends to have had a prospect of Cromwell's Ambitious Designs, as he
calls'em, long before they were brought to perfection: To much purpose; for had
he been a true Emulator of Cromwell's Gallantry, he might, perhaps, have made a
much better use of his Lieutenant-Generalship, and his Command of the Forces in
Ireland in the Rescue of his distressed Minions, then to sit an Exiled Scribler
of Trivial Memoirs, that dropped from his Pen, more to the shame of his own
Darlings, then the Defamation of Cromwell in those Matters where the Stress of
his Reproaches lie. And thus much for the Memoirs in general.

To come to Particulars: There is little worth Observation in the First Volume,
which is no more then a succinct Relation of the Military Transactions of those
Times, both in England and Ireland, for the greatest part, from the Beginning
of the Combustions, to the first Dutch War: Wherein however, he is very
particular and tedious in the Account which he gives of his own Exploits when
he was Governor of Wardour Castle, and High Sheriff of the County of Wilts,
larded with such Impertinent Circumstances, of a dozen Pasties of which the
Enemy had just baked, and would have carried away, had he not come in timely
and manfully with Forty Horse to their Rescue. He holds out Wardour Castle in
his Relation, almost as long as the Enemy lay before it, enlarging his Recital
on purpose to magnify his Courage, his Resolution, and Zeal to the Cause, even
to Vanity. The rest of the Pages, after he had delivered the Castle, and was
become a Prisoner of War, from 92 to 112, are all no less a Panegyric upon
himself. Not consid'ring, that the Praises which come from Others, are pleasing
to the Ear; but the Elogies which a man ascribes to himself, are ever most
troublesome. He omits not to tell ye how he took up one of Gabriel Ludlow, and
of the Misfortunes that befell his two Servants, Stent, and Henry Coals; with a
world of

But the main thing remarkable in his First Volume is, That because he would
make the World believe him to be a Man of Parts, and one that was able to
balance a Party, he takes great Care to display his Intimacy with Lieutenant
Cromwell. One Morning, says he, as I was walking with L. G. Cromwell in Sir
Robert Cotton's Garden, he inveighed bitterly against those that accompanied
the Earl of Essex to his Grave; saying in a familiar way to me, If thy Father
were alive, he would let some of 'em hear what they deserve; adding farther,
That it was a miserable thing to serve a Parliament; to whom let a Man be never
so faithful, if one Pragmatical Fellow rise up and asperse him, he shall never
wipe it off. Whereas, said he, when one serves under a General, he may do as
much Service, and yet be free from all Blame and Envy.

From these words Ludlow it seems persuaded himself that Cromwell had at that
time conceived the Design of destroying the Civil Authority, and setting up
himself; and that he took that Opportunity to feel his Pulse, whether he were a
fit Instrument to be employed to those Ends.

We shall not dispute the Truth of this Discourse, nor will we deny but that
the Author of the Memoirs Conjecture might be as true, That Cromwell might
speak the Words, to take the Dimensions of Ludlow's Capacity. But seeing there
is not the least Ground for the drawing of any such Inference as he makes from
the Words, we must rather believe that the Lieutenant General in Ireland's
Surmise was of a later date; like those who pretend to have prophesi'd of
things after they are come to pass. Nevertheless, that Cromwell upon his
Canting Answer had enough of him, we look upon as a thing beyond all
Controversy: For Cromwell was a Person who never sounded the Breast of any Man,
but he soon reached the Depth of it.

However, soon after this, the Author of Cromwell. For he says, That the
Parliament being displeased with the Carriage of the Army, some menacing
Expressions fell from some of the Members; upon which Cromwell took an Occasion
to whisper the following Words in his Ear, These Men will never leave, till the
Army pull 'em out by the Ears. But here I am afraid the Lieutenant General in
Ireland a little forgets himself: For after he had told us but two Pages
before, That Cromwell not finding him fit for his purpose, He never heard from
him any more upon that Point; meaning the Point of Destroying the Civil
Authority, and setting up for himself: Here he introduces Cromwell altering his
Mind, and whispering to him a Secret of far greater Importance; and a much
clearer Demonstration of the Evil Design which the Lieutenant General suspected
him to be meditating against the Civil Authority, then any he could gather from
his former Discourse. I must confess this does not hang well together. Cromwell
did but feel the Lieutenant General's Pulse before; now he begins to be
downright, and to open his Heart: And yet Cromwell was never taken to be a Blab
of his Tongue. Neither is it probable that Cromwell, a Person so reserved as he
was, would have uttered such a dangerous Expression in the midst of his
Enemies, to a Man whose Imbecilities and Bigottry he had so lately tried. Why
did not the LieutenantGeneral in Ireland immediately charge him with it? It
would have been the best piece of Service he could have done for those, who, as
he says himself, were at the same time for securing Cromwell; and who from
hence might Ludlow believing that this would be objected against him, tells
ye, That he would have resented it, if the A very lame excuse, and which lays
the total Overthrow of his Party at his own door: For if this be true, That
Cromwell should be so inadvertent to whisper those words into his Ear, it is
plain that Fortune put an Opportunity into Ludlow's hands to have preserved his
Party; but he was so simple that he knew not how to make use of it. And now I
appeal to all unbias'd Men, whether this manifest slip be not sufficient to
invalidate the whole Testimony of the Irish Lieutenant General, and to render
suspected what he shall henceforward advance in the Derogation of Cromwell's
Proceedings, as being only the Murmurs of Self-interest.

But this great Familiarity between the English and the Irish
Lieutenant-Generals, broke off on the part of the Author of the Memoirs, upon
Cromwell's and the Armies Treating with Ludlow calls, A driving on a Bargain
for the People's Liberty by Oliver alone: For it was the Opinion of the Author
of the Memoirs, that which way soever the King had bin Restored, he might
easily have gratified his Friends, and revenged himself upon his Enemies. So
that the Lieutenant General in Ireland was clearly for a Republic, and he knew
that so long as there was a King, there could be no Republic in Israel. But in
regard that Cromwell's Treating with the King was imputed to him as a Crime by
none but Ludlow's Republicans, while the Presbyterians and Scots did the same;
and if Cromwell made any Bargains with his Royal Prisoner for his own
Advantage, it was no more then what General Monk did afterward, we shall pass
from our Author's Memento's upon those Transactions, which bring a far more
general Odium upon himself then upon Cromwell, while he was one of those, who
under the Name of Commonwealths-men, declared, That Monarchy was neither Now
that Ludlow was one of this Cabal is plain, by the same token, as he says
himself, that Cromwell, after he had learnt what he could of the Principles and
Inclinations of those present at the Irish Lieutenant-General's Head, and then
ran down Stairs: But the undaunted Commander in Chief of the Forces in Ireland,
soon overtook him with another, which made him hasten down faster then he
desired. And here certainly after such a Victory as this, the Irish
Lieutenant General ought to have closed his Memoirs, and set up his Hercules's
Pillars; for after such an Achievement as this, no less then the putting to
Flight one of the most Victorious Captains of his Age, and till then
Invincible, What could he expect to do greater, or that could more Eternize his
Fame? At least, it is to be wonderd, that his Party did not take from hence a
prosperous Omen to set so valiant a Champion up in Opposition to Cromwell;
since they had great reason to hope, that he who had put the famous Cromwell to
Flight with a Cushion, would easily subdue him with his Arms in his Hand.

In the mean time this Passage is of that nature, as evidently demonstrates
Ludlow to be as deep in the Mud, as Cromwell was in the Mire; nay, he may
rather be thought the worse of the Two: For Ludlow was one of those that were
already Premeditating to call the King to an Account, and then to alter the
Monarchical Government of the Kingdom, and set up a Commonwealth. These
disdained all manner of Treaty with the King; whereas Cromwell designed his
Restoration, and may be said to have acted not so much by premeditated Design,
as by the impulse of a driving Fate, that pushed him on by degrees, by the
encouragement of concurring Events, and conduct of opportune Prosperities. And
therefore it is much to be admired that the Publishers, or at least the
Over-viewers of these Memoirs did not strike out this and many other Passages
of the same nature, before they let 'em see the Light. Certainly they did not
consult the Honor of the Author, to let such an Antimonarchist as Ludlow to
appear in England with his Helvetian Commonwealth Meditations, barefaced and in
all his Republican Colors, at a Time when Monarchy had recovered her Ancient
Splendour in the Kingdom. His best Friends most certainly could never believe
that either his Person or his Works could be acceptable or welcome here, or
procure him any Esteem in a Nation wholly Monarchical. And all this to blacken
the Actions of Cromwell, who was so far from being a Hater of Monarchy, that he
at length set up for a Monarch himself; chiefly too by those Actions which to
this day are no way displeasing to the greatest Asserters of Monarchy. So that
if these Memoirs were published to prejudice Cromwell's Memory, they will miss
very much of their Aim; seeing that the Reputation of a Bad Man can never
receive much damage from the Accusations of one that is worse then himself. And
it is to be feared that all the Recompense that Ludlow will get by these
Memoirs of his, will be only the Sarcasm of Juvenal, Clodius accusat Moechos,
Catilina Cethegum.

But whatever Jealousies and Suspicions the Republicans had of Cromwell, when
they thought themselves secure, yet whenever any imminent Danger threaten'd'em,
they flew to him for Refuge. And therefore by the Confession of the Author of
the Memoirs himself, when Hamilton was upon his March into England with Twenty
thousand Scots, and Langdale ready to join him with Five thousand English more,
several who had opposed his Proceedings as Arbitrary and Selfish, then thought
themselves obliged to strengthen his hands, in a Work which they called
necessary, and assured him of all the Assistance they could give him.

And now you have the Lieutenant General of the Horse in Ireland making another
Confession, That it was not Cromwell who broke off the Treaty with the King in
the Isle of Wight, but that he himself was one of the main Instruments that did
the King that kind Office. a visible Design to render all their Victories
useless, he went to Sir Thomas Fairfax, and told him, That a Design was driving
on to betray the Cause, in which so much of the Peoples Blood had been shed;
and that the King being under Restraint, would not think himself obliged to any
thing he should promise under such Circumstances; assuring him at the same
time, That they who were most eager for the Treaty, never intended that the
King should be bound to the performance of his word, only they designed to use
his Authority to destroy the Army, which ought to be his care to prevent. Nay,
that he might ascribe all the Honor of this Enterprise to himself and his
Party, to the Exclusion of Cromwell, the LieutenantGeneral of the Horse in
Ireland tells ye a Story some Pages before, how that Cromwell, being inclined
to close with the Commonwealth Party, invited some of 'em to confer with him at
his Chamber: with which when he acquainted our Author of the Memoirs, he
affronted him with a very rude and uncivil Answer, telling him, That when he
had an occasion he knew how to cajole 'em and give 'em good words; which put
Cromwell into such a Passion, that he gave him as rude a Reply, That the
Republicans were a proud sort of People, and only considerable in their own
conceits. And thus the Irish LieutenantGeneral would seem to insinuate that
Cromwell could be none of their Cabal, but only that they made use of him as
their Plantain Tree, whose spreading shade might secure 'em from the Swelter of
Trouble and Danger. Though it is not rational to believe, but that they were
influenced altogether by his Counsels and Directions; however, Cromwell knowing
their Humor, let 'em alone, and played with 'em as an Angler does with a Pike,
when he has the unruly Fish fast in his Hook. More then that, as our Author
says, he was so complaisant, as to declare at his arrival from Scotland,

It farther appears that Ludlow would seem to make himself more then ordinarily
busy in this Transaction. For finding Fairfax Irresolute, he presently repaired
to Ireton to Negotiate their Grand Affair; and still he would make the World
believe that he was the main Instrument of the Revolution. But what was the
effect of all his Labor? Why, the Army having wonderfully dispersed their
Enemies on every side, began to consider how to secure themselves and the
Common Cause against those Counsels that were carried on in Opposition to 'em,
and to that end drew up a Declaration at St. Albans, etc. and so the Irish
LieutenantGeneral was turned out of his Employment. However, though Cromwell and
the Army had laid him aside, yet still in exaltation of himself, he would make
ye believe, they were afraid of displeasing him. And therefore he now pretends
to be a Confident of Ireton's, who upon the Armies drawing toward London, in
order to purge the Parliament, wrote to the Irish Lieutenant General, that now
he hoped they should please him; which as he acknowledges, they did, not from
any particular Advantages that he expected from it, if you will believe him,
but that the People of England might be preserved in their just Rights from the
Oppression of Violent men; being fully persuaded that an Accommodation with the
King was unsafe to the People of England, and unjust and wicked in the nature
of it. And thus you see, the Irish Lieutenant General writes with a twoedg'd
Pen, with one side to gash the Reputation of Cromwell; and with the other to
Sliver the Devotion of those who venerate Charles the I. for a Martyr.

And now we are come to the last Act considerable in the first Volume; wherein
our Author is very Industrious by extenuating, to advance his own worth, to
show the continuance of his Familiarity with Cromwell, and display his own
Ingratitude to his Friend. And here it is observable in the first place, that
he still made Cromwell the Aggressor in his Discourses with him: An evident
Sign that he affected to have it believed by all the World that Cromwell had a
high Opinion of him for his Abilities, and the Infallible Counsels of his
Oracular Forefight: Whereas all Judicious Men that read his Memoirs will find,
that Oliver, who was a Man of a deep reach indeed, had quite another Aim. For
Cromwell well knowing that his Bigotry to the Party had gained him a Reputation
for his fidelity to the Cause among 'em, and that he was for that reason
entrusted with all their Secrets, addressed himself to the Irish Lieutenant
General as one of the weakest among 'em; that by sifting his Thoughts, he might
understand the Judgment of the rest of the Party, or at least of the more
Cunning sort.

He tells us, That Cromwell, after the Parliament had voted him General, as our
Author was sitting by him in the House, expressed an Extraordinary Sorrow to
observe an Alteration in his looks and carriage toward him, by which he
apprehended that his dear Friend Ludlow had entertained some Suspicions of him.
Which Address of Cromwell's might be very probable; not that it is to be
thought that Cromwell cared a rush for his Looks or his Carriage; but it was a
Complement proper to draw an Easy man into the Nooze that better Cunning was
preparing for him. After this, nothing would serve Cromwell but a Meeting with
this same Seraskier of the Irish Spahi's, to remove the Grounds of their
Mistakes and Misapprehensions, and accordingly they met in the Queen's
GuardChamber; where, as he says, Cromwell endeavored to persuade him of the
Necessity incumbent upon him of doing several things that appeared
extraordinary in the Judgment of some Men, who in opposition to him, would
bring Ruin upon themselves, as well as Him and the Public Cause. Presently
Ludlow consters these Extraordinary Things, to be Cromwell's Treating with the
King, and shooting to death one of the Soldiers, and imprisoning the rest, that
mutiny'd at Ware upon the account of that Treaty, and testifies his dislike of
those Actions, as being done for sinister ends. However, since the Army and He
had manifested themselves convinced of their Errors by their Adherence to the
Commonwealth, he was willing to wait for the accomplishment of those good
things which he expected from him, so soon as he should return with Victory
home again (for Cromwell was then going to invade Scotland) but Interests and
Principles would lead him to do what was most agreeable to the Constitution of
a Commonwealth, and the good of Mankind. Nor did he forget his own particular
Grievance by the bye, which was the too partial Hand of the Parliament and
General in their Distributions of Gratuities; considering how he had held out
Wardour Castle, and exposed his Life in Wiltshire, and never got any thing for
his pains. Now if you will believe our Author, nor is it material to contradict
him, can any man of sense persuade himself that Cromwell, at that time a
General, and a Man oppressed with Ponderous Affairs, would have spent his time
in soothing up the Humor of an Empty Bigot, and wasted above an hour in
preaching upon the 110th Psalm, Cromwell was then ready to march for Scotland,
and wanted a Journyman for his Son Ireton in Ireland. Some he thought too
nimble and cunning, some too faithless to be trusted; but here was one for his
turn, stout of his Hands, a weak Headpiece, and one that would be easily ruled,
if well managed; but for want of Understanding, displeased with his
Extraordinary Proceedings, and for that reason to be fondl'd into a good Humor
again. And therefore so soon as the General saw him mollify'd, he not only
propounded the Preferment he designed him for the forementioned Reasons, to
himself, but proposed him to the Council of State, and they to the Parliament,
and so got him chosen in a manner in despite of his teeth; when others far
more deserving and experienced in the Irish Affairs, such as the Lord Broghil,
and Sir Hardress Waller, solicited for the same Employment at the same time.
And indeed he would make ye believe it was really so: For as he says, he not
only pleaded the common Excuses, and Goodly good Morrows of Inability and
Unfitness, but the apparent Emergencies of his Estate and Family. But Cromwell,
who knew he had committed a proper Tool into the hands of a good Workman, would
admit of no denial.

However, he had no sooner received his Commission, but his Advancement puffing
him up with a high Opinion of himself, he so ordered it, that his Friends gave
out; That the Opportunity was taken by the General to remove him out of the
way, least he should prove an Obstruction to his Designs; yet himself still
standing upon his guard of Modesty, and telling the world, that he could not
think himself so considerable. Nor could his Friends believe it, whatever they
Published, who knew so well it was not Cromwell's way to remove, but quite to
lay aside those Persons whom he acccounted Dangerous, or looked upon as
Obstructors of his Designs. Besides, that such affected selfdebasements seldom
find belief with Men of Sense, as being incompatible with Truth, in Men that so
often complain of unrewarded Merit, as our Author does.

Seeing then, that this great Preferment was not forced upon him, least he
should obstruct the General's designs, as our Author himself pretends, but as
he rather conceives, for his Merit, it follows that the world must conclude him
guilty of a great share of Ingratitude, so to bespatter, as he does, with the
Epithites of Ambitious, Wicked and Impious (for in such Heats and Passions we
shall find the Lieutenant General of the Forces in Ireland in the next Volume)
his only Benefactor, and the very Person that exalted him to the highest
Dignity that ever he attained to in this world, and Higher then e're he could
have expected from his own Deserts. So that whatever hard Opinion the worst of
Cromwell's Enemies may have of him himself, they can never be so ungenerous to
have any kind thoughts of the Author of these Memoirs, who has so unbeseemingly
trampled upon the dust of his Benefactor.

It may be Objected, That Ludlow had no Enmity or Hatred against the Person of
Cromwell in his private Capacity; but that he condemns his Public Actions
only, his Violation of the Laws, his Subversion of the Government, his
Arbitrary Proceedings, his Treachery to those from whom he derived all his
Authority, and his Assuming to himself the Supreme Power out of the hands of
those who were invested with it; and no man is bound to retaliate the Benefits
of an Enemy of his Country.

But it is readily answered, that this Objection had bin of some force indeed,
if Ludlow had bin in the undoubted Right, and Cromwell in the unquestionable
Wrong. But general Opinion concludes, that Both were in the Wrong; and then
Ludlow's Accusations and Impeachments of Cromwell's Actions are Unjust and
Injurious, as being grounded upon no true Foundation. For the Subjects of
praise or dispraise must be such as are universally taken pro Concesso;
otherwise he that condemns another for that which is not certainly Evil in it
self, or by the Fundamental Laws of the Land, condemns him only upon the
Instigations of Passion and Prejudice, and makes that a Crime, which others at
the same time may look upon as a Virtue. But granting that Ludlow did firmly
believe himself and his Party to be in the Right, yet he could not be so
infatuated to his Bigotry, as not to see that Two of the Principal and most
numerous Judgments of the Nation were against him; and then it was a high piece
of Ingratitude to lay general imputations of Impious, Wicked, and Arbitrary,
upon his Friend that had bin so kind to him, for acts committed against his
particular Party, where the Controversy was so dubious, and the Balance so
unequal against him.

Upon these wrong foundations Ludlow proceeds, and taxes Cromwell, for that
after the Battle of Worcester he took upon him a more stately Behavior, chose
new Friends, and after the Fight, frowned upon and dismissed those who had
assisted him against the common Enemy, though he knew they had deserved as much
Honor as himself and the standing Army. And wherefore was it? Because he knew
that a Useful and Experienced Militia was more likely to obstruct, then second
him in his Ambitious Designs. But these are the Murmurs of Envy and Prejudice.
For what would our Commander in Chief of the Forces in Ireland have had the
English General have done with the Militia when there was no farther use of
'em? He that pretended to have bin always so tender of burthening the Nation.
He would have had the General, instead of Frowning upon 'em (for which we have
only his bare word) have Kissed 'em Man by Man, and Rewarded 'em every one with
so many Points and a White Loaf, like the Procession Boys at Whitsontide. But
he should have blamed the Parliament for that Omission; that was none of the
General's business. He would have had the Parliament have kept 'em up to
obstruct the General's Ambitious Designs. But to their Misfortune they were not
so quick-sighted as our foreseeing Author of the Memoirs, and therefore they
sent 'em home again to their Wives and Children; whither, no question, they were
as willing to return, as the General was to send 'em away. However, afterward
the same Militia Petitioned for bringing Delinquents to speedy Punishment; and
then, I hope, they pleased our Commander in Chief of the Irish Forces, as well
as if they had kept the Field. Now for the Ambitious Designs of Cromwell, with
which our Author often makes a great noise, I would fain know, What was the
difference between the Ambitious Design of setting up a Tyrannical Republic,
and the Ambitious Design of advancing a single Usurpation? The latter I Am sure
was more consonant to the Ancient Government of the Nation; for that restored
the Monarchy, though not the Person; but the other would have pulled down the
very Fabric and Constitution of the English Government. And now let him cry
out as much as he pleases against our Ambitious Design, we will not exchange
with him; because our Ambitious Design was better then his. Nay, they were so
fond of this Ambitious Design of theirs, that they would have Bribed the
General to have let 'em alone to sit still, till they had reared their
Triumphant Arch of a Commonwealth. But they were such narrowSoul'd People, that
their stingy Avarice would not suffer 'em to offer any more then Performance of
his Duty.

However, while he is thus degrading the Reputation of the Father in Law, no
sooner is the Son in Law dead, but he extols him to the Skies, and raises him a
Monument as high as his slender Elocution will permit him. A clear Argument
that Lieutenant General Ludlow was no other then a thick-skull'd Officer of
Horse, who might have entered into Battle invulnerable in the Forhead; so to
extol as he does the Son in Law, who was the Framer and Contriver of many of
those very Designs, which he calls Impious and Wicked, at the same time that he
expends all the small Shot of his Indignation against the Father in Law, for
putting 'em prudently and resolutely in execution. He applauds his departed
Friend for his Affection to his Country, his Abilities of Mind, his Impartial
Justice, and his Diligence in the Public Service; and at length embalms his
Memory in a Venomous Effluvium against the generality of Kings both past and to
come; affirming that his Virtues were a far greater Honor to it, then a
Dormitory among the Ashes of Kings, who as they governed Others by their
Passions, so were they Themselves no less governed by 'em.

And now you shall find the sincere and upright Compiler of these Memoirs in a
second palpable Contradiction of himself. For he tells ye before, That when
his Friends would have persuaded him that Cromwell took the Opportunity of
preferring him; to remove him out of the way, least he should prove an
Obstruction to his Designs; he made'em answer, That he could not think himself
so considerable, and therefore could not concur with them in their Opinion. But
now upon Lambert's Refusal to go over without any Character into Ireland, less
then that of Deputy, a certain Speech of Mr. Weaver, tending to continue him in
his increased Oliver's Jealousy of him, that he might prove an Obstruction to
the Design he was carrying on, to advance himself by the Ruin of the
Commonwealth; and therefore resolved to place Lieutenant General Fleetwood at
the Head of Affairs in Ireland. Before, he denied that his Preferment by Oliver
proceeded from any Suspicion that the General had of being disturbed by him in
his Designs, because he knew himself incapable to do him any harm. Here he
affirms that the Increase of that Suspicion, meaning doubtless that Suspicion
which he had before denied, was the reason that Oliver resolved to place
another above him. Now all men know, what never was, can never increase. To
salve then this same slip of the Lieutenant-General's Memory, we must believe
that either Cromwell was not so cunning as the World took him to be, or else
that the Lieutenant General dissembled with his best Friends. But it is to be
hoped that the Lieutenant General may be pardoned for forgetting himself a
little, provided he might gain the Honor of being thought an Antagonist
capable to prevent the Ambitious Designs of a Man so formidable as Cromwell.
It Is the nature of such Aspirers as the Lieutenant General, to be like
Bladders, sometimes shrivel'd up with Self denial, and by and by swollen up with
the Wind of Vanity and Self-Conceit; or otherwise, like Prospective Glasses,
that lessen at one end, and magnify at the other.

But it seems Cromwell was too nimble for him, and soon rid himself from all
his Fears of the Lieutenant-General's obstructing his Designs; which the
disappointed LieutenantGeneral loudly bemoans. For upon Fleetwood's Arrival in
Ireland, he fetches a deep Sigh, and with the Cobbler cries out, Perdidi Operam,
finding all his Cares and Fatigues recompensed only with Which was, no doubt,
the reason that afterward he resolved to repay Cromwell in his own Coin.
Nevertheless, as much rejected as he was, he will not forego the high Opinion
he always had of himself; and because he had no other Witnesses, cunningly
brings in Envy and Hatred to be the Testimonies of his Great Performances. For
Envy and Hatred among Great Personages, never attend little matters. I must
confess he tells ye of many things he did in Ireland; among the rest, how he
smoked a Party of Irish to death in a hollow Rock; and how out of his great
Ingenuity, perceiving the Smoke that went into the Cavity of the Rock, came out
again at other Crevices, he, as LieutenantGeneral of the Horse in Ireland,
caused those places to be closely stopped, and another Smother to be made; and
then conceiving the Work to be done, by the same Authority as before, he sent
in his Men armed with Back, Breast, and Headpiece, to fetch out the dead
people. But this was no such mighty Act to deserve the Hatred and Envy of any
Man. And therefore seeing the Lieutenant General gives us no account who they
were that envied and hated him; and for that we see no ground to believe it;
more especially, if he means Cromwell to be one; for Men of Cromwell's Temper
never hate or envy those that they know can do 'em no harm, unless the
LieutenantGeneral mistook Contempt and Slight for Envy and Hatred; we can only
believe it to be a Stratagem of the Lieutenant-General's himself, to insinuate
the Grandeur of his own Achievements and Merits, which others either could
not, or were unwilling to do to that degree as he was desirous they should.
More then this, it is observable that notwithstanding all the Great Actions in
Ireland, which the Lieutenant General assumes to himself to have so gloriously
performed; Whitlock, so particular in relating the Actions of other Great
Officers in Ireland, as Broghil, Waller, Jones, Axtel, Zanchy, etc. makes no
mention at all of the Lieutenant General, till after Ireton's death; and then
he says no more of him, but that he was appointed to command the Forces in
Ireland, till the farther Pleasure of the Parliament was known.

This is the Substance of the First Volume of Ludlow's Memoirs, so far as they
relate to his Inconsiderable Quarrels and Dissatisfactions with Cromwell's
Proceedings; which may be reduced to three particular Heads: His private Treaty
with the King; his suspected Designs to ruin the Republican Party, and set up
for himself; and his neglect of recompencing the Lieutenant General according
to his Merits. Which are Accusations so far from doing any Injury to Oliver's
Memory, that they rather ingratiate him with the most considerable part of the
Nation. So that, as I have already once or twice repeated, I admire to what
purpose these Memoirs were printed in England, unless it were to expose the
Author to be a Person that hated Monarchy, and consequently the present
Government, with such an Inveterate Abomination, that it may be questioned
whether he had any Kindness for Adam, because he reigned single in Paradise.
They might indeed have served to show his Gratitude to the Canton of Bern, to
which purpose they were written: But to print 'em so unseasonably here in
England, with a Noisy Title, and himself standing in his Ornamental Iron at the
Entrance into the Booth of his Memoirs, like a Charlatan and Three Trumpeters
solus in a Bartlemew-Fair Balcony, was an Act that wanted so much
Consideration, as ought to have preceded their being thus sent to Farce it
abroad in the World. Besides, that when you expect a Gaudy Show, there is
nothing to be seen, but Relations of things long since Lippis and Tonsoribus
nota, and already recited by others with much clearer Exactness, and a more
pertinent Fidelity.

Nevertheless, the Gentleman Usher to these precious Memoirs applauds his
Author for a Person that served his Country with that Indefatigable Care,
Diligence, and Fidelity, as no man more; which he does upon a false Notion of
Ludlow's Services, and for want of well distinguishing between the nature of
Public Services. For it is one thing for a man to serve his Country, another
thing to serve a particular Party. Now I do not find by the Preamble, that he
ever did any Service for his Country, otherwise then by expending his Care and
Diligence for the Service of the Republican Party; (which, by the way, the
Writer of the Preamble calls his going through innumerable Hazards for the
Liberties of England,) for he never acted under Cromwell's single Power, and he
hated Royalists and Presbyterians both alike. But whether he served his Country
in serving the particular Party of the Republicans, is a Question that lies
wholly at the Writer of the Preamble's door to decide. I am apt to believe, if
he will be so adventurous to assert it, he will meet with Champions enough that
will undertake him. Certain it is, there were some, and those no mean Persons,
nor few in number, among whom there were some Judges of the Land, who never
believed the Writer of the Preamble, that ever Ludlow did any Service for his
Country; and therefore though the Lieutenant General so frequently complains that
he could never be gratified according to his Merits, they would have
recompensed him to the full of his Deserts in fighting for his Country, had the
Lieutenant General not fled from his reward. And so we proceed to his Second
Volume.

VOLUME II.
THE Second Volume begins very tartly and roundly indeed, and displaying a kind
of Billingsgate Passion against Cromwell for dissolving that part of the
Parliament, which the People afterward in Derision called the Rump; and which
the Lieutenant General calls a Villainous Attempt, and a Barbarous Usage of
which they who well consider will find to be the Language only of Prejudice and
Self-Interest, and in the LieutenantGeneral to be no way justifiable, It Is
true, his Charge against Cromwell is very high, and very plausible; but whither
the Accusations will fix a real Guilt upon the Party accused, is the Question.
For this is an Axiom in Logic, that nothing is to be admitted for Truth, but
what is acknowledged to be certainly such. That is to say, all Precipitancy and
Prejudice in judging is to be avoided; and nothing is farther to be absolutely
concluded, then as it is so clearly and distinctly Evident to Reason, that it
can no way be called in Question. Now there is no Body will deny but that
Cromwell turned out the Rump; yet there are Thousands will deny that he did
amiss in doing it. But to show how Partiality blinds the Reason of some People,
I would fain know, where lay the Difference between purging the House, and
turning out the Members that were treating with the King in the Isle of Wight,
and dissolving the Republican Rump: for Oliver was as much a Servant to the one
as the other. Yet the Lieut. Genesis could approve the first Act, whatever
Exclamations he makes against the Latter. Then Oliver was faithful and an
Assertor, now a perfidious Invader of the Liberties of the People. Neither did
Cromwell owe 'em that Obedience which the Lieutenant General pretends: He was a
Member of the same Body, equal in Authority, superior in Power, and fought for
himself as well as for them; and if they aided him with Money, and their
Counsels, he assisted them with his Counsels and his Sword. They sat under his
Protection, and owed their Grandeur to his Victories; and he might be said to
have given 'em their Being in a Political Sense; and to support that Being of
theirs, he ran all the Hazards Abroad, while they enjoyed the Fruits of his
Labors at Home. Their Power was only precarious, and while they ruled by Laws
only of his and their own making, he was not Circumscribed to any limits of
Obedience, to Acts and Ordinances made only for present Conveniences; which in
an unstable Government there may be as great a necessity to alter or repeal
upon new Emergencies.

In this Confusion of Popular Anarchy, Cromwell resolved to be governed by the
only standing Law in the Kingdom at that time; which was the Law of
Self-Preservation: And the ejected Republicans may thank the E. of Essex when
General, and the Scotch Commissioners for teaching him that Lesson. Mr.
Whitlock in his Memoirs tells the Story thus.

Colonel Cromwell being made LieutenantGeneral of Manchester's Army, gave such
an Account of the Miscarriages of the Parlaments Forces before Donnington
Castle, as made great Impressions of Jealousy in the Earl of Essex's Breast,
then Captain General for the Parliament: Insomuch that he was advised to put
his strength to rid Cromwell out of the way; and the means to effect it was
supposed to be by the Scots Commissioners, who were not well pleased with
Cromwell for certain words which he had spoken, as they apprehended Derogatory
to the Honor of their Nation. So early did Cromwell begin to be both Eminent
and Formidable.

One Evening Mainard and Whitlock were Summoned to Essex House, whither they
went to attend the Lord General, not knowing the occasion of their being sent
for, and found already come before 'em, the Scots Commissioners, Mr. Hollis,
Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir John Meyrick, and some others. After the usual
Complements, the Lord General addressing himself to Mainard and Whitlock, told
'em, he had sent for 'em upon a special occasion, to have their Advice and
Counsel in a matter of great Importance, wherein the Lords Commissioners of
Scotland were concerned as well for their own, as the state of England; and
referred himself to the Lord Chancellor of Scotland, as a much better Orator
then himself, to acquaint 'em with the Business.

Upon which, the Lord Chancellor, after he had assured 'em of the good Opinion
that himself and his Brethren had of their Worth and Abilities, You ken vary
weel, said He, that Lieutenant General Cromwell is no Friend of ours, and since
the advance of our Army into England, he has used all underhand and cunning
means to take off from our Honor and Merit of this Kingdom. Therefore, it is
thought requisite for us, and for the carrying on of the Cause of the tway
Realms, that this Obstacle or Remora may be removed out of the way, whom
otherwise we foresee will be no small impediment to us, and the good design we
have undertaken.

He not only is no Friend to us and the Government of our Kirk, but he is also
no wellwiller to his Excellency, whom we have all cause to love and honor: so
that if he be permitted to go on in his way, it may, I fear, endanger the whole
Business; therefore we are to advise of some course to be taken for prevention
of that Mischief.

You ken vary weel the Accord betwixt the two Kingdoms, and the Union between
the two Kingdoms by the solemn League and Covenant, and if any be an Incendiary
between the two Nations how he is to be proceeded against. Now the matter is,
wherein we desire your Opinions, what you take the meaning of this word
Incendiary to be, and whicher the Lieutenant General Cromwell be not sike an
Incendiary, as is meant thereby; and whilke way wud be best to proceed against
him if he be proved sike an Incendiary, and that will clepe his wings from
soaring to the Prejudice of our cause.

Now you may ken that by our Law in Scotland we clepe him an Incendiary, wha
kindles Coals of Contention, and raises Differences in the State to the
public Damage, and he is, tanquam Publicus Hostis Patrioe. Whether your Law be
the same or not, you ken best who are mickle Learned therein; and therefore
with the Favor of his Excellency, we desire your Judgments in these Points.

Whitlock replied, That the sense of the word Incendiary was the same in
England as his Lordship had expressed it to be by the Law of Scotland, One that
raises the fire of Contention in a State, or that kindles the burning hot
flames of Contention; but whether LieutenantGeneral Cromwell were such an
Incendiary between the two Kingdoms, could not be known but by proof of his
particular Words and Actions tending to the kindling of such a Fire of
Contention between the Two Nations.

That it was not for the Lord General and the Lords Commissioners of Scotland
to appear in any accusation of this nature, unless they were certain it could
be made out by sufficient proofs.

That they were to consider the Condition, Parts, and Interest of the Person
who was to be accused as an Incendiary.

That Lieutenant General Cromwell was a Gentleman of quick and subtle Parts,
and one who had gained no small Interest in the House of Commons, and wanted
not Friends in the House of Peers, nor Abilitles in himself to manage his own
Defense to the best advantage.

And therefore since neither his Excellency, nor the Lord Chancellor had
mentioned any particulars, nor that he knew of any by his own private
Observations, that could amount to a clear proof that would satisfy the House
of Commons that Lieutenant General Cromwell was an Incendiary, his advice was,
That they should desist from any further prosecution of this matter, till they
were certain of evident Proofs to make out their Accusation.

Maynard gave the same Answer, only varied in words. However, Mr. Hollis, Sir
Philip Stapleton, and some others, spoke smartly to the Business, and
mentioning some particular Passages and Words of Cromwell, tending to prove him
an Incendiary, would willingly have bin upon the Accusation. But the Scots
Commissioners were not so forward to adventure upon it, for the reasons
alleged by Maynard and Whitlock. Nevertheless, this business was not carried
so privately, but that Cromwell was informed of it: Which Mr. Whitlock gathers
from hence, That though Cromwell took no notice of any particular Passages at
this Conference, yet he seemed more kind to Whitlock and Maynard then formerly
he had bin, and carried on his Design more actively of making way for his own
Advancement.

From hence it is apparent, that there was a Party in the Parliament that bore
an early spleen against Cromwell, and fain would have nipt him in the Bud; but
his eminent Service at Naseby procuring him to be appointed and continued
Lieutenant General under Fairfax; the continual Successes that attended him
from that time forward, set him above their Machinations. Nevertheless, they
did not erase out of his Breast the remembrance of the kindnesses they would
have done him; nor did their Flatteries of his Prosperity make him the more
neglectful of standing upon his Guard. And it was as warrantable for Cromwell
to secure himself from the Contrivances of his Enemies in a shattered
Parliament, of which he had so long before such timely notice, as it was for
them to seek his Ruin. For they were not his Sovereigns, but his Equals. This I
urge to throw off that common aspersion from Cromwell, That he sought his own
Advancement from the beginning, more then by enlarging his Fortune by acts of
Prowess, and joining with others to procure the general good of the Kingdom.
For Baxter confesses, that at first he took extreme care to get as many
Religious Men into the Regiment that was Baxter's Life, Part 1.
to serve immediately under him, as possibly he could; who being People of more
understanding Airs, Berry, Desborough, and the rest of that Troop, that they
proved so Valiant, that as far as he could learn, they never turned their backs
to an Enemy. He adds farther, That at Cromwell's first making choice of such
Men, it was the very Esteem and Love of Religious Men that principally moved
him; and the avoiding those Disorders, Mutinies, Plunderings and Grievances of
the Country, which Debauched Men in Armies are usually guilty of. Now it is not
easy to believe, that a Man of such Principles should be guilty of that
inordinate Ambition which his Maligners lay to his Charge. But when he found
that his Prosperous Achievements raised him Enemies on every side; that they
who were most beholding to his Victorious Successes, combined with the greatest
Animosity to his Destruction, 'twas time for him then to look about him, and to
oppose their undermining Devices with countermines of the same nature. Nor does
it appear by any proof that carries Authority with it, that he pretended to
single Greatness till he was forced to it for his own safety. It is agreed by
the Author of the Memoirs himself, that Cromwell offered more candid and easy
Conditions to the King then the Presbyterian Party did; which if the King had
accepted (and it does not appear to be Cromwell's fault that he did not)
Cromwell himself had then put a stop to all his single Advancement; whereas he
would surely have taken another course, had he at that time meditated single
Sovereignty; but the King, who was designed by Fate to be a Victim to Evil
Counsel, refused those Offers, trusting to vainer hopes. On the other side, it
was manifestly apparent that the Presbyterian Party aimed at nothing more then
their own Advancement by their Selling the Bishops Lands, and when they came to
Treat with the King, by their so stiffly adhering to their Proposition for the
Abolishing of Episcopacy, knowing there could be no Bishops without
Maintenance, and that then they must be the Paramount Clergy of the Kingdom.
But then (indeed) Cromwell perceiving that it was not safe to rely upon the
King, nor willing to truckle under a Party that were Treating for their own
Advancement upon his Ruins, it is rational to believe, that from that time
forward he began to look upon the King as a Conquered Prince, and that none
could better supply his room then the Person who had Subdued him.

The Motives and Provocations that incited Cromwell to Dissolve the Rump, were
somewhat different; for before the Presbyterian Party was Expelled, though the
Royal Party had deserted the House, there was a Number still left sufficient to
take upon 'em the Name of a Parliament; and there was some face of that
Authority which the Law of the Land had invested in the Representatives of the
People; besides, that the King had acknowledged 'em to be a Parliament, upon the
Treaty at Uxbridge. But they being Ejected, the small Remainder was only a
Junto, which derived their Authority from the Power of the Sword; their Votes
and Acts were no farther Laws then the Sword constrained Obedience to 'em; they
were only continued in their Seats by Cromwell for a present Convenience; and
therefore as they were only countenanced and supported by the Power of the
Sword, which was then in the hands of Cromwell, they were to be looked upon as
no other then a Party set up by him, and owing their Authority to him. So that
when they began to extend that Authority beyond its Limits, and assumed to
themselves a Democratical Power in opposition to him from whom they derived
their subsistence, they were rather Rebels to Cromwell, then Cromwell to them;
and as he set 'em up in hopes that they might be serviceable to him for the
good of the Nation, might pull 'em down again, when he saw 'em exceeding their
Commission. Now whether the design, for the bringing of which to pass, Cromwell
fixed 'em in their Seats pro tempore, were good or bad, is not the Question:
But whether they who were no lawful Authority, but only acted under the
safeguard of another unlawful Authority, had power to make any act good or
evil, as it suited with their Interest, or opposed their Designs. For if they
had not, which is most probable, Cromwell is never a jot the more Impious, the
more Perjured, the more a Villain, because they call him so. For being a Junto
of his own erecting, upon such and such Considerations, he might without any
fear of those Reproaches, send 'em a grazing when he found 'em deviating from
those ends for which he had suffered 'em to keep their Places. Now it is plain,
that Cromwell never intended they should sit long, or thought 'em able to
accomplish his main Design, which was to settle the Nation. For Whitlock in his
Memorials gives ye an Account, how that aftter the Battle of Worcester,
Cromwell desired a Meeting with several Members of Parliament, and some Chief
Officers of the Army at the Speaker's House, where in the presence of a great
many that met, he proposed to 'em, That since the Old King was Dead, and his
Son Defeated, he held it necessary to come to a Settlement of the Nation, and
therefore he had desired that Meeting to Consider and Advise what was fit to be
done.

Whitlock offered, Whether it were not requisite to be understood in the first
place, in what way such a Settlement was desired; whether of an Absolute
Republic, or of any Mixture of Monarchy.

Cromwell concurred with Whitlock, that his meaning was, that it should be
considered, Whether a Republic or a mixed Monarchy would be best to be settled;
and if any thing Monarchical, then in whom that Power to be placed.

Sir Thomas Widdrington was of Opinion, That a mixed Monarchical Government was
the most suitable to the Laws and People of the Nation; and if Monarchical,
that it would be most just to place it in one of the Sons of the late King.

Fleetwood thought that the Question whether a mixed Monarchy, or a Republic,
would not be very easily determined. But,

St. John, the Chief Justice, was of the same Opinion with Sir Thomas
Widdrington, and so was the Speaker; but they did not mention where it was
proper to be placed.

Widdrington again proposed the Duke of Gloucester; and Whitlock propounded that
a Day might be fixed for the King's Eldest Son and the Duke of York to come
into the Parliament, that so upon such Terms as should be thought fit and
agreeable, both to the Civil and Spiritual Liberties, a Settlement might be
made with them.

Cromwell replied, That it would be a business of more then ordinary
difficulty; however, he really thought, that if it could be done with safety to
the preservation of the English Rights, a Settlement with something of
Monarchical Power in it, would be very effectual.

In short, the Soldiers were against any thing of Monarchy, as Desborough and
Whalley, who were present at the Meeting; but the Lawyers were for a mixed
Monarchy.

Hence it is apparent, that the Dissolution of the Rump, in order to the
setting up a Government with a mixture of Monarchy in it, had a truer and more
noble Aim, as being more conformable to the Laws of the Land, then the
continuance of a Republic.

The Point is not here, Whether Cromwell did ill in setting up himself; but
whether he did amiss in setting up himself above the Republican Rump; and for
that, he has of his side the Opinions of the Greatest and most Learned Lawyers
of that Time: And Whitlock testifies, That St. John, the then Chief Justice,
with many others, advised him to Dissolve the Rump. So that Ludlow's Outcries
of Villainous, Wicked, and Perfidious, are False and Scandalous, as being
grounded upon Ignorance, Passion, and Partiality. He could not be taxed with
Wickedness or Villainy, because he pursued the Constitutions of the Nation, at
least much closer then they who had designed the Subversion of the National
Government: Nor could he be charged with Perfidiousness, because he never
promised to perpetuate their Session, but had often desired 'em to Dissolve
themselves, which they foreslowing by a thousand cunning delays, he took the
liberty to dismiss 'em by force.

But how highly soever Ludlow was offended with the Dissolution of his
Republican Brethren, many others were not of his Opinion. For Whitlock tells
ye, that their Dissolution caused much rejoicing among the Kings Party; and
that among the Parlament's Party several Pastors of Churches and their
Congregations were pleased at it; and that several Acknowledgments of the
Justice of that Action were sent up to Cromwell and his Council of Officers,
not only from several Parties of the Army, but from others in various
Countries, with Engagements to stand by him; and Baxter tells ye, that no sort
of People expressed any great Offense at their being cast out. Though he closes
his advantageous Testimonial of the general Approbation of the Action, with a
lash of his Satirical Pen, upon the score of his old Friends, the Exterminated
Members. For Mr. Baxter does not appear in his descants upon Cromwell to be a
Man without Gall. However, he serves as a good Witness against Lieutenant
General Ludlow, to show that Oliver's Dissolution of the Rump was no such
Crime, as he proclaims it to be. And thus it is observable how strangely
Falsehood is imposed upon the world in the various dresses and disguises of
Truth. If you will believe the Affirmations of Self-interest and Partiality,
there as many Truths, as there are Wastcoats of the Virgin Mary among the
Papists; at least there is no Champion of a Party but has his Wardrobe of
Prerences, and Dresses of Justice, Piety, Virtue, and whatever is revear'd and
esteemed among Men, to prank and trick up their Minion Falsehood, that it shall
not be possible to distinguish her from Truth; nor are they at the same time
without as many Magazines of deformed Vizors and Disguises to render Truth the
most odious and monstrous of all things, and ungrateful to Mankind. One cries
up this for Truth; another asserts for Truth that which is diametrically
opposite; a third steps in, and charges 'em both for Impostors. And the
generality of Men, too lazy to examine which is Truth and which is Falsehood,
refer themselves to him, who having got something of a Name in the World,
either for his Learning or Piety, or it may be sometimes for both, has the
greatest Authority over their Persuasion.

This is Cromwell's Case; of whom it was said, That no Man was higher Extolled,
no Man more basely vilifi'd; no Man Worse, no Man Better spoken of; as Interest
led the Judgments of Men. The Presbyterians, with Baxter at their Head, affirm
it was an Act of Rebellion, Perjury, Perfidiousness, and Impudence, to turn so
many of their Members out of the House at once: The Republican Party say, No;
that was no Crime at all; but it was a Villainous, Barbarous, Perfidious Act to
Dissolve the Rump. Whence it is naturally concluded, that until Both Parties
can make out their diametrical Infallibility in these Points, Cromwell's
Reputation stands Irreproachable, as to those Acts with which they charge him
committed against themselves. Add to this, that being all Parties and
Accomplices, they were no competent Judges of the Justice or Injustice of their
own Cause; consequently neither of Cromwell's Proceedings against themselves.
So that having no Right to Judge, they had no Power to Condemn. Quis tulerit
Graechos de Seditione querentes?

And now we come to the Accomplishment of the Southsayings and Conjectures of
our Irish Lieutenant General, That after all was done, Cromwell would certainly
fool the Rump, and set up for himself. And here with the Painter-Stainers Brush
of his overweaning Malice, he strives to render Oliver as deformed as possibly
he can, to the end he may make his Rump appear the more sleek and immaculate.
To this intent, his main pretense is violent Usurpation, but his chief Reasons,
which he displays too inconsiderately to the World, were his own Discontents,
and the Abatement of his Pay, and his being at length turned quite out of
Commission: For, says he, the Pay of some of the Officers of the Army was also
reduced; among whom it fell heavier on me, then any other; for I was obliged to
keep a more plentiful Table then the rest, and Twenty Horses continually in my
Stable ready for Service: And indeed it would have vexed a Saint, to have bin
thrown down like Lucifer, from so much Glory all of a sudden. Then for his
Commission, he himself acknowledges that it was not taken from him, till he was
discovered to be a Memento's against the Person who procured it for him, and in
whose Name it was given. And here his pretended tender Conscience being pricked
and goaded with a hundred scruples and niceties, it is very pleasant to see how
it caper'd and curvetted upon the demand of that Commission. However it is
apparent, that he was used with a world of Civility, more then he deserved, and
that great care was taken to recover him from those Pious frenzies and
fegaries, with which his Celestial Bigotry was led astray.

As for his Charge of Usurpation and Tyranny upon Oliver; we must take him for
a Person abstracted from all other Parties but his own, and deal with him as
one that boasted that he had Subscribed the Engagement to be true to the Rump,
without King or House of Lords, with his Hand and his Heart; and then we must
affirm, that he has gone all along upon a wrong ground; seeing there could be no
greater Proof of usurpation, then that very Engagement which the Lieutenant
General Signed with his Hand and his Heart. For it was a demand of Fealty by
those who had no Legal Authority to require it, and a perfect Invasion upon the
Prerogatives of the King and the Lords, and erecting a spurious Commonwealth
upon their Ruins. So that the Confidence of the Lieutenant General is greatly
to be wondered at; who being an Accomplice in so signal a usurpation, durst
adventure to call Cromwell a usurper, who did no more then what they had done
before him with much more Injustice and Illegality. For the Lieutenant and his
Copartners usurped upon the Fundamental Constitutions of the Nation; whereas
Oliver was only a usurper upon usurpers, if it might be called a usurpation.
However, to make it out, the Lieutenant General conjectures this, and surmises
that, according as his own idle Fancy prompted him; and would make the world
believe that he knew Cromwell's Thoughts, and all the reasons of his Actions,
which he takes so much care to bespatter with his fond Reflections and
Interpretations, to the best advantage of his undefiled Rump. Whereas there be
some who reck'n that Action of Cromwell's among the most Glorious of his
Performances, and which came the nearest to one of the most famous
Achievements of Hercules himself, to cut off that many-headed Geryon of
Anarchy, Folly, and Tyranny, at one Blow.

But notwithstanding all his stroaking and clapping his Republican Rump, there
are others that write with more Impartiality, who give us a better account of
things; and from those bare Relations of Matters of Fact, we find that Cromwell
always advised with the Greatest Lawyers in the Nation, before he put his
Determinations in Execution. In an accidental Conference between Cromwell and
Whitlock, the latter agreed with the former, That Ludlow's spotless Rumponians
were a Proud, Ambitious, and Self-seeking sort of People, engrossing all Places
of Honor and Profit to themselves and their Friends, and daily breaking out
into new and violent Parties and Factions; that they were delayers of Business,
and Men that designed to perpetuate the Power in their own hands. So that it
was then concluded between 'em, that there ought to be some Authority and Power
so Full and so High, that might restrain their Exorbitances, and reduce things
to better Order.

Certainly these were Inducements for Cromwell to Dissolve the Rump, much more
Just and Honest, and far more Beneficial to the Nation, then those Figments
which Ludlow charges him withal. Had they bin those By ends, and that Ambition
which Ludlow would pretend to discover in him, it was well known, and Whitlock
put him in mind at the same Conference, that he had all the Kingly Power in him
already; that of the Militia as he was General: That as to the Nomination of
Civil Offices, those whom he recommended were very seldom refused; and that
though he had not a negative Vote in passing the Laws, yet what he disliked was
not easy to be carried; and that it was in his Power to dispose of the Public
Money: Then as to Foreign Affairs, though the Ceremonial Application were made
to the Parliament, yet the expectation of good or bad Success was from himself;
and particular Solicitations of Foreign Ministers, were only made to him.

But Cromwell well knowing that the Power of a King was universally understood
and Reverenced by the People of this Nation, and that a single Person under
what Title soever, was more agreeable to the Constitutions of the Kingdom, in
all probability believed that it would be much better to destroy the Republican
Hydra, past recovery, then to be guilty of so many foreseen Miscarriages, by
suffering the unruly Monster any longer to domineer under the Protection of his
Power. For certain it is, that whatever the Nation had suffered, though it had
passed in their Names, would have bin all laid upon his Shoulders. And by the
Event it may be justly thought, that these were the real Motives that swayed
Oliver to assume a Single Title, rather then the Fictions of Ludlow's Malice
and Discontent. However, Ludlow pretends, that his Rump was dockt in the full
career of their good Intentions for the Good of the Nation; to which some
Credit might have bin given, had some indifferent Person spoke it: But as the
Praises and Encomiums of a Bigot gain little Belief, so neither are his
Defamations and Reproaches any more to be regarded among Men of Sense. More
then this, Cicero will not allow that any Man should accuse another for that
which he is as much, or more guilty of himself. Now it is apparent that Oliver,
as has been said, so far as concerned the Rump, was much less a Usurper, then
Ludlow and his Party, who had Usurped all the Authority in the Kingdom to
themselves, and were going about to Subvert the Fundamental Government of the
Nation; whereas Oliver did but dissolve a Conventicle of a Parliament, out of a
firm belief that they were meditating the Ruin of the Kingdom; which having no
Legal Authority, might easily be Dissolved by the same Power that Supported it.
So that there is not the least pretense for Ludlow's Outcries of Usurpation
against Oliver, who had as much right, if he saw cause, to Dissolve 'em, as
they had to Sit; more especially seeing neither Ludlow, nor any of his Party
could claim any redress from the Law of the Land, to which they were all sworn
Enemies by virtue of their Engagement; nor was there any other Law to make it
Usurpation, unless they meant some petty Votes of their own, which signified
nothing.

The Lieutenant-General's next Charge upon Cromwell, is an Accusation of
Tyranny; not that the Lieutenant General ever felt the effects of it, unless it
were his being turned out of Commission for endeavoring to raise the Posse
Comitatus upon him, as we told ye before, by dispersing Petitions and
Memento's against Oliver and his Government, which he Lieutenant General having
read or heard that Usurpation and Tyranny were generally Concomitants, he
thought it a Duty incumbent upon him to give Oliver a double scratch, and
because he had charged him with Usurpation, that therefore it behooved him to
accuse him of Tyranny, by reason they were so near a kin. Such Blunders do Men
commit that are swayed by Prejudice and Disgust. Now therefore we are to
examine who were the greatest Tyrants, the Rump, or Cromwell. The definition of
Tyranny, according to Aristotle, is the Domination of one or more Men, with
regard to nothing else but their own proper Interest and Advantage.

Now you have heard the Characters of the generality of the Rump; that they
were Proud, Ambitious, and Self-seekers: Endowments so tempered by Original Sin
to qualify Men in Authority for Tyranny, that it is a difficult thing for those
that possess 'em to avoid the Temptations of Despotic Dominion. But to come to
particulars; their Despotick Votes, from which there was no Appeal; the
Sequestrations, Decimations, their CommitteeMen Bashas, and Sangiacs in every
Corner of the Kingdom to Extirpate the Ancient Gentry and Nobility of the
Nation; their designing the very Annihilation of Kingship, by Exposing the
Palaces of Royalty to Sale; their Lording it over the Episcopal Clergy to that
degree, that they would not suffer 'em to have Two or Three gathered together
in their Savior's Name, as if the Cavaleers had had no right to Heaven; Taxes
imposed ad Libitum, by a Usurped Authority, to maintain Wars with Holland, Wars
with Portugal, that signified nothing to England, but tended all to the
advancement of their own Grandeur: And all this while the Nation rent and torn,
Family against Family, Parents against their Children, Foreigners increased in
the Staple Manufactures of the Kingdom, and Confusion, that always nurses
Anarchy and Tyranny, as the Wolf did Romulus and Remus, raging uncontrolled
from Dover to Berwick.

While the Kingdom was in this disasterous Condition, Cromwell steps in and
puts a stop to these precipitant Phaetons, that had quite overturned the
Chariot of Government, and finding no other way but to restore the ancient
Establishment of a Single Person and a Parliament, takes the Reins into his own
Hands. And this is that which our Lieutenant General of the Forces in Ireland
snorts and fumes at with so much Indignation, and calls, though very
improperly, his own Circumstances considered, a betraying of the precious
Cause, and a Sacrificing of all their Victories and Deliverances to his Pride
and Ambition, contrary to his former solemn Vows and Professions. A Charge of a
high nature, but which has bin sufficiently answered already. However, Cromwell
would not be overhasty in this Affair of so great Importance; he first calls an
Assembly of Men, the Best and most Able, as he thought, to find out an
Expedient to rescue the Nation from the growing Confusions that were like to
overwhelm it. But these Persons, after they had for some time laid their Heads
together, proved as arrant Bunglers, as the others were Fools and Knaves;
however, they had the honesty to acknowledge it, and so unwilling to go beyond
their Last, resigned up their Power into his Hands who had called 'em together.
Now whether this were done out of Policy for form and fashions sake, or out of
sincere Intention, is not here to be disputed; we are only to clear it from
Ludlow's Aspersion of Tyranny, as being a Method that looked with a much better
face of moderation and reason, and carried a fairer pretense of satisfaction to
the Nation, then the Lawless Violence of the Rump in taking Possession of their
several Thrones, and Voting themselves into an Arbitrary and Despotic
Domination, without the least Consent of the People, but imposing themselves
upon 'em for their Representatives, without any regard to the Laws and
Constitutions of the Land.

On the other hand, Cromwell and the Gentlemen before mentioned, had resigned
their Authority up to him, before he would intrude himself upon the Nation,
draws up a certain Instrument, containing several Covenants and Compacts
between him and the People, which he took an Oath in the Presence of God, never
to Violate or Infringe, but to Govern the Three Nations according to the Laws,
Statutes, and Customs thereof, seeking Peace, and causing Justice to be equally
Administered.

This the Rump never did, they broke the Laws and Statutes of the Realm every
day in the year; and required that all People should Swear to them, but they
Swore to no Body: They gave no reason of their Actions, but called themselves,
Custodes Libertatis Angliae, and as such, they locked it up with their Great
Seal, and would never part with it to the People: They were only ingenuous in
one thing, that they acknowledged what God they served by their Deus Nobiscum
upon their Coin. And this same Mammonish Deity seems to have had a great
influence upon the Conscience and Piety of our Lieutenant General, by his
Complaint for the Abatement of his Pay, and the Viol of his Wrath poured out
upon Cromwell, for distributing a Thousand Pounds a Year to Ireland, and sent a
Grazing into Wiltshire, after all his great Services at Wardour-Castle, and
against the Bogtrotters, and his obstructing the Proclaiming the Instrument of
Government in Ireland, in Obedience to the squeamishness of his crazy
Conscience. Which put him into such a heat every time he thought of it in
Switzerland, that he was resolved to be even with Cromwell for it; and
therefore lays it as a heavy Charge upon him, his allowing a 1000 l. a Year to
his Privy Council, to tell the World, That he Ibid.
did it as a Public Robber who had possessed himself of the Purse of the
Nation, because nothing of Conscience or Honor could be presumed would ever
keep 'em steady in their Fidelity to him. Never considering that his Spotless
Rumponians were of the same Opinion, which made 'em carve the Wealth of the
Nation so profusely one to another, to cement their mutual Union, that Martin
was reported to have spent a Hundred Thousand Pounds of their Liberality upon
his Concubines, of which the Donative of Darby House was a part. And they who
desire to see a farther List of the Munificent Gratuities of their Fidelity to
each other, may find it in the History of Independency, unless my Memory fail
me.

But to return to Cromwell, it is apparent that still he gave reasons for what
he did. He tells the world, That having had sufficient Experience of the
Inconveniences of a Republican Dominion, which was altogether dissonant from
the Temper of the Nation, he had reduced it to the Ancient Form of a Single
Person and a Parliament, as being most agreeable to the Sense of the Nation,
judging it to be the most likely means to avoid the extremes of Monarchy on the
one hand, and Democracy on the other, yet not so neither as to found Dominium
in Gratia. And to show how far he was from intending a Tyrannical and Despotic
Rule, he drew up an Instrument containing several Covenants and Agreements with
the People, with the Form of an Oath to be taken by him for the Performance of
the several Articles.

The chief of these Covenants were, That the Laws should not be altered,
suspended, repealed, or abrogated, nor any new Law made, nor any Tax or
Imposition laid upon the People, but by common Consent of Parliament.

That there should be a Triennial Parliament, not to be dissolved before they
had sat Five Months; which should be summoned sooner, if the Necessities of
the State required it.

That the Office of the Single Person should be Elective, and not Hereditary.

That Liberty of Conscience should be allowed to all Professors of the
Christian Faith: But the Public and open Profession of Popery and Prelacy not
to be allowed.

That every successive Single Person should take and subscribe a solemn Oath to
seek the Peace, Quiet, and Welfare of the Nations, and to cause Law and Justice
to be equally administered.

Now, with our Major-General's leave, I would fain know what Tyranny there was
in all this? More then this, as to the Sincerity of Cromwell's Intentions, if
we may believe him, as there is certainly much more reason to believe him
speaking as it were in the Presence of God, then to give Credit to an
exasperated Bigot jabbering to the Canton of Bern, he assures the Parliament
which he had called, That he desired not to keep the Government any longer then
he might preserve England in its just Rights, and the People in their just
Liberty of Conscience. To this we may add, that at another time in his Speech
to his Parliament, speaking of his Government, he has this Expression, That let
men say what they would, he could speak it with Comfort before a greater then
any of 'em, as to his own Intentions, it was a Thing calculated for the
Interest of the People alone, and for their Good, and without Respect had to
any other Interest.

I do not find in all Ludlow's Memoirs any such League made for the Welfare of
the Nation by the Rump, or any such Tenderness so much as pretended by Ludlow's
Republican Patriots. Ludlow takes no notice of all this, but runs on, hunting
after all the Riffraff of Defamation and Reproach which he can rake together,
on purpose to pull down his Memory, and bury it under the Rubbish of his
Memoirs. He scrapes together with an implacable Malice, all the Bad, or will
admit of bad Interpretation concerning him; but he omits every thing that might
be justly said in his Favor: Which, if we may believe Cicero, is the greatest
Proof of the Injustice of an Accusation that can be.

Baxter, though no Friend to Cromwell, was in this particular more Ingenious;
he mixes what he thought bad, and what he esteemed good in Cromwell, both
together; and his Words are worth reciting, as bearing a signal Testimony
against the Virulency of Ludlow. I did in open Conference, says he, declare
Cromwell Baxter's Life, Part 1.
and his Adherents to be guilty of Treason and Rebellion, yet I did not think
it my duty to rave against And speaking of his Carriage after he had assumed
the Protectorship, He had the Policy, says he, not to detect or exasperate the
Ministers or others that consented quietly, without putting any Oath of
Fidelity upon any but his Parlaments.

From whence it is obvious, that it was a piece of Tyranny in the Rump, that
they would let no body rest in quiet, that did not swallow their Engagement;
which was a Tyranny not only over the Bodies, but the very Souls and
Consciences of men; of which Ludlow in the height of his Partiality says
nothing.

By the way, there is one Accusation which Baxter and Ludlow both charge upon
Cromwell, That he permitted many things, to necessitate the Nation to take him
for their Governor: Which Cromwell taking notice of, gives this solemn Answer,
in his Second Speech to his Parliament; And I say this, says he, not only to
this Assembly, but to all the World, That that man lives not, who can come to
me and charge me that I have in these great Revolutions created Necessities: I
challenge even all that fear God. After all this, I must leave it to Judgment,
whether it be fair to favor the Suppositions and Conjectures of Bigotry,
against so solemn a Challenge as this.

And now we are to compare the Benefit which the Nation received by the Rump,
with the Advantages of the Protector's Government. As for the Actions of the
Rump, the chiefest of Remark was their War with the Dutch. A War by which the
Nation reaped no Benefit, and which the Dutch declined as much as possibly they
could, disowning the rash Action of Trump, and taking God to witness, that his
fighting the English Fleet was against the Knowledge and Will of the
StatesGeneral. But the Rump, who then thought themselves the Lords of Three
Kingdoms, and were setting up for a Commonwealth, and flushed up with
Cromwell's Victories at Dunbar and Worcester, resolved to let the Dutch know,
that as they were the largest, so they would be the Topping Republic in Europe,
and would not have the Point of Precedence disputed with 'em. Which was the
Reason that most people, because they could find no better, gave for their
entering into a War impertinently expensive to the Nation, and altogether
against the Protestant Interest, which ought to have been much more dear to
those pretended Zealots, then a Punctilio of Honor. As for their War with
Portugal, it had somewhat a better pretense, because that King protected Prince
Rupert's revolted Ships in his Harbors; but it caused a great Cessation of
Trade.

On the other side; Cromwell made Peace with the Dutch, and made 'em pay for
it. He renewed the Leagues with Sweden and Denmark, by which he kept the Sound
open to his Merchants, and strengthened the Protestant Interest. He relieved
the distressed Protestants of Savoy with considerable Sums. And if he erred in
closing with the French instead of the Spaniard, yet thereby he added Jamaica
and Dunkirk to the British Dominions; the Loss of the last of which Places has
been too sadly lamented in these our last Wars with France. At home he took
care to fill the Seats of Justice with Men of known Integrity and Ability; and
he went a great way in reforming the Abuses of the Law. Lastly, he kept the
Nation in Peace, Trade flourished, and Money was plentiful under his Government.

But he was no sooner laid in his Grave, but the Rump, which was enough to show
the Nature of the Beast, broke in upon his Son Richard, and put all into
Confusion again; and by that means made good the Truth of all the Remonstrances
and Declarations that the Army and Cromwell put forth in Justification of their
Proceedings against him. This Baxter says, as done by them, was as barbarous a
Perfidiousness as ever History did declare; that they should so suddenly, so
scornfully, and proudly pull down him whom they had so lately set up and sworn
to, and that for nothing; they could scarce tell why themselves; nor were ever
able to give the world a fairer reason for their Villainy, then the Munster
Fanatics had for their Bedlam Outrages and Rebellion; as if Perjury and
Rebellion had bin newly put into the Commandments.

And here it is time to make a stop, that I may not trouble the Reader with
Repetitions and Impertinences, which would certainly be the consequence of any
farther tracing the remainder of his Memoirs, wherein he seems to be only in a
pleasing Trance, gratifying his own Humor, and talking of old Stories, like
old weather-beaten Officers in the Chimney-corner of a Lame Hospital.

From the whole there is only this one Observation farther to be made, How
great a Prejudice Posterity receives from such Mountebanks in History as the
Author of these Memoirs. For the Supreme Law of History is, That there be no
suspicion of Favor or Affection; none of Envy or Partiality, nor any thing of
Ostentation in the Writer; of all which Crimes these Memoirs are apparently
guilty. And therefore such Commentaries as these, are better committed to the
Flames, then transmitted to future Ages, which are thereby led into Error, and
altogether deprived of making a right Judgment of preceding times. Truth is
darkened either Libidine Affentandi, or odio Adversus Dominantes; and so
between Folly and Knavery there is no care of Posterity. And therefore in
regard that Men for Scandals and Defamations of the Living, are many times
punished with severe Penalties, How much more do all passionate and misguiding
Histories, that murder the Fame and Reputation of the Dead, deserve the
Condemnation of all the Rational part of Mankind?

THE END.

