A LETTER To the Honorable Sir ROBERT HOWARD, Occasioned by a late Book,
Entitled, A Twofold Vindication Of the late Archbishop of CANTERBURY, And of
the Author of the History of Religion.

By All. MONRO, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for E. Whitlock near Stationers' Hall, 1696.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 4. for this r. that p. 6. l. 21. r. elegancies p. 7. l. 8. r.
accent. ibid l. 15. r. Philosopher p. 8. l. 12. for to r. in ibid. l. ult. for
innocence r. innoscence p. 9. l. 4. r. innoscence ibid l. 9. r. innoscence ibid
l. 29. r. highlander p. 10. l. 7. r. Cameron ibid. l. 10. after more add of
ibid. l. 19. for used r. and p. 12. l. 14. for Socinianism r. Socinians p. 13.
l. 13. r. innoscence p. 16. l. 21. for Sixth r. Sixteenth p. 18. l. 11. after
there add are p. 20. l. ult. r. Hero's p. 23. l. 29. r. Diminutive p. 26. l.
16. r. title.

SIR,
I Received your Answer to my Letter dated the 13th of April last, and I thank
you heartily for your civility. In mine I gave you a short Account of the
barbarous Treatment I met with, in a Book Entitled, A Twofold Vindication of
the late Archbishop of Canterbury, and of the Author of the History of
Religion. I presumed to address my complaint to your self, because you was
pleased to prefix an Epistle to that Book, in which I am exposed with greater
contempt and severity than I deserve at your hands.

I humbly suppose you proceeded upon the same Mistakes and malicious
Informations, that provoked your two Anonymous Authors to so much Fury and
Indignation. The ground of their quarrel is, that they take it for granted,
that I am the Author of a certain Pamphlet Entitled, The Charge of Socinianism
against Dr. Tillotson considered. This is the second time that I have been
rudely and publicly accused on this very Head. I might reasonably expect, that
your Two Philosophers would more narrowly examine the Matter of Fact, before
they had abused an innocent Stranger in so scurrilous a manner; they are such
as left me no opportunity to know their Names, or the place of their Residence:
Nor am I now at liberty to make a stricter search where those Birds of darkness
may be seen. We know without the Assistance of a Revelation, that he that does
evil hates the Light.

The Advertisement, which I printed in the Month of January last, in opposition
to the Censures published against me, upon the foot of that Calumny, might (one
may reasonably think) cover me from all Libels of that Nature, since I am ready
to take my Oath, before any Judge, that I never had the least thought of
writing any such Book, as the Charge of Socinianism, etc. in any former moment
of my life: And so far from writing any Animadversions on your History of
Religion, that I never saw it until the 16th of April, 1696.

It may be, that your two Champions will impute this second Vindication to my
fear and pusillanimity, and say, that I am some timorous and silly Creature, I
dare not now avow what I have foolishly done: I am so lashed, that it is not
fit to write any more, to provoke the Anger of such terrible Men, whose
greatest Talent is calumny and impertinence. Nevertheless, I may venture to
tell you, (hoping that your passions are more calm,) that I can prove, to a
demonstration, by Witnesses of more unstained Authority and Reputation than any
of my Accusers, that another is the true and sole Author of that Book: And
perhaps he may, in due time, discover himself, if he can be secured against
those Inconveniences which may probably follow upon his being known. When your
very learned Authors consider this, it may mortify their accurate Wisdom, to
have thrown away all their Ammunition of Wit and Raillery before they discovered
their Enemy. And now, Sir, I beg your pardon, if I have not the same opinion of
their Morals, that you have of their Intellectuals. To rob a Man of his good
Name maliciously, and without any certainty of matter of Fact, can as little be
reconciled to the Rules of Honor as to the common Measures of Justice.

The first of them endeavors (all he can) to represent me a Beast. The next
makes me a Devil, though one of the weakest and silliest Orders. It Is happy for
the Prisoner at the Bar when the Evidences contradict one another. However
between them two I make a very sad figure. I am not now to entertain you with
my thoughts of their Learning and Theology; they may Write or refute what Books
they please: It Is time for me to interpose when they meddle with any thing that
is truly mine. I arrogate to my self no man's performances. As for the the
Book, that they seem to tear in pieces with so much bitterness and violence, I
only read some few pages in it; And the Gentleman who gave me a Copy is ready
to take his Oath, that, upon the delivery of the Book, I said to him, that I
should never be able to read it to the end, it was printed in so small a
Character.

It is not enough for your two Philosophers to fall upon me like Madmen, and to
abuse me for what is contained in the Book, but they must needs drop some
Reflections that they think are peculiar either to my Person or my Country. If
they had confined their Libels to the Subject matter, I would Judge it no part
of my business to undeceive them: But when they make use of Arguments and
Critical Observations, to prove that I am the Author of such a Book, their
Reasons are so short and superficial that I may be allowed to examine them. The
first says, page 33. that I was not able to keep my own Secret, but that it got
abroad among a great many, that I was the Man, that thought my self qualified
to censure the Doctrine of an Archbishop of Canterbury, and to encounter with
the great Author of the History of Religion.

This is impudence with a witness. Did I say so to himself, or to any other
Trifling Calumniator? Is it not reasonable for him to let me know who this
Gentleman is to whom I said any thing of this Nature? But this fair and
ingenuous Dealing is not his way; it is enough for him that he was informed by
some little Whisperer that I was the Author of such a Book. And your
Philosopher thought this a sufficient proof; he was glad any Man was named, on
whom he might so safely discharge his fury. But when he found it was some tame
Illiterate Pedant, then he puts himself all in Armor, as all Cowards do, where
there is no danger. If I confessed the matter of fact my self it is in vain to
contradict it. In the mean time I presume to tell you, that whether he spoke
this of himself, or whether he was prompted by others, that he is in the
Strictest sense a Calumniator and a Liar. I confess these words are harsh, and
are not ordinarily heard in the Conversation of Gentlemen. But if any thing can
provoke this Impertinent Accuser to do himself Justice, I think it may warm him
into some generous behavior, to be so represented to his Great Patron. If he
patiently endure the Character of a Liar, I do not envy him the honor of his
invention; if not, he will let me know who was his Informer, as in justice and
common sense he is obliged to do. And this is not answered by Writing of
Pamphlets, and gathering together several incoherent Stories and Probabilities,
but by an ingenuous acknowledgment of his wilful and unaccountable Forgery;
for when he re-examines his Evidence, he will discover his own Precipitation
and rashness. I gave occasion to no such Calumny, no not by the least
inadvertence or indiscretion: And it is very hard to oblige me at this time of
day to the Drudgery of Vindicating my self from Infamous Libels.

You say in your Preface, that they are two very Learned Men. Men may be mad
without too much Learning: I wish their civility and good breeding had been
equal to their Learning. Nor is it a pin matter to me how Learned they are: I
am sure they are very Impertinent to Libel a Man, upon the Public Theater of
the Nation, to whom they are as great Strangers in all Regards (either as to
his life or accomplishments) as I am to the Emperor of Morocco.

However, as far as I am concerned, it is needless to baulk any of their
Arguments. The question between me and your two very Learned Gentlemen is not
any Common Place of Theology, but a matter of fact. I let pass all their
Virulent Reproaches, that seem to be occasioned by the Book that they undertake
to refute.

The first Argument to prove me the Author of it is, that I did not keep my own
Secret. Of this you very kindly put me in mind in your Letter, dated the 13th.
of April. But how does he prove this? Very well, after his way; He says, that
it got abroad among many People, that I thought my self qualified for such an
Undertaking. Does it become a Man that sets up for an Accurate Philosopher to
proceed upon Whisper, Hearsay, and Surmise, to the ruin of his Neighbor's
honor and reputation. Was not he obliged to give the World a plain account of
the Authority and honesty of him, upon whose testimony he built his Defamatory
Libel. He must needs know, that a Malicious inconsiderate Liar sets thousands
of People by the Ears every moment, especially such Informers as may be
reasonably supposed our two Authors have conversed with. They heard such a
thing, and there was no more necessary in their opinion to make one the Author
of such a Pamphlet. But if a Report of this nature can bear the Superstructure
of such a calumny, Men might have nothing else to do than to Write
Vindications; they must run from one corner to another, without intermission,
to publish their Defenses and Apologies against every Rude and Impertinent
Libel.

The Philosophers advise us to be slow and wary in Drawing Consequences; yet,
it seems, they have lost all their pains upon your two Precipitate Authors. We
ought to treat no Man otherwise than the Golden Rule of our Blessed Savior
allows; Quod tibi fieri non vis, etc. There is nothing so Treacherous or fails
a Man sooner than a transient Whifling report;

Tam ficti pravique tenax quam Nuncia Very. But perhaps the next Argument is
more Conclusive and Solid. He is very sure the Author is a Scot, because for
positive he always Writes possitive. To this he adds some Elegencies, or rather
Improprieties that he thinks are peculiar to the Scots, viz. The Men
above-told, the Reason above-told. And again; it makes all my flesh to creep.

From these he concludes the Author not only to be Scot, but a Highlander. Now,
upon supposition that these were Idioms of the Scottish Dialect, his ridiculous
conjecture would scarcely make up a probable Argument, if there was but one
Scots-man in the Isle of Britain: But when there are so many thousands of them,
his guesses vanish into a Dream, and proves that there are greater flaws in his
reasoning faculty, than there are Improprieties in the Scottish Dialect. May
not those Foreigners, who learn to speak English, put their own Idiotisms in
English words? Are there not some English that frequently converse with those,
as well as with the Scots? Are there not several Counties in the Northern parts
of England, that differ in their Phrase as well as in their Account from those
in Kent, and Middlesex? Are there not some other People in the World, besides
the Scots, who have different Phrases and Idioms from the English? And have not
they also a dependence upon the Monarch of Great Britain, as well as the Scots?
and this may oblige them frequently to reside in or about the City of London.

Let our very learned Philosophers view his own Argument again; he may easily
find he has not been so slow and cautious in drawing his Consequences as he
ought to be. Are there not some Englishmen, that, for reasons best known to
themselves, now and then make use of Scottish Phrases? If any of these
suppositions hold true, his Argument, to prove me the Author of such a Book, is
the most precarious, weak, incoherent Conjecture that ever dropped from a Man's
Pen.

But, Sir Robert, I have more to say to this Argument, it is this; that one of
your Authors takes those words to be Idioms of the Scottish Dialect, which no
Scotch-man ever heard of: For my part, neither in their Writings nor
Conversation did I ever remark any such Phrases, as he sets down for Arguments,
to prove his Author to be a Scotch-man; such as these, the Man above told, the
reason above told. And the difference between the Scottish and the English
Language, is not in those imaginary Improprieties, that he fancies may
distinguish the first from the last, but rather in this, that We of Scotland,
(besides a different Accent) retain a great many of the Old Saxon words, which
are not now used in England: But they that understand the English Language
accurately, understand also those Saxon words, some of which may be met with,
in the Old Version of the Psalms, daily read in the Churches. And if he be so
squeamish as not to read that Version of the Psalms; he may read Milton's
Poems, and Chaucer's Works, where he may see many of those words that
distinguish the Scottish Idiom, from that which is now used in England. The
difference is not to the misplacing of words, but in the Phrase it self, the
first may proceed from the inadvertence of an Author, either Scottish or
English: And it is a very bad Argument to prove that the Author of such a Book
is not an Englishman, if I meet with an unusual word, or an impropriety in his
compositions. There is no fixed true Standard for the English Language, and
therefore every day we see new Words, as new Books do appear; and several of
them so harsh in the sound, and so little used, that immediately they vanish
unto their former darkness and solitude. Thus have I read in a late Book the
word (impunibly) (and in a Book written against Mysteries too.) But I suppose
no Man will reasonably conclude, that the Author was either Scot or English,
only from this unusual word.

To come a little nearer: If I might venture to reason, as your Philosophers
seems to do, I would prove that the Author of the History of Religion is not an
Englishman; for in the 96th Page, I meet with a word which very few
Englishmen know or ever heard; for there the Author says, that the mistakes
and opinions which proceed from innocence do not make Men guilty, that is to
say, from their weakness and ignorance.

How much weakness and ignorance there may be implied in the word (innocence) I
cannot tell; it may have in it all the Mysteries of Vid. Seld. de Dis. Syris.
Abracadabra, for any thing I know; for I never read it before. Nor do I admire
the word (Impersonation) in the Author of the Charge of Socinianism, no more
than I do the word (Innocence) both of them want Authority and Custom, to
preserve them from being banished out of ordinary Conversation.

Perhaps your Author built his Confidence, not so much upon the strength of his
critical Remarks, as upon the Authority of his Informer; yet, to mortify him
and his choleric Neighbor; I may be allowed to tell you, that the Author of
the Book, Entitled, The Charge of Socinianism against Dr. Tillotson, was never
in Scotland; so far from being beyond the River of Tay, that he never was on
the other side of Tweed, nor any City or Village in that Ancient Kingdom.

One of your Authors tells us, (speaking of Mr. Atterbury) that Students do not
hold themselves obliged to reason accurately and closely, as other (common) Men
must, but, by leaping over some intervening suitable Propositions, may skip
from Tumult to King Pipin; or, what ^s as good, from Historian to Scorner.

One would think, that the distance between an unusual Phrase, and a
Scotch-Highland, is as wide as that between Tumult and King Pipin; or that
between an Historian and a Scorner. I see, that Students are not the only Men
that reason loosely, and incoherently; there are other Sparks who pretend to
digest nothing but Self-evident Propositions, and accurate Infallible
Deductions from clear Premises; and they sometimes mistake the Mark as much as
the former, who are said to owe their false reasonings to dark keeping, and
other Infelicities of their Education. I cannot perceive Vid. Preface of the
Twofold Vindic.
how the Highlander was forced to make up the Comical part of the Book. I
suppose Buchanan and Cameran were greater Critics than the two Philosophers;
and they were both of them Scotch-Highlanders. But when I consider the
petulance and temper of our Authors; I am afraid, the naming of any of our
Countrymen, to remove their Mistakes, may savor more meanness than
Condescension.

His observation that the flesh of a Highlander creeps, is as New to me as the
Phrase: I am sure, there are several of them, that he thus Lampoons, would be
very apt to make his Flesh tremble, if they knew him, and that withal he
continued obstinate in his scurrilous rudeness. National Reproaches make up the
divertisement used Witticisms of Porter's and Buffoon's. I know no Country but
may boast of its Heroes and Excellent Men; And they, who are forward to make
comparisons, are never reckoned into the number; they are Knights of a lower
Order, such as pass all their Campaigns in Taverns and other places not sit to
be named. In these, there may be dangers; but, I humbly suppose, very little
Honor.

It Is true, our Soil is not so fertile as the more Southern parts of the Island:
Our Sun seems to be sick for several Months in the Year; nevertheless, the
common Character of the Scot's prae fervidum Scotorum Ingenium, may be thought
(generally speaking) more true than that which he is pleased to bestow upon his
imaginary Adversary, Viz. That his Northern frozen head could not perceive the
Socinian Subtilties. I thought they were a Sect that pretended to advance
nothing (nay, allow of nothing) but plain and undisputable Propositions; that
they were so slow and cautious in drawing Consequences, that nothing short of
Mathematical Evidence could satisfy them: And when I was reading the Book that
occasioned this Letter, I meet with the following words; For as to report and
the Whispers of those Sagacious Men, who so certainly know all Authors, they
are so often mistaken, that, except it be here and there a Student, no body heed:
them, or rather every body abhors them.

Yet, this very sagacious Philosopher; this very Man of Evidence and
Demonstration, without any other proof, than a slender Whisper or an Impudent
lie, finds out all Authors, and knows them exactly, as if he had been
conversant with them from their Infancy. But if his Conjecture stumble upon a
Highlander, then such a contemptible Creature must be crushed to death. But Men
of valor use not to draw their Swords at so a great distance, they approach
their Enemy with less noise: and they that pretend to Philosophy trust more to
their Arguments than to their Fury and Indignation. It is certainly so and so
as he concludes; it can be no other than such a one; there are Improprieties in
the Book, and none else could be guilty of them but that one Man; and then, by
such accurate reasoning, his creeping Witticisme must get abroad. I would
advise this unknown Gentleman once more to consult the trifling Informer that
gave him his intelligence, and ask him but a few plain questions, viz. Whether
he had his information from me? Whether he himself is familiarly acquainted
with me? Whether, after all he be a Man of any Honor or Justice? Whether he is
resolved to appear to make good the Charge? One may reasonably presume, that a
vid. page 51 of the Towfold Vindication.
very Learned Author would not be so very Confident, unless the Authorities,
that he built upon, were strong enough to support the weight of his Insolence
and Buffoonry.

The next Author treats me with the same virulence and contempt that the former
does; but he may appear, even to himself, a very ridiculous Fellow, that, with
so much wit, undertakes the defense of such particular Propositions as I my
self lately proved (I hope plainly enough) against another tribe very different
from the Socinianism, in a small Treatise entitled, An Enquiry into the New
Opinions, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. And this Book appeared, with my name, a considerable time before
his scurrilous Libel was Printed. I instance but in one particular, which I
advance in that Essay, and it is this; that our Blessed Savior complied with
those Rituals in the Worship of God among the Jews, which had their Rise and
Original only from human Authority: Nay, I think the Opposite Doctrine, that
allows of nothing in the Solemnities of Worship, but what is founded upon
express Divine Institution, to be the source of all Bigottry and Enthusiasm.
God is to be Worshipped, and that in Unity and Society. If this be allowed,
several Rites and Ceremonies must be Practiced and enjoined, which have no
Institution but in the Prudence and determination of our Superiors. If the
angry Gentleman read this little Book that I have named, he may then be more
able to pass his Decretory Sentence, how far the Contemptible Professor is of
Mr. Knox's Principles. He or his Neighbor, (I do not now remember which of the
two) not only lashes me as being tainted with those Principles of Sedition and
Confusion, that were so warmly Propagated by Mr. Knox, but he says, that all
the Episcopal Clergy of Scotland, though they forsook Mr. Calvin and Mr. Knox in
the question about Church Government, yet, in points of Doctrine, they have
varied nothing at all from Mr. Knox Author of the Reformation there.

If this Man's knowledge in Theology was equal to his skill in our History, he
would certainly make the saddest figure that ever appeared, that is to say, he
would be all over Innocence in its true Original and Insignificant Notion, so
much below a Cipher that there is no Room left for him in Arithmetic.
Therefore he may be advised to let the Clergy of Scotland and their Doctrine
alone; they are not yet so low, after all the oppressions and contradictions of
sinners that they have endured, as to want an Apology against the Railings of
an inconsiderate Calumniator, who knows as little the Persons, that he thus
bespatters, as he does the Author of the Charge of Socinianism, etc. Let him
read Dr. Forbes Bishop of Edinbourg his Considerationes Modestes, and then let
him tell me whether he was in all points of Doctrine of Mr. Calvin or Mr.
Knox's Sentiments: And he was a Person whose Character and Learning was more
likely to make Disciples amongst the Clergy of Scotland, than the two Reformers
that he is pleased to name. Nevertheless, Calvin ought to be mentioned with
honor, because of the purity of his style, and other extraordinary
accomplishments.

Some of our Clergy may have their differences amongst themselves about the
Doctrine of Predestination and Freewill, but then this is no reproach peculiar
to Scotland; these are Common Places in Divinity that divide (not Churches from
Churches but) Men from Men. Those questions have been disputed in all Ages, and
will remain dark to the end of the World, even to the Socinians themselves, who
pretend to banish all mysteries. I believe the Infinite Incomprehensible Power
of God, and that he is the first cause of all things; in him we live, move, and
have our Being. I believe him also infinitely Good, and that he loves us better
than we can do ourselves, and that he governs the World by Laws just, holy, and
excellent. I Worship him under this Idea of Original Goodness and Power; and I
am very sure, that none of the true and necessary deductions, from these two
great Attributes, can be at variance with one another. If I, (who am but Dust
and Ashes,) neither can see, nor happily explain their agreement in all Minute
instances, it is my Ignorance and Weakness. The Good I do is from God, the Evil
altogether from my self: And this is a short Confession of what I think all Men
ought to adhere to, in those Intricate and abstruse questions of Predestination
and Freewill.

I am not now inclined to enter into any particular disquisition concerning the
Original of Sacrifices; nor had I ever the least thought of writing
Animadversions on any Sermons Published by the Late Archbishop Tillotson; most
of them as were Printed before the Revolution I read with great satisfaction;
and those that since appeared I only read some of them, as I met with them
accidentally in the Booksellers-shops, being not in an humor to buy New Books,
when I knew not how long I could keep such as I had formerly purchased.

Then your Philosopher recommends to me that I should read Spencer and Outram.
I love him the better that he converses with such Authors, who are as much
above the Common Level of Systematick Writers as their Learning exceeds his own
modesty and good nature.

The former Author draws a Picture of me in little. I am not concerned much to
view it, though the Lineaments and Features had been more true: but as they are
extremely ugly and extravagantly false, he may lay it up in his own Closet, to
entertain himself with it, when he is in his Hypochondriack fits. The first
strokes of his Tableau are Historical, and terminate only in my Person, and
such as the Author of the Charge of Socinianism is not at all concerned in. In
the mean time, I think my self obliged to give him no account of any part of my
life, unless I knew him better: And if I did, perhaps I might still continue in
the same resolution. He accuses me to have charged the late Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Bishop of Sarum, and the Author of the History of Religion
of Socinianism: And he adds this most accurate Reason, because I mistake the
Doctrine of the Church and the Arguments she uses for the Socinian Doctrine
and Reasons.

Whether any of those Gentlemen now named were, or are Socinians, is more than
ever I intend to enquire. It is a very new thing to me to hear that the Church
uses Arguments for the Socinian Doctrine and Reasons.

It is true; one of his eminent Authors accused me of being the Author of the
Charge of Socinianism, in the Month of December Vid. Vind. of the Bishop of 8.
p^inted for Mr. Chiswel. page 105 106.
last; a mercenary malice and profound ignorance were but some of the virtues
he allowed me. I heartily forgive him those precipitate ramblings I have
suffered since that time some things more terrible than the disdainful strokes
of his Pen, I am apt to think that his Credulily led him into this mistake. It
is the unhappy lot of most, who are advanced to Eminent. Stations, to be
haunted with, Sycophants, false Accusers, Liars, and Tale-bearers. If they
guard against the malignity of such Vermin, their Virtue is more than ordinary;
and if they do not hear with both their ears they are certain plagues to human
Society.

But one of the most surprising and impertinent strokes of your Author's Libel
is, that he charges me to have accused your self of ingratitude to K. James,
for I never heard of your name until this Book was put into my hands by one of
my Friends: And I am as much qualified to write the lives of all the Irish
Kings before the Conquest, as I am to give any tolerable account of any part of
your self. As for your Book entitled, the History of Religion, I never saw it
until the 6th of April 1696. So far have I been from writing any Animadversions
upon it. And if did, they should be very short. And I had rather communicate
them to your self, than print against an Author that I have not the honor to
be acquainted with. The Book seems to be designed against (...) Persecution,
and mystery. The word (Preist-craft) is of late become very fashionable in the
mouths of some; who are no great Patterns for Philosophical Gentlemen to
imitate. If by Priestcraft is intended the sacred employment of a certain
Order of Men, who, by their Office and Character are obliged to superimend the
Solemnities of Public Worship: Such Men are no less necessary to the
Preservation of the State than to the Administrations of Religion. And the
Persons so employed, (even in their Lowest ebb of Interest and Reputation,) are
too strong to be attacked by any private Gentleman in Europe. I argue now from
what is Present and Visible, and not from the more divine and excellent
considerations of Religion, because, what is felt and seen is much more valued
and considered; than the Original Distinction between Good and Evil, or what
may be pleaded from the terrors of an Invisible State. I confess the Argument
is not so Philosophical and Sublime, but it is such a one as now I offer to
your own consideration how far it ought to regulate the Practice of any Man,
who lives in a Nation, where the Priests are so able to assert; from the best
Topics, their Distinction and Character, and the Priesthood it self is guarded
by so many Laws.

As for Persecution, I hope, I am as much an enemy to it as any other in the
World. But since Conscience may be pretended when faction and sedition are
intended, I think, the State may be left to judge for it self in all things
relating to its own preservation; and therefore the Good Laws, that have been
made, to preserve the Beauty and Order of God's House; may be reasonably and
charitably put in execution to prevent such Confusions as must needs follow,
where Giddiness and Enthusiasm are upper most. We may suffer hard things from
Ecclesiastical Laws that are severe; but human nature it self, common sense,
and civility are banished where a Boundless Skepticism prevails.

Arbitrary Power is most frequently declaimed against by such as are invested
with no Power: But it is very hard to oblige the Sovereign Powers of the World
to give an account of all their Actions; and if they did, the Body of the
People can never perceive the Reasonableness of what they do, even when their
measures are most Divine and unquestionably just. If I should say that I know
no reason why I am committed to the Gate House, I would be thought very
Impertinent, though I should stumble upon the truth. No Governors are obliged to
let every body know what they do at all times.

If there are mysteries in the Government of the World, it may be more
reasonably presumed that that there mysteries in Religion which we ought to
believe, though we can never fully grasp nor comprehend them. When Men have done
their best, there is some thing dark in the object of Faith. If we have good
reason to believe, that the Revelation, which contains the Articles of our
Religion, proceeds originally from God, and that we do not mistake the plain
signification of those Words, in which it is conveyed, we may, with the greater
safety, believe that such and such Propositions are true, though they be above
the comprehension of our Reason. We cannot say, that we fully understand the
Essence of any the least Created being, far less the Infinite and Eternal Mind,
who made the World and governs it. We believe, that his power is beyond our
thoughts and Incomprehensible; but can any Man confidently say, that he himself
has a full and adequate Idea of what is Infinite or Incomprehensible?

Sir, I have kept you too long on this subject. I would humbly entreat either
or both of the two Calumniators to be a little more wary in their Libels. It Is
an easy thing for them to put it to a fair Trial whether I can read Greek or
Latin, or whether either of them can Speak any other Language than what his
Mother taught him. As for the reflections thrown upon the Universities of
Scotland, those Societies are above the Censures of an unknown Trifler; his
tongue is an Unruly Evil, it is full of Deadly Poison. I cannot tell how Jam.
3. Chap. 5. 8. 9.
often he blesses God with it; his greatest talent is to curse Men made after the
Similitude of God.

One of them recommends to me two very good Books; and I thank him for his
kindness. I think, he himself had need to read over again Crellius Ethics; And
if that be troublesome, he may cast his eye upon a most excellent Sermon
against Evil-speaking, Published by one of his eminent Authors. And now, Sir,
your two Philosophers may ask one another, whether they know the Person they
have so impudently Calumniated? Whether the Authority they proceeded upon be so
firm as to bear the weight of their notorious Forgeries and Lies? Whether ever
they heard that there was any Professor in any University of Scotland at any
time, since their first foundation, so ignorant as they represent me to be. But
if they built their Calumnious stories upon the Authority of one of their
Eminent Bishops, I may be allowed to tell them, that I was already at some
pains, in the Month of January last, to undeceive their Author as to this
Calumny. Then there was a Libel Published against me; and it seems it was below
his Eminence to retract an injury he had done to so mean a Person. It is much
more easy eloquently to extol the Morals of Christianity, than to practice
self-denial and humility: Pride, Popular Applause, and Vanity do animate Men to
the first; but nothing short of a profound Resignation to the will of our
Blessed Savior can terrible us to practice the latter.

I take it for granted that my greatest Accuser is now convinced, that I never
wrote any such Book as the Charge of Socinianism, etc.] Yet because the same
Libel is again Propagated by the industry and malice of two unknown Slanderers,
I think it fit to subjoin to this Letter the Advertisement, that I was forced,
(some Months ago in to Publish in my own Defense: And he that reads the
Bishop's Vindication, Printed for page 105, 106.
Mr. Chiswel in St. Paul's Churchyard, may easily understand what is either
expressed not insinuated in the following Paper. There are some words in it
which might have been spared, but if compared with the Character bestowed upon
me, perhaps many more might have been added, without any Consure from the
Impartial World. If the open injustice, that I met with, made me then so free,
the peevishness, which may be occasioned by imprisonment, may extenuate the
Reprinting of it, since the Loads of Reproach thrown upon me, by your two
scurrilous Champions, are but some Larger Annotations on the Original
Character, in which I was then represented in such taking colors to the view
of the Nation.

Sir, I now make an end of this Letter, and I presume to ask but the same
question that I humbly desired you formerly to consider, namely, what
reparations you think are due to an innocent Stranger so unworthily abused. I
forbear to aggravate the Injustice that is done to me in your Preface, as well
as in the other parts of the Book, for I believe you wrote it carelessly, and
you thought that your two Hereos were as infallible in their censures, as they
appeared to you accurate in their Reasonings. I heartily forgive you; and I
wish you may be, for the time to come, more critically nice in examining those
Reports that have no other beginning than Malice, Nonsense, and Impertinence.
Sir, I am in all Sincerity and due respect,

Your very humble Servant, A. MONRO.

THE following Advertisement was Printed in the Month of January last, to
undeceive such as might be imposed upon by those Libels which then charged me
with the same Calumny that is now sufficiently removed by this Letter.

AN ADVERTISEMENT By A. M. D. D.
WHereas it has been talked by some idle and impertinent People, that I am the
Author of a certain Book, entitled, The Charge of Socinianism against Doctor.
Tillotson, etc. I think it fit to declare, that I never was the Author of any
such Book, charging him or any other with Socinianism. And I further declare,
That I was never enticed, prompted, or encouraged by any Man (dead or alive) to
write any thing of that nature. And I am ready to take my Oath, in the most
solemn manner, to confirm the truth of all this, if duly required thereunto.

When I have said so much, I think I am but little concerned to answer any
Libel intended against me upon this occasion, in which I am sensibly struck at,
by some distinguishing innuendo's, (though not particularly named,) as the
Vindicator himself acknowledges. The several reflections, in a short digression
of a late Book, levelled at me, are but some common places of Reviling, which
only proves, That the Author was very angry. One may venture to draw this
Consequence from what is said Page 105. and 106. of his Vindication, without
the imputation of either Ignorance or Malice. No modest Man loves to be put
upon the unpleasant Task of defending himself against Reproaches of this
Nature. It is barbarous to invade a Man's good Name, upon slender and foolish
Surmises. The Rules of Humanity oblige us to more Compassion and good Nature:
But most Men had rather talk of Generosity than practice it. If we truly
understood the Precepts of Natural Religion, we would be the more prepared
heartily to believe that which is Revealed.

It is a great Infelicity to continue for any considerable time, under the
dominion of a brutal Passion: And it is very difficult to hide it, where once
it has got the Ascendant. Art and Memory may give a Man the slip, and Nature
will appear in its own Colors. It is uneasy to act a Part, even when we are
much accustomed to it. I thank God, I was never made a Tool to serve the
Passions or Interests of any particular Man or Party: I still retain the
liberty of my Thoughts and Actions under all my Disasters. If I am obliged to
my Friends, I am resolved to be Grateful: I am very sure, none of them gave my
Enemies any Commission to upbraid me with their kindnesses. Cruel Mockings do
ordinarily attend the State of the Oppressed: And Philosophy, as well as
Justice has deserted the Earth. What St. Paul has said of the Primitive
Christians is, in a peculiar manner, true of the Clergy of Scotland, if there
be not another Life, They are of all Men the most miserable. I pray God they
may possess their Souls in patience.

For my part, I love my Solitude and Retirement; and the oldest Books in
Divinity better than all the later Essays and Explications. When my
Ecclesiastical Superiors inform me, That my endeavors to serve the Church, are
impertinent or unseasonable, I cheerfully submit to their Authority, as I have
always done, ^n their and my) more prosperous Circumstances.

What is observed by my Accuser is certainly true, viz. That some Men have an
Art of Writing to disparage the side they write for. For this very reason, some
hasty Productions have been committed to the Flames; and others, which perhaps
deserve the same Illuminations, are suppressed.

If he had left me half dead under the Cloud of general Strictures, there might
be some hopes of a Resurrection; but he thought it convenient to set me in a
better Light: I must be ferreted from one Dominutive unto another, until the
Multitude fix their Eyes upon me. A Triumphal Arch must be raised, where such a
contemptible Creature was slain; and therefore he adds, That it is probable,
the Party will desire their Journey-man to forbear writing, and reserve himself
for Fighting, in which he is better practiced.

One that reads this last stroke may be made to believe, that some time or
other I have fallen into Quarrels and Contentions, very unbecoming a Presbyter,
whereas the true story, that is thus disguised into an Invective, is no more,
than that I was persuaded by a Relation of mine (then Lieutenant Colonel to my
Lord Dumbarton's Regiment) when I was very Young, to go abroad with him: I
complied with his Invitation: I stayed in France about two Years and a half:
And though I was Listed in that Regiment, I was under no restraints that might
divert me from any part of Learning that I had a mind to: That Scene was
quickly over; I returned to my (...) Country and former Studies. This innocent
(...) of my Life made up a part of the Presb^ Libel at Edinbourgh, Anno 1690.
and it appeare^ (...) so ridiculous, that I thought it should never be revived
again by any Man thereafter.

To have been a Soldier, is a Reproach only in the Opinion of some few Men,
who understand Libelling better than the discipline of War. The Greatest in all
Ages thought, that, the Liberal Sciences, and the knowledge of Arms are not at
such odds with one another. Julius Scaliger and Monsieur Des Carts, (to name
no more) were Soldiers. The truth is, I am not ambitious of being called a
Journey-man: And I am surprised to find so mean a World placed so near another,
that is so usual and so manly. Some Men forget nothing but the Decorum due to
their Character: It is fitter for such to give hard Names, than for me to
return an Answer. Notwithstanding of all this, I thank God, I was never obliged
nor inclined to Fight, nor yet engaged in any Rencontre that could make me
incapable to serve at the Altar.

It is no part of my business to know or enquire what Books are written against
my Accuser or any of his Friends and Acquaintance dead or alive. I think it
very hard to publish scandalous Reports against a Presbyter, before he is
either heard or examined. The Laws of Nature and Nations condemn this practice:
And the Evangelical Canon requires, that no Accusation ought to be received
against an Elder, but before two or three Witnesses.

Clandestine Libels are more Malicious than when a Man is particularly named.
It is a sad Misfortune to be made the Property of every little Intelligencer.
If groundless Stories, and unexamin'd Falsehoods are published for Truths, what
then comes of the Peace of Human Societies? I pray God convince all Men, that
are engaged in such Designs, of their Error and Injustice; and in the mean time
deliver me from the Malice of such as I never provoked.

A Copy of Sir Robert Howard's Letter to me, dated the 14th. of April 1696.
being an Answer to my first unprinted Letter.
SIR,
YOur Letter found me very ill in a sit of the Gout, yet I was unwilling
(notwithstanding my pain) to seem so uncivil as to give you no Answer. In
short, Sir, the two Treatises were sent to me, bebefore they went to the Press,
to peruse; And by reason of the kindness showed to me and the great abilities I
saw in them, I prefix a short preface to them, having also the opportunity to
say something to Mr. Atterbury, who, in a Sermon at Whitehall before the Queen,
had ventured to treat me very ill. But when these Papers were brought, I
neither knew nor was told from whom they came: But the first seems to say that
you did not keep your own Secret, but that it got abroad among many that you
were the Author. And the second sets down your name, and tells you at the
beginning that I hardly knew his face. This, I confess made me take it for
granted that it was yours. But if it is not, which I believe upon your
affirmation, I confess, I think, they ought to ask your pardon, which if ever I
know them I shall invite them to do. For your Printed Paper, there is not a
little in it that concerns any thing I ever knew or said. As to your Person, I
am so far from having any quarrel or animosity, that I am rather sorry that
this Letter should find you in restraint. I wish you all freedom and remain,

SIR, Your humble Servant, To. HOWARD.
April 13 1696.
FINIS.

