A LETTER To a FRIEND, Giving an Account of all the Treatises that have been
published, With Relation to the Present Persecution Against the Church of
SCOTLAND.

Lam. I. iv. The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn feasts:
all her gates are desolate: her Priests sigh: her virgins are afflicted, and
she is in bitterness.

And verse xii. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by?

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball, over against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1692.

A LETTER To a FRIEND, etc.
SIR,
I Don't much wonder, that the present State of the Church of Scotland should
be a little surprising to you, at your return from your Travels beyond Seas, it
being so very much changed from what it was some Years ago, when you were last
in Scotland, that the bare reflection upon it must needs occasion Grief and
Sadness to any who are endued with the least sense of Religion or Morality. The
Church was then in a flourishing condition, her Authority and Discipline in
such force and vigor, that a Sentence of Excommunication was even terrible to
the most wicked and profane; her Pastors were Men of Judgment, Learning, and
Prudence, and of such unblameable Lives and Conversations, that they quite
stopped the Mouths of their calumniating and malicious Enemies. Whereas now the
Scene of Affairs is so much altered, that the Church is made level with the
ground, and her Adversaries take pleasure in the rubbish thereof; the
Apostolical Order of Bishops totally subverted, and the greatest part of the
Episcopal Clergy barbarously driven from their respective Churches, many of
which are at present void and destitute of Pastor, and their Flocks left
desolate, like Sheep wandering without a Sheepherd; others of their Churches are
invaded by Men who can lay no claim to that sacred Function of the holy
Ministry, having never received Ordination from those Persons who are duly
authorized to confer it: and their pretenses for Learning, and the other
Qualifications necessary for that Office are so very little, that the greatest
part of them have never had occasion to apply themselves to those Studies, but
have been all along trained up in Mechanic Employments, and have now leapt
directly from the Shop into th Pulpit, where they exercise their Gifts at such
a rate, and entertain the^^ Auditors with such nauseous Stuff Vid. The
Presbyterian Eloquence lately printed.
, (sometimes intermixed with blasphemous Sentences) that instead of advancing
the Christian Religion, it is to be feared, they have propagated more Atheism
and Irreligion in the Nation, than many Years will be able to root out.

And since your Curiosity prompts you to a strict enquiry into the Ways and
Methods by which this surprising Revolution was brought about, I shall, in
order to your satisfaction, direct you to all those Treatises that have been
published on this occasion, where you may find an exact and impartial account
of the present Persecution raised against the Church of Scotland; how it was at
first contrived and set on foot, after the landing of the Prince of Orange here
in England in the Year 1688, and how it has been managed and carried on even
till this time, with all the Fury and Violence imaginable by the Presbyterian
Faction in that Kingdom.

The first Discourse, I think, which was published on this Subject was, A
Memorial for his Highness the Prince of Orange, in relation to the Affairs of
Scotland; together with the Address of the Presbyterian Party in that Kingdom
to his Highness, and some Observations on that Address. By two Persons of
Quality.

This Memorial was wrote sometime before the Prince of Orange was proclaimed
King of England, and the Author's design in it, was to inform the Prince, how
seditiously and rebelliously the Presbyterians in Scotland had behaved
themselves under the Reigns of K. James VI. K. Charles I. and K. Charles II.
how in the Reign of K. Charles I. they overturned not only the Government of
the Church, but usurped likewise that of the State, rescinded all the Royal
Prerogatives, and murdered Thousands of the King's best Subjects, besides the
many other Barbarities which they committed under the pretense of Religion. And
from hence the Author takes occasion to show the Prince, how much his Interest
obliged him to suppress that insolent Party, whose Principles and Practices
were not only inconsistent with the Monarchy, but even destructive of all human
Society; and that on the contrary, Episcopacy being necessary for the support
of the Monarchy, he ought to make it his chief care and concern to maintain and
support it; and the rather, because he had so solemnly engaged his Honor for
the Defense thereof; for having published in his Declaration, That his design
of coming over was to support the Laws of the Nation, he tells him, That he was
therefore in Honor bound to support Episcopacy, it being confirmed by Twenty
Seven Parliaments of that Kingdom.

The Observations upon the Presbyterians Address to the Prince of Orange are
done by another Pen: They sufficiently expose the Contradiction and
Inconsistency that always appears in the Actions of that Party. In their
Address to the P. of Orange, they complain heavily of their Oppression and
Suffering under K. James's Government, that They were lying in the Mouth of the
Lion, while Refuge failed, and when they looked on their right and left Hands,
there was no Man found to pity them, till the Lord raised up his Highness for
their Deliverance. And yet notwithstanding these heavy and grievous Complaints,
we find that in their Address to K. James, they render him their humble and
hearty Thanks, for putting a stop to their long and sad Sufferings for
Nonconformity; and they acknowledge the receipt of Favors from him, valuable
above all earthly Comforts. Nay, so little reason have they to complain of
Persecution from him, that it is known how the leading Men of that Faction were
only caressed and cajoled by the then Ministers of State to a very high degree,
and preferred to Places of great Trust in the Nation. And they themselves were
then so sensible of these Obligations, that out of Gratitude they offered to
use their Interest for carrying on the Designs at that time set on foot by the
Papists for promoting of Popery in these Dominions.

It is very well known to any who were then in Scotland, how eminently they
complied with the Dispensing Power in taking an Indulgence from the Papists,
how they magnified K. James upon that account, as the best of Kings that ever
reigned; and how active some of the most pragmatical Men of that Party were, in
engaging all of their own persuasion to promote a Relaxation of the Penal Laws,
and in persuading such Members of Parliament as they could influence, to go
along with the Designs of the Court therein. And this is so notorious, that one
of their own Preachers Dr. Hardy, at Edinburgh.
was severely checked and rebuked by the Party, because much about that time,
in a Sermon preached before their Provincial Assembly at Edinburgh, he
signified his dislike of these Proceedings, and laid before them the dangerous
Consequences of the same, how fatal such Methods would at last prove to the
Protestant Religion in these Nations. I could here entertain you with a great
many Instances of their Behavior under K. James's Government, and of their
ready complyances with all the Popish Designs then set on foot, but that I
think it altogether superfluous, since one of their own Party Mr. Shields in
his Remarks upon the Presbyterian Addresses to K. James, at the end of his Hind
let loose.
has sufficiently exposed them to the World upon this account, and shown how
their Practices at that time were directly contrary to their former Principles,
and that their Behavior was such, as did rather become Sycophants and Court
Parasites, than those who assumed the Title of Ministers of the Gospel. And his
Accusation is so very true, that they have never as yet attempted to answer
him, or to vindicate themselves from those many Scandals and Reproaches
wherewith he so justly charges them; nay, on the contrary, they are so
conscious of their own Guilt, that in their Address to the P. of Orange, they
very very frankly own it, and make a long Apology to his Highness for it.

The next thing that appeared abroad with relation to our Scotch Affairs, was a
short Letter entitled, The present State and Condition of the Clergy and
Church of Scotland.

It gave us but a very short and brief, tho a true, account of the many
Affronts and Indignities that were done to the Episcopal Clergy of that
Kingdom, by the Presbyterians there; but after having enumerated some few
Instances of their atrocious Cruelties, such as the killing of one Minister,
the daubing of another Face with Excrements, and the inhumane usage of the
Wife of a third, tho in Childbed, he at last concludes, That it was beyond the
power of words to express their Misery to that degree as they suffered it. This
Letter had not been very long published, when there comes out a scurrilous
Pamphlet, under pretense of an Answer to it; it was called A brief and true
account of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland, occasioned by the
Episcopalians since the Year 1660. being a Vindication of their Majesty's
Government in that Kingdom, relating to the Proceedings against the Bishops and
Clergy there. With some Animadversions upon a Libel entitled, The present
State and Condition of the Clergy and Church of Scotland.

The Author of this Pamphlet, instead of answering the Letter, as he pretends,
sums up, and highly aggravates the Punishments that were justly inflicted upon
the Presbyterian Dissenters by the Civil Government, for their frequent
Insurrections and Rebellions against it, and charges the Episcopal Clergy as
the Authors of all their Sufferings upon that account. The Proceedings of the
Civil Magistrate against this rebellious Crew are sufficiently vindicated by a
learned Pen, as I shall afterward inform you. And as for the Behavior of the
Episcopal Clergy, with relation to the Sufferings of these Men, they were so
far from being any ways the Authors of them, that there may be many Instances
given, where the Clergy have interceeded for their Pardon, and actually saved
many of them from the Gallows, which they could not have escaped, had they been
left to the due course of Law: And yet these Men did afterward prove so
ungrateful, that they were the chief Instruments of all the Sufferings and
Persecution which those Clergymen, to whom they owed their Lives and Fortunes,
met with in this late unhappy Revolution of our Church Affairs. And this is
plain in the Case of Sir John Riddel and Mr. Chisholm, Minister at Lisly, whom
he was then prosecuting for his Non-complyance; and yet, at the same time,
ingenuously confessed to him, before a good many Witnesses, that he had been
very much obliged to him, and protested he would never have treated him at that
rate, if it had not been Matter of Conscience to him.

This Answer is all over stuffed with so many groundless Reflections and
Aspersions upon the Clergy, and filled with such obscene and scurrillous
Language, without the least semblance of Reason or Argument, that the true way
of answering it, had been to publish to the World a true and impartial History
of the Author's Life and Actions, that by comparing it with his Writings, they
might easily perceive what Credit and Authority they ought to have among all
serious and sober Men. I must confess, I Am a great Enemy to all personal
Reflections in whatever kind of Writings, as knowing how prejudicial they often
are to the Merit of the Cause, and how antichristian it is^ for us to publish
to the World the personal Infirmities of our Brethren, when the Laws of
Religion oblige us rather to cover and conceal them, and to endeavor to
reclaim them by a private and brotherly Admonition; yet when Men do thus divest
themselves of all Morality and Religion, as at this rate, without the least
restraint of Modesty or good Manners, to bespatter the sacred Persons of
Princes and Prelates, I know no other way to deal with them, but either to
oblige them publicly to recant their Calumnies and Aspersions, or at least to
fight them with their own Weapons, and to expose them to the World in their
true Colors, that the unwary and undiscerning Multitude may not be bubbled
into a belief of their malicious Lies and Calumnies.

There was indeed a Reply very soon returned to this Answer, which, I suppose,
did not a little discompose our Author, it giving him a small taste of what
Treatment he might expect, if he should still continue to write at this
extravagant and scurrilous rate. The Title of it is, The Prelatical Churchman
against the Phanatical Kirk-Man, or a Vindication of the Author of the
Sufferings of the Church of Scotland.

This is a short Vindication of such of the Clergy as our Author had attempted
to wound in their Reputation, by his groundless and malicious Aspersions. But
much about this time, or a little before, there was a Discourse published,
which, tho it was not designed as an Answer to this scurrilous Pamphlet, it
having been published before it came abroad, yet contains such Matters of Fact
as do fully answer all the Calumnies of this Accuser, and it relates the
History of the Persecution so impartially, as that it defies the Contradiction
of the most effronted Adversary. It is called, An Account of the present
Persecution of the Church of Scotland, in several Letters.

The occasion and design of this undertaking, was this. When the Presbyterian
Par^y had barbarously and inhumanly treated the Episcopal Clergy of that
Kingdom, when their Rabble had turned out of their Churches by Force and
Violence, above 300 Ministers in the Southern and Western Countries, and had
driven them in the midst of Winter, with their Wives and tender Children, from
their Houses and places of abode; and when they had got such Ministers, as
their Rabble could not reach, deprived of their Livings by a Sentence of their
Civil Judicatories, and by this means had exposed them to all the Miseries of
Poverty and Want; yet all this was not enough to satisfy their implacable
Malice, but after they had thus cruelly treated their Persons at home, they
endeavored to murder them in their Fame and Reputation abroad; for here in
England they industriously printed and dispersed Papers, under the pretense of
giving an account of the Transactions in Scotland at that time, which contained
a number of malicious and bitter Invectives against the deprived Episcopal
Clergy of that Nation, representing many of them to have been deprived for
gross Scandals and Immoralities in their Lives, and impudently denied the many
Affronts and Indignities that were done them by the Rabble; and by this Method
they thought not only to render our Clergy odious to the English Nation, but
also to make the World believe there was no such thing as a Persecution raised
against them, and that all the noise about it was nothing else but the Clamours
and Outcries of a Party disaffected to the Government.

The Episcopal Clergy therefore seeing that these malicious Lies and Calumnies
gained credit daily with People in England, who were altogether Strangers to
these Transactions, and being in a short time sensible how much they suffered
in their Fame and Reputation upon this account (than which nothing ought to be
more dear and sacred to Men of their Prof^ssion); found it altogether necessary
to vindicate themselves from the Aspersions cast upon them by their Enemies,
and to publish a true and impartial Account of their Sufferings, that the World
might not any longer be imposed upon in the History of these Transactions. And
so they published this account of the Persecution in Four Letters, which do
very fully and impartially r^late a great many Matters of Fact concerning the
said Persecution; how it was at first begun by the Rabble in the Western
Shires, how they were animated and enticed thereto by their Pastors and
Teachers, and how at last the Presbyterians having got the Government of the
Kingdom in their hands, did prosecute the Episcopal Clergy in their Civil
Courts with such open Partiality and Injustice, as if they had seemed resolved
never to deny it.

This Treatise no sooner appeared abroad, than People easily saw how much they
had been imposed upon by former Accounts, and being now fully convinced of the
Truth of the Persecution, began to have some Pity and Compassion toward those
Reverend Persons that were thus exposed to the Fury and blind Rage of an
opposite and bigoted Faction. But the restless Spirit of that Party was still
at work to run down this Account of the Persecution as false, and to persuade
the World, that the Matters of Fact related therein had not the least shadow of
Truth in them. However, in a short time their Impudence in denying so boldly
these known Matters of Fact was soon baffled, and they themselves were quite
confounded at the sight of another Treatise which came out very shortly after
the former, viz.

The Case of the present afflicted Clergy in Scotland truly represented. To
which is added for probation, the Attestation of many unexceptionable Witnesses
to every particular, and all the public Acts and Proclamations of the
Convention and Parliament relating to the Clergy. By a Lover of the Church and
his Country. In this Discourse we have some further account of the Proceedings
of the Rabble and Presbyterian Governors against the Clergy; and most of the
particular Matters of Fact, mentioned both in this and the other Treatise, are
so fully attested by many unexceptionable Witnesses, that it gave satisfaction
to the most scrupulous Enquirers, and made the Presbyterians themselves almost
despair of cheating any more into a belief of their Lies and Aspersions. For
here you will find among the Collection of Papers, particular Declarations of the
Outrages and Cruelties committed upon many worthy Ministers and their Families,
owned and subscribed by themselves, and attested by many other Persons of good
Fame, that had the misfortune to be Eyewitnesses to many of their tragical
Sufferings. Our Author has likewise inserted all the public Acts and
Proclamations of the Convention and Parliament, relating to the Clergy, by
reading of which, you will in some measure perceive, with what open Partiality
and Injustice they were treated by the Presbyterian Governors at that time,
even those whose Station and Character did oblige them at least to put on an
outward show of executing Righteousness and Justice in the Land.

A further continuation of the History of this Persecution we have under the
Title of A late Letter concerning the Sufferings of the Episcopal Clergy in
Scotland.

This relates only to the Persecution of such Ministers as lived in the
Presbytery of Stranraver in the Shire of Galloway, of which the former
Treatise had promised us a fuller account, since it was only hinted at there.
Here we have a brief Narrative of the condition of that place for some few
Years before this last Persecution arose; he tells us, in what Peace and
Tranquillity they lived for a considerable time before the Indulgence granted
by K. James; how that before the publishing of that, there were not above two
Dissenters in the whole Presbytery of Stranraver, but all People went
regularly and orderly to Church, nay even the Presbyterian Ministers themselves
were constant hearers of the Episcopal Clergy in their Parish Churches. But no
sooner was this Indulgence proclaimed, than the Presbyterian Ministers erected
separate Congregations, and by infusing seditious Principles into the Minds of
the giddy Multitude, did in a short time transform the Country into a
Wilderness of Savage Beasts. He deduces their History in short till the
commencement of the Persecution against the Clergy, and then informs us of a
great many Barbarities that were committed upon them by the Rabble. I will not
here trouble your Patience with informing you of any of the tragical Stories
related both in this and the former Accounts, but rather advise you to read the
Accounts themselves, where you will find the Presbyterians charged, and that
justly too, with such monstrous Barbarities, as the most savage Infidels would
have been ashamed to commit.

There are two other short Treatises in Print, which, tho they do not
immediately concern the History of the Persecution, yet since they have a
reference to the Principles and Practices of our Scotch Presbyterians, I
thought fit to send you this short Account of them. The first, which was
published a considerable time before the Discourse last mentioned, goes under
this Title, Some Questions resolved concerning Episcopal and Presbyterian
Government in Scotland.

Our Author's design in this Discourse, is to prove that the Presbyterian
Government was not by Law settled for many Years after the Protestant Religion
had the legal Establishment in that Kingdom, and that it was never settled in
the Church of Scotland, without restraint from tumultuous times; all which he
unanswerably proves from our Records of Parliament and our best Historians; and
further shows, that even at present, it is very far from being agreeable to the
Inclinations of the People, the Basis upon which it is now erected. He shows
likewise that the Principles of Presbyterians allow no Liberty of Conscience to
any that dissent from them, and clearly demonstrates that their Principles are
utterly destructive to the legal Monarchy of that Kingdom. He further proves
that the Penal Laws in Scotland against the Presbyterians, had nothing of
Persecution in them, and he fully vindicates the Episcopal Clergy from being
any ways concerned in the Sufferings which they so grievously complain of. He
has likewise given us an Account of the Behavior of the Church of Scotland, in
reference to the Designs of taking away the Penal Laws against Papists, and
shown us how industrious and active the Presbyterians were in promoting the
Designs for taking away the legal Restraints against Papists. So that in this
Treatise you may meet with a full and satisfactory Answer to all the Calumnies
and Aspersions which the Presbyterians have in their Pamphlets of late
maliciously thrown upon our Clergy.

Soon after the publishing of this, followed the other Discourse entitled.

The Danger of the Church of England from a General Assembly of Covenanters in
Scotland, Represented from their Principles in Oaths, and late Acts of
Assemblies, compared with their Practices in these last two years, By a true
Son of the Church. To the first of these Discourses there was an Answer
published under this Title, A Vindication of the Church of Scotland, being an
Answer to a Paper, Entitled, Some Questions concerning Episcopal and
Presbyterial Government in Scotland, wherein the later is vindicated from the
Arguments and Calumnies of that Author, and the former is made appear to be a
Stranger in that Nation. By a Minister of the Church of Scotland, as it is now
Established by Law.

In which the Author pretends to prove, that the Answers given to these
Questions by his Adversary are altogether false and erroneous; but the
performance is very much disproportioned to the strength and merits of the
Discourse he undertakes to attack, as you may easily discover by comparing them
together.

Having thus far informed you of the Discourses that relate the History of our
Scotch Persecution, as it was acted by the Laity, viz. the Rabble and
Presbyterian Governors: I come in the next place to acquaint you with those
Treatises which contain that Scene of the Persecution wherein the Presbyterian
Clergy were the Principal and only Actors. It is true that in the former part
of this Tragical Scene, their Ministers were not bare Spectators of the
Sufferings of the Episcopal Clergy; nay on the contrary, they took occasion in
all their public appearances at that time, from their Pulpits and elsewhere,
to incite and stir up the Rabble to the commission of all these Cruelties and
Outrages upon the persons of those Reverend and Worthy Men, by calling it the
glorious work of Reformation, and telling them, that they were carrying on the
work of the Lord, and that God would certainly reward them for the great
services they were then doing to his Church and Kingdom. Whereas it had been
more for their personal Credit and Reputation, and more suitable to the
Character they assume to themselves, of being Ministers of the Gospel of Peace,
to have repressed the fury of the Rabble, and to have restrained them from
these Insolences and barbarities which they were acting in several corners of
the Kingdom. But in this later Period of the Persecution, the Presbyterian
Clergy acted their part openly and barefacedly; when they sat upon the Bench as
Judges, and established iniquity by a Law. The first Discourse of this Nature
that was published, was An Historical Relation of the late General Assembly
held at Edinburgh from October 16. to November 13. in the year 1690. In a
Letter from a person in Edinburgh to his Friend in London.

And here our Author has given us a very exact and impartial account of the
proceedings of the Presbyterian Ministers against the Episcopal Clergy both in
their General Assembly, and likewise before the meeting thereof. The Parliament
after having abolish^d Episcopacy, was pleased to lodge the whole Government
and management of Church Affairs in the hands of some few old Presbyterian
Ministers, who in the year 1661. had been deprived for refusing to submit to
the Episcopal Government then Established by Law. This was a Presbyterian
Constitution, you may say, not very agreeable to their Principles, which only
allow an equal parity among all the Ministers of the Gospel; but however the
Constitution being so much for their Interest, it was not thought convenient to
stand two nicely upon Principles. These men who were now entrusted with the
Church Government having met at Edingburgh, and assumed into a share of the
Government such of the Presbyterian Minist^rs as they could entirely confide
in, did first agree upon the Method of Constituting their next General
Assembly, and afterward divided themselves into several Classes and
Presbyteries, for examining and enquiring into the Principles and
Qualifications of the Episcopal Clergy, and this in order to deprive them of
their Livings and Preferments. One Author gives us a great many instances of
the partiality and injustice that attended the proceedings of these inferior
Judicatories, and then continues his History to the sitting down of the General
Assembly, where he entertains us with an useful and pleasant account of what
passed in that meeting.

When the General Assembly was dissolved, they appointed a Commission for
prosecuting the work of the Reformation, and putting an end to what the Rabble
and Assembly had begun. This Commission was invested with a full power to cite
before them, and deprive such of the Clergy as they should judge unfit for
enjoying their Preferments in the Church. And what the Methods were which they
used in turning out the Episcopal Ministers that as yet retained peaceable
possession of their Churches, what trifling Crimes they were forced to invent
against them, may be easily gathered from another Discourse which the same
Author published not long after the former, viz.

A Continuation of the Historical Relation of the late General Assembly in
Scotland. With an account of the Commissions of that Assembly, and other
particulars concerning the present state of the Church in that Kingdom. In this
Treatise the Author informs us what were the effects and consequences of the
Measures, which the General Assembly had laid down for establishing and
securing the Presbyterian Government. And besides many Historical Relations of
considerable importance, which are contained both in this and the former
Treatise, he has likewise inserted here several Original Papers which add a
great deal of Light and Authority to his History; among which there are two
Letters from King William to the Commissioners of the General Assembly in
Scotland, wherein he requires them to receive into their Communion such of the
Episcopal Clergy as were willing to subscribe their Confession of Faith, and
submit to the Presbyterian Government as then Established by Law. He further
commands them, during his absence out of Britain to stop all further Processes
against the Episcopal Ministers until they received further directions from
him; and withal he assures them of his Protection, and that he will maintain
the Government of the Church in that Kingdom by Presbytery, without suffering
the least Invasion to be made upon it.

It is to be hoped that the worthy Author of this Historical Relation of the
General Assembly will gratify the World with a further Continuation of the
History of their Proceedings, especially of what past at their last Meeting of
their General Assembly. And this is the more earnestly to be wished for, since
the two former parts were so very acceptable, and so very satisfactory to all
that perused them.

I come now to inform you of an Answer to some of those Discourses above
mentioned, which after a long delay was at last published under this Title, A
Vindication of the Church of Scotland, being an Answer to five Pamphlets. By
the Author of the former Vindication in answer to the ten Questions.

The Discourses which he pretends to answer are these. 1. An account of the
present Persecution of the Church of Scotland, in several Letters. 2. The Case
of the afflicted Clergy in Scotland truly represented. 3. A late Letter
concerning the Sufferings of the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland. 4. A Memorial to
his Highness the Prince of Orange in relation to the Affairs of Scotland, etc.
5. An Historical Relation of the late General Assembly held at Edinburgh from
October 16. to Nov. 13. Anno 1690.

The occasion the long delay of this pretended Answer was this. The Assembly,
it seems, enjoined this task of answering the Historical Accounts of the
Persecution to one Mr. Alexander Pitcairn.
of their Ministers, and recommended to him, to receive particular Informations
from the places of the Kingdom, in which these cruel Barbarities were acted;
but he, finding that the Informations sent him did confirm the truth of most of
the Historical Relations he was required to answer, and being a Man of more
honesty and ingenuity than many of his Brethren, did, after he had for several
months made a trial of the work, at last entirely decline it, because he saw
these Accounts could not be answered without justifying what the Rabble had
done, which, he ingenuously acknowledged, he was neither able nor willing to
do. And therefore they were forced to pitch upon another Mr. Gilbert Rule.
for this employment, whom, as it appears, being a Man of a greater stock of
Boldness, and far less Sincerity than the other, they found both fitter and
readier for serving their designs. And he after a great many strugglings, what
with the Checks of his own Conscience, and the difficulties he met with in
guilding over and disguising these Matters of Fact, which are so faithfully and
so circumstantially reported in these Discourses he had undertaken to attack,
at last appears abroad in the World, thinking by his bare confidence alone to
impose upon the Sense of Mankind, and with a bold denial to confute those
truths which have all the proof and attestation that a Matter of Fact can
possibly bear. They are owned in Public and Printed Declarations, subscribed
by the Ministers upon whom these Outrages were committed, and attested by many
Witnesses of unspotted Fame and Reputation; nay further, the Ministers who were
the Sufferers undertake, under the severest Penalties, to prove the truth of
these Declarations before any Judicial Court, even to the Conviction of their
most obstinate Enemies; and what further Proof can any reasonable Man desire?

But to let you see how fully and beyond the possibility of contradiction these
matters of Fact are attested, I have subjoyned hereunto two Declarations
relating to this Subject, the Original Copies of which are in my hands,
subscribed by the Ministers upon whom these Cruelties were acted, and their
Subscriptions attested by very good Witnesses. I send you these the rather,
because they are not to be found among the Collection of Papers annexed to the
Case of the Afflicted Clergy in Scotland, and one of them is a great deal more
particular in the Relation than any therein inserted: For in this Declaration
the particular days and months upon which these barbarities were acted, and the
names of the particular persons that were Actors of the Tragedy are expressly
mentioned, and three or four Witnesses at least brought to prove every
individual matter of Fact that is there related; and, if my memory don't very
much fail me, a Copy of this Declaration was given in to the Privy Council at
Edinburgh, and the Gentleman desired a redress of these grievances, and offered
to prove before them the truth of all these particulars, if they thought them
worthy of their Cognizance; so that I would gladly know what further proof and
attestation can be brought for any matter of Fact, than is here offered to
evince the truth of these. Here follow the Declarations.

Declaration of Mr. John Arbuckell, Minister of Rickartoun, concerning the
Indignities done him by the Rabble.
I Master John Arbuckell, Minister of Rickartoun, declare to all whom it may
concern, That first I was taken Prisoner by the Rabble, commanded by one
William Campbel, accompanied with Alexander Hillhouse, his Brother John
Hillhouse, and the Lord of Allangreig was present with the Rabble, to the
number of Forty or thereby, all in Arms except Allangreig; and by them carried
along to Tarboltoun, being Five Miles from Rickartoun, together with my eldest
Son under silence of the Night, and there kept Prisoner in the House of Mr.
James Gillespie, Minister of that place, and in the Morning carried, together
with the said Mr. Gillespie, to the Churchyard, where his Gown was torn, and a
part of it laid on my Shoulder, and the other part on his Shoulder, I wanting a
Gown, in respect I was not at home; and after a long Discourse, previous to the
tearing of the Gown, they led us by the hand over the Churchyard Dyke, not
permitting us to go over the Style; required us never hereafter to preach or
crave any of our Stipends, and forbid all Men to pay us under the highest
peril; and to finish the Solemnity of that great Action, they dismissed us with a
Volley of Shot. After this I was forced to fly the Country, my Wife and tender
Family continuing in the Manse Or Pasonage-House.
of Rickartoun till Fasting's Eve Shrove-Tuesday.
or thereby, when she and her Four Children were turned out by Violence on a
Saturday, the Mercat-day at Kilmarnock. It being Snow in the time, she, with
great difficulty, obtained liberty to stay in a Stable till Monday, upon this
condition, that she should remove the rest of our Household Furniture which
they had not thrown out, on that Night before they returned from the Market,
which was not half a Miles distance. In testimony of the Premises, I and my
eldest Son have subscribed these presents at Edinburgh.

April 16, 1690. Jo. Arbuckell. James Arbuckell.


Declaration of Mr. Gilbert Muschet, Minister at Cumbernauld, concerning his
barbarous Usage by the Rabble.
I Master Gilbert Muschet, Minister at Cumbernauld, do by these presents
declare, That whereas I was orderly presented to the Church at Cumbernauld by
John Earl of Wigtone, and received Ordination and Collation from Alexander,
late Archbishop of St. Andrews, then Lord Archbishop of Glasgow, and continued
there these Twenty Three Years in the Function of the Ministry: Yet
nevertheless I have been of late excluded and expelled by the Rabble, both from
the Church, and from my Manse and Glebe, and I my self, and my Wife, have been
in great danger of our Lives, having been hurt and wounded by my own
Parishioners and their Associates.

Follow the particular Wrongs done me by the Rabble, and the Parties and
Witnesses, if I could have a hearing.

On Christmas day, 1688. They took away all my Books, together with my Papers,
to burn them at the Trone. The Parties were James Mochrie, Rob. Allan, John
Kirkwood, John Anderson, James Rae, James, John, and Alexander Neilsons; by
order, as they alleged, from John Carmichael Chamberlain, James Carmichael,
his Son, and James Fleyming, Ground Officer. Witnesses were Fergus Lugie, Hary
Logy, John Baird, and Robert Boyd, Younger.

In January, 1689. They made me, by their Threatenings, give back Four Petty
Poynds to the value of ten or twelve Pounds Scotch, that were long ago obtained
in a fair legal way, by a Decree before the Sheriff, for payment to the Reader
and Beddal. The Parties were Ja. Brounlees, John Ballach, John Russel, of
Catecraig, and Tho. Smellie. Witnesses, Fergus Lugie, Will. Cassils, Ja.
Stark, and their two Wives, and Robert Stark, Kirk-Officer.

February 4th. They excluded me from the Church, and sacrilegiously robbed and
took away the Key of the Church Door, together with the Vtensils of the Church.
They likewise broke open the Doors of my House with a great Hammer, rent my
Gown and burnt it, and laid violent hands upon my self and my Wife, and the
Kirk Officer. Parties, Ja. Bailzie, Ja. Mochrie, Rob. Angus, Ja. Bresh,
Alexander Harvy, Ja. Thomson, Ja. Rae, John Gillespie, Younger, Agnes Mochrie,
and Agnes Steil. Witnesses, John Davy, Rob. Stirling, Tho. Buchanan, and John
Steil.

March, 7. They came out with Staves and Battoons, and stopped my Plough, after
I had tilled near Three Acres thereof, and threatened to beat the Ploughmen, to
cut the Horse Legs and Plough-tackling, if they did not desist. Parties, Robert
Stirling, Marion Lamb, Agnes Mochrie, Margaret Moorhead, Margaret Miller, Jean
Miller, Margaret Davy, and Ja. Buchanan. Witnesses, John Watson, David Macklay,
William Cassils, Younger, James Machany, Margaret Colen, and Mary Stark.

April, 30. They took possession of my Glebe, being Seven Acres and a half of
Land, for the use of the Meeting House Preacher; they tilled the rest of it,
and thereafter did sow and harrow it all, (except one ridg which I had caused
sow and harrow before). Parties, Robert Boyd, Ja. Russel, Ja. Gilmore, John
Anderson, John Young, James Mochrie, William Cassils, and Ja. Rae. And tho
Eight of them had promised to pay me for what I had tilled and sown thereof,
yet they never performed the same. Witnesses, John Carmichael, James
Carmichael, James Davie, and Ja. Jarvey.

April 21. They violently, by force of Arms, stopped my entry into the Church,
in order to read the Convention's Proclamation, and threw the Proclamation in
the Ditch, and carried me Prisoner to the Town. Parties, Ja. Rae, and John
Greenlees, armed, their Associates, John Kirkwood, William Cassils, Ja.
Mochrie, Robert Allan, James Thomson, John Anderson, John Smith, James
Buchanan, and Tho. Dinn. Witnesses, Rob. Bresh, James Machany, John Stark,
Robert, Alexander, and John Ewans, Hugh Templeton, with diverse others.

April 28. The entered the Meeting House Preacher into the Church by force of
Arms, tho he never read the Convention's Proclamation, nor obeyed the tenor of
it then or since. Parties, Ja. Mochrie, John Kirkwood, William Cassils, Ja.
Thomson, Ja. Rae, John Greenlees, Thomas Dinn, John Smith, Ja. Anderson, Ja.
Renie, John Gillespie. Witnesses, Ja. Russel, John Young, John Stirling, with
diverse others.

May 2. They broke open the Windows of my House, robbing me of several things
to a considerable value, and charged me to remove the rest of my Furniture
within Twenty four Hours, otherwise they would throw it into the Stone-Quarry.
Parties, Ja. Mochrie, Ja. Rae, Ja. Gilmore, Younger, and Ja. Buchanan, with
others. Witnesses, Jo. Kirkwood, Ja. Neilson, John Gillespie, and Ja. Buchanan.

May 3. They again, after opprobrious Language, haled me Prisoner to the
Newtoun, commanding me to deliver up the Key of the Manse, and three of them
broke two of the Doors in my own House within the Newtoun of Cumbernauld,
beating my Wife. Parties, Ja. Mochrie, Ja. Rae, and James Buchanan; the first
of these searched narrowly for me in my own Chamber, threatening to kill me,
where I narrowly escaped, and he thereafter pursued me upon the King's
Highway. Associates to the said Three Persons were, John Gillespy, Younger,
Ja. Gilmore, Younger, and James Renie, together with John Kirkwood, William
Cassils, and James Thomson, John Anderson, John Greenlees, and John Smith.
Witnesses, John Young, Hary Luggie, Ja. Barrie, Hugh Templetone, and others at
a public Wedding.

May 20. Mr. Michael Robb, the Meeting House Preacher, extruded me from the
Glebe, as the Rabble did from the Manse, and caused his Servant to beat the
Kirk-Officer, when he was shearing a little Grass for my Horse, when he was
taken away by the command of one Lieutenant Haddo, who took him along to the
South and West Countries twenty days, upon pretense of a commanded Party.
Witnesses, John Stirling, John Bennie, John and Tho. Buchanans, Jo. Cowie,
Robert Stark, Alexander, Robert, and John Ewans.

July 28. After ringing the first Bell I entered the Church, and read the
Convention's Proclamation before an English Captain and Cornet, and John
Carmichael Chamberlain, and having thereafter offered to preach in the
Forenoon, and to obey the tenor of the said Proclamation, I was stopped by
James Rae and William Cassils, the last whereof laid violent hands upon me in
that sacred place, and hurled me by the Shoulders through the Church Isle, and
thrust me out at the Door, tearing my Coat and my Gown. Witnesses, Ja. Robb,
James Neilson, John Gillespy, Younger, James, John, and Tho. Buchanans, and Ja.
Renie.

August 6. They caused Home of Nineholes Troop eat a whole Night the Grass of
that Meadow, which I paid Duty for to the Earl of Wigtone, the Hay thereof
being worth Ten Marks Scotch, was quite destroyed, and they caused Captain
Morton's Horse eat a considerable quantity of my Corn of that Land I pay for
yearly. Parties, John Carmichael, who quartered the said Troop, Mr. Robb, and
John Cuy, his Servant, who put them from the Glebe to eat my Meadow, Witnesses,
John and Thomas Buchanans, Alexander and John Ewans.

September 20. They pursued me upon the Highway as I was convoying a Cousin of
my own, alleging that he and I had taken down the Bell. They hurled us back
Prisoners to the Town, and James Rae ran at me with a Halbard, it seems, with a
design to have killed me. Parties, John Gillespy, Younger, who wounded me in
the Head, John Kirkwood, William Cassils, James Buchanan, John Smith, David
Dabie, John Russel. Witnesses, John Ker, Younger, William Grudlay, Andrew
Currie, Geo. Mushet, John Carmichael, John Fleeming, John Donaldson, and
several others.

The truth of the Premises is attested by my Subscription of these presents at
Edinburgh, the Eleventh day of April, 1690. before these Witnesses, Mr. Richard
Scot, Parson of Aschott, and John Falconar, Master of Arts.

Richard Scot, Witness to this Subscription. John Falconar, Witness to this
Subscription.
G. Muschet.

And now Sir, I hope, you see with what evidence and clearness of
Demonstration, the particular Instances related in the History of the Scotch
Persecution are accompanied, and from this you may easily judge what a height of
Impudence Men must needs arrive at, to deny so plain and so evident Matters of
Fact, that have all the Proof and Attestation that the Nature of the thing can
possibly bear. And yet the Author of this pretended Answer is not in the least
ashamed to put on such a degree of Confidence in this matter, as no Man besides
a Presbyterian is capable of. But to let you see a little of his Disingenuity
in managing this Affair, he has collected together five Discourses whieh he
undertakes to confute, and then urges the number of the Books he is to answer,
as an Excuse why he cannot confute them all sufficiently, least he should swell
his Answer into too great a Volume. What should have obliged this Author to
undertake to answer so many Treatises at one time, I cannot readily conjecture,
unless it were to have some plausible pretense for not being able to give a
sufficient Answer to any of them singly. I Am sure the meanest of these
Treatises does far exceed the Malice of his weak Efforts, and the Assembly
enjoined him but the first two Discourses to confute, which, if he had done to
purpose, he had better s^tisfy'd the Commands of his Superiors, and done
greater Service to his Party, by vindicating them from those heavy Crimes so
justly charged upon them.

But all the Vindication he offers to bring for them, is in some Cases with a
daring Boldness to deny point blank the Matter of Fact, without disproving the
Attestations brought to confirm it; in others to alleviate it, by pretending
the Episcopal Clergy had exposed themselves to the Hatred of the Rabble; but in
most Cases he acknowledges the Truth of the Relation, and then disowns the
Actors were Presbyterians, and therefore the sober Presbyterians, he says,
ought not to account for those Proceedings: Whereas it is notoriously known,
that these Persons whom he thus disowns and reflects upon, are the only true
Presbyterians, and act in a close Conformity to their Principles, while others,
pretending to a little more Sobriety and Moderation, have evidently deserted
the Old Cause, and degenerated into a mungrel Constitution which they know not
how to name. And notwithstanding that the Author disowns the Actors to be of
their Communion, yet in his Vindication he is pleased to call them the Zealous
Party, and represents them as pretty gentle, in that they made it their work
only to deprive, and not to murder the Episcopal Ministers. In some
particulars, the better to disguise and lessen the attested Matters of Fact of
our late Persecution, he has brought a few Evidences and Attestations of some
Witnesses, whom he looks upon as Men of Integrity and Credibility; but they are
those very Persons who were the principal Actors of that horrid Tragedy; and
how fair and candid dealing this is, I leave the World to judge. Is it to be
supposed, that Men who had such a degree of Malice to act these unheard of
Barbarities, will be at a loss for a little Impudence to deny them? And yet
this you will find to be the whole of his Vindication, after perusal of it, which
I would advise you by all means to do, since, instead of answering, it rather
confirms the Truth of the Accounts that have been given by the Eyewitnesses
and Sufferers in that Persecution.

There are lately published some Remarks upon this Vindication, which are
printed with another Book called, The Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence, which I
shall have occasion to mention afterward. But the Author of these Remarks has
taken the pains to collect several of this Vindicator's Falsehoods and
Contradictions, with which every Page of his Book does abound, and which may be
sufficient to direct us in passing our Judgment on the whole; he shows, how in
some places he justifies or excuses the greatest Barbarities of the
Presbyterian Rabble, and in other places disowns and condemns them; so that he
is not ashamed to contradict himself at every turn. It Is probable that ere long
you may see this Vindicator more severely chastis'd, as he truly deserves, and
therefore I Will trouble you with no further Account of him at present, but leave
him to the Correction of those that are chiefly concerned to take notice of his
Insolence, and shall conclude with this one Remark. That if these Men were in
earnest to answer the Historical Relations of the Persecution published by the
Episcopal Clergy, the most effectual and satisfactory way of confuting these
Accounts, were to examine upon Oath before an impartial Judicatory, the
Witnesses that attest all these public Declarations printed in the Case of the
afflicted Clergy; and if they disown the truth of these Relations, or if the
Ministers be not able to prove their several Declarations by sufficient and
unexceptionable Witnesses, let them ever after be reputed as Men infamous for
Lying and Calumny. This, methinks, is a fair way of dealing, and such as that
Party ought not in reason to refuse, since they have the Government of the
Nation in their hands, and may easily put it to a Trial when they please. And
till they do this, they must excuse the World to believe these Accounts of the
Persecution to be true and genuine Relations, and to proceed neither from
Malice nor Revenge.

The next Period of the History of our Scotch Affairs, relates to the
Visitation of the Universities, and other inferior Schools of Learning. The
Presbyterian Ministers never thought themselves secure, were never at Peace and
Quiet till they got this brought about; they looked upon them as Nurseries of
such Plants as would infallibly overturn their Settlement and Constitution; and
therefore it was still the subject Matter of their Sermons before the
Parliament, to press them to a speedy purging of the Universities, that the
Youth of the Nation might not any longer be poisoned with Loyal, Episcopal, and
suchlike Antichristian Principles. This was their constant Topic for many
Months together, and there was nothing galled them more than the delay of so
desirable a Work; but at last their Importunity was gratified* and an Act of
Parliament published, constituting a Commission for visiting the Universities
and other Schools and Seminaries of Learning within the Kingdom. This
Commission divided themselves into several Committees for visiting the
particular Universities, who were to make report to the General Commission of
the Qualifications and Behavior of the Professors and Regents in each
University. And what the Methods of their proceeding in this Visitation were,
you may easily learn from the History of what they did in relation to the
College of Edinburgh. It goes under this Title, Presbyterian Inquisition; as
it was lately practiced against the Professors of the College of Edinburgh,
August and September 1690. In which the Spirit of Presbytery and their present
Method of Procedure, is plainly discovered, Matter of Fact by undeniable
instances cleared, and Libels against particular persons discussed.

This Discourse is a sufficient demonstration to the World, what injustice and
severity the Professors of this College met with from their Presbyterian
Visitors. It would not satisfy their Malice to strip them of their places and
preferments, but they must likewise contrive some ways to ruin their Fame and
Reputation, the better to palliate their own injustice. They invent Libels, and
deliver them into the Visitors, no Accuser produced to own the Libel, And
refused when legally required.
no Witnesses brought to prove any particular of it, and yet these Libels must
be Registered and kept upon Record as Authentic Evidences, containing the
Crimes for which the Professors were then deprived; and all this with design to
render them infamous not only in the present, but likewise to future Ages. It
was this sort of treatment that obliged the Professors of the College of
Edinburgh, to publish a true Narrative of the Proceedings in their Visitation,
that they might vindicate themselves from the aspersions cast upon them by
these Libels, and let the World see, that the greatest Crimes their Adversaries
had against them were their Sallaries and Revenues. In this Account you have a
general Narrative of the Proceedings of the Committee against all the Members
of that College; and particularly you have here inserted at large the whole
Trials of two of their number, viz. Doctor Monro Principal of the College, and
Doctor Strachan Professor of Divinity. There you may see all the Articles
Libelled against these two Doctors, to what necessity their Accusers were
reduced, in being forced to invent mean and trifling Calumnies against Men of
an unblemished Character; you may see likewise their particular Answers to the
Libels, wherein they have fully vindicated their Innocence against all those
silly aspersions, that the utmost effort of their Adversaries Malice could
contrive. The Author has likewise inserted in this Treatise, the Report of the
Committee to General Commission in relation to these two Doctors, and the
Commission's Sentence of Deprivation against them, together with their several
Animadversions upon the Report of the Committee. And that none might doubt of
their partiality in this Affair, Mr. Andrew Massie's Libel is inserted, which,
though notoriously true, owned and offered to be proved by persons of
unquestionable Credit and Reputation, was not in the least enquired into,
because he had declared himself to be of their Party. All these things you will
find fully related in this Account, which in your reading will afford you
Matter of Diverson as well as of Instruction.

These are, I think the chief Discourses, that have been published by our
Episcopal Divines, relating to the History of the Persecution under which their
Church at present most heavily groans. But I must likewise beg leave to mention
another Treatise lately come from the Press under this Title, The Scotch
Presbyterian Eloquence, or the foolishness of their Teaching discovered from
their Books, Sermons, and Prayers, and some Remarks on Mr. Rule's late
Vindication of the Kirk.

The occasion of publishing this Tract, as I am informed, was this. You may
observe that the Presbyterians of Scotland in all their Vindications, endeavor
to justify their Proceedings against the Orthodox Clergy with this Topic, by
pretending that a great many of them were turned out merely for their Ignorance
and Insufficiency. This was the great Test by which the Presbyterian Teachers
pretended to proceed in Judging and Depriving such of the Episcopal Clergy as
condescended to appear before their Assemblies. Upon this account therefore, it
seems, the Publisher of this Treatise thought it convenient, to inform the
World a little of the Qualifications and Learning of our Presbyterian Doctors,
and if it were possible, to make them sensible of their own Infirmities, and
for the future ashamed of their Insolence, that they should pretend to Deprive
Men for Ignorance, who are so many degrees above the reach of their low
capacities; that they, who in their Preachings and Writings appear to be not
only void of all manner of Learning, but likewise destitute of common Sense and
Reason, that that they should be so arrogant, as to think themselves fit Judges
of any Man's Qualifications for the Office of the Holy Ministry. They might
have acted perhaps more prudently, if they had set this Topic aside, and made
choice of another Test for Depriving the Episcopal Clergy, and that is, as they
are pleased to call it, the want of Grace; then in all appearance, they had not
given our Author this occasion of proclaiming to the World their scandalous
Ignorance, and they would have acted more consonantly to their own Principles
and Doctrines, when they run down all kind of Human Learning as a thing truly
Antichristian.

And here, Sir, I must tell you, that their particular despite against all
manner of Learning is so observable, that when you return to Scotland, you will
find your self deprived of the Society of many of these Learned and Ingenious
Gentlemen, in whose Company and Conversation you were formerly wont to be so
much Edified, and so highly pleased. They have not only Persecuted the Clergy
at that rate, as to make some of our most eminent Divines leave the Kingdom;
but have likewise extended their Malice against the Learned Men of all other
Professions, and discouraged them to that high degree, that they have forced
some of the most Conspicuous of our Lawyers, Physi^ians and Mathematicians, to
desert their Native Country, and take up their Residence among such as have a
just value and esteem of their Merit and Desert. I could instance in all these
Particulars, but that you your self will be too sensible of it, and the
instances are so well known, and so generally exclaimed against, that the
Presbyterians themselves begin to be somewhat ashamed of their Proceedings
toward them. And truly no wonder, if they consider with what abhorrence and
indignation their Posterity will remember them; that they should have been such
Hosts Patriae, such open and declared Enemies to their Native Country, as by
their violent Proceedings to banish therefrom Men who were the Glory and
Ornament of their Nation.

This Discourse is a Collection of several remarkable Passages taken out of the
Writings and Sermons of the Presbyterian Pastors; in which their gross
Ignorance in matters of Learning, and their ridiculous and almost blasphemous
way of Worship is sufficiently described. The Author has collected a great many
instances of the Madness and Delusions of the Presbyterian Vulgar; how they are
passionately moved with a Sermon of the greatest Nonsense, if it be pronounced
but with a loud Voice and a whining Tone; how they contemn the Creed, the
Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, as childish Ordinances, and far below
their Care or Concern; and how upon their Deathbeds they take it as a certain
sign of Salvation, that in their lifetime they never heard a Curate preach.
These are such strong Delusions and Infatuations, that it is easy to guess by
what Spirit they are thus acted. In the next place he describes the peevish and
unconversible Temper of their Pastors; how they have enslaved themselves so
wholly to the Humors of their People, that to gratify them, they must divest
themselves of common Civility, as well as Christian Charity. He shows that
their Pretenses to Learning go no further than to understand the Doctrines of
Election and Reprobation, and how by their indiscreet Sermons upon this
Subject, they often drive many of the ignorant Multitude into such a high
despair of God's Mercy, as to make them lay violent hands on themselves, and
this they call The Saving of Souls. They infuse into the Minds of their Hearers
sordid and low Notions of the high and eternal God; they represent him as a
severe and unmerciful Being, and have not the Prudence to intermix God's Offers
of Mercy with his Threatenings. They not only force their Followers into
Despair, but likewise sometimes encourage them in direct Impieties, by telling
them, that if they be among the number of the Elect, they may be guilty of the
greatest Sins without hazarding their Salvation. They talk of the greatest
Mysteries of Religion in such homely, coarse, and ridiculous Expressions, as
are very unsuitable to the Gravity and Solemnity with which these sacred
Mysteries ought to be treated. And all these Particulars the Author of this
Treatise proves against them by such undeniable Instances, that I believe
they will hardly be so bold as to offer to confute them, least thereby they
expose themselves to the greater Scorn and Derision.

I think I need not caution you to read this Discourse I here speak of, with a
due Regard and Veneration to those sacred things you see thus polluted and
profaned; and not to improve it to such a bad use, as I too much fear some of
our open Prophaners of all Religion will be inclined to do. I know you have
more just and adequate Notions of the Divine Majesty, and of the Mysteries of
our Holy Religion, than to entertain the meaner Thoughts of these holy and
sacred things, because you see them profaned in this manner by the Mouths of
such sordid and silly Creatures; you know that Pearls cast before the Swine
lose nothing of their intrinsic Worth and Value. I must therefore entreat you
to improve the reading of this Treatise to the true design for which it was
published, viz. That all good Men, being rightly informed of the present Misery
and Desolation of the Church of Scotland, and being sensible of the great
Detriment that accrues thereby to Religion in general, may contribute their
assistance, what by their Prayers and other lawful means, for restoring that
National Church to its Primitive and Apostolical Institution; that Religion may
again flourish there as the Palm Tree, and all manner of Iniquity being
depressed, Judgment may as yet run down our Streets like a River, and
Righteousness like a mighty Stream. Is it a matter of no moment, to see a whole
National Church, with its Apostolical Government, quite overturned and
destroyed? To see many Hundreds of the Ministers of God's Word, together with
their Families, exposed to the extreme Necessities of Poverty and Want, and by
that means to the Contempt of the Laity? To see them thus sacrificed to the
Fury and Rage of a blind and bigoted Party? Is it nothing to see Religion in
this manner abused and polluted by sordid and stupid Men, who assume to
themselves the Name of Pastors? To see them profane the sacred Mysteries of
our holy Religion by their Drollery and Ridicule? To behold many Christians in
a Kingdom wandering to and fro, without any Guide to direct them in the ways
and means of Salvation, or which is worse, having only such Teachers as
entertain them with Nonsense and Blasphemy, and infuse into their Minds such
seditious Principles and Doctrines as must inevitably tend to their Ruin and
Destruction? These are Matters not of mere Jest and Diversion, but of great
Concern and Importance, and will at last prove to be of far more fatal
Consequences than, I fear, many of us are aware of. If this Deluge of Atheism
and Impiety, which these Men are too too likely to introduce into that Kingdom,
by venting such nauseous and ridiculous stuff in their Prayers and Sermons; I
say, if this Deluge be not timely prevented, but be suffered to go on without
any stop or hindrance, it will not be found very easy to rid the Nation of the
bad Effects of it for many Generations.

Having now gone through all the Discourses that have been published on both
sides, concerning our late Revolution in Church Matters, I think it may not be
amiss to acquaint you with two or three other Treatises, which, tho they
principally relate to the Civil Affairs of our Nation, yet do contain some
things that concern likewise our Church Affairs. The first of them is entitled
thus, The late Proceedings and Votes of the Parliament of Scotland, contained
in an Address delivered to the King, signed by the plurality of the Members
thereof, stated and vindicated.

That you may rightly understand the occasion of printing this Discourse, It is
necessary to acquaint you, That after the Convention of Estates in Scotland had
devolved the Government of that Kingdom upon K. William and Q. Mary, they fell
into great Heats and Animosities among themselves. What the causes of these
Divisions were, I am not at present concerned to enquire, but divided they were
into several Parties, one of which went ordinarily under the Name of the Club.
It consisted of a great many Members of Parliament, who were most of them
Presbyterians, and zealously affected to the present Government, having
appeared very active and industrious in dethroning K. James, and advancing K.
William and Q. Mary to the Throne. This Party combined together to obstruct and
oppose all Matters brought into the Parliament, till they should first get
their Grievances against the former Governments redressed by this, according to
their Claim of Right. They alleged K. William had refused Satisfaction and
Redress to these Points of the Grievances which were most material, and that he
was so far from performance, that both he and his Ministers denied there lay
any Obligation upon them for that end; so that in this Revolution, they
pretended the People did only observe a change of Masters, but no ease of
Burden, or redress of Laws. And this obliged them to send up an Address to K.
William, subscribed by the greatest part of the Members of Parliament of
Scotland, representing to him the Grievances which they wanted to be redressed
in the present Parliament. This Address was delivered to him by the Earl of
Annandale, the Lord Rosse, and Sir James Montgomery of Skelmurly, at Hampton
Court, the 15th. day of October, 1689. They were much dissatisfied with the
Ministers of State whom King William had received into his Councils and
Service, alleging that he had made choice of those very Men, who had been the
Instruments of K. James' Miseries and Ruin, by advising him to these Courses
that had robbed him of the Hearts of his Subjects. It was these Ministers whom
they blamed as the Authors of all the Differences that had arisen betwixt K.
William and his Parliament in Scotland; they thought his delaying to gratify
their Desires, proceeded merely from the sinister Misrepresentations given him
of their Demands as illegal, and as Encroachments upon the Royal Authority. And
therefore, to justify their Actions, they published this Treatise and their
Address to King William, to show, that what they desired therein was agreeable
to all the Rules of Law, Religion and Policy. The Author has inserted at large
the several contested Votes of Parliament, to which K. William had refused his
assent, and he endeavors to demonstrate the Legality, Reasonableness, and
Necessity of them, by proving them to be in all Points agreeable to the ancient
Laws and Customs of that Nation.

This has produced us another Discourse on the same Subject, in answer to the
former. It is called, An Account of the Affairs of Scotland, in relation to
their Religious and Civil Rights.

Here our Author undertakes to satisfy the World, that K. William had offered
to the Parliament in Scotland all the Satisfaction and Redress of their
Grievances that reasonable Men could expect; and that the true Source and
Fountain whence proceeded all the Complaints of the discontented Party, was,
that some of their Number were not advanced to such honorable and advantageous
Posts of the State, as they thought they had merited by their Zeal for K.
William, and the eminent Services they had done him in advancing his Interest
in that Kingdom. And to evince what he undertakes, he has set down at length
the Grievances themselves, and the Redress offered them by King William in his
Instructions to his Commissioner, and makes some Reflections on both. If you
incline to search any further into the History of these Debates betwixt K.
William and his Parliament, you may consult the Treatises themselves, to which
I refer you.

I suppose you may have heard how active and diligent the Presbyterians in
Scotland have been ever since this late Revolution, to exclaim against the
Injustice and Severity of the former Reigns, and particularly that of K.
Charles II. (under whose Administration we enjoyed so much Peace and
Tranquillity) whom they charge with Tyranny and Oppression, Cruelty and
Persecution against them and their Adherents; and reproach his Ministers of
State as Subverters of the Laws of the Kingdom, and Betrayers of the Liberties
and Property of the Subject. The bad Impression which these Clamours made upon
Strangers that were ignorant of these Transactions, obliged Sir Geo. Mackenzie,
(who had been Advocate to K. Charles II. and was principally aimed at in many
of the Reflections cast upon the Government and its Ministers) to vindicate his
Majesty K. Charles and his Ministers of State, from these Calumnies and
Aspersions so unjustly thrown upon them. And this he has very fully and
satisfactorily done in a Discourse published after his Death, and called, A
Vindication of the Government in Scotland, during the Reign of K. Charles II,
against Misrepresentations made in several scandalous Pamphlets. To which is
added, The Method of proceeding against Criminals, as also some of the
Phanatical Covenants, as they were printed and published by themselves in that
Reign. By Sir George Maekenzie, late Lord Advocate there.

In this Treatise we have a short Narrative of the Proceedings of that
Government in relation to the Presbyterian Dissenters, which alone is
sufficient to undeceive Persons that have been imposed upon by
Misrepresentations, and to confute all the malicious Calumnies raised against
the Government. For when we consider the frequent Rebellions and Commotions
which the Presbyterians raised during the Reign of King Charles II. we shall
soon find that those Acts of the Government, which they tax with the greatest
Severity, savor of nothing but Mildness and Lenity, and that the Government
proceeded by the slowest steps imaginable to punish those who openly owned
their Designs of subverting the Monarchy. The Author has collected all the
Objections and Instances of pretended Cruelty against the Government, which the
Malice of its Enemies could contrive, and has answered them beyond the
possibility of a Reply. The Publisher has subjoyned a Collection of original
Papers published by themselves, which contain an Account of their avowed
Principles and Practices, and from thence you may easily judge how consistent it
is with the Security of any Government, to suffer the Propagation of such
wicked and seditious Principles. But I think you cannot have a more impartial
and true Account of their Principles, nor a fuller Vindication of the
Proceedings of the Government against this rebellious Party, than from a Book
lately published under this Title, The History of Scotch Presbytery, being an
Epitome of the Hind let loose, by Mr. Shields. With a Preface by a Presbyter of
the Church of Scotland.

It is Epitome of a larger Book published by Mr. Alexander Shields, one of
their most eminent Preachers, and a zealous Defender of the good old Cause.
Here we have a true Description of the Temper and Genius of the whole Party,
and it discovers the true Spirit of the Presbyterian Gospel. There is none of
them that b^tter understands the true Tenets of the Presbyterians, nor is more
consequential to their Principles; for he fairly sets down their Doctrines and
Opinions, and disowns none of the most absurd and pernicious Consequences that
naturally flow from them. He gives us an Historical Account of their many
Insurrections and Rebellions against the Civil Government, and very frankly
owns and justifies them all, together with several of their barbarous Murders
committed upon the Archbishop of S. Andrews, and some others,; so that by a
slight view of this Book, you may easily judge, whether any Government of
whatever species can subsist where such Principles and Doctrines are suffered
to be propagated among the Subjects.

And now, Sir, I have satisfied your desire as fully as possibly I could; I
have given you an exact Account of the most, if not all the considerable
Treatises that have been Printed with respect to the present Persecution of the
Church of Scotland, and that you may be the better able to judge of the truth
and certainty of it, I have set down the Treatises published by both Parties;
and likewise that you may the more easily procure any of them you are desirous
to read, I have subjoyned to this Letter a Catalogue of them all with the names
of the Booksellers by whom they are to be sold. I think it is sufficiently
evident from the foregoing Collection, what Sufferings the Orthodox Clergy in
Scotland have endured, and how unaccountable the Proceedings of the
Presbyterians are toward them; and which is most to be lamented, the present
miserable state and condition of the whole National Church, and the great
prejudice that Religion sustains by the overthrow thereof, is no less apparent.
How much it concerns all Sober and Religious Men to contribute their
endeavors, for delivering that Oppressed Church from the Miseries and
Calamities under which it at present Groans, I hope we are all sensible; and
therefore I shall give you no further trouble but of this one request, which
is, That you would be careful to inform all persons with whom you may chance to
converse, of the present deplorable state of Affairs in Scotland, that every
one may lend their assistance for rescuing the Revered Clergy of that Kingdom
from under their present Sufferings and Oppressions, that the Rod of the wicked
may lie no longer upon the back of the Righteous, least they stretch forth
their hand unto Iniquity, and likewise that our National Church may be restored
to its Primitive Order and Beauty. This is the earnest desire of

June 1^. 1692. Sir, Your most affectionate and humble Servant.

A Catalogue of Books mentioned in the foregoing Letter.
A Memorial for his Highness the Prince of Orange in relation to the Affairs of
Scotland, etc. London Printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1689.

The present State and Condition of the Clergy and Church of Scotland. London
Printed.

A brief and true Account of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland
occasioned by the Episcopalians since the year 1660. etc. London Printed Anno
1690.

The Prelatical Churchman against the Phanatical Kirk-man, etc. London Printed
Anno 1690.

An account of the present Persecution of the Church of Scotland in several
Letters. London Printed for S. Cook Anno 1690..

The Case of the present afflicted Clergy in Scotland truly represented. London
Printed for J. Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball over against the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill. 1690.

A late Letter concerning the Sufferings of the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland.
London Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul 's Churchyard.
1691.

Some Questions resolved concerning Episcopal and Presbyterian Government in
Scotland. London Printed, and are to be sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall. 1690.

The Danger of the Church of England from a General Assembly of Covenanters in
Scotland. London Printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul 's
Churchyard, and John Hovell, Bookseller in Oxon. 1690.

A Vindication of the Church of Scotland, being an Answer to a Paper,
Entitled, Some Questions concerning Episcopal and Presbyterian Government in
Scotland, etc. London Printed for Tho. Salusbury at the Sign of the Temple near
Temple Bar in Fleetstreet. 1691.

An Historical Relation of the late General Assembly held at Edinburgh, etc.
London Printed for J. Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball in Cornhill, near the Royal
Exchange. 1691.

A Continuation of the Historical Relation of the late General Assembly in
Scotland. London Printed for Sam. Keeble, at the Great Turks head in
Fleetstreet, over against Fetter-lane-end. 1691.

A Vindication of the Church of Scotland, being an Answer to five Pamphlets.
Printed at Edinburgh, and reprinted at London, for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible
and Three Crowns near Mercers Chapel in Cheapside. 1691.

Presbyterian Inquisition, as it was lately practiced against the Professors of
the College of Edinburgh. London Printed for J. Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball
in Cornhill. 1691.

The Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence, or the foolishness of their Teaching
discovered from their Books, Sermons and Prayers, London Printed for Randal
Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1692.

The late Proceedings and Votes of the Parliament of Scotland, contained in an
Address delivered to the King. Glasgow Printed by Andrew Hepburn 1689.

An Account of the Affairs of Scotland in relation to their Religious and Civil
Rights. London Printed, and are to be sold by Richard Bald^in in the Great Old
Baily near the Black Bull. 1690.

A Vindication of the Government in Scotland, during the Reign of King Charles
II. By Sir George Mackenzie late Lord Advocate there. London Printed for J.
Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball in Cornhill.

The History of Scotch Presbytery, being an Epitome of the Hind let loose, by
Mr. Shields. London Printed for J. Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball in Cornhill.
1692.

FINIS.

