THE Spanish OTES, OR, The Unparalled IMPOSTURE OF Michael de Molina,
Executed at Madrid in the Year, 1641.

Faithfully Translated out of the Spanish.

LONDON, Printed by J. Bennet, and are to be Sold by Walter Davis in
Amen-Corner, 1685.

Michael de Molina, Of Cuenca in the Kingdom of Castile,
To Titus Ambrosio, of Salamanca, in the County of Rutland, Greeting.
FEw Words are best, among Friends. Here Is a Plot for your Plot, and a
Hanging-Speech into the Bargain. The One may serve for your Instruction, and
the Other for your Example.

Michael de Molina.

The Spanish OTES, etc.
MIchael de Molina, Born of Honest Parents at Cuenca, a City in the Kingdom of
Castils, bred there in the Jesuits College, and after at the University of
Alcala de Henares; to try his fortune, went thence to Court, where to gain a
living speedily, he Undertook to give Secret Intelligence to the Secretaries of
the several Ambassadors then residing at that Court; and to give the more
Credit to his Reports, gave out, That he was Servant to Andrew de Rojas,
Cavalier of the Order of Sant Iago, and Secretary of the Council of State:
Insomuch that he Forged Letters, Feigned Discourses, Framed Intelligences,
fitted for the Purposes and Affairs of the Ambassadors wherewith he dealt,
Counterfeited the Kings Hand, Invented Ciphers, made Consultations and Orders
to the Number of 345 several Papers, and all with that dexterity, that he
Deceived and Abused not only the Secretaries of the Emperor, the Venetian, and
French Ambassadors, but also and most of all, Don Lorenzo Coqui, Secretary to
the late Don Lorenzo Campegi, Nuntio to the Pope; in whose House he was at
length Apprehended; upon whose Apprehension and Search of Papers, he told the
Officers, That if the Tenor of those Papers should be looked upon as Jests and
Conceits, he should not speed so Ill; but if as a Crime it would appear so
great, that one life would not be enough to pay for the same. And his Majesty
taking notice that the business was of that Importance, that the like had not
been heard or found in any History, Cammanded that there should be on purpose a
Court of Justice composed of Two of the Chief Nobility, and Two of the Chief
Judges, before whom when the said Michael de Molina was sufficiently convinced,
and had made a large Confession (which for its matchless strangeness shall be
Verbatim set down) he was sentenced as follows;

IN the Town of Madrid, July 31. 1641. the Lords of his Majesty's Counsel, who
by Particular Order have taken cognizance of the Accusation given in by Don
Marcellino Faria de Guzman Attorney, Nominated by his Majesty, for this Cause
against Michael de Molina late of Cuenca, Prisoner in the Gaol of this Court
for Offenses and High Treason, Committed by him, whereof he has been Accused,
do Condemn the said Michael Molina to be Hanged on a Gallows, and his Goods to
be Confiscated to the Kings use, the Execution whereof they leave to the Lord
Judge, D. John de Quinnones; and this is their Will and Pleasure.

This Sentence was made known to the Prisoner upon the First of August, and
Execution done accordingly in the Placa Major of Mad^id, the Third day
following; at which time and place the Proclamation usually made at the
Execution was thus;

THis is the Justice which the King our Sovereign Lord Commands to be done
upon this man, for having Committed HIGH TREASON, and Published FALSITIES,
FORGERIES, and HORRIBLE CHEATS on the Affairs and Grave Ministers of State; for
which he Commands that he be Hanged by the Neck till he Die, to the end that it
may be to him for a Punishment, and to others an Example; then Concludes, Quien
tal haze tal pague, He that thus does, let him thus pay for the same. As he
stood upon the Ladder ready to be turned off, he delivered in Writing to father
Andrew Emanuel of the Society of Jesus, a Declaration, the Contents whereof
ensues Word for Word.

LOyal Subjects of our Sovereign Lord the King, I am Michael de Molina, Born at
Cuenca, the Grievousness of my Crimes is so great, that a Punishment can hardly
be invented to Equalize mine Offenses against God, against our Sovereign Lord
the King, whom God Preserve, against the Emperor, against my Native Country;
against the Lord Duke de Oliverez, and Sant Lucar, against the most Grave,
Faithful and Loyal Ministers of State, whom I have Discredited with my
Forgeries and Lies. The Clemency of the King our Sovereign (whom God preserve)
has been very Eminent in Sentencing me so Mercifully: God grant, to whom I now
go to render a Strict Account, that there be found Mercy for me in Life to
come, and that I then pay not for the clemency showed me here. I do here
declare and confess upon mine own free will, that not having the fear of God
nor Man before mine eyes, I have been the cause of the greatest part of the
mischiefs that this Monarchy suffers, and of those calamities and miseries
which you faithful people yet suffer, for which I humbly beg pardon of all
those that are Absent, as well as of you here Present. For I am the man that
Feigned that the King our Sovereign Lord (whom God preserve) and the Emperor,
Instigated thereunto by the Lord Duke of Saint Lucar, and Fomented by him, did
Plot the Death of our Most Holy Father Urban the 8th Pope, Head of the Church,
and Vicar of Christ, for which purpose I Invented and Contrived Orders of the
King our Sovereign, and of the Emperor, LETTERS from the Duke, ORDERS,
INSTRVCTIONS, and IVDGMENTS of the Counselors of State, with Letters from
Viceroys and Ambassadors, with purpose to abuse and deceive the Nuntio and
the Ambassadors of several Princes, and thereby to get Money from them, not
caring for the damage might arise and accrue from thence to the World, and to
this Monarchy; and not contented herewith, I Invented that in case the said
Death could not be Effected, that then Endeavor should be to call a Council,
and to Depose the Pope, or make a Schism in the Church. I Invented and Forged,
that the Lord Duke did by Order from the King, the Emperor and the Counsel of
State, Endeavor to Kid the Cardinal Rich^lieu, Favorit to the most Christian
King of France; for which purpose, and for the Death of the Pope, I Feigned
Persons that were to have been Instruments of the same; I gave notice to the
Ambassadors hereof, showing them Letters and Orders, which I feigned as I
judged meet. I made them believe that I was an Officer of the Counsel of
State, and that by that means I came to the knowledge of these Plots and
Conspicaties, whereby I have disturbed the World, Caused Ielousies, and
Suspicions amongst all the Princes of Europe, and the Mischiefs that this
Monarchy now Suffers. I also advertised the Ambassadors, and the Enemies of
this State, of LETTERS, CONSVLTS, Orders and Decrees, made by the King and
Counsel, for driving the French out of Piemont, the Correspondencies of the
Cardinal of Savoy with the Subjects of that State, for the Effectuating the
same; the coming of Prince Thomas from Flanders to Savoy for the same purpose,
and to lay Siege to Casal; of an Army to be raised, and Maintained in Alsatia;
of an intention to Kill Duke Bernard de Weimar General of the Swedes, the
intentions of the King our Sovereign, with the States of Venice and Genoa
concerning Piemont and Caesal; the purpose of supplies which both States of
Venice and Gonoa would send to France and Holland; and the intentions of the
Pope to Assist France against Spain; the intent of England to league with
Spain; the purpose that the French and Hollanders had to join their Fleets to
hinder all succors of Flanders, and to surprise the Plate-fleet, and infest
the Coasts of Spain; the Design that the Hollander had upon Antwerp in the Year
16^8. The Success of Fontarabie; whereupon I feigned Letters from the Prince of
Conde, and from the Duchess de Chevereuse; also concerning the Imprisonment of
Don Gualterio Peni Secretary and Resident for France in this Court, with whom I
had intimate friendship, which was the ground of all these Disasters: of the
Secret Compliance between the Cardinal Infant, and the Prince of Orange: of
the Conspiracy by the Prince of Orange to kill the Cardinal Richelieu; the
Design of Holland, that the States of Flanders should be independent of Spain,
and our King should renounce his Right to the Cardinal Infanta, to the end the
Hollanders should receive him, and subject themselves to him: of the
Capitulations and Agreement betwixt the King our Sovereign and the Duke of
Modena, whereby I feigned that the said Duke was to assist with Six Thousand
men, at his own charge, against France; and that the King was to give him the
charge of Viceroy of Catalonia, and Twenty Thousand Soldiers to enter into
France by Catalonia, which was the first ground of the War at Salsas and
Perpignian the Key of Catalonia; of the General Resolutions of the Year 1639.
in order to the Affairs of Germany, Flanders, and Italy: of the purpose to take
away the Nuntio's Court in these Kingdoms for the disorders and Excesses of the
same: of the great Resentments of the King our Sovereign against the King of
France, for his Leagueing with the Swedes, his Confederation with the Turks and
Protestant Princes of Germany, for his Protection and League with Holland; for
his Commerce with Venice and Genoa to the great discommodity of Spain; for the
disunion which he endeavored to make between Spain and England: of the
Resentment that the King our Sovereign had against the Pope, for his Amity and
Assisting of France; and not his endeavoring rather as a Father of the whole
Church to pacify the Wars by all means possible; of the Design of changing the
Commanders in Chief of all the Emperors Armies and the Spanish, there by to
make the People desperate, hecause of the failing of faith and credit; of the
Recruiting and Arming the Galleys of Spain, Cicily and Naples for the
maintaining commerce, secret intelligence in Toulon and Marseilles; of the
capitulation of the Venetian with the Grand Turk: and the means whereby they
drew the Turk to Assent to their Demands, and the little security the Turk had
from them: All which I INVENTED, FEIGNED and CONTRIVED; together with many more
LETTERS, CIPHERS, Papers, etc. without any intelligence, Correspondence, or
Amity with any Officer or Minister of State of this Kingdom, but that I alone
without the help or assistance of any other have Feigned and Invented all the
for said Designs, where of I gave Information to the Nuntio and his Secretary,
to the said Ambassadors, and to Monsieur de Penny with whom I have kept
correspondence in France since the breaking forth of the War: the which as a
Truth I Swear before God, and declare it for discharging my Conscience; I ask
of God forgiveness, also of the King our ^overeign (whom God preserve) of the
Emperor, of the Lord Duke, against whom I directed most of those forgeries, of
the Duke of Me^ina las Torres, of the Marquis of Leganes, of the Duke of
Villahernosa, of the Count of Oniate, of the Marquis of Villa Franca, of the
Marquis of Mirabel, of the most Illustrious Lord Inquisitor General, the
Father Confessor of the most Eminent Cardinals, the Cardinal Borgia, and
Cardinal Spinola, and Cardinal of Sandoval, of the Lord Don Geronimo of
Villanueva,, Pronetary of Arragon, and Secretary of State, of Don Andrew de
Rojas Secretary of State, of the Ambassador of Genoa, and of all the rest whom
I have Falsely Defamed by These FORGERIES and IMPOSTVRES; and also I ask Pardon
of all the faithful and Loyal Subjects of these Kingdoms, Charging them to
take Example by me. And to the end that it may be manifested to all times, I
thus make Declaration, that God may Pardon me, and for the Satisfaction of
this, and all other Nations which I have disturbed with the wickedness of my
Inventions. In witness whereof I have hereunto set my Name, Dated in the Placa
Mayor, and Place of Execution in Madrid, the 3 of August, 1641. Thus Ended
Michael de Molinae, in whom the Refran or Spanish Proverb was Verified; Quien
^n un ano quiere ser rico al medio le ahorcan, He that will be rich in one
year, shall be hanged at half years End.

FINIS.

