Monsieur in a Mouse-Trap: or the Parable of the Shark and Herring-Pond
By the Author of the Magpies.
THere is an old English Proverb, that Truth must not be uttered at all times,
nor to all persons; and that is the reason, I suppose, why men of late publish
their Sentiments in Masquerado. We have already seen the Parables of the
Bear-baiting, and the Magpies; now give me leave to present you with that of
the Shark and the Herring Pond, since after Four-footed Beasts, and Birds, Fish
comes next in course.

There was a time, when the Scaly Inhabitants of the Ocean were divided into
several Empires, Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and Provinces; each watery Nation
being subject to their respective Sovereigns, even as it is here on the Land.

Amongst the rest, the Shark reigned over the Gudgeons; he a voracious, cruel,
tyrannical Fish; they silly, tame, weak, despicable Animals, cut out for
Slavery and Contempt. This Shark, or King of the Gudgeons, was the worst of all
his Race; for he won'd enter into Leagues with other Royal Fishes, his
Neighbors, only to render them the more secure, whilst he amassed up huge
Treasures by Oppression of his Subjects, and raised great Armies, with design
to rush suddenly upon his Friends and Allies, to bring them into Contribution
and Slavery.

He had one potent Neighbor, who was an Emperor among the Fish, and had many
Princes subject to him. The Shark bore a great spite to this Imperial Fish,
and often invaded his Territories, and made great Havoc and Devastation among
his Subjects; for he would come on the sudden, (as it is the nature of that sly
Fish,) and snap off a whole Limb, or Branch of the Empire, together, at a
Mouthfull; and this at such a time as they were all at Peace, and never dreamed
of any such Usage. And to show that he absolutely designed the total ruin of
the Imperial Fish, and all his Dependants, the Shark sent Ambassadors to the
Whale, a mighty Fish; and who had the largest Dominions, the strongest Armies,
and richest Treasury of any Royal Fish in the Ocean: A proud Fish also, proud
as Lucifer; for disdaining all Earthly Emblems, he wrote the Moon for his
Crest, and styled himself the Shadow of God. To this terrible Whale, I say, the
Shark sent Ambassadors, and made private Leagues with him, against the Imperial
Fish, persuading him to send Armies to invade the Imperial Territories. Thus
whilst the Imperial Fish was busie^ on one side, in defending himself and his
Empire against the Incursions of the Whale, the Shark takes the Opportunity and
breaking all his Treaties of Peace, leaps suddenly into the Bowels of the
Empire, plundering, murdering and desolating all, wheresoever he came.

Yet the Shark; not content thus to ruin the Imperial Fish, sets upon another
King, among the Scaly Nations, that was a near Relation, Friend and Allye of
the Imperial Fish: He sends Armies, and invades the Territories of this King
also, who was called the Sea Bull; lays waste his Dominions, leads his Subjects
into Captivity, and does him all the mischief that his Malice, Ambition,
Covetousness and Pride could prompt him to.

Thus the Wars continued amongst the Watery Nations for many Years, great
Massacres and Depopulations were committed by the Shark, the Whale, and their
Armies, so that the Sea was dyed red with Blood.

Whilst these things were transacting, it so fell out, that the Crocodile was
made King over the Whitings, Salmons, Mayhrills, and Pikes, and other Fish:
having by various cunning Trains, and wheadling Artifices, persuaded that
innocent sort of Fish, that he was a Dolphin, and no Crocodile; and having made
them large Promises, confirming them also with an Oath, that they should enjoy
their ancient, native Freedom and Liberty in all things. So that the poor
Whitings, deluded by these fair Words, and the insinuating Stories of the
Mayhrills, and overpowered by the Salmons, Pikes, Sturgeons, Eels, and other
Fish, were contented that the Crocodile should reign over them.

But in process of Time, the Crocodile began to appear in his naked Colors,
and not only broke his Word with the Whitings, but also stretched forth his
Tali to the Maybrills, and entrenched upon their Privileges. He also made a
private League with the Shark, the Whale, and the Allegators of the
Mediterranean; which gave great suspicion to his own Subjects, as well as to
the neighboring Princes and States among the Fish. Great were the Discontents
of the Maybrills, the Whitings, and other Fish under the Crocodile's Dominion:
They found they were mistaken in their King, who now proved a real Crocodile, a
Fish of Prey, and daily imposed on his Subjects such Laws and Orders, as
plainly tended to enslave both them and their Posterity. This made them cabal,
and lay their heads together how to save themselves from imminent Ruin: So at
length it was agreed upon, among the Makyrills, Salmons, Pikes, Eles, and other
Fish under the Crocodile's Dominion, to remonstrate their Case to the Dolphin,
and invite him to come and deliver them from the Crocodile's Tyranny; for
indeed, the Dolphin had a kind of Title to the Government of the Whitings, etc.
being descended of the Blood of their ancient Kings. So the Dolphin makes
preparation to go against the Crocodile, being assisted by the Commonwealth of
Herrings, among whom this Prince kept his Court. In a Word, Upon the first
Approach of the Royal Dolphin, with his Army of Herrings, the Crocodile's
Subjects deserted him, and joined the Dolphin's Army; so that the Crocodile was
forced to swim away, and take Sanctuary with the Shark.

The News of the famous Expedition of the Dolphin, and the Flight of the
Crocodile, was quickly spread through the Scaly Nations, and all rejoiced at
the good Success of the Dolphin, who was soon chosen King of the Whitings,
Maycrils, Salmons, etc. Then Ambassadors were sent from all parts to
congratulate his Accession to the Crocodile's Throne, and to enter into League
with Him, against the Shark, the Whale, the Crocodile, and the Allegators of
the Mediterranean. Armies were raised on all sides, and many fierce Battles
were fought between them: The Dolphin was looked upon as the great Protector
and Deliverer of all the Confederate Fish, from the cruel Oppressions and
Encroachments of the Whale and the Shark. But in regard the Maycrills (who were
chiefly instrumental in bringing the Dolphin to the Crown) proved treacherous,
and held a private Correspondence with the Shark and the Crocodile, other
Measures were taken by the Imperial Fish, the Dolphin, the Commonwealth of
Herrings, the Sea-Bull, and the rest of the Confederated Fish. And because they
could not entrust their secret Counsels to any Ambassador's Envoys, or Agents,
without manifest danger of Discovery; therefore they all resolved to meet
together in person, appointing the Herring-Pond to be the place of their
Randezvouz.

In the mean while it was thought convenient for the Dolphin to send an
Ambassador to the Whale, in Quality of a Mediator for Peace between the Whale
and the Imperial Fish. When the Shark heard of this, he ordered his Ambassador
at the Whale's Court to oppose the Reception of the Dolphin's Ambassador with
all his might; but all his Rhetoric proved ineffectual, for the Dolphin's
Ambassador was kindly received by the Whale, and his Overtures of Peace were
hearkened to, which gave great Encouragement to the Confederated Fish to hope,
That an Accommodation might be concluded between the Imperial Fish and the
Whale, whereby the former would be in a better Capacity to make War upon the
Shark, his powerful Neighbor and old Enemy.

Well, the Time came, when the Confederated Sovereigns of the Fish were to meet
together; great Preparations were made to honor so Royal and Illustrious a
Congress; and especially to welcome the Dolphin to the Herring-Pond, who was
made Guarantee of this Princely League. In fine, they meet at the Time and
Place appointed, not without great danger of the Dolphin's Life and Liberty,
who as he was swimming to the place of Rendezvous, happened to be benighted,
and stuck his Fins fast on a Shelf of Ice, so that he could not disingage
Himself in less than 18 Hours time, whereby he was liable to have been starved
to Death with Hunger and Cold, and likewise to have been killed or taken
Prisoner by any of the Shark's Scouts,, who used to ly in wait in those parts.
But Neptune and Heaven were kinder to him, and next Day he happily got rid of
this Remora, and arrived safe at the Herring-Pond, to the inexpressible Joy and
Satisfaction of all the Fish in those parts.

Monsieur the Shark finding all things to succeed well to the Confederated
Fishes, and that he himself was like to be caught in a Net, they having
surrounded Him with Armies on all Hands, and having made a fair Step toward
the concluding of a Peace with the Whale; considering these things, I say, he
sent an Ambassador to the Congress at the Herring-Pond, with spacious
pretenses, and insinuating Wheadles, in order to an Accommodation. This
Ambassador was a Fish of no small Quality and Extraction, a cunning Statesman
and good Orator: (For the Fish do not come a whit behind the Birds and Beasts
in all manner of Accomplishments) He Addresses himself therefore to that August
Assembly in Words to this effect.

Most Serene and Illustrious Princes, and High and Mighty Lords, etc.
THE Shark my Master being desirous to prevent for the future the spilling of
the Blood of any Fish, from the Whale to the Millers Thumb, has taken into
serious consideration, the Original, progress, and present state of the War
between him and the confederated Sovereigns of the Fish; and having maturely
weighed all things in his impartial Gills and finding his end approaching (for
he was well stricken in years) for the better discharging of his conscience,
has sent me to acknowledge in his Name, that he is the first Aggressor, and
that the insatiable Thirst of Empire has carried him beyond the Bounds of
Justice and the civil Laws of the Sea. Wherefore being desirous to die in
peace, and repose his old carcass in Quiet, he has made his last Will and
Testament, whereof I here present your Royal Highness, and your High and
Mightiness, an Authentic Copy under my Masters own Signet, and the public
Seal of his Kingdom.

A Copy of the Shark's Last Will and Testament.
IN the Name of Neptune and Thetis and all the Sea Gods and Goddesses, etc. I
Lodowick Rhodomontado Shark, King of the Gudgeons and other Watery People,
finding my Fins begin to decay and fail me, my Teeth grow rotten and drop out,
with many other Symptoms of approaching Death; being also of a great Age and my
Carcass almost rotten, yet in perfect sound Sense and presence of Mind, have
thought fit to make, and do by these Presents make this my last will and
Testament.

Imprimis, I restore all the Bones of the Herrings, Turbets, Mullers, Plaise,
Flounders and other Fish, whom I and my Armies have massacr'd in the Dominion
of the Imperial Fish, the Sea-Bull or any of their Friends and Allies; I say I
restore these Bones to the surviving Friends and Relations of the Fishes so
massacr'd to be disposed of at their Discretion.

2. Item, I bequeath to the Imperial Fish, the Sea-Bull and their Friends and
Allies, ^^l those great or small Limbs and Brancoes which I have at several
times slyly and unjustly snapt from them when they were not aware of me.

3. Item, I bequeath to the aforesaid Persons all the Contribution Money, that I
have unjustly squeezed from their Subjects by Fire and Sword. With an Overplus
of as many Millions as will compensat for the Losses sustained by their said
Subjects in Houses, Goods and Provision plundered and destroyed by my Armies.

4. Item, I bequeath my Kingdom to the Dolphin and the rest of the Confederated
Fishes, as they can agree about it.

5. Lastly, I bequeath my Carcass to the Sea-Hogs, and my Skin to be stuffed
and hung up for a Memorial on the Top of Mount Teneriff, as a sign to all
succeeding Generations. And I appoint the Imperial Fish, the Dolphin, the
Sea-Bull with the rest of their Friends and Allies to be the Executions of this
my last will and Testament. Provided always, That they shall not molest me so
long as I live, but that there shall be a Cessation of Arms from this time till
the Day of my Death. After which it may and shall be lawful for them or any of
them to enter and take Possession of my Kingdom, and to put in Exectuion all
the Particulars of this my Last Will and Testament.

Given at our Court at Shark-Castle, etc.
Monsieur Gudgeon the Shark's Ambassador, having thus delivered his Masters
Last Will and Testament to the Prince and Lords of the Congress, was ordered to
withdraw, whilst they consulted about an Answer. There needed no great
Deliberation In an Affair, which they were all provided for; wherefore after
some time taken for Form's sake, the Shark's Ambassador was called in again,
and the Speaker of the Congress told him in the Name of the Prince: and States
there assembled together; That the Shark, the said Ambassador's Master, had so
often broke his Word, violuted his Promises and Oaths, that they were all
unanimously resolved never to treat with him again, but to take those measures
as should seem most expedient to themselves without giving him any further
Account, Reason or Answer.

Away swims poor Pilgarlick the Gudgeon with this short Reply to his Master the
Shark, who found himself caught in a Trap, and knew no^ which way to escape. He
fluttered and flounc'd from one fide of his Trap to another, like a Captive
Mouse; but all in vain, for the Herrings, the Whitings, the Salmons, the
Flounders, and innumerable other sorts of Fish had besieged him, and hemmed him
in, resolving every one to have a touch at his old Jacket before long. What the
Issue was, you shall hear, as soon as I receive the Intelligence from Neptun's
Currier.

Reprinted in the Year, 1691.


