MONSIEUR COVENANTS Last WILL and TESTAMENT.
SIck, mortally sick, heart-sick, and without hope of redemption; yet of as
sound, and perfect memory, as when I was Master of the Treasury, and kept the
Register of State-consciences in mine own hand. And though my foundation be
thrown down, and the lease of my life near done, I have left that behind me
which shall give cause to Posterity to remember me. So as, though I; Rump-like,
should fry in the fire: or Phaenix-like be resolved to mouldred ashes, my
memory shall live still in the Calender of the GOOD OLD CAUSE; in defense
whereof I appeared so stout a Champion, till these late Vindicators of their
Liberty fought me out of breath. Wherein how I behaved my self both here and in
that Neighbouring-Nation (which received me, nay nursed me, as if I had been
their Darling) I freely appeal to my Compurgators, those many trusty Co --
jurers of mine, who swore valiantly for me; nay swore many out of their lives
and fortunes, that they might more devotionally serve me. But these Memorials
suit not with my condition, I am now marching to my Doom, for now that
Spit-fire, that Tyburn topman appears, who has made Exchange of his Loup with a
Link, to squib out my Spirit with his consuming light. Now then to my WILL,
though I have no Will to make it, for though I value not the world much, having
so unfaithfully dealt with me, and broke my COVENANT: yet so indeared be my
Allies to me, and so stoutly have they sided with me, and so unanimously
supported me, as it is a torment to me to leave them in the Lees; or like
moulted Scaledrakes drilling, and drivelling under-water, sculking like so many
forlorn Runnagado's in every blind corner, and cursing those Incendiaries of my
deserted Covenant, the sole foretresse of their honor.

It is not unknown to me how saucily one of the Cavalier-Synod jeered me before
my sentence was pronounced, who standing up used these words; Whereas he was of
opinion, that the Covenant had been so long time laid aside, as he verily
thought it was grown moist and dampish: and consequently less apt to take
fire: he held it fitting that those fiery and spritely Works of Mr. PRIN should
be joined to it, to make it more combustible.

In the disposal then of my Corporal Estate (for Temporal I have none worth
looking after) civil gratitude injoyns me to bestow my best wishes, and
bequeath my chiefest Legacies upon my choicest friends. First, it is my Will
(which I hope my Testators will never labor to reverse, nor question in a
Court of Conscience, a Synodall which I have ever mortally hated) that after
dissection of my body, the constitution whereof I have felt daily sailing and
falling into decay, ever since my dear Rump was so Jewishly circumcised, nay
shamefully carbonado'd; this small remainder or Fag-end of my Covenanters
receive to their sole use and behoof the light, and benefit of mine Eyes;
knowing well that they must either look about them, or be caught; and so become
a pitiful prey to those that hate them. As for my Brains, I bestow them on the
Phanatick, his Zeal makes him more desperate then discreet. Let him fight, but
know the power of his Accomplices first. I could wish too, that when he has
sufficiently supplied his own Interest; in a Brotherly pity he would contribute
his assistance to my feverish Brother the upright Quaker: who though he would
not attest my Covenant with an Oath (being a tie which his scrupulous
Conscience ever bogled at) yet cordially held he closely to the mainest of my
Anarchicall Principles. In lieu whereof (for I would never appear regardlesse
of the security of my friend) it is my desire that the grossest, and
unrefinedest part of those Brains bequeathed as aforesaid, should be infused,
and carefully boiled in a pipkin, with some grains of Mercury, pure and
unmortifyed quicksilver, with sundry other Chymicall Ingrediencies,
artificially mixed: purposely to enliven the drowsy Spirit of my Quaker, and
make him more factiously active. This is the best receipt that can be applied
to his crazy condition; both to secure him in the Holy ways of his Calling, as
likewise to fortify him in any action of service wherein his beloved
fraternity shall be pleased to employ him: or in whatsoever he shall be
affronted by those Libertines that shall malign him. And to enable him the
better, it were not amiss, if he chafed, and cheered his sinueshrunk arteries
with the nerve-oyle of a spritely Leveller: this will scrue up his drooping
Spirit to a lofty pin.

But give me leave a little to look upward before I go downward: and travel
over Sea by direction, where I shall never be received by color of my
Commission. And in the first place, my dear and trusty GOF, I must not forget
thee; thou held my Covenant for an Article of Faith, and spoke stoutly for it,
till thy pipes grew accidentally stopped: to supply which defect, and render me
thankful, I bequeath thee my Lungs before Dun dismal hand handle them, either
by seazing or cinging them. 2ly, I am to have an eye on my old friend HUSON,
for that one-eyed Aulman can find no more for me; I do leave him a Spectacle
with one light which an honest Monoculist bestowed on me at his death, and some
little time before the birth of my now discountenanced Covenant. To put him
upon a design I shall not need, his Profession was never without Ends. I could
wish him both his eyes to prevent a sad one. But I fear infinitely (if my fear
could secure him) that the blind Hunx, unless he break his chain, will scarcely
escape the Nooze, for he is sure to be baited by two tried dogs, and both of
the Garden, that will Collar with him: Ball and Porter, I mean, who know how to
hold, and keep him at advantage. As for my discarded Jeweller unfortunate
BAXTER, it grieves me to hear his Tower-rents disrented. It was once in my mind
to have sent him over a Ream or two of my scattered Covenants (for both Press
and State grew weary of them) purposely to wrap up his rich Carknets,
Bracelets, and Lockets: but hearing lately how all those precious Prizals were
by misprision laid in Lavander, their unhappy conversion saved me a labor.

I am not unmindful of Commissary WHALEY, nor those insupportable affronts his
undaunted patience has incountered in my defense. I could willingly bequeath
him my Stomach, with which I might sometimes have compared with the Estrich:
for Iron is of easier digestion then wrongs. But his intimacy with our Great
Master OLIVER (if he may safely pass over the Stygian Flood) will afford him
better advice, and quicker relief, if there be any Place or Office in that
Region, then the Countenance or Sollicitancy of his nearest Allies here. So as
I leave him there to take up free quarter.

-- Oh me! the fear of my approaching dispatch (for I hear DUN at the door) had
quite put out of my mind the memory of my incloistered Crimson Favorite
Justice LISLE; his Sanctuary or book, I hope will save him; otherwise those
decayed Carcasses of his old acquaintance lately lodged near Paddington will
prefer their Petition by a sollicitous Mercury, for the enjoyment of his
Company.

Thus from the ashes of my cindrous fortunes have I contributed to my cashiered
friends. Legs have I yet left me, which I would bestow for Legacies on those
in-grated Cubs in the Tower, if they could make use of them. But since they
cannot, I must: being now jogging on to that place which I hated most: and to
that end which I feared least. -- Yet Solamen miseris! I see by a Landscape my
ancient constant Comrade ARGILE, (whose Nation, though it gave me first birth,
it most unnaturally doomed me to death) stalking same way, and the very same As
it was reported and intended, though afterward otherwise executed. With whom
two Stout Scotch Sectaries GUTHREY and GIFFEN our faithful Covenanters, with
undaunted courage suffered; Scoffing at death, saying, when their hands were
tied behind them with a Garter: Take notice, Brethren, we are mounted to high
honor, and now at our deaths invested with a gallant Order; for we are made
Knights of the Garter! So bravely did these Kirk-Rufflers domineer it in a
halter.
day: while in this my last walk, I observe to mine honor, the pomp of the
world emblematiz'd in me, and my late Protector. He left the world with a
blast, I with a flash.

Thus by suspense (whereto it was voted by some who took it) is my Covenant
quite reft of sense; and my deserted hopes of revivall.

FINIS.

