GREAT BRITAIN's JUST COMPLAINT FOR HER Late Measures, Present Sufferings, And
the Future Miseries She is exposed to.

With the Best, Safest, and most Effectual WAY of Securing and Establishing Her
Religion, Government, Liberty and Property, Upon Good and Lasting Foundations.

Fully and Clearly Discovered, In ANSWER To Two Late Pamphlets, concerning the
Pretended French Invasion.

Printed in the Year MDCXCII.

Great Britain's Just Complaint FOR Her Late Measures, Present Sufferings, and
the Future Miseries She is Exposed to.
THE last great Revolution in Britain (which does so much exercise the Heads,
Hands, Purses and Pens, of the Inhabitants of this Island) is not to be
paralel'd by any Instance from ancient or modern History. When we have ransackt
the Annals of all the Nations of Europe, and traveled as far as the Indies to
find an Example, we shall at last be forced to acknowledge, after all
Circumstances are exactly weighed, That we have been blindly following the
Dictates of our own personal Prejudices and intoxicated Judgments, rather than
tracing the Footsteps of our Predecessors, or of the most zealous Assertors of
public Liberties in other Nations. I do not deny, that in every Province and
Kingdom of the Universe we may find Instances where Subjects have been at last
necessitated by force of Arms to secure themselves, their Religion and
Liberties, against such violent and repeated Acts of Tyranny in their Princes,
as did visibly endanger the Frame of the Government it self, as well as the
Safety of every Individual: And many Princes have lost their Crowns by a tract
of Cruelties and Exorbitances in Government, and an incorrigible Obstinacy and
Deafness to all the humble Petitions and repeated Complaints of their Subjects.

But we scorned to be confined within such ancient Rules, to be regulated by
the Practices of our Forefathers, or to be taught at the Expense or by the
Experience of others. We have walked without Guides, amidst dark and dangerous
Precipices: Our Fears have overrun our Reason; we have taken things upon Trust,
without searching them to the bottom; and we have been imposed upon, by the
cunning and artificial Disguises of self-designing and ambitious Men, to
overlook a most infallible way of securing Liberty and Property to all future
Ages; which the Ambition of the Prince of Orange, and the hard Circumstances of
our own King, had put into our hands. We have vacated a Throne, for the
pretended Disertion of a Prince, violently forced away by a surprising
Defection of his Children, Servants, Subjects and Soldiers; and under the
terror of dangers threatening his Life and Liberty. We have justified this
Severity, by enumerating Miscarriages in Government; which, though Errors and
Mistakes, were very far from overturning Foundations; and which the King was
put upon by the artifice and cunning of his Son inlaw, who was grasping at his
Crown: And we have obstinately refused all Treaties, when offered; whereby
Grievances might have been redressed, and provided against for the future; and
we have ventured upon such Steps as have no Precedent, and furnished an Example
for History, which will be found too desperate and expensive for imitation.

Yet so far has this Poison spread and diffused it self, that though the
pretended Reasons of our Proceedings appear at last to be empty, false and
forged; though the principal Actors are ashamed of their former grounds, and
love the sound of Conquest better than that of a Deliverance, and are
countenanced in it by the Practices as well as Inclination and Maxims of our
present Monarch; there are some People who would gladly continue the Cheat, and
amuse us still with a Hodge-podge of Right of Succession, Election, and
Conquest, and the lofty and agreeable sound of Religion, Liberty, and Property;
which appears to be as little the care as it was the design of our principal
Reformers.

Hence it is, That we have of late been entertained with two famous Pamphlets,
the one entitled The pretentions of the French Invasion examined; Licensed, or
rather written, by the E. of Nottingham: The other is A Letter to a Friend,
concerning the French Invasion; which must be the Offspring of a Person of
equal Quality with the former, since his Character stamps it legitimate,
without a License. These two Pieces do not in the least answer the Figure which
the Authors, who are assigned them, make in the World: For all along, they
falsify, disguise, or absolutely conceal Matter of fact; they labor to impose
Falsehoods for Truths, and their base Alloy as good Coin upon us: They advance
Positions for undoubted Maxims, which have been controverted all the World
over, and upon this Sandy Foundation they raise their Building; and their
Reasonings are either false, sophisticated, or most conclusive on the other
side.

To make good this Charge, and acquit my self of the Duty I owe my Country and
fellow Subjects, in contributing my Mite toward the rectifying their Judgments
in such a nice and important Affair, wherein our own Peace and Happiness, as
well as that of our Posterity, is so much wrapped up. I shall endeavor to make a
full and distinct Answer to these Two Pamphlets, by a true unbyassed and
impartial Deduction of Matter of fact, by seting out the public Councils,
Designs, and Conduct of particular Persons, in their true Light, without those
Disguises which were Art-fully thrown over them; and by their own Reasons and
Maxims, concluding a great deal more forcibly against themselves: And to deal
fairly by them, I shall confine my self to those very Arguments, which are
assigned by the Author of The French Invasion examined, as the Motives upon
which the Restoration of King James is desired and endeavored; viz. The
repairing the Injury done to the King, the settling the Government upon its old
Basis, the delivering us from the Oppressions we suffer under the present King,
and the securing the Protestant Religion for the future.

There is no Englishman but must allow these Considerations to be Grave,
Weighty and Important; and if as True as Considerable, sufficiently conclusive
and persuasive for a speedy Restoration. I will then enter upon a particular
Enquiry; and I do not despair, before I have done, to establish the Truth, as
well as the Importance of those Reasons, against the Cavils of those Authors: I
join them together, because their Reasonings are much the same, equally
levelled against the aforesaid Motives, and must stand or fall together.

As to the first Motive Of the repairing the Injury done to King James. If it
can be made appear, That he was unjustly upon false Pretenses deprived of his
Birthright by his Subjects, who by Nature and Oaths were bound to defend him
in it; then must it be acknowleged a Duty by all, as well as those Authors, to
repair that Injury done him, by restoring his Right again. I shall apply my
self particularly to the clearing of the Injustice done him, since upon that a
great part of the Controversy depends, and most of the Reasons assigned by
these Authors against his Restoration will fall to the ground: In doing of
which, I must look higher than the beginning of King James's Reign; the early
and unnatural Ambition of the Pr: of Orange, as well as the necessary
connection and series of Affairs, oblige me unto it.

It was not the danger which our Religion and Liberties were threatened with,
from the Designs and bad Administration of King James, and a tender regard to
the British Subjects, for their Love and Respect to his dearest Consort, and
Himself, with the Interest which his Birth and Marriage gave him in us, first
induced the Prince of Orange to look toward these Kingdoms and our Affairs.
The late King Charles (notwithstanding of all the tenderness he had discovered
for that Prince's Education, and care for his Interests, in espousing them so
vigoursly upon all occasions against the States of Holland, who would gladly
have secured themselves, by depressing him and his Family, against those
prophetic Fears they lay under, for their beloved Rights and Liberties) was
the first that felt the Effects of his Nephew's towering and boundless Ambition.
No sooner did the Prince of Orange find himself reinstated, by the Authority
and Interest of his Uncle, in the Posts of Grandeur possessed by his Father and
Predecessors, and so put into a Condition to appear upon the Stage, and mingle
in the greatest Affairs of Europe, but he gave loose Ranes to his Ambition, to
range wherever it could perch and fix; without being restrained or frightened
by those common Rules or Barriers, which Morality and Religion had placed as
Spoaks too mean in his Opinion to stop the Careere of a bold and daring Spirit.

Britain was the Place he fixed his Eye upon; neither could Relation, or
Gratitude, place any rubs in his way. The lazy Temper of that Monarch, addicted
to his Pleasures, and his being without Children, the Religion of his Brother,
and want of Male Issue, together with his own Alliance with the Royal Blood,
and some Discontents of the People, which were begotten and heightened by the
Addresses and Malice of a few Grandees, promised him a plentiful Harvest in
return to his Cabals, and Cajoling Insinuations; upon which those Grandees were
applied unto; and as quick and hearty returns made by them, with assurance of
Zeal, Dependence and Fidelity, being glad of so considerable a Support. Hence
sprang all those fatal Divisions which so long time exercised that Prince, his
Councils, and Parliaments.

To spirit this Party in England, and to fix himself one Degree nearer the
Crown, which he so much longed for, the Prince made his Addresses, and was
Married to the Lady Mary, much against the inclination both of the King and
Duke, who did very well foresee the Consequence, and were afraid of so near a
Conjunction with so restless a Spirit. But it is well known who disposed the
King to agree to the Match; for which, and other good Services then in
betraying his Master, he is well rewarded now, rather than for any Merits he
had to plead upon this Revolution.

After this Match, our Divisions and Discontents past all Bounds; nothing less
than the interruption of the Royal Line, by a Bill of Exclusion, would
satisfy. I know the danger of our Religion, from a Popish Successor, was
pretended; but the Prince of Orange's immediate Succession to the Crown, in the
Right of his Princess, was the thing truly intended by the Prince's Agents, and
Privadoes: Nothing else, but such a hidden secret Design, could have inclined
so many Men of Sense and Reason, to refuse the great Concessions was offered
'em; which without Danger, or the bad Consequences of neglecting a just Title,
did equally secure Religion and Liberty. To this Project were Sacrificed all
those great and mighty Securities, which K. Charles would willingly have
Granted in favor of our Religion and Liberties, to be rid of that troublesome
Bill of Exclusion; and thus we lost the greatest, and best Establishment we
ever had in our view; and which would legally, peaceably and willingly, have
been settled upon us, without any farther trouble, danger or expense: So early
did this Prince's Ambition become fatal to our Liberties and Properties.

Hence sprang all those Councils and Measures, which did so much Discontent the
People; and put that King upon the Quo Warranto Project, thereby to temper and
qualify Parliaments, which the Cabals and Machinations of the Prince had
rendered so warm and uneasy to him. Hence sprang that Ferment, and those bad
Humors, which gave Life and Motion to the Duke of Monmouth's Invasion and
Pretenses, who all a long had been made a Stale by some; though the Prince lay
close at the bottom, and seemed to favor the Man; until at last he perceived
that the Duke did in earnest catch at that he so much longed for himself. With
what regret, yea indignation, must every English Breast be filled upon that
blessed occasion we lost, which might have prevented our present Expense of
Blood and Treasure, and all those Fears and Miseries we are now groaning under,
and know not when we shall be at an end of? It is with unspeakable Grief I am
obliged to remember so great a Loss; nor do I mention any thing, but what is
very well known for a Truth to some Persons yet alive, and which I have seen
clearly verified by some convincing Dispatches which are yet extant, and which
shall be carefully preserved until they may be with safety produced. Does not
Sir W. Temple, in his Memoirs, licenced and published of late, acknowledge the
greatest part of what is here asserted? as if, in this reforming Age, People
were to make their Court by publishing of Services, for which their Posterity
may have reason to curse their Ashes. Thus we see what fatal Influences the
Prince of Orange's Ambition had scattered upon our Councils and Measures,
during the later end of K. Charles his Reign: Neither will he be found less
active and successful, by himself and Agents, during K. James's Administration,
as will appear from a particular Enquiry into the pretended Abdication.

This strange and mysterious word, which to this day is not well understood,
neither can be explained, nor rightly fitted to what was intended by it, either
by the Authors of it, or by any body else, was first made use of in the Kingdom
of Naples, some Ages ago; and begot that fatal Sruggle between the Anjouin and
Arroganian Factions, which at last quite ruined that flourishing Kingdom, and
brought it under a foreign Yoke, under which it continues to this day. I shall
not criticize upon it, nor examine how improperly it is applied in the Case of
King James, (though that be obvious enough to any Man who understands the Civil
Law, or the proper and genuine signification of the Word) but shall only
enquire into the subject matter, which according to the Sense of our Reformers,
amounted to Abdication and a Vacancy; and that is King James's Disertion and
Invasion of the fundamental Laws and Liberties of England.

As to the first, how properly his being forced away may be called a Disertion,
will best appear from a true Narrative of Matter of fact; which I shall give
the Reader: And though it may contain several things which are not generally
known, and yet contribute exceedingly to the clearing of this point, I shall
deliver nothing but Truths, which can be made evident, either by Letters, or
Evidence above all exception. No sooner was the Prince of Orange landed, but it
quickly appeared to the World how strangely successful his Agents had been in
their Negotiations. The Poison was universally spread, and the Pretenses of his
Declaration greedily swallowed down without Examination; though I shall make it
appear, before I have done, That it was partly forged, and nothing of it ever
intended to be performed. There was nothing sound or untainted in the whole
Kingdom: His Children run away from him; the Clergy juggle with him; his
domestic and menial Servants betray him; his Subjects flock in to the P. of
Orange; his Army disert; and the very Creatures which he had raised from the
Dust form Designs to deliver up his Person.

Was not this a Scene, the most wonderful and astonishing that was ever
presented upon the Stage of human Affairs? What ground had the King to think
that his Person could be with any manner of Safety, amongst a People who had
thrown off all Ties and Duties which could rationally be depended upon in the
like case? When that natural Affection which was due from Children to their
Parents was quite forgotten; when the Love, Respect, Service, and Gratitude,
which is due from Servants to their Master and Benefactor, was entirely thrown
off, and unheard of Treachery cherished in their places? When that Allegiance
which is due from Subjects to their Prince was debauched, and running into
another Channel? When that Fidelity, which was due from Soldiers, (both as
Subjects, and Men who make a particular Profession of Honor) to their Prince,
General and Nursing Father, was so generally corrupted, that he was advertised
by his General Officers, That the Army was quite poisoned, and would not fight?
When his own Ministers and Counselors were in Pay and Correspondence with the
Invader, and pushing him into Councils and Measures, which might increase the
present Ferment, and facilitate the Prince's Designs? What hopes of
Accommodation, or Assurance of Safety, could remain, without renouncing all
Reason, Sense, and Discretion? especially if we consider that as soon as the
account came that Oxford's, and St. Alban's Regiment of Horse commanded by
Langston, and Cornbury and Heyfort with their Dragoons, were deserted and gone
into the Prince, he called his General Officers and Colonels together at
London; amongst which were Churchil, Kirk, Trelauny, Grafton and others; and
acquainted them, he had called a free Parliament, that he was resolved to
secure Religion, Liberty and Property, at their Sitting. He obtested these
Officers to let him know if there was any thing farther which they desired for
the Security of their Religion and Liberties, and he would most willingly grant
it; and withal desired, That if there was any amongst them who could not be
satisfied, to let him know it, and he would frankly grant them Passes for
themselves and Equipage, to go in to the Prince. Upon which, they all answered
cheerfully and unanimously That they were fully satisfied, and would hazard
their Blood, to the last drop, in his Service: And yet how basely and
ungratefully some of them afterward dealt by him, is too well known, and was
enough to give that Prince just Jealousies of his own Safety amongst Men so
lost as to all sense of Honor and Integrity.

And yet so loath was this Monarch to part from a People who had forsaken him
first, though surrounded with Fears and Distractions, under which any other
Person would have sunck, that he made offers of a Treaty; which the Prince
accepted, not that he designed to come to any Settlement upon it, but because
he durst not unmask himself so far as to refuse it; and was in hopes to find
some Pretext or other to break it off. Upon this, the Commissioners met on both
sides, but with so little Inclination, on the Prince's side, to come to an
Accommodation, which would have bereaved him of that sweet Morsel he had been
so long laboring for; nay, he discovered so firm a Resolution to attain his
ends, without scrupling any thing, how severe soever, which could compass them;
that those noble Lords, who were empowered by the King to treat for him, did
acquaint his Majesty with the insuperable Difficulties they met with in their
Negotiation; and that they thought themselves bound in Duty to let him know
that his Person was not in Safety under the Power of a Prince, who by the
haughty and rigid Conditions he proposed, or rather imposed, and his still
marching on, notwithstanding the Treaty, did visibly enough discover some
farther hidden Design. This must certainly be thought Warning enough from
Persons who were even then leaning to the strongest side, and so would not have
hazarded such advice, unless forced to it by Truth and Horror of the Design; or
put upon it by the Prince himself, to frighten the King away, who was sensible
his Stay did check his Designs, and so was resolved to be rid of his Person
some way or other.

Upon this the King thought fit to withdraw; and afterward sent the E. of
Feversham, from that place, with such ample Concessions, and such real
discoveries of a sincere Intention, to satisfy his People to the full, that
the Prince was extremely alarmed upon it, and did plainly see the miscarriage
and ruin of all his Designs, if Feversham's Message should be imparted to the
English that were about him; for though there were some, who upon all occasions
were forward enough to advise the utmost Severities against the King's Person,
yet by far the greatest part for Number, Interest and Quality, were at the
bottom for an Accommodation with the K. which would have settled and bettered
the Nation; but at the same time would have quite dashed the Prince's Hopes and
Expectations; and therefore some bold Stroke must be given, that so much
Patience, so great Labor, and so many Crimes might not be lost; the Public
Faith must be broken, and Feversham must be secured, without so much as
acquainting the Persons of Quality of the English Nation who were about him
with it, though all a long he had pretended to act by their Advice. But in so
nice a Conjunction he was afraid to trust to their Affection, as knowing very
well they would have p^y'd more than was fitting, for his Interest, into the
pretended Cause of the Earl's Confinement, and his Message: the Goodness of
which would certainly have preserved the Public Faith inviolable in the Earl's
Person, notwithstanding of the Crime alleged against him, and continued in the
Treaty; whereas by this Method the Message was concealed, the Treaty was quite
broken off, and the King would most certainly be frightened to steal away. After
such a series of Defection amongst all sorts of People, after such an Advice
sent by Persons whom he had trusted with the most important Concerns of his
Crown and Kingdom, after such an open Breach of the public Faith, and after
such visible and open discoveries of the Prince's secret Designs and unlimited
Ambition, a Passion which never scruples to sacrafice every Remora to its
Establishment where it Predominates; Is there any cool and rational Man will
censure the King's Conduct in disbanding that Army, which had for the most part
made a Defection from him; and in taking care of his Person by a speedy Retreat
from amongst such wavering Subjects, dangerous and disingenuous Enemies. But in
farther Evidence of the King's unwillingness to part from his People, and of
the Prince's fix d and determinate Resolutions to force him to as great a
distance as he could, being always jealous of a Reconcilement, which would have
quite buried his ambitious Thoughts and Designs; I shall give the World a
particular account of the most important Steps taken by either Relative to
their several Designs.

The King, when he came to London, sent a Message to Sir Thomas Stamp, now
Mayor, and to Sir Simon Lewis, two eminent Aldermen of that City; desiring them
to acquaint their Brethren, and others of the Common Council, That he was
resolved to put himself into the hands of the City, there to remain until by a
free Parliament he had given all Satisfaction to his People, by securing their
Religion, Liberties and Properties, to the full; hoping, that in the mean time,
they would take care to guard and secure his Person. The foresaid Persons
communicated this Message, as they were desired; but by the influence and
interest of Sir Robert Clayton the offer was refused, and the security of his
Person would not be assured to him. Here is plain demonstration, both of the
King's Willingness to piece up with his People, and of the Danger which
threatened his Person. When the King came from Feversham to Whitehall, Monsieur
Zuylestein delivered him, at Somerset house, a Letter from the Prince, which
was designed to have reached him before he came from Feversham; wherein he was
desired, but in the Style of a Command, not to come any nearer London than
Rochester: To which the King very meekly returned an Answer, That he would have
complied with the Letter, had it come sooner to his hands. Can there be any
more doubt, after this, of the Prince's unjust and ambitious Designs, to put
such a Restraint upon a Monarch in his own Dominions, whose undoubted Title he
had acknowleged, both by his Declaration and a Treaty: This was a piece of
Haughtiness and Insolence above all Example, except what his own future
Practices has furnished us with.

As soon as the King came to Whitehall, he wrote to the Prince, inviting him to
St. James's, allowing him his own Dutch Guards to secure his Person, and
assuring him, That upon their Interview he would fully satisfy the intent of
his Declaration. But this was no satisfaction to the Prince: He had a secret
and concealed aim at the Crown; and provided he could gain that point, he liked
it the better that it were Vested with all the Power he so much complained of
in his Declaration: His Conduct since has sufficiently cleared this to these
Nations: An Interview, which was so much desired by the King, did not suit with
this darling Project; he could neither well ask it, nor expect to have it
granted. Besides, he found the Torrent of the Peoples Affections, which had run
so swiftly toward himself, was then at a Stand, and in danger to be turned
into another Channel, if the King remained at Whitehall, and at liberty to
apply himself to the regaining of his Subjects Hearts; which he was sincerely
resolved to court and acquire at any rate, being free from the bad Influences
and Advices of those Ministers which were in Confederacy with the Prince. Upon
all which, it was resolved that Count Solmes should possess the several Posts
at Whitehall with Dutch Guards, and make the King a Prisoner: And about two a
Clock in the Morning he received Orders from the Prince, by the Mouths of three
noble Lords, to be gone immediately from his own Palace; and accordingly he was
sent Prisoner to Rochester, attended by Dutch Guards, and all this performed
with unspeakable Rudeness and Indignities done to his Person.

He was disturbed at an unseasonable hour, with a Sentence of Banishment from
his own Palace, passed upon him by his Son-in-law, who pretended only to settle
and fix his Crown by redressing of Grievances, and that Sentence pronounced
unto him by three of his own Subjects, who accompanied it with some unmannerly
Severities, which their fears of a courser Treatment, if he staid, put them
upon. He was refused his own Guards to attend him, and his own Coach to carry
him to Rochester, though he declared, That he could not travel by Water in so
cold a Season, against Wind and Tide, without greatly endangering his Health.
Good God! that such Barbarities should be practiced, and afterward justified,
by Christians, which Pagans and Infidels would be ashamed of.

Whilst the King staid at Rochester, and during the Sessions of those Lords and
Commons, who first put the Administration of Affairs into the Prince's Hand,
and moved for calling of the Convention, he sent a Message to the present B of
Winchester, which he desired might be communicated to the rest of the Bishops;
acquainting him with his Resolutions to come either publicly or privately, and
put himself into the Hands of my Lords the Bishops to be under their
Protection^, until at their Sight, and by their Advice, he had fully settled
and secured every thing in a free Parliament. This Message the Bishop of
Winchester did impart to the rest; and their return to it was, That they could
not receive him, either publicly or privately, under their Protection; for in
that case they would be responsible for his Safety, and they were not in a
Condition to secure him against the Ambition of the Prince, who was resolved to
accomplish his Designs; and surrounded with so many Troops, after so many
Advertisements given him of the danger his Person was in, by People who might
know it, and whose Testimony was not to be suspected; and those Advertisements
fortified and confirmed, by the Prince's strange and unaccountable Carriage, in
breaking the public Treaty, in imprisoning my Lord Feversham contrary to the
public Faith, thereby to elude the Effects of his Message, in refusing a
personal Treaty, depriving him of his Liberty, putting him under Guards, and in
banishing him imperiously and unmannerly from his own Houses. After so many
fruitless Applications to the Prince, to the City, and to the Bishops, only to
be secured as to his Person, until by a free Parliament he had given full
Satisfaction to his People. Can there be any Person who is not become Bankrupt,
as to common Sense and Reason, who will blame the King for withdrawing, and
thereby endeavoring to put himself in Safety? And it is evident,
notwithstanding all those ineffectual Applications, he was resolved upon every
occasion to court his Subjects to return to their Duty: Witness his Letters
addressed to several Members of his Privy Council; and also that Letter written
from St. Germains, and designed for the Convention of Estates, which they would
not so much as receive or read.

I would now gladly know after what manner, and upon what account, in what
sense, and for what reason the King can be said to have deserted. Desertion,
according to common sense and acceptance, is a voluntary Neglect and
Withdrawing his Person, Care and Influences, from attending that
Administration, Protection and Exercise of the Government, which is due from
him to the People committed to his Charge; when no Force compelled him, no
Danger threatened him, and the People were willing to r^tain him. Is this
applicable to the King's Case? May not the Invading his Dominions with foreign
Troops and an armed Power, the Imprisonment of his Person, putting him under
Guards of Foreigners, and banishing him from his own Houses, be properly enough
called a Force? May not those extraordinary Indignities done him by the Prince,
and those Advertisements given him by several Persons of Quality, Knowl dge,
and Interest, of his hard and difficult Circumstances, be very well called
Dangers, according to the common Rules of Prudence and Discretion? With what
Sense can the universal Defection of his Children, Servants, Soldiers and
Subjects, the rejecting all Treaties, whether personal or by Proxy, the
Refusal of all Applications made by him to the City, Bishops, and Convention of
Estates, be understood an unwillingness in his Subjects to part with him, or a
voluntary Withdrawing or Neglect on his side? We must renounce common Sense,
and quite invert the Nature of things, before a Withdrawing so circumstantiated
will pass upon the sober part of Mankind for a Desertion.

Besides, it is a Maxim laid down by the Author of the Pretenses of the French
Invasion examined, p 4 l. 3. and downwards, That where a King or Queen is
submitted to, and owned by Oaths, and other Methods required in such Cases, the
King himself is not at Liberty to give up his own Power, and consequently
cannot Desert; much less can the People wrest it from him A Man has himself
much more Right to lay down that Power which is legally vested in him, than any
other Person or Persons can have to take it from him I hope this learned
Gentleman will allow us the Benefit of his own Maxims, which we are willing to
admit of. It cannot be denied King James was submitted unto, and owned by Oaths
and all other Methods required in such Cases; and so not at Liberty to give up
his own Power, tho never so willing: And consequently this pretended Desertion
must march off the Stage, according to the Author's own Rules.

But the Disbanding of the Army, in the Sense of this Author and others, was so
illegal a Step, that it must pass for his dissolving of the Government. Why
truly, common Prudence advised the Discarding of an Army, which had dealt so
treacherously with their Prince and Benefactor: And I would gladly know, what
Statute this Measure of the King's trespassed upon. I challenge the Author to
point it out to us. I have heard it alleged, That the King could not raise and
maintain an Army without the Consent of Parliament: But his power of Disbanding
was never yet questioned, much less made a Crime: If the first be justifiable,
the last must be much more so. From what has been said, I hope the Desertion is
quite shut out of doors: The Reasons adduced make unanswerably against it; and
the Pamphleteer's own Maxims knock it dead without Mercy; by which the greatest
part of the Author's Pamphlet and Reasonings falls to the ground, since he
goes all along upon the Supposition that the People were still willing to have
acknowleged his Rights and secured their own, to have treated and come to an
Accommodation with him: as also that the Prince never proposed any thing, but
to have Grievances fairly redressed, which was still insisted on by the Prince
and People in the most humble and usual Methods: But that the King wilfully
deserted, threw up the Government, refused all Treaties, and left them in a
perfect Anarchy, to shift for themselves. The Falsity of all which is already
plainly enough demonstrated, and the Ab^ication must halt, having lost the
better half of its Foundation.

I come next to examine the Maladministration, which makes up the other part
of this Structure; in prosecution of which, I do not intend to play the
Advocate, to defend and justify any Breaches made upon the Laws and Liberties
of my Country: I am as tender of those great Concerns as any Man can be; I love
them as well; I value them as high, and shall be always ready to hazard as far
for their Establishment, as a good Englishman, who knows their Worth, ought to
do. And perhaps I have given better Evidences of this, than the Authors of
these Pamphlets can bring for themselves, notwithstanding their Fustian Words
and high Pretenses.

But Mistakes in Government will be slipping in under the best Reigns; and it
is not every Error can furnish a good Reason for such important Revolutions,
such general Defections, such deviations from that Duty which is due to Princes
from the Obligation of Oaths, the Ties of Nature, and the Laws of the Land; and
for dethroning of Kings, inverting the nature of the Monarchy, and the
interrupting the Royal Line and Succession. Such Alterations have been
accompanied in all Ages with such Confusions, Convulsions, Blood, Ruin and
Desolation, that nothing but the necessary Rescue of the Government it self,
and of all the public and private Rights which are wrapped up in it, from a
clear, plain, visible, undeniable, and otherwise unavoidable Ruin and
Destruction, with a Certainty and Conviction that the Remedy proposed will
prove feasible and successful, without running us into the same dangers and
difficulties; ^^n furnish the least shadow or pretense for Experiments which
are to be attended with such Dangers, founded upon the Breach of so many sacred
Ties and Obligations, and Supported with such Expense of Blood and Treasure.

We ought to be very sure, That the Errors complained of would certainly have
overturned all Foundations, and entirely robbed us of our Rights; That those
Errors did certainly arise from the natural Disposition of the Prince himself,
obstinately and incorrigibly bent to pursue them to the utmost, whatever the
Consequence might be, and not rather from the Impulse of corrupted Ministers,
from a Design to ruin him and make a Property of us, in serving the ambitious
but gilded Pretenses of some other Person; before we run headlong into such
Measures. But alas! I am afraid we are not able to stand this Trial, which
every cool and thinking Man must allow to be very reasonable; and upon an exact
and impartial Enquiry it will be found, That with all this Bustle, Noise,
Blood, Treasure, and Pretense for public Good and Liberty; we have been
destroying what we have built up; grasping unsuccessfully at that amidst the
dangers, Cruelties, and Expenses of a War, and with the Breach of so many
sacred Ties and Engagements, which we might have Insured to our selves and
Posterity with much ease and innocence; and wreathing a Yoke about our N^cks,
which will gaul and pinch us more severely than what we endeavored to throw
off.

The Male-Administrations charged upon King James by those Pamphletteers, are
shortly summed up by them in the Western Severities, the High Commission, the
turning out of Office all good Protestants, the attempting to reverse all the
Penal Laws, the putting unqualified Men into Places of Trust, Profit and Power;
the exercise of the Dispensing Power, the excluding the Fellows of Magdalen
College, and putting in Papists; with the Imprisonment and Trial of the
Bishops. It seems these Authors are of opinion that any Reason, how weak and
unconclusive soever it be, should pass as good Coin upon us, since they come
from such Magisterial and Florid Pens. But if they designed that their
Authority alone should pass for Reason amongst us, they ought to have subjoyned
their Names, to add thereby some Value and Weight to Arguments and Grounds, by
far too weak in themselves to support so lofty a Building as is founded upon
them. Some of the Misgovernments here enumerated, which I have exactly Copied
from p. 6. l. 8. and downwards, of The Pretenses of the French Invasion
examined, are false, others maliciously aggravated, and the rest the King was
forced upon by the Importunity of Ministers who were gained by the Prince, and
offered such Advices only with a design to render him odious to the People, and
thereby to dispose them for this happy Revolution, which has since fallen out.
But to examine them severally;

As to the Western Severities, I believe it will not be denied, even by this
Government, that the Duke of Monmouth his Invasion was a Rebellion; and that
the Lives and Fortunes of all engaged in it, were by the Laws of the Land
forfeited to Justice. I am heartily sorry that so much Blood was shed by the
Hands of the common Executioner; but it is very well known to many Persons of
Honor and Quality, that those great Severities were only to be ascribed to the
insolent and cruel Temper of J^ss^ries, P^llexsen and Kirk; that the King
himself was extremely offended at it, and immediately put a stop to their
Proceedings so soon as he was acquainted with them: And it is strange enough
how this comes to be charged so ^ome upon King James, by the Champions of th s
Government, since King William by his a ^^arcing and employing of Kirk and
P^ll^xsen, (...) plainly discovered to the World, That either he did not look
upon those S^verities to be unseasonable or (...), or also that he loved them
the (...) for th ir (...) and bloody Dis^^^^tio^, as (...) for his Service and
Designs; otherwi^e such Butchers would not have (...) countenanced by a
Reforming (...).

The High Commission Court I will (...): But we know very well Who ^dvised it;
and we see one of the most active Members of it in a fair Way of Preferment
now; and certainly our present King would not honor such a Man, or trust his
Affairs into his hands, if he looked upon that Commission to have been a good
ground for Ab^i^ati^n.

The turning out of Office all good Protestants, and the putting of unqualified
Men into all Places of Trust, Profit and Power, is a large Strain of
Eloquence, which though like the usual Flights of the supposed Author, is too
light and false for so grave and weighty a Subject: For many Places of Profit,
Trust, and Power, were kept filled with good and zealous Protestants; and we
know to whose Councils and Advice, and at whose door we must charge the
filling of so many Places of Trust with unqualified Persons. If an E. of
Sunderland and Lord Churchil had not been Ministers of State and Favorites
then, perhaps the Leo had not yet been exchanged for Kensington It is to their
faithful Counsels and Influence we owe the Advancement of Father Peter's to the
Council Board; the new modelling of the Irish Army and Government; the Magdalen
College Reformation; the Regulation of Corporations; the Clos^t^ing, and the
Imprisonment and Trial of the Bishops: And if so, there is a certain Prince who
is really more guilty of those Miscarriag s than the Abdicated Monarch, sinc he
was the main Engine who set those noble Lords to work; and I am afraid his
Conduct since, when examined, will in a great measure make good the Charge.

It Is natural enough for a Prince to carry some little savor to those of his
own Religion, and easier for a treach^rous Minister to trapan him into more
Indulgence for them, than the Laws c^n w^ll allow; and those two Lords being
entirely Devoted to the Advancement of the Prince's Designs, did employ their
utmost Interest with the King to bring him into all those Measures, which did
so much favor and precipitate this Revolution. There were some faithful
Servants who quickly discovered the Roguery of this, and stoutly made head
against it; but a blind zeal having betrayed the new Converts into those
Measures, and the time serving Courtier being joined with the Pack, Roguery
became too hard for true Honesty; and yet it was with great difficulty, and
matchless Importunities, the King was wrought upon to do several of those
Things which were the only important Errors. It is well known, that it was with
no small trouble he was prevailed upon to admit Peter's to the Council Board.
And as to the Regulating of Corporations, the King gave his Opinion against it
to the very last; and I dare appeal to the Earl of Bathe, whose Testimony is
not to be suspected by this Government, if in his access to the King about the
Regulations, in those Countries were he was Lieutenant, he did not discover the
Truth of what I here assert, from the King's own Complaints to his Lordship,
How greatly he was importuned to give way to those Measures, from which in his
own Judgment, he was so averse.

We might have continued Ignorant, in a great measure, of the particulars of
all this fine Christian Policy, if upon the Revolution these honest Agents, in
so good a work, had not (by boasting of their several Merits, Diligence and
Activity, in betraying an honest hearted Prince, and so the more Credulous to
his own ruin) discovered all the Steps of this Intreigue; but in the Opinion of
some every thing is lawful for the obtaining of a Crown. If it be alleged, that
most certainly the Prince never dreamt of the Crown of Britain until it was
presented to him, as a reward from a grateful People for their Deliverance; his
promises of Places at Court, and Governments of Forts, before he came from
Holland, which were only in the disposal of the King of Great Britain; his
imprisonment of the E. of Feversham, who was a public Messenger, and Peer of
England, and under the Cognizance of none but the King; his imprisoning and
banishing King James from his own Palace, though acknowleged as the just
Monarch by his own Declaration; his banishing the French Ambassador out of
England as soon as he came to London, and before the Administration was put
into his Hands, by which these Kingdoms were engaged, without their own
Consent, in a War with France, without so much as any pretense of Entertainment
given to their Abdicated Monarch, being a considerable time before K. James's
retreat thither; were direct, possitive and most Solemn Acts of Sovereignty,
before ever the Crown was conferred upon him; and are so many plain and evident
Indications of that early Ambition I have charged upon him. And in farther
Evidence, that all his Designs, from the very first, were aimed at the Crown;
and the Crown Vested too with the most towering Prerogatives: When the
Convention was Deliberating, upon some future Provisions, against Arbitrary
Power, the Prince sent my Lord Wharton to several Lords, and Mr. Coulin to Sir
Edward Seymor, and Mr. Hambden, and other Commoners, to let them known, That if
the House insisted so much upon Limitations, that he would return again, and
leave them in the lurch to the Mercy of King James: So generously Tender was
this great Deliverer of our Religion and Liberty. As to the Dispencing Power,
assumed by King James, I do not pretend to justify it. I am heartily sorry
that so bad a Measure was taken, to carry on and establish so desirable and
necessary a Good and Birth right of Mankind, as Liberty of Conscience, which
carries its own native Beauty and Usefulness, so visibly stamped upon it, as
could never have failed to obtain an Establishment from the Reason and
Judgment of an English Parliament: But this would have so much united the
Hearts and Affections of English Subjects with their King, and laid such an
invincible rub in the Way of the Prince's ambitious Designs, that it became one
of the nicest and most sicklish Points to manage, the hardest to ward off, and
the most dextrous and artful part of their Game; there was no downright
opposing of so general and desirable a Good; (...) was easier to poison and
divert (...) The King was first put upon Establishing this Liberty by a
Proclamation, that so the Parliament might be prejudiced against a Thing, which
otherwise they would have granted, upon the account of the first Measure taken
about it; but finding that the general Good and Benefit, which was to be reaped
from this Liberty, would have digested and sweetened this Pill; from a pretense
of saving the King's Honor from a Foyl, and making all sure, though really with
a design to ruin Him and baffle the Thing, they put him upon the Regulating and
Closetting Projects, and upon obliging the Clergy to read his Proclamation for
Liberty of Conscience from their Pulpits. This did alarm the Bishops, as was
designed, and obliged them to think upon Petitioning against it; upon which,
those Beautefeux, being afraid lest the KING should call in his Proclamation,
having always found it hard enough to bring Him to such Methods; they ordered
the business so, that the Bishops were so long in presenting of their Petition
to the King, that though their Reasons had convinced and satisfied Him, there
was not time enough to countermand his former Orders, though never so willing.
Upon which they took occasion to incense the King against them, as if they had
delayed their Petition so long, with design to embroyl Him with his People; and
so they run the Bishops into the Tower, and from thence to the Bar.

This is the true History of the Dispencing Power, and of the Bishops
Persecution, which was so warmly, and bitterly urged against the King, as
undeniable Proofs that his Inclination to Catholics was too strong for the
Laws. But to speak plain English, I hope those Stretches, in favor of
Catholics, which were Criminal in King James, are not become more Legal and
Meritorious in King William; the exercise of the Dispencing Power in their
favors, I hope, is as much a fault now as ever. The Charge will be denied; but
I shall make it good when I come to discourse upon the Third Motive to the
King's Restoration. Are not Catholics employed now in the Army, tho not
qualified by Law? It will be alleged they are Foreigners; so much the worse;
for an English Catholic will still have some regard for the Laws and Liberties
of his Countrymen; whereas a mercenary Foreigner is absolutely at the disposal
of his Master. Are not the Catholics as much Countenanced, and in the exercise
of as much Liberty for their Religion, as ever? The necessity of humouring a
Confederacy, which must support us, the great Strength of which are Catholics,
may be urged as a very good Reason for this; but if we examine it to the
bottom, this threatens our Religion more than any Indulgence was granted them
by King James. When the Catholics of England hold their Liberty merely from
the favor of the Protestants of England, they must be thankful for it, and
humble under it: but when they come to derive their Favors, Immunities, and
Liberty, from the necessity of our Circumstances, and humble Regard and
Deference we must pay to Catholic Princes, without whose Assistance and
Friendship we cannot Subsist; their Spirits, Hopes and Haughtiness, will be
enlarged by it: They must make grateful acknowlegements to those Catholic
Princes, by whose kind Influences they enjoy their Liberty. This begets a
Correspondence with and Dependence upon Foreign Princes; and we do not know how
far, by the Instigation of Catholics here, those Princes may be prevailed upon
to improve the necessity we have of their Alliance, to the advantage of those
of their own Religion amongst us. The House of Austria, within our remembrance,
was the most zealous Champions for the Roman Religion, and the dependence of
the Catholics of England upon that House has been always terrible and
troublesome to this State: And though their Losses, and the growth of France,
has humbled and levelled all the towering Thoughts and Ambition of that Family,
which did so much exercise both the Councils and Forces of their Neighbors,
yet since by our Assistance that House is to recover its Losses, and France to
be reduced within its ancient bounds; with their lost Provinces, the House of
Austria may resume their old Designs: They were but covered up, not
extinguished; concealed through Weakness, to be discovered upon a greater
Increase of Strength and Vigor; in which case we may come to be whipped for our
present Politics

May the great God avert those dangers and difficulties which inviron us, and
visibly threaten the Religious and Civil Concerns of these Kingdoms. We have
been pulling Destruction with both our hands upon our selves, and desperately
risking our Religion and Civil Rights without any necessity; and unless we
repent, and repair these Errors, the Punishments we deserve will certainly
overtake us. We have turned away our King, whose Right and Title was certain
and unquestioned, nay we have chased him from us with unspeakable Indignities,
upon the Pretense of Errors in Government, which he was put upon by the
Artifice of his Enemies, and which he was willing to have repaired at our own
Sight: He courted us by repeated Applications to carve out our own Securities
for our Religion and Civil Rights; but we have obstinately refused any Treaty
with him. We have set our selves up for a Mark of Reproach to future Ages, by
our foolish and invincible Malice and matchless Impudence, in Vacating a Throne
by a pretended Abdication, which imports a Voluntary Resignation; and yet the
Abdicated M narch never made any, but asserts his ^itle to this day. We have
ground d this Abdication upon a wilful Desertion in our Prince, when we forced
him away for the Preservation of his Life; and upon Mistakes in Government,
which he was trapan'd into, and which he was willing to have repaired; but we
would not; as if every Error in Government had been a Sin against the Holy
Ghost, which neither can be attoned for, nor forgotten. The Injury done to our
Sovereign is very visible from what I have written; and so Reparation ought to
be speedily made, notwithstanding all the Reasons given by these two
Pamphleteers against it. But before I enter upon answering their Objections, I
shall discourse upon the other three Motives assigned for the King's
Restoration, and make them equally plain with the first I have already
handled; which will in a great measure prevent or take off all Objections can
be made.

The second Motive was the Settling the Government upon its old Basis; which is
visibly interrupted and quite unhinged by this Abdication. We have turned our
Hereditary Monarchy into an Elective: We have cut the Royal Line, interrupted
the Succession, and destroyed the just Rights of innocent Persons, upon a
pretended Abdication which tho well founded, is but personal, and cannot be
extend d any farther. To this it is answered by the Author of The Pretenses of
the French Invasion examined, p 10. l. 1. and downwards, That the Breach, as to
the Person of the Reigning King, was made by himself, having deserted; That the
Convention did not make, but found the Throne vacant; That in Regard there were
so many clear Indications of the Imposture of the Prince of Wales, the
Conventi^n applied to the present Queen, who was the next and undoubted Heir;
and at her Request, a Title was given to her Husband, and that (...) for Life,
though he was much nearer in Blood than Henry IV. and Henry VII. successively
made Kings of England; That much greater Breaches have been made, since the
Conquest, in the Lineal Succession, by deposing the Reigning King, and setting
up his Son, or a remoter Person, which he acknowlegeth an Injury to the King so
deposed; and that the saving the Succession to the Princess of Denmark and her
Heirs, shows how far the Convention was from any such thing as is alleged.

By such Reasonings the Author of this Pamphlet discovers but small Knowledge in
History, and the Affairs of his own Country; little Judgment and Veracity,
joined with a great deal of Disingenuity and Impudence. How truly the Breach
made in our Monarchy, by the Abdicating Vote, is to be laid at King James's
door, upon the Account of his Desertion, may appear from what I have already
said: And though this Author does very confidently assert, That the Throne was
void by Desertion, it seems the Convention were not of that Opinion, but found
it necessary to declare it so by a Vote, before there was Access to fill it
again; and the E^rl of Nottingham was then quite another Man, and of other
Principles, than we find him now, as an Author, or Licenser only. A Regency was
not in the least akin to a Vacancy. But to humor the Author, suppose there was
a Vacancy, either before or after the Vote, which he pleases; a Vacancy in a
Monarchy is a certain infallible Mark of its being elective: For in a
Hereditary Monarchy, such as this of England, upon the Natural, or Civil Death
too (if the Author pleases) of the Regnant Monarch, the Right of the next
Successor does immediately take place; and the People, whether by their
Representatives in Parliament, or otherwise, do humbly submit to and
acknowledge, not declare and authorize, his Native Title. Our Law Books teach
us, That the Kings of England can never dye: The meaning is, That in an
Hereditary Monarchy the Throne cannot be without a Possessor, were it but for a
Moment; so that where either there is the least Vacancy, or where the next
Possessor wants a Sentence of the People to give him a Title; that very
Sentence, however disguised, is an Election; and together with the preceding
Vacancy, does certainly and indispensably stamp the Monarchy Elective.

Is it not highly impudent in this Author to tell us, that there are many clear
Indications of the Prince of Wales being an Imposture; and, at the same time,
not to let us know what they are, and upon what Grounds they are so clear and
evident? Can this Author be so vain as to think we must take his Word for a
Thing upon which so much depends; no less than the justice, or injustice of a
Sentence, which must stand the Nation in so much Blood and Treasure, so many
Perjuries and repeated Acts of Violence and Oppression, to support and
maintain? Or does he therein follow the Example of the Prince of Orange in his
Declaration? Which tells us of many just and visible Grounds of Suspicion, that
the Prince of Wales was not Born of the Queen, and refers the Inquiry of that
Truth to a free Parliament. King James also has made the same reference, in a
Letter from St. Germains, nay desired the last Parliament to look narrowly into
that Affair; and yet the Prince has never to this day desired the Parliament
to fall about this important Search, nor acquainted us with any of those just
and visible Grounds of Suspicion. Is it not very strange, That the only
plausible Pretense, in all the Declaration for his undertaking, should be so
much overlooked; when a clear and plain discovery of such an infamous Cheat
and Imposture, would have fully justified the Proceedings of the Convention of
Estates, the present Settlement of the Crown, given us all peace of Conscience
and Satisfaction under it, and would really and truly have Abd cated King James
for ever in the H^arts and Affections of every honest Englishman? The Prince in
Honor was concerned to have pressed it; and the supr^am Senate was obliged in
(...) and Ju tice to have made a fu^^ Discovery of the Truth or Falls hood o^
^t, esp^cially when they have (...) so much pressed and challenged, (...) it
were in the face of the World, (...) about it by King James, and (...)
Petitioned so to do by seve^^ ^ rio^s of Honor and Quality in October, 1690.
and which was delivered into many of the Members Hands; besides the times and
circumstances of Affairs were the most ^^^sonable for such an Enquiry. It was
not to be supposed, that the Witnesses could either then be bribed or overawed
into a partial Testimony; and there was all imaginable encouragement for
freedom of Questions for confronting the Deponents, and producing Counter
Evidences, if there were any such; so that the whole Matter might have been
laid open and cleared, to the satisfaction of all Persons concerned. The
vindicating the Honor and Justice of the Nation; the quieting of so many
Peoples Consciences, who think themselves bound by their Oaths of Allegiance to
the King's next and immediate Heirs; the regard due to an innocent Child, if
the Imposture be not cleared; the satisfaction of the Christian World, and the
securing these Kingdoms from those great Dangers and Confusions, which are
certain and infallible upon Competitions, in point of the Royal Succession;
were great and unanswerable Motives for an Enquiry, nay amounted to the Weight
of a Duty due from them to their Constituents, themselves and Posterity. What
can any thinking Man conclude from such a Neglect and Omission, but that the
Evidence, for the reality of the Prince of Wales his Birth, was clear and
convincing; and the Counter Evidence, which was pretended against it, false and
forged; that the Prince of Orange, in his Declaration, had rather Studied to
amuse the World with great and specious Pretenses, than to satisfy them as to
the realty and truth of his Grounds; and that the Convention and Parliament
have followed the Dictates of Passion and Prejudice, more than the Rules of
Prudence and Justice. It cannot be supposed they forbore to trace this
Imposture from any tenderness to the King's Reputation, which would have been
so deeply Wounded by a discovery of the Cheat. So much time and pains spent
unsuccessfully, in laying open the Earl of Essex's pretended Murder, shows
evidently how glad they would have been of any occasion, or probable pretense,
whereby to blacken King James.

So that the Nation must even rest satisfied without any further Evidence of
this Imposture, than some pretended Suspicions which were both groundless, and
raised industriously by those public Agitators for this Revolution: As for
Instance, The Princess of Denmark being forced out of the way to the Bath at
the time of the Queen's Delivery; whereas it is very well known, and can be
made appear, by Persons of undoubted Honor and Integrity, that the King was
against it, that her Physicians in Ordinary were against it, and that pains was
taken to search about for Physicians who would advise her going, as expedient
for her Health; so early were they contriving Pretenses for this Calumny. But
the Prince and Princess of Orange were all along Suspicious that the Queen was
with Child; and yet no care was taken to satisfy them about it. Did they ever
acquaint the King with their Suspicions, and desire some Method might be taken
to remove them? And were they refused it? This was the proper and usual way in
such Cases: And since it was not taken, there is no ground for Complaint. The
King could not dive into Suspicions; which, in my Conscience, I am persuaded
they never entertained. And lastly, it is alleged no care was taken to satisfy
the Nation, who were full of doubts about the reality of his Birth. But why did
they doubt? Were any Methods neglected, which used to be observed? Or any
Persons secluded, who ought to have been present? Did they give any intimation
of their Suspicions by humble Petition or Remonstrance, and desire to be
satisfied about 'em? The Queen had formerly brought forth Children without any
pretended Jealousies. Who could foresee that such a black and hellish Calumny
would be then invented? Yet the Wisdom of God Almighty knowing how far the
Wickedness of this Age would extend; and as an earnest, I hope, of his good and
kind Intentions to this Nation, has Providentially furnished us with a better
and more numerous Evidence of the Birth of this Prince, than can be brought for
the realty of the Birth of any Prince, or private Person in Europe; and has
yet fortified and confirmed it by another Conception, and Pregnancy of the
Queens, to the Birth of which Child many Persons of all Qualities have been
called, and invited in an extraordinary manner; so willing is the King to
satisfy even our malicious groundless Complaints. But it seems our Rulers have
no doubts upon that Head, in which they desire to be satisfied, or find it not
for their interest to have them cleared.

From what has been said, it is evident that there is a real Prince of Wales,
who must be considered as such so long as the pretended Imposture is not
cleared to us, and who has Injustice done him by the Convention of Estates;
for though the Abdicating Vote were well founded against the Father, it was
only personal to Him, and cannot reach the Son: In which Case, the Princess of
Orange's Right being only from the Gift and by the Election of the People, is
a manifest Breach of the Royal Line, and has quite altered the Nature and
Frame of our Hereditary Monarchy. As to the Title given to the Prince during
Life, at her Request, the Princess of Denmark, by the Rules of Succession in an
Hereditary Monarchy, is unquestionably ^ex Heir to her Sister the Princess of
Orange, if she dye without Children: By the Survivancy of Royalty lodged in the
Prince, after the Princess's Death, there is another manifest Injury done to
the Princess of Denmark and her Children; there is another unquestionable
Breach made upon the Royal Line, and the ancient Constitution of our Monarchy;
and there is a second Election of a Monarch by the Convention, to the Prejudice
of the next undoubted Heir, lest the first Instance had not made a stro g
enough President for an Elective Monarchy for the future. And whereas it is
pretended, That the Prince had his Title at the request of the Princess, who
was the next Heir, and willing to give him Place, where is this request and
Concession of the Princess to be seen? When was it presented to the Convention;
or where is it recorded? But tho it were real, what is that to the Princess of
Denmark and her Heirs? Can a Compliment, intended by the Princess of Orange,
from her self to her Husband, cut off their Rights? Again, is it not evident,
That by such a request it is confessed the present Settlement of the Crown is by
the Election and from the Gift of the People; and plainly acknowledged that
there is a Right in them to alter the Succession, and make a Breach of the
Royal Line at their Pleasure?

But it is alleged, We have the practice of our Predecessors to warrant our
present Measures, who have made much greater Breaches in the Lineal Succession,
deposed Kings, and given the Crown to Persons remoter from the Royal Blood than
the Prince of Orange; and that in the Cases of Hen. IV. and Hen. VII. In this
the Author discovers himself to be ignorant of the History and Affairs of his
own Country, in mistaking the Case of Hen IV. in giving us an Instance in Hen.
VII. of a Breach of the Lineal Succession, to the Prejudice of the surviving
King and next Heir, since it is very well known that Richard the Usurper was
killed in Battle, and lest no Heir behind him; and King Henry being undoubt d
Heir of the House of Lancaster, by his Marriage with the Heiress of the House
of York, united the two Roses, and had an unquestionable Title to the Crown,
without any Breach in the Lineal Succession: And also in omitting to give us
the Instance of Edw. III. which are all the Examples our History affords, and
are very far from making a Precedent in our Case. Edw. III. was the eldest Son,
and undoubted and nearest Heir of the Crown; and tho he mounted the Throne
during his Father's Life, yet it was upon his Father's Resignation: And though
he had all the Heat and Ambition of a young Man, and discovered during his
Reign a largeness and greatness of Soul more than ordinary, yet he constantly
refused the Crown, until his Father's Resignation was obtained. This can be
none of those greater Breaches of the Succession, hinted at by our Author; and
does not at all suit the Case of King William: And Hen. IV. makes as bad a
Precedent for our Practice. King Ri. II. resigned in the favor of Hen. had no
Children to be prejudiced by his Resignation: King Henry was the next Heir, the
Pretenses of the House of York being not then set on foot; but that Family
acquiesced in his Right as well as the rest of the Kingdom: So that our own
Histories can as little furnish us with Examples, to justify our present
Practice, as those of other Nations. If in the Instances assigned, the horrid
Violences of Richard the Third, the Male Administrations of Richard the Second
and Edward the Second, could not in the Opinion of this Author warrant their
Dethronnig, from the Character of Injuries done them, he must certainly be
jesting all along with us in his Pamphlet, in justifying an Abdication, for
less and shorter Errors; and the Tory Nottingham is forced at last to peep out
from under his Republican Disguise.

As to the Pretense, That by saving the Succession to the Princess of Denmark
and her Heirs, the Convention has sufficiently shown how far they were from
designing any Alteration in the Succession, or the ancient Constitution of our
Monarchy; it is equally weak and frivolous with any of the rest; and lays a
Foundation for another Election, as it is expressed in the Vote: For the
Provision is not to the Princess of Denmark's Heirs simply, as the Author
falsely and disingenuously represents, but runs thus, To the Princess Ann of
Denmark and the Heirs of her Body; which failing to the Heirs of the Body of
the said K. William, which excludes all collateral Pretenders of the Orleans
and Palatine Families, who would have been comprehended under the general
Notion of Heirs. It was not possible for the Wit of Man to contrive a Vote,
which in so few Words could more visibly alter the Nature of our Hereditary
Monarchy, make more and stronger Precedents for an Elective, occasion more
Interruption in the Succession, and lay a better Foundation for the like for
the time to come. For in this Sentence we have a Breach in the Person of the
reigning King, by the Abdication; we have another Breach in the Person of the
Prince of Wales; we have the People conferring the Crown by Election upon the
Princess of Orange, to the Prejudice of that Prince his Title; we have a
Survivancy of the Government settled in the Prince of Orange, by a second Act
of this Elective Power of the People, to the prejudice of the Princess of
Denmark and her Heirs, which makes a third Breach in the Succession; and
lastly, we have all the Collateral Heirs of this Crown quit^ cut off by the
Entale; by which the Monarchy is to b extingu shed, or a Series of Elective
Monarchs buckled upon this Nation, us ^trongly as those good Patriots could do
it by their Sentence. Let any wise and thinking Man judge, if this be not such
a palpable and visible ^^^inging of all the ancient Frame and Constitution of
our glorious Monarchy, as deserves the warmest Endeavors and most diligent
Application of every honest Man, for the settling of this our ancient English
Government upon its old Basis, by the Restoration of K. James.

The Author of A Letter to a Friend concerning the French Invasion, did
certainly foresee these Difficulties the former Author had run himself into;
and being unwilling to shipwreck his Reason upon such gross Absurdities, he
broadly hints at Conquest: And in this he but seconds the Author of the Answer
to the Paper delivered by Mr. Ashton at his Execution, Licenced by a Secretary
of State; who boldly, and without Disguise, pleads upon that Title. This
Plea, though it be not liable to the same Absurdities with the other, yet
labors under greater; since by one blow, and with one dash of his Pen, he
levels at the Birthrights of the Subjects, as well as of the Monarch; and
undeavours to extinguish the Freedoms of Englishmen, as well as the ancient
Government; and certainly to entail upon and place us actually under that
Slavery, the fear of which is the best Reason they assign for restraining us
from assisting our King in his Return; as if such remote fears of Slavery were
more dreadful than present Servitude, which is the necessary consequence of
Conquest. These Champions make very bold with their Prince, and wound his
Honor and Interest deeper than the keenest Enemies could do: Such Blunders
must fall in, when Men reason rather from Passion than from steady and
generally received Maxim, and labor to defend a deeply tinctured Republican
Revolution by Tantivy Monarchical Principles.

It is strange to see a Man who is endued with a rational Soul, whose greatest
Prerogative and Excellency consists in a clear unbyassed and distinct Exercise
of Reason, so blinded with foolish Prejudice, as rather than submit to plain
and convincing Truth, choose to betake himself to this unaccountable notion of
Conquest; which is absolutely inconsistent with the Prince's Declaration,
destroys the Maxims and Grounds, upon which the Convention of Estates (from
whom the Prince derives his Title) did proceed; overturns the Subjects Claim to
Rights and Privileges, the pretended care of which is the best Support of this
Government; brings home to our Fancies and Imaginations the most frightful
Ideas, which a freeborn People can form to themselves of Tyranny and Slavery,
with all the terrible and desolating Consequences which attends them; and
consequently lays us under Obligations, from a due regard to our selves and
Posterity, and Duty to our Country, to shake off the Yoke with all Speed,
though with neversomuch Hazard and Difficulty.

The Prince, in his Declaration, after an Enumeration of Grievances, assures us
He came for no other Design, than to have a free and full Parliament assembled,
and the Elections made and returned according to the ancient forms; and that
the Members of this Parliament should meet and sit in full freedom, until such
Laws be prepared, as the two Houses should concur in, and find necessary for
Maintenance of the Protestant Religion, and securing the Peace, Honor and
Safety, of this Nation; that there may be no more Danger of falling at any time
under Arbitrary Government; and that he had nothing before his Eyes, in this
Undertaking, but the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the Covering of
all Men from Persecutions for their Consciences, and the securing to the whole
Nation the free Enjoyment of all their Laws, Rights and Liberties, under a just
and legal Government. For the accomplishing of which, since he had only brought
a Force with him, for defending his Person, against the Violence of Evil
Counselors, all the Peers of this Realm, Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and
others of all Ranks and Degrees, are invited to assist him against all who
shall endeavor to oppose the redressing of Violences done to the Constitution
of the English Government. These Pretenses can never be adjusted to the Notion
and Title of Conquest. The Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of this Realm, acting
in a free and legal Parliament, for the securing of their Laws, Rights and
Liberties, under a just and legal Government, neither can nor will ever design
it.

I will charitably suppose the Convention of Estates, and their Constituents,
did believe they had valuable Rights and Privileges, their Religion, Liberties
and Properties, which were derived and secured unto them from positive Statutes
and Laws of the Land, as well as from the Dictates of Nature and Original
Contract; that those Rights and Privileges were invaded, and in danger to be
lost; which made them run into that general Defection, and make a Present of
the Crown to the Prince of Orange, as the only expedient they could then think
of. So long as the Prince's Title runs in this Channel, they are at Liberty,
when they please, to review those Measures, examine the Grounds, and upon a
Rectification of their Judgments, and Conviction that their beloved Rights and
Privileges may be better secured under their ancient Monarch, to betake
themselves again unto him. Sublata causa, tollitur effectus. Or they may
enquire into the Conduct and Government of the Prince, whether it Quadrate with
the Original Contract they made with him; whether their Rights and Privileges
have been entirely preserved; and if they can discover any bad Influences or
Aspect toward Liberty and Property, then to make a Sacrifice of the
Workmanship of their own Hands to a fresh Establishment of those Sacred and
Venerable Rights, by the Maxims of this last Revolution; The Interest of the
People is paramount to that of the Prince.

But if our Conquest take place, then Adieu to Rights and Privileges, Liberty
and Property. The old musty Statute Books and Records of Westminster hall and
the Tower, may be committed to the Flames, as so much waste Paper: His Will and
Pleasure must be the Law whereby we are governed; our Liberties must lie at the
Mercy of his Ministers; and our Properties must be committed to the Stewardship
of his Soldiers. Let us examine the Condition of Conquered People and
Provinces, from ancient and modern History. Their old Government, Laws and
Customs, which they had been inured to from their Infancy, recommended and
endeared to them by long Use and Acquaintance, must be swept off the Stage;
strange Orders, strange Customs, strange Ministers, must take their place: Our
Persons, our Liberty, our Estates, and all our most valuable Earthly
Enjoyments, must lie at the Mercy, Pleasure, and Will, of the Conqueror:
Industry and Virtue will vanish, there being no Reward for them; for a
Conquered People must aspire no higher, than to learn to obey submissively, and
to eat the Bread of Tribulation and Affliction with Patience: The care and
desire of Posterity will languish; being unwilling to beget Children, to become
Slaves and miserable as our selves. The Indian Women strangled their own
Children, after their Birth, that they might not become Servants to the
Spaniards; and Dutch Severities will be found nothing short, upon the Record of
History, of Spanish Cruelties. The Annals of all Nations can furnish us with
dreadful Instances of the unspeakable Miseries of a Conquered People: We may
find those Examples of the Calamities of that Condition, which would make us
embrace Death for a Favor, and be able to sink us into utter Despair, unless
at the same time these very Histories had given us a view of the strenuous and
successful Endeavors of those generous and worthy Spirits, who have despised
Dangers, Difficulties, Torments, and Death it self, for the Rescue and
Deliverance of their Country and fellow Subjects. The greater and more terrible
the Dangers were, the more vigorously and undauntedly did they court them, when
they were in pursuit of so glorious a Quarry. The Efforts of Conquered Nations
for the Recovery of their lost Liberties, stand fairest upon the Records of
Fame, and are handed down to us with the greatest Exactness and Encomiums; as
if our Ancestors had judged it necessary, and all Writers had conspired
together to rouse up, when Occasion called for it, that desire of Liberty,
which was born with us. If Conquest must be forced upon us as our present Lot;
I hope all true Englishmen now will discover as great a Sense, as any upon
Record of a vindicative Duty to their Country, and love for their Liberties, be
as tender and careful to transmit them safe and sound to their Posterity, as
their Ancestors have been vigilant and active in handing them down to them;
that they will be no less careful of the ancient Government and Monarchy of
this Nation, than of their own particular Rights; since every blow which
reaches the one, must certainly wound and endanger the other; and that it shall
be impossible to make the English a Conquered People, because they will
generally choose not to be, rather than to be Slaves.

It may be alleged, that all that I have said upon Conquest might have been
forborne, since the King sets up for no such Title; perhaps it is not seasonable
to do it: But to have Conquest so publicly pleaded for in Pamphlets, Written
or Licensed by Secretaries of State, and that without any Check or Punishment
from the Prince is very suspicious, especially if upon Examination of those
Oppressions which we suffer under the present King, we shall find his Conduct
smell Rank that way. If we be treated as a Conquered People, the Misery is
still the same, or rather greater; though the Prince who deals so by us should
be called a Reformer.

It being made evident and plain, That King James was highly injured, and the
ancient Government quite unhinged, by the Sentence of Abdication and our late
Measures. I come next to examine how exactly the Prince has fulfilled, and
made good unto us the pretended Ends and Designs of his Declaration; how well
he has kept the Original Contract we made with him; and what benefit we may
expect to reap for the future by this Revolution. I shall take his Conduct in
both Kingdoms jointly under Consideration, since he has not only united them
in the same Declaration, but likewise issued out a Declaration apart for
Scotland; intimating thereby, That the Oppressions in that Kingdom were more
weighty and numerous than here, and that the Arbitrary Designs of our Prince
did always first commence there, to make a Precedent for this Kingdom; and that
the Conduct and Posture of Affairs there, did always certainly Prognosticate to
the curious Observer, what was designed to be Copied and Executed here. I do
not pretend to give a particular detail of the present Administration in that
Kingdom; but there are some considerable Errors have been acted there which
have made a Noise, and raised such public Complaints there, as has conveyed
the Knowledge of them here to us.

The assuming a Power of Dispensing with the due Execution of Laws, enacted by
King and Parliament for Security of Religion, Liberty, and Happiness of the
Subject, is much urged against King James, as a great Motive to the Prince's
undertaking. A Dispensing Power assumed by any Prince, does fatally threaten
the Liberties of a People where it is practiced, and makes them Tenants at Will
for those Privileges which the Laws of the Land has given them a Freehold in.
This is really such an important Point, and of such Consequence for the Subject
to have been cleared, that it was indispensably the Duty of a Reforming Prince,
Convention of Estates, and Parliament, to have decided this Controversy, and
placed such Marks and Boundaries for the future, so plain and obvious both to
Prince and People, that each might have known their particular Rights, and
governed themselves for the future accordingly. But our Parliaments have
thought fit to leave it where they found it, dark and undecided to this day;
and the Prince has discovered he was well enough pleased with this Omission,
by taking as large and broad Steps that way, as any can be charged upon King
James.

The Irish Treaty furnishes us with a convincing Proof of this; where such
Indulgences were gran^ed unto them solely and si^g^y by his own Authority, with
relation to the exercise of their Religion, pro^ of their Arms, dispensation
from Oaths, and security against ^rsuits for their Plunderings; as were
directly contrary to the Laws of the Land, the Safety, Rights, and Privileges
of the Protestant Subjects of that Kingdom. This Treaty, I do acknowledge, was
afterward ratified by Parliament; but though in some Cases the Authority of
Parliament may give a legal Being for the future, yet that new Life commenceth
only from the date of their Sanction, and does not justify preceding Errors;
and the many Difficulties which arose in both Houses about the Ratification,
was a clear Innuendo how dangerous and illegal they judged the Treaty to be.
How strangely are we altered? King James's exercise of this Dispensing Power,
could neither be forgotten nor attoned for; but King William's stretch that
way, shall obtain a Parliamentary Approbation; such is the Justice and
unbyassed Integrity of these Times.

But we need not look so far as Ireland for Instances: We have our personal
Liberties secured to us by positive and express Statutes, and Methods appointed
by our Law, whereby to recover our Liberties when lost, with such severe
Animadversions against those who obstruct the due course of Law in obtaining of
our Freedom, with such great and considerable Damages appointed in that case,
as plainly enough Points out unto us the Value and Worth of this true English
Privilege. It is the choicest piece of our Magna Charta, and Original Contract;
and, for my part, I should much rather allow a Prince to dispense with Penal
Statutes, and issue out a Proclamation for Liberty of Conscience, than to sport
himself at Pleasure with my personal Freedom; without which there can be no
relish in any other Enjoyment; and yet there never was a Reign wherein our
Birthright in this has been more abused, spoiled, and broken in upon. The
English Subjects have been put into Proclamations, and clapped into Prisons for
High Treason, and refused the benefit of their Habeas Corpus, though there was
no Information upon Oath against them, according as the Law appoints to warrant
such a Procedure: Nay so grossly, frequently and impudently, have our public
Ministers affronted the Laws upon this Head, that they have found themselves
obliged to apply to Parliament for Pardon: For we have found out a new Trick in
this Government, and reforming Age, first to act all imaginable Violences
against the best and choicest of our Laws, and than to obtain either a
Ratification or Pardon in Parliament; whereby they have struck our English
Constitution, and the Liberty of the Subject, Dead at one Blow, by Debauching
our Parliaments into a Confederacy against, (in place of Protecting,) the
Liberties of the People, and so making the Nation as it were Felo de se. No
period of History does furnish us with such wholesale Merchants for our best
and most valuable Rights; neither do we know when this Trade shall be at an
end, or when our Rulers will be weary of Tricking us out of our Liberties. We
have a fresh Instance of late of the Knowledge and Learning of our Judges: When
the Earls of Huntington, Midleton, and others moved at the Bar for their
Habeas Corpus, there was no Information upon Oath against them to warrant a
refusal; otherways to be sure we should have heard of it: But Aaron Smith must
make Affidavit that they had Evidence for the High Treason charged against
them, which could not be got ready; and so by his Liberty and Freedom of
Conscience, save in some measure the Credit of the Court: By this fine new
Knack, they were all remitted back to Prison again. Such Judges may at last
come to be fit enough for the Bench even under a Conquest; but in the mean time
all such Expedients, which are not warranted from the Statutes, do rather prove
the Injustice of the Court, than fulfill the Law; and however it may be Gilded,
we cannot but see and feel the bitter Pill we must swallow.

Was not the Habeas Corpus Act suspended for many Months? It Is true this was
done by Parliament; but so much the worse, if our own Delegates, in whose Hands
we trust the care, but not the entire surrender of our Liberties, make a
Complement of that which is not in their Power, to the Ambition or Necessities
of any Prince. Parliaments can no more justly over-turn Foundations, than the
Prince can. Such Privileges as are derived from King and Parliament, upon the
account of the Subjects Temporary Conveniences, are trusted to the review of
the same Court; but these Fundamental Privileges, which are the Birthright of
Nations, and derived Originally from the Laws of Nature it self; such as the
Freedom of our Persons, and Dominion over our Properties, fall only under the
Cognizance of Parliaments, for their better Establishment against such
Breaches, as the depraved Nature of Princes and their Ministers will be making
upon them.

The Nature and Design of Societies, has occasioned a partial Submission of
these two great native Privileges to the safety of that Body Politic, by
punishing of Crimes; and to the support of it, by Taxes, which we grant our
selves; but in no Construction of Reason, Sense, or Justice, can Delegates be
understood to be empowered, to make an entire surrender of those Rights into
the Hands of any Prince, were it but for a moment. It may be alleged, That the
safety and necessity of the Government put our Rulers upon such extraordinary
Measures. If reasons and pretenses of State (the Secrets of which are always
locked up in the Prince his Br^ast) can apoligize for such bold Strok s,
against our most Fundamental Privi^eges and Laws; Where is there any Right or
Immunity, which we can call our own, or be ^ssured off? Since such pretenses
shall never be wanting to entitle the Prince to an absolute Dominion over (...)
Property, as well as over our Liberty; since the last is more valuable than the
first; Why may not Reasons of State, as justly render him Master of the one as
of the other?

If it was to preserve our Liberties from the insults of King James, we placed
the Prince upon the Throne, we have certainly either mistaken the Disease or
the Cure; since he cannot be preserved upon it at a cheaper rate, than a
Sacrifice of what we intended to preserve, we are to learn nothing from this
Revolution, but a surer and more infallible way of enslaving the Subject. King
James never dreamt of such a Method. An English Parliament was hitherto
esteemed a Court inseparable from the true Interest of Englishmen; but a little
more Training under so good a Master may make them change Principles, and
become in time as complacent and good natured as ever the French and Swedish
States were. Nothing, it seems, in Gratitude, can be refused to our Deliverer.
But tho Gratitude be a Virtue, it ought to have its Bounds, lest it run us
farther than designed or intended at first, even to the destruction of those
Rights, for the Preservation of which we desire to appear so grateful. The King
of Denmark, in our time, by the Merit of some Actions performed for his People,
and during their first Raptures of gratitude for it, sound the way to Enslave
them, by changing an Elective and Limited, into an Hereditary and Despotick
Monarchy.

The admitting of unqualified Persons into Places of Employment, and the
erecting the High-Commission-Court, were thought great Crimes in King James,
and mighty Errors in Government; and yet the first is as frequently practiced
in the Army as ever; and how much further the Prince's dependence upon Popish
Confederates may lead him in favor of Catholics, must be owing to their
Moderation; for we lie at their Mercy upon that head, and may come to be made
sensible, that our Foreign Allyances may prove as troublesome and uneasy to
us, in favor of Papists, as King James's Religion was: And as to the last, the
Prince must either look upon that Court to be no Crime, or by favoring the
most active Members in it, he must destroy and invert that old English Maxim,
That our Kings can neither Err, nor be Punished; but that evil Counselors are
liable to both.

The turning out the Fellows of Magdalen College from their Freeholds, contrary
to that Provision in Magna Charta, That no Man should lose his Life or Goods,
but by the Law of the Land, is not to be justified; and yet falls much short of
the putting People to death, under this Government, by Martial Law, before it
was Enacted. Few Men will ever scruple to secure their Lives, with the loss of
their Places. The Quo Warranto and Regulation Projects, were much to be
complained of; but we may very easily imagine to whose Practices they were
owing, by the Countenance and Preferments the Authors and Promoters of those
Councils received from this Government; neither can the Quo Warrantoing of
Charters be so illegal, as the Declaration would make us believe; since King
William himself treads in the same Path, by imposing a Governor upon New
England, upon the Quo Warranto Foot, contrary to the Opinion of his
Privy Council.

Whereas by the Declaration, the slighting and rejecting of Petitions delivered
by Subjects, with Submission and Respect, is considered as a high Strain of
absolute Power; yet when the People of Scotland had secured to themselves the
Privilege of Petitioning, by their claim of Rights; and in pursuance, and by
virtue of that Privilege, the greatest part of that Parliament, which placed
the Crown upon his Head, had humbly addressed unto the present King for his
assent to some Votes, which they had passed for Establishing of Religion and
Liberty, and which were agreeable to their ancient Laws and Privileges, they
were scornfully and disdainfully refused and rejected. If by the Declaration it
was a fault to treat a Peer of England as a Criminal, for asserting that the
Subjects were not bound to obey a Popish Justice of Peace; it cannot be a piece
of Justice in King William to pass a Sentence of Banishment upon the Earl of
Feversham, who is a Peer of England, within these few Weeks, without so much as
alleging a Crime against him.

Since by the Declaration, the obliging People to deliver their Opinion before
hand, as to the repealing the Test and Penal Laws, and the turning out of
Employments such as would not promise lustily, is represented as so fowl a
piece of Collusion. The Closetting of Members of Parliament now, to pre-engage
their Votes in Affairs depending before them, and the Disgraces which some
obstinate Persons fell under upon it, should have been forborne, unless King
William be dissatisfied with the Prince of Orange's Declaration, and the Rules
and Maxims therein Established.

According to the Scottish Declaration, the appointing of Judges in an unusual
manner, and giving 'em Commissions, which were not to continue during Life, or
good Behavior, was highly illegal; yet K. William, after he got the Crown,
found he was mistaken in that Paragraph, and nominated the whole Bench, without
subjecting them to a Trial and Approbation of Parliament, according as Law and
Custom required; did not think fit to continue their Commissions during Life or
good Behavior; and appointed them a Lord President, tho by express Statute he
was to be elected by the Bench.

By the Declaration, the imposing of Bonds upon whole Counties without Act of
Parliament, and the permitting of free Quarters to the Soldiers, are declared
to be high and intolerable Stretches of Government: The same has been
practiced in this Government, with greater Confidence, less Compassion, and
other aggravating Circumstances. Bonds have been imposed by Authority of
Council, without Warrant of Parliament, as may appear from (...) public
Proclamations; and many Thousands of Soldiers have been maintained upon free
Quarter, and for many Months together countenanced and abetted in it by the
Government; and the Funds for reimbursing the Country, which were appointed by
Parliament, have been otherways diverted.

The Commissionating the Officers of the Army, to sit as Judges upon the Lives
and Estates of the Subjects, and the putting People to death without a legal
Trial, Jury, and Record; were complained of in the Declaration; were thought
good Reasons for Fore-faulting of K. J. and were provided against upon this
last Setlement of the Crown: And yet both the caution given by the Sentence
against K. J. and the future Provision made by the Estates, prove to weak to
restrain this Government from practicing the same things, by ordering and
impowering Colonel Hill, and Lieutenant Colonel Hamilton, to put Glencou and
all the Males of his Clan, under Seventy, to death; which was partly executed
upon them, without any legal Trial, Jury, or Record. Neither can their former
Enmity, and opposition to the Government, furnish any Apology for so barbarous
a Murder, since they had all either actually taken the benefit of the
Indemnity then granted, and so were Pardoned, or had Protections in their
Pockets, which put them under the immediate care and safeguard of the
Government. It may pusle the best Heads to find out the reason why Irish
Papists, though stated Enemies, should be indulged to the prejudice of our Laws
and Rights; and yet Protestants, though formerly Enemies, barbarously
Massacred, when indemnify'd and under protection; unless K. W. be resolved,
from the Obligations he is under, and the Deference he must pay to the Pope and
Popish Princes, to embrace every occasion of destroying the one, and cherishing
the other.

By the Declaration we are assured, That the Prince will concur in every thing
that may procure the Peace and Happiness of these Nations, and which a free and
lawful Parliament shall determine; and yet how many necessary and useful Bills,
for the Happiness of the Nation, have been stifled by the Interest, Intreigues,
and Solicitations of the King himself, his Ministers and Courtiers; and the
Royal Assent refused to many Bills in our Neighboring Kingdom: And in this to
the Bill about Judges, which was thought so necessary an expedient for the
Establishing of Justice, and to cut off their servile Dependence upon the
Court, which was charged as such a blemish upon the Judges in K. James's Reign,
and was always looked upon as dangerous to the Lives and Liberties of the
English Subjects.

We were assured that the only design of the Prince's Undertaking, was, The
preservation of the Protestant Religion, the covering all Men from Persecution
for their Consciences, and the securing to the whole Nation the free enjoyment
of all their Laws, Rights and Liberties, under a just and legal Government. How
well and truly he has confined himself within these Limits, and other Bounds
he prescribed to himself in his Declaration, may partly appear from what has
been said; and shall yet be made more clear and evident by a true and impartial
Enquiry into his Conduct, and some considerable Stretches which have been made
in Points not glanced at by the Declaration, because they were Strains of
Absolute and Despotick Power, which K. James's Reign did not furnish us with
any Instances of the like.

The Power of imposing Taxes is unquestionably lodged in Parliament; and the
People of this Island have a natural Right unto, and Dominion over their
Properties; and the Prince cannot share with them in it, in whole, or in part;
except in so far as they consent to it themselves, by their Representatives in
Parliament: And our Parliaments, though abundantly liberal in other respects,
have never indulged the least Liberty to our Monarchs on that head; being so
far tight to their Trust; and their Constituents Interest: And the Estates of
both Kingdoms judged it necessary, upon the present Settlement of the Crown, to
assert the Peoples Right in it; and plainly to express it as one of the
Conditions of that Settlement. And yet the Privy Council of the Kingdom of
Scotland have openly and avowedly, in Contempt of the ancient Laws and late
Original Contract, by their public Proclamations, commanded and appointed,
under the severest Penalties, the Subjects of that Kingdom, at their own Charge
and Expense, to furnish a great number of Horses for the use and service of the
Army; and for carrying Ammunition and Provision of Victuals, with Men to attend
the said Horses: And I am informed, That when upon cool and second Thoughts the
Council, considering what they had done, how illegal it was, and the danger
they had run themselves into by it, thought fit to apply unto the Parliament
for an Approbation, it was refused them.

Extravagant Bail was complained of, and provided against by the States of both
Kingdoms; and yet it is daily and frequently imposed, and exacted many times
far above the Value of their Estates.

The Freedom of Elections to Parliament, from the Bribes and Directions of
Court and Courtiers, was expressly conditioned by the States of both Kingdoms,
upon their Tender of the Crown. How well that is kept and observed, may appear
from the bare faced and open Applications made to Counties, Corporations, and
particular Electors, for the Choice of such and such Persons, with Threats and
promises of Reward. Nay, I have known Three thousand Pounds expended for secret
Service, to prevent the Election of a Person who had been eminently Serviceable
to this Government, bec^me he was found tighter to the ^nterest of his Country,
than to the Court* for there never was a Reign wherein the Interest of King and
People are more confidently stated as contradistinct, than in this, though it
be only the Consent and pretended Interest of the People, gives Birth, Rise,
and Title to it.

The frequency of Parliaments, for redressing of Grievances; the amending,
strengthening, and preserving of the Laws, with all Freedom of Speech and
Debates in them, was insisted upon and fundamentally established by the States
of both Kingdoms, when they elected their present Majesty's to the Throne How
well this is observed and made good to both Kingdoms, is obvious enough. It is
not for redressing of Grievances, amending or preserving the Laws, they are
assembled; but for giving of Money. The craving Necessities of the State, the
pressing Circumstances of the Consederates and foreign Affairs, the early
Preparations of the French King, an honorable Peace, the Good of the
Protestant Religion, and Fears of King James; are become the cruel and
everlasting Topics, the common and ordinary Stale, whereby the true Intent of
Parliaments is baffled, and the Money business quickened and finished. The last
is now so much the business of Parliaments, and the firit so little, that it is
an equal Wager that this Court may come at last to plead Prescription against
Parliaments, as to any other business but Money-bills.

As to freedom of Speech and Debates, though there be none questioned for it,
yet Members are so frequently Discouraged and Frowned upon at Court, Disgraced
and turned out of Employments, whenever they launch out into an enquiry after
Grievances, or the present Administration: And upon the other hand, the Places
of Honor and Trust, and the Money of the Nation, are so openly and visibly
employed for debauching of Members from a sense and feeling of the true
Interest of the People, and for divesting them of all the public and generous
Notions, Zeal, unwearied and bold Endeavors for the Rights and Privileges of
the Subject, the joint Good and Interest of King and Kingdom, which has been
hitherto so much the Glory and Entertainment of brave English Spirits in our
Parliaments; that this native and necessary Freedom of Speech and Debates, is
more visibly threatened, and more effectually destroyed, than ever could have
been done by Force, Sentence, or Imprisonment. We are sooner wheed^ed with
false, if gilded, Pretenses, than hectored or huffed into a Court Compliance.

Lastly, was there ever a Reign, wherein the plunderings and Free qu^^terings
of Soldiers was more counteranced, and the People more grievously oppressed by
them, than in this? The Complaints of Scotland upon that head already hinted
at, the irregular and unheard of Abuses and Miscarriages of the Irish Army, the
Desolations brought upon that miserable Kingdom by them, and the daily
Instances we most with of that nature in this Kingdom, are convincing and
undeniable Evidences of the Truth of it. Nay, to such a pass is it already
come, that when a Secretary of State was applied unto, by persons injured, who
were entirely in the Interest of the Government, and presented by the Knight of
the Shire with Complaints against the Abuses and free Quartering of Soldiers;
they were scornfully rejected with this Answer, That Men and Horses must eat:
Meaning, no doubt, that since the Taxes designed by the Parliament for that
end, were necessarily to be applied unto the use of the Consederates, the
people must be doubly burdened for the Subsistence of the Troops. Such brave
Guardians are our present Rulers become of the English Liberties.

Here we have a sad but true Catalogue of our Miseries; only it is not full and
complete. The present Administration can furnish us with a great many more
Instances: But I have confined my self to a Deduction of those grosser Errors,
which visibly infringed the Pretenses of the Prince's Declaration, and the
Petition of Rights; the securing and preserving of which, was the Reason
expressly assigned for his Election into the Throne. If in the Infancy of his
Government, when his sense of Gratitude for the Gift of Three Crowns, if ever,
must be fresh in his Memory: when the Hearts and Hands, as well as the Purses
of the People, were necessary for his Support; when his Honor as well as
Interest called for a different Conduct, he run so warmly into such Measures:
what must we feel, when he comes to sit sure and be fixed upon his Throne?

We may certainly conclude upon the Inclinations and future Designs of a
Prince, by his preceding Conduct, and the choice of his Ministers; and from
both these Reflections, in the present Case, we have but a melancholy View of
our future Condition. Are not those very Men, who in both Kingdoms were the
Authors, Contrivers, and Actors of the most Arbitrary and grievous Proceedings,
which were complained of, during the Reigns of our two last Monarchs, become
the Ministers, the Darlings, the Favorites of this Reign? Have they changed
their Principles and Maxims? The former Instances, in which they have their
share, may convince us to the contrary.

Is it to be imagined that a Prince, who signalized his Entry upon the Stage of
public Affairs with a breach of the most solemn Oaths to the contrary, the
Destruction of the Liberties of his Native Country, and by grasping at a Power
which the Nature, Law, and Constitutions of that Government denied to his
Character in it; will be more tender of his Oaths to us, and of our
Constitution? His past Conduct may clear it up unto us; we are Strangers to
him, and he to us; his Affections, as well as his Birth, are foreign; he
distrusts and despises us, as treacherous to our former King; He may love the
Treason, but hates the Traitors. It is not a single Crime can entitle us (...)
his Favor; it is by a Sacrifice if (...) of King and Country we can touch his
heart; it is only by this double Treason we can get into his Confidence. The
Fate and Disgrace of those Persons, who upon this Revolution frankly sacrificed
the first, but knew not how to subdue their Scruples as to the last, may
sufficiently prove this Truth. We have none but our selves to blame for this
Mischief: By our Abdicating Vote, and subsequent Measures, our ancient, just,
and legal Government, is destroyed and overturned; and in so doing, we have
disingaged him from the Promises he made in his Declaration, since it was only
under a just and legal Government that we were assured of his Endeavors to
preserve our Laws, Rights, and Liberties. Let us yet a little farther examine
the Benefits we shall reap from this Revolution, the Means we have to support
it, and what will probably be the Issue of all these great Transactions.

The malignant aspect of our late Measures, toward our beloved Rights and
Privileges, seems to be pretty well cleared already, and scarce admits of an
aggravating Thought more; unless we consider that we are like to pay the Price
of a perfect and lasting Cure, for downright Poison and a mortal consuming
Feavor: But perhaps this Victorious Prince, by his Conquests and admirable
Conduct, will raise the Military Glory of this Nation so high, and enlarge her
Territories and Command so far, as shall quite darken and eclipse the Luster
and Fame of our greatest and most fortunate Kings; and thereby alleviate, or
quite bury our Sense and Feeling of past, present, and future Miseries. If the
Laurels and Conquests of a Monarch, which are first drenched in Tears, and are
founded upon the Slavery of the People, can atone for such Miseries, the French
at this Day would be the happiest People in Europe. This will not pass upon
English Men, who observe from their Histories, that the most Victorious of
their Monarchs have always been most render and careful of their Liberties; and
I am afraid that even this faint Comfort shall not be afforded us. What reason
have we to expect, that by the Conduct and Military Knowledge of a Prince,
(against whom the Naked and Undisciplined Irish made Head for three Campaigns
together,) we shall be able to gain Troops and Provinces, from the more
Numerous, better Disciplined, and Conducted Troops of France? For though the
Author of A Letter to a Friend concerning a French Invasion flatters us, with
our Victories over the French at the Boyn, Athlone, Agrim, and Limrick, and
from thence foretells our Success in Flanders; they were still but Undisciplined
Irish we subdued, with difficulty enough in some of those Places; and our
Victories over the French in Ireland or Flanders, have not as yet burdened our
Gazettes. We have already expended many Millions of Morey, and lost many
Thousands of Men, and have nothing in return for all this Consumption of Blood
and Treasure, but the Reduction of Ireland; which vigorous and early Measures
could have secured unto us at the beginning, and prevented the utter Ruin and
Desolation of that Country; and our late Victory at Sea over the French, to
comfort us for our two former Disgraces at Bantry and Beachy, the shameful loss
of many of our Navy Royal to the Enemy, the seizure of so many Hundreds of our
Merchant Ships, and our Misfortunes in Flanders: Some of our former Princes,
with a far less Expense of Men and Money, when Affairs were managed with true
English Councils, and executed by English Men, have subdued whole Provinces,
and given Law to Europe. But we go now upon Politics, and are governed by
Measures, which are Calculated rather for the Interest of Foreign Confederate
Princes, than adjusted to the Honor, Profit, and Good of England. This
Confederacy has cost us already a great deal of Money; and it is plain, that
the particular Interests, Ambition, and Pretenses of these Foreign Princes gave
Birth to the Prince's Undertaking, rather than any kind regard to our Religion,
Rights and Liberties. It is pleasant enough to imagine that the Pope, the
Fathers of the Spanish Inquisition, and the Authors of the Hungarian and
Piedm^ntish Persecutions, against those of our Religion, should be so concerned
to establish the Protestant Belief amongst us; and that those Foreign Princes,
who have extinguished the least shadow of Liberty and Property in their own
Dominions, have such pangs of Conscience, and tender Regard for our expiring
Liberties. They wanted our Money and our Troops, to carry on their several
Pretenses; and if they could be still sure of Feasting, and making War at our
Expense, the Favor would be as acceptable from the Hands of King James, as
from the Prince of Orange: But the Prince who must stand equally obliged to
them for his mounting the Throne, and support in it, was judged a fitter
Instrument, more humble, obedient and active, for emptying the English
Treasures i^ to Dutch Excheq^ers, than ever they could expect from our Native
King, whom they were afraid would be found m^re steady to a true English
Interest, than to gratify their un^atiable and boundless Pretenses.

King James was a good Husband of his Treasure, and they were afraid would
never be induced to part with any of it to them, but for equivalent Returns of
Glory and Profit to the Nation. They knew the Prince had a w^^k side, which
might be better ^^ought upon: His towering Ambition, and v^st unlimited Desires
after Command and a noisy Fame, exposed him continually to the bait they
designed him; which was, to pay him in a^y Titles, empty Compliments, and
feigned Pretenses of Service and Obs^quiousness, for our good English Gold, and
brave English Troops. The Plot has succeeded, and we paid them very handsomely
for the Trick they put upon us; we have made vast Issues of Men and Money; we
have liberally fed those needy Princes and their Troops; it is probable that
more Money will be expected and demanded from us; what are we to have for all
this Expense we have already made, and yet can see no end of? What Cities, what
Provinces, are we to have? Is the French Navy to be burnt, or put into our
hands? Are our old Pretenses to the French Crown, at least to the Maritime
Provinces, to be made good unto us? Or are we to reap nothing but the vain
Honor of having contributed toward the Establishment of our Neighbors, by
our own Ruin?

The Duties of Neighborhood are mutual; and suppose them as strong and binding
as the Author of A Letter to a Friend concerning the French Invasion would make
them, they plead as strongly for us as against us: There lies as great an
Obligation upon the Confederates, to assist us in the Recovery of Normandy and
Guyen, as upon us to recover the lost Provinces in Flanders and upon the Rhine,
for them: No doubt our present King has taken Care for it in his Treaties with
the Confederates; if he have not, it is a plain Discovery that the Interest of
Foreigners is dearer to him than that of England. How unjust is it to ^ob us of
the fruits of so many Millions spent, and of so many which are in hazard, with
our Religion, Liberties, and our All to boot? If there be any effectual care
taken for this, by his Treaties, it were very fit the Nation were made
acquainted with it, and that we certainly knew what we were to have, and what
Security the Confederate Princes have given for making good such Treaties; it
must be more than Words and common Security, that can balance the real Deeds
and Kindnesses which we are daily conferring upon them.

But I am afraid we have not so much as a bare Promise of any thing. The
increase and growing Strength of our Monarchy lies so visibly cross to the
several Pretenses and Interests of the Confederates, that they would be deaf to
any such Proposal; and the Prince depends too much upon them for the support of
his present Title, to press such ungrateful things. Can any Man of Reason
believe that the Dutch and the House of Austria will agree to have the French
Fleet put into our hands, which would render us Sovereigns of the Ocean, as
well as of the Narrow Seas? Or is it not next to Frenzy, to imagine that the
House of Austria will ever give way that we should recover our ancient Footing
in France, either in whole, or in part; by which so many Catholic Cities and
Provinces would be subjected to Heretics, the Communication betwixt Spain and
Flanders cut off, by shutting up the Channel on both sides; and our Monarchy
put into such a condition as would visibly shock the ambitious designs of that
House; which they would again resume, upon recovery of their lost Provinces? So
that we are not to expect any new Acquisitions, with all this vast Expense, but
are to rest satisfied with the Honor, or Folly rather, of raising the House of
Austria to its ancient Greatness; and building up a Power, which would more
fatally threaten us and the rest of Europe, than that which we must be at such
Pains and Expense to pull down.

If the Prospect of a successful War be so little encouraging, what have we to
fear and feel from an unfortunate Issue? How sadly may we come to be whipped,
when we shall be obliged to take back our Abdicated Monarch, whether we will or
no? There will be nothing then to trust to for the Safety of our Religion and
Liberties, but the good Nature and true English Temper of a Prince, whom in
that Case we have injured, slighted, and despised to the last degree: Nay, upon
the Issue of a successful War against France, we may be obliged to undergo the
same Fate. So far will this War, in any Event, be from terminating in an
Establishment of our present Settlement, that it does visibly tend to the
contrary. This will appear no Paradox to any Man who does exactly weigh the
different Interests and Politics of the several States of Europe, with
Relation to us, and amongst themselves. Such a curious and diligent Observer
will quickly discover how much more agreeable King James's Restoration would
be to the secret concealed Interest of all our Neighboring States, than the
Prince of Orange's present Royalty.

The good Intentions of France toward it, is not to be doubted. The House of
Austria, after their Pretenses upon France are satisfied, do certainly become
Favorers of King James's Restoration, both upon the account of Religion, and
to remove a Dutch Stadtholder from being King of Britain; thereby to facilitate
their ancient Pretenses upon those revolted Provinces. The Dutch will heartily
agree to his Restoration, to get rid of their Stadtholder, who presses so
hard upon their Liberties; they will be in no more Fears from France, from this
supposed Issue of the War; and the Interest of England would always oblige its
Monarch to cover and protect them from the Ambition of the House of Austria.
The best Wishes of Sweden cannot be wanting, were it only by the Admission of
the Prince of Wales's Right, to place the Prince of Denmark a Remove farther
from the Crown; since his Accession to the Royalty amongst us, by Virtue of his
Princess's Title, might endanger the Conquests which that Crown has made upon
Denmark. And since the Politics of Denmark, with relation to us, are solely
levelled at his Brother's Interest; whenever the Indignities done to the Prince
and Princess of Denmark shall oblige them to resume that Duty and Loyalty which
is due from them to their kind old Father, who is still ready to receive them,
and to secure unto them those Advantages which they can never expect from the
Pr. of Orange; the Concurrence of that Crown toward King James's Restoration
can be no longer wanting. I do but hint at things, which are of sufficient
Importance to make all true Englishmen, who love their Country and their
Liberties, to bethink themselves seriously how to cover and secure all those
great and valuable Rights from the Oppression of the P. of Orange, the
Miseries, Poverties, and Dangers, which will inevitably attend either a
successful or unsuccessful War. We have thrown our selves into a
State-Hurricane, from which there is no way of escaping, but by restoring the
just and legal Government of this Nation into its ancient and unquestioned
Channel.

Having fully established and made out the first three Motives assigned for K.
James's Restoration, I shall enquire a little into the fourth and last, viz.
the Securing of the Protestant Religion for all future Ages. This appears a
great Paradox to the Author of The Pretenses to the French Invasion examined;
at which he falls into Exclamations against Mankind, as the oddest Piece of the
Creation, for believing such incredible things. But it is not his bold,
impudent, and false Assertions, supported only by empty and noisy Eloquence,
which can hide the Danger from us, that our Religion as well as our Liberties
and Properties lies under from this Revolution. For clearing the Truth and
Weight of this Motive, I shall make it evident, That our Religion was in no
probability of being overturned by K. James's Practices before this Revolution:
That it was in our power to have secured it, even against our Fears and
Jealousies, without any Breach upon the ancient Government; That the Dethroning
of Monarchs upon the Pretense of Religion, has been fatal and destructive to
all the several Protestant States who attempted it; That according to all
appearance, it will be equally fatal in our Case and Circumstances: And lastly,
I shall make it evident, from a full and distinct Answer to all the Arguments
adduced by the Authors against King James's Restoration, that the best,
surest, and most infallible way, whereby to secure the Protestant Religion, our
Liberties and Properties, upon lasting and durable Foundations, is, by
returning to our Duty, and restoring our Abdicated Monarch by as general a
Consent as he was chased away by us.

It is very natural and common with Mankind, and with Princes as well as
others, to have some more particular regard toward those of their own
Religion, to wish them well, and to endeavor their ease, when it lies in their
Power; so that it was nothing extraordinary to find King James laboring to
give his Catholic Subjects a Right and Title to that ease and security, which
the Laws of the Land had deprived 'em of. I do not believe that Liberty of
Conscience in general, and the covering of People from Persecution on that
score, can be rationally condemned as destructive and ruinous to the Protestant
Religion; we ought to have a better Opinion of the Principles of our Faith, and
be better convinced of their Truth and Excellency, than to be afraid to have
'em bassled or shaken, much less ruined, by the Reasons of any other
Persuasion. That Religion which dares not show its Face publicly, and stand
the shock of all its Adversaries, without skeening it self under the Severity
of Penal Laws, furnishes great Suspicion to curious and prying Men of its
weakness and insufficiency: But this, I hope, is not our Case; our most holy
Religion is built upon that Rock of Ages, which can never be shaken; is
fortified by the Testimonies of the Law and the Prophets, and expressly
contained in the Word of God, or derived from thence by clear and necessary
Consequences, and can subsist by its own worth and excellency, without robbing
the rest of Mankind of that Liberty their Birthright Intitles them to, and
enslaving Consciences. So that King James his Principle about Liberty of
Conscience, if duly and legally Established, will be allowed: But it is the
Method we complained of, which discovered some farther Design than bare Liberty
of Conscience, and thereby did visibly threaten our Civil Rights and Liberties,
and endanger our Religion.

Why, truly the Measures taken were unjustifiable; but we know to whose Council
and Advice they were owing: The whole was a Plot upon that Prince, to spoil the
Project of Liberty of Conscience, which would have rivitted him in his Throne;
and to improve his Inclinations for the Roman Religion to his own ruin and
destruction. But suppose something more was intended by some, than a bare
Liberty; perhaps the opening, a Door of Preferment to Catholics, or the
propagating that Religion over this Island: Such an undertaing is irrational,
foolish and desperate; can never be accomplished; and the impossibility of it
is so plain and obvious, that no Man who understands the World, and knew
England and English Men so well as King James did, could believe it
practicable. And as to the miraculous and enterprizing Faith of Priests and new
Converts, the zeal, folly, and warmness of their Brains, will always prevent
any real Mischiefs; nay, K. James his Reign, even upon the supposition that it
were as bad as is alleged, is an undeniable Proof that the Protestant Religion
cannot be undermined, nor the Popish Religion Established in these Kingdoms, by
the Address or Authority of any Prince.

I shall give it for granted, that all imaginable Methods were taken for
propagating the Popish Religion; that they were indulged in the public
Exercises of it; that Court Preferments were thrown upon them, merely upon the
account of their Religion, without any Virtue or M^rit to Entitle them to it;
that Protestants were absolutely, and upon all occasions, discouraged, that it
was endeavored to make the World ^e^^^ve, that all Favors and Preserments
were for the one, and nothing but Dis^races and Frowns for the other; that
there was the greatest Care, Pains and Application, in the World, made use of,
to make the Army and Courts of Judicature. I do belive, by this supposition, I
have outdone all that the most malicious Enemies will urge against K. James;
and yet all the World knows what little Progress was made, how few Converts
were gained, and how really weak their best and surest Precautions did appear
when it came to the touch. If so many of his Subjects, Soldiers and Servants,
were prevailed upon by Fears and Jealousies, which were maliciously and
industriously heightened above what any reason, which was given for them, could
well bear; what must then have been the Consequence, if by real, public, and
undoubted Discoveries, the King's intentions to ruin the Established Religion,
had been made unquestionably plain and evident: Nothing less than an universal
Defection, and his perpetual Banishment from the Hearts and Affections of every
English Man, could have followed.

The Catholics of Britain are not one of a hundred; they have neither Heads,
Hearts, nor Hands enough to force a National Conversion. As the Protestants are
the most Numerous, so the Laws and Constitutions are upon their side; their
Civil Rights and Liberties are twisted together with their Religious; and
whosoever strikes at the last, must infallibly wound the first. It is not easy
to overturn the Laws and Fundamental Constitutions, whereby Religious and Civil
Rights are secured to free born People; we are in Possession by our Laws of our
Religion, and of that Liberty which distinguishes our Happiness from that of
other Subjects; we love it, and know it is true worth; we value and esteem our
selves above other People, upon the account of our native Freedoms, and we will
not easily part with 'em; all Attempts and Designs upon them have been
unsuccessful. Ambitious Princes, and Arbitrary Ministers may be forming
Projects and Designs, fortifying them the best way they can, and making Parties
for it; but our Constitution, together with the Protestant Religion, which is
now become part of it, and our Laws, will prove always too hard for them at
last: Nothing can expose or betray our Religion and Constitution to any danger,
but overmuch fondness in the People to a Prince, who under some popular Mask
and Pretense, covers close and fatal Designs against either. Let us but examine
the present condition of our neighboring States, and we shall find that
Raptures of Love in the people has overturned more Constitutions, and built up
more Despotick Governments, than the Force or Address of Princes could ever do.
It is commonly received for a Truth, That Love is blind and credulous, and
certainly holds good, with relation to a Political Affection. There is a
certain allowable Jealousy in the People, which is very consistent with the
Duty, Affection, and Respect due to the Prince; and guards and protects their
Laws and Constitution. Without some Measures of this Jealousy, the
Constitution will be always in danger; and this Antidote can never be wanting
in the Protestant Subjects of Britain, under a Popish King: His Religion gives
us such a lively and active Jealousy of him, and his Designs makes us so
watchful, and puts us so much upon our guard, that all the Efforts of such a
Prince, tho never so dextrous, supported by so weak and inconsiderable a Party
as the Catholics of Britain, can never endanger Religion and Liberty. Rather
his Circumstances and Inclinations to those of his own Religion, their ease and
quiet, might have been improved into farther and more real Securities for
Religion and Liberty, by a wise and discreet Treaty, orderly managed in
Parliament.

To all this it may be alleged, That though the Catholics of Britain be not a
Party sufficient to carry on, and effectuate such Designs; yet the Forces of
the Hector of France were still at the Command and Service of his Dear and
Faithful Ally, for carrying on so good and meritorious a Work, as that of
Reducing again Great Britan into the Bosom of the Roman Church: This is
maliciously and artfully enough suggested; but let us examine it a little. How
does it appear that King James was become so lost to all Reason, Morality and
Discretion, as to resolve to call in a French Power to overrun a Country
which was his own, and destroy a People who were living peaceably under him; by
which, from one of the most Considerable and Potent Monarchs of Europe, he
became the Least and most Contemptible? His refusal of French Troops and
Assistance, when threatened with a Foreign Invasion, seems to be no great Proof
of this; and his betaking himself at that time to the Love and Affection of his
Subjects, as it was a plain discovery he was not Conscious to himself of any
real Design, which could destroy that mutual Love and Confidence betwixt Prince
and People, which is a Debt due from the one to the other, however his Measures
might have been Traduced, or maliciously Poisoned; so it may let us see how
improbable it is to imagine, that a Prince could ever form Designs of
destroying a People whose Affections he durst trust in such an Extremity.
Again, What Reason is there to imagine that the French King would be so ready
to furnish Troops, and be at the Charge of such a Reformation? He is generally
allowed to be a Prince who studies his own Interest the most of any; and fits
all his Maxims, his Conduct and Allyances, exactly to it; and never takes a
step, which upon the remotest view, may seem to cross the Interest of his Crown
and Monarchy: And if it do appear, as certainly it will to any judicious
thinking Man, that the Reducing Great Britain to the Bosom of the Roman Church
may greatly endanger the Crown of France, than all ^^^rs of a French
Reformation will fall to the Ground.

The English Pretenses to the most considerable Maritime Provinces, nay upon
the Crown of France it self, are generally known; and Histories can inform us
how troublesome, how dangerous, and how successfully they were many times
carried on against those Monarchs; partly by the natural Boldness, Spirit, and
Courage of the English, far surpassing that of the French; but more especially
from the Inclination of the French themselves to live under a Government which
was so much easier, and more agreeable than their own; it being natural for
People to covet the same Plenty and Freedom, which they see is enjoyed and
possessed by their Neighbor. Hence it was, that though we lost all our Footing
in France, yet still our Forces and Enmity was more dreadful to those Monarchs,
than that of any other State in Europe, though more considerable for its native
Strength, and consining by dry Marches upon 'em; and they always Courted our
Friendship and Alliance, with the greatest Submissions and Applications
imaginable: And until the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, the French did always choose
rather to divert our Invasions with their Money and Treaties, than to encounter
them by Force; being afraid to graple with that Power, which they had so often
felt to their Cost. Since that time, neither our Friendship has been so much
Courted, nor our Enmity so carefully Avoided as formerly. This does not proceed
from the increase of the French Power, and decrease of ours; though the
Revenues and Military Force of France be strangely augmented since; ours, in
proportion, has received the same increase: Our Treasure is augmented; and
that being the Sinews of War, quickly furnishes and maintains every thing
else: And the other States of Europe are, from the Circumstances of Affairs,
better disposed for Allyances with us, than ever they were in the time of our
Ancestors. So that France is but still France, and England in the same
Proportion with it, as to Force and Revenue; and in a more promising Condition
of making Allyances, and of being more usefully served by them: Our Pretenses
are still the same, and every whit as Strong and Just, and we as willing and
desirous to make Advantage of them; and yet we are in no respect so formidable
to that Crown, as formerly; nor in a Condition to shake that State, and make
such impressions into the Heart of France, as our Ancestors have done: The true
Reason is our difference in Religon; for we being Protestants, and France
Popish; this sets the Two Nations at a greater distance from mutual
Correspondence and Contrivances, which must necessarily preceed and occasion
important Revolutions, than all their former Animosities, Emulation, and Duty
to their natural Prince could ever do. Loyalty to Princes, National
Considerations, and Point of Honor and Reputation, do many times give way to
present and future Advantages: But when Religion and Point of Conscience comes
in to gather and cement all those divided Interests together, and unite them,
as it were, into one bundle, they become the more hard and difficult to
overcome. This plain and evident Reason cannot escape the Knowledge and
Reflection of so wise a Prince, as the French King is acknowledged to be. The
difference in Religion is a much greater Security to him against our Attempts,
than his Armies, Fleets, or Strength of his Towns. The Sense of Religion does
many times rouse and influence the Courage and Resolutions of Men, when other
humane Considerations prove to weak to quicken their drooping Spirits:
Catholics will fight to the last, to escape the Dominion of such as they
believe Heretics; when, perhaps, French Men would be willing enough to come
under the English Government, which is so much easier and better than their
own. I do not question but this very Consideration alone, will prove strong
enough to keep the French King from endeavoring our Reunion to the Roman
Church; which would make the Pretenses of an English Monarch more dangerous,
than ever by our Union with Scotland, which formerly gave such notable
Diversions to our Forces both at Home and in France: That Prince's Disputes
with the Pope, for Point of Prerogative, shows plainly that he never will
endanger his Crown in his own Person, or Posterity, to serve the Interests and
Desires of the Papal Chair; from all which we may safely conclude, that the
Protestant Religion in Britain, was in no great danger of being ruined by King
James, though really as bad as he was represented.

If our Religion and Liberties were placed so much out of danger of being
overturned, by the Laws and Franchises we were then in Possession of, how much
better might we have established them for the future, and placed them above the
shadow of any Danger, by embracing and improving the Offers which our lawful
Prince made us, of carving out our own Satisfaction and Securities. He was
surprised with an astonishing Defection of his Subjects, with a Conspiracy of a
great many Princes and States against him. He knew no place but France to
retire unto; where he might have a Cover for his Head, but could have no great
Expectations of being quickly restored to his Throne by a Power which had so
much other Diversion. He was unwilling in his old Age to go into Exile, was
very desirous to leave a perfect Calm to his Son, before his own Death, which
by the Co rs of Nature, and the ordinary Destiny of his Family, he could not
believe was very remote; and had a Love and Kindness to us still, as a Father
for his disobedient Children. All which would have procured us, from our lawful
King, a lasting, legal, full, and happy Settlement; would have established our
Religion, bettered and secured our Liberties upon lasting Foundations, without
any trouble, and with a great deal of innocence. How many crimes would have
been avoided by following this Method; and how many more prevented, which will
be necessary, if we be obstinate, to support and maintain the Injustice we have
done? How many Millions of Money, and how many Lives might have been saved, or
at least more profitably employed, by the Conduct and good Husbandry of our
Lawful King, for the Honor of England, restraining the unbounded Pretenses of
ambitious Neighbors, and in giving Peace and Quiet to Europe? There is no
question, but a King who was so unwilling to leave us, and had so much of an
English Spirit, would have gone into any Measures, with relation to foreign
Affairs, that his Paliament should have thought fitting; in which case, what
returns of Glory and Profit would this Nation and Monarchy have reaped from
this Blood and Treasure, which is now absolutely lost and thrown away, and our
future Expenses and Dangers daily growing upon us, with as little hope of
Success? My heart is so rent and torn with the thoughts of it, that my Pen is
ready to drop out of my hand as I write: But we wantonly longed for an
Abdication, without examining the true Value of what we refused, and the
Consequences were to follow upon the other Measures. We have made a religious
War of it, which may be fatally returned upon us; and we never considered that
Defections upon Pretenses for the Protestant Religion, seldom or never
terminate otherwise than by the Destruction of Religion and Pretenders both.
It seems God Almighty did always discover more of Passion and Worldly Designs,
than true Zeal for Religion, in those Undertakings; and I am afraid, That since
we deserve the like Charge, our Punishment may be the same, unless by a
seasonable and early Repentance we prevent it.

The first Example I find in History, is Zisca's War in Bohemia, against the
Emperor Sigismond; which tho managed as successfully in the beginning as any
thing we can flatter our selves with, yet had an end very fatal to the
Reformation in that Kingdom. The Civil Wars in Germany, managed by the Elector
of Saxony and the Landgrave of Hesse, against Charles V. had no better Issue;
many Imperial Cities and Provinces were lopt off from our Communion, and the
principal Actors themselves were remarkably Sufferers by it, and their Families
wear the Scars of it to this day. The second Bohemian War, under the Elector
Palatine, whom they had chosen for their King, was yet more fatal to that
Kingdom than the first, and almost ruined the King of Denmark, did exceedingly
weaken the Protestant Interest in Germany, and laid the Foundation for the
present Grandeur of France, which is so terrible to Europe at this time: Upon
the Event of that War the Civil Rights and Liberties of the Subject, as well as
the Protestant Religion in the Kingdom of Bohemia, were entirely ruined and
extinguished: The principal Electorate of the Empire, together with the
Palatinate of Bavaria, were wrested out of a Protestant, and placed in a Popish
Family: Several other Protestant Princes and States were lost; and the French
possessed of both the Alsatias, which has since given infinite Disturbances to
that Empire. And the Hungarian War commenced first upon pretense of Religion,
and came at last to be managed by Tekely, has quite buried the Protestant
Religion in Hungary and Transylvania; and it is very Remarkable, That so long
as they kept Petitioning as Subjects, (Though with Arms in their Hands, for the
free Exercise of their Religion,) they were constantly Victorious, and got into
the absolute Possession of the greatest part of that Kingdom; and might have
fully secured their Religion and Liberties, by Concessions and Immunities which
the Emperor offered them in repeated Treaties: And yet no sooner was the Crown
given to Tekely, and an Alliance made with the Turks to support him in it, but
by a series of Misfortunes all their former Successes were unravelled, and
their Affairs reduced to the miserable Condition we now see them in.

What sad alarms may such Instances give us? How truly do they point at our
Case; and perhaps our Fate? Can any of the abovementioned Examples discover
such plain and visible Marks of worldly Ambition, Self-interest, and corrupted
Designs and Artifices, for their Original, as have evidently actuated the
Contrivers of and principal Agitators in our Revolution? And yet how fatally
were they punished? And can we hope to escape? The Emperor Ferdinando was in a
worse Condition to resist the Elector Palatine, backed by the Protestant
Princes of Germany, countenanced by Br^^an and Holland, and the present
Emperor Rodolph was under harder Circumstances to support a War against his
Hungarian Rebels, and the Turkish Power, than any that France has to graple
with from Us and our Allies; and yet their numerous Armies and strong Allies,
could not secure them from those Miseries which did at last overtake them.
There is no way for us to get safe from the Precepices we have been walking
upon, to retrieve our Religion from the desperate Danger we have run it into,
and to setle and secure it; but by a National returning to our Duty, which will
sufficiently atone for so general a Defection, by resuming that Treaty we so
foolishly br k off and refused; and thereby securing Religion and Property, by
those Concessions which our Sovereign is still ready to grant us: Let us put it
home to him, and lay it at his own Door; let him have it in his Choice to
return by his People if he pleases; convince him that his Protestant Subjects,
upon securing their Religion and Liberties, will repair their former Errors, by
contributing heartily toward his Restoration. And if he decline to return
upon a Protestant and English Foot, there is an end of the Controversy, and of
all Disputes amongst Protestants; for Religion and Liberty will never be
Sacrificed by true English Men.

I am come in the last place to the Objections raised, by the new Authors,
against King James's return; which are stuffed with virulent, false, and
sophistical Reasonings; and, in a great Measure, taken off by what has been
already said. The first thing they endeavor to frighten us with, is a
Conquest, and with Popery and Slavery as the necessary Consequences of it;
since it is impossible K. James can return otherways, because K. William will
not Abdicate. I abhor the thoughts of Conquering my native Country, as much as
any Man; more it seems than The Author of a Letter to a Friend, who would allow
of it in the Person of K. William, and I am against it in any Case. But by whom
are we to be Conquered; and to whom must the Conquest belong? Are we to be
Conquered by such Troops as K. James, in point of Prudence, and according to
the practices of all Ages in the like Case, must bring with him for the defense
of his Person, and the untying of that Force which the Prince has put upon us?
I know no reason, why it may not be as Lawful for K. James to bring Fifteen
thousand Men to assist him in recovering his Throne, as it was for the P. of O.
to bring the like Number to chase him out of it; and that without giving any
Jealousy to us of a Conquest? Thrice that Number were too few to make a
Conquest of this Island; and I hope they will be so well seconded, and so far
out numbered by the Accession of his own Subjects, upon a feeling Discovery of
the Pr. of Orange's Tyranny, as well as of the Injustice done their King; as
may justly Stamp it a Revolution brought about by English Men, who have
Conquered their Passions and not their Country; rescued, and not enslaved the
Nation; and who have preserved, and not endangered their Religion.

Is this imaginary Conquest to make us Slaves to the Fr. King, or Catholics
and Slaves to K. James? I cannot believe the first: For I do not think K. James
so much in love with the French King, as to make him a Present of Three Crowns
to the prejudice of Himself and his Posterity; and so become either his
Subject, or his Vassal. These are suppositions fit only to pass upon Children,
deserves no serious Answer; and plainly shows the weakness of the Cause, which
can furnish no better Reasons wherewith to defend it. As to the last; The
French King will never force us to be Catholics, for the Reasons already
assigned; and it does as little agree with his Interest, to have us Slaves to
our Monarch. Friendships are seldom lasting amongst Neighboring Princes,
rarely continue during their own Lives, and are never transmitted to to their
Posterities; so many Reasons and Jealousies of State are falling in, which
occasion frequent and unavoidable Breaches: And a King of England, who is
Absolute and Master of his Subjects, would be a great deal more troublesome and
dangerous to France than otherways; and so it is not very probable that that
Monarch will ever contribute to make us a Conquest to K. James, and introduce
Popery and Slavery amongst us. There is one sure way to prevent this danger of
Conquest, and that is by the vigorous endeavors of every Enlish Man, to repair
the Injury done to our Abdicated Monarch. King William's unwillingness to
Abdicate, which these Authors threaten us with, cannot put a stop to it: His
breaches upon our Laws and Constitution, and his violation of the Original
Contract made with himself deserves it; and it is not all his Partisans and
Troops, can cover him from Abdication whenever the People of England thinks fit
to declare it.

We are told next by these Authors, That K. James is become so in love with the
French Government, that we shall never so much as have his Promise for securing
our Religion and Liberties, even though we have no reason to depend upon that,
or any other Security he can give us; since he has undertaken to the Pope and
K. of France to make void all when he is upon his Throne; and that it is
visible from his Carriage in Ireland to the Protestants there, that neither the
sad Example of K. Charles the First, who suffered for the like Attempts toward
Arbitrary Power, nor the fresh Remembrances of his own Misfortunes, will ever
oblige him to lay aside his Arbitrary Designs: And however instrumental
Protestants may be in his return, that Pardon for their former Failings is all
can be expected from him, without obtaining the least kind regard to their
Religion or Liberties on that Score.

I would gladly know upon what Grounds they assert, that K. James will grant no
Security at all for Religion and Liberty? Have they made the Experiment, and
been refused? It is not a bare Assertion can convince us of the Truth of it,
since we are assured to the contrary. I have heard of a Scotch Plot for
Restoring King James; the particulars of it I am not acquainted with: Only I
have been told, That upon the Application of some few Gentlemen of that Nation
unto him, he frankly granted them, under the Broad Seal of Scotland, all that
was proposed for the security of Religion and Liberty; and agreed to several
Immunities which the P. of O. refused that Nation, though he was solemnly
engaged to grant them when the Crown of that Kingdom was tendered unto him.
Here is more than a bare Promise; the Concessions are passed under the Broad
Seal, and granted by him, when his Affairs were in Promising Circumstances, at
the desire of a few Gentlemen who had been active against him, and who could
make no such considerable Addition unto his Party, as might induce him to it;
unless his own Inclinations, when free from the pressure of designing
Ministers, and readiness to rectify whatever was grievous to the People, had
put him upon it. Can it be doubted after this, that he will deny any thing that
is necessary for the good and happiness of his Subjects whenever they apply
seriously unto him for it?

But he must make good his Engagements to the Pope and King of France, and make
void all when he remounts the Throne, which his hard Circumstances obliged him
to grant. If this were made plain unto us, there would be a great deal of
weight in it; all the Evidence we have for it is the Veracity of the Author,
which goes no great length; being founded only upon supposition, that he could
not be countenanced by those Princes without such an Engagement. This is an
Argument that concludes more forcibly against themselves; since it is
reasonable to imagine, that more solemn and sacred Engagements in favor of the
Holy Chair, and a Conviction of more punctual and ready Performances, were
necessary to induce the Pope, and so many Popish Princes to countenance a
Protestants mounting the Throne, to the prejudice of a Papist.

I am yet to learn what were the great Merits of the Irish Protestants since
the Revolution, the fresh Obligations laid upon him, and what were the new
Discoveries he gave us there of his hatred to Protestants, and irregular
Arbitrary Courses. I have seen a Book written by Dr. King, which these Authors
refers us to, as sufficient Evidence to make good their Charge; but it is so
scandalously and notoriously False, and stuffed with so many gross Errors, and
willful Mistakes, in point of History and matter of Fact, even in many things
which fall under my own Knowledge, that the Doctor seems to have Calculated his
Book for a Virulent false Libel; thereby to merit some Benifice from this
Government, rather than for our Information by a true and impartial History:
And the World shall be obliged with a particular Account of his Falsehoods and
Calumnies, by a full and impartial Account of those Transactions. But to come
close home to the Charge; Did not the Irish Protestants generally declare for
the Prince of Orange? Did they not actually either appear in Arms for the
Prince, or quit the Kingdom? And those who stayed, were not they rather lookers
on than actors, or any ways useful toward the asserting the King's Rights? I
do not design this as a Satyr against the Protestants of Ireland; the Measures
taken there gave them much better grounds for their Fears than any we can
pretend; but only to show that the Protestants of Ireland contributed no
Endeavors toward his Restoration, but run generally along with the Stream
against it; and so cannot be said to have made any new Experiment of his
Kindness to, and grateful sense of Obligations performed by Protestants. They
never desired, or obtained, any new Securities for their Religion and
Liberties, upon the Account of Services performed for him; and so have no fresh
Branches of Promise to charge upon him, as our Authors do insinuate, whereby to
deter the Protestants of Britain from contributing toward his Restoration.

On the contrary, we have a very convincing Argument, from his Care of his
Protestant Subjects there, though either actually Enemies, or at best but idle
Spectators; and his constant Endeavors to protect them from the Insults and
Fury of the Irish, of whom he was not fully Master; to persuade us of the
Gratitude and kind Returns we may exp^ct from him, when at liberty, and obliged
by our Services, to express it. How carefully did he preserve their Estates and
Goods? With how much tenderness did he give free Passage to the Women and
Children from Londonderry, when by denying it he must infallibly have carried
the Town? With what exact Discipline did he Govern an Army, serving without
Pay, until King William's Protestant reforming Troops which were under Pay, by
their unheard of Plunderings, Robberies, and Oppressions, committed upon the
poor Protestants within their Lines, gave such Examples of Insolence and loose
Discipline, that the Irish could be no longer restrained, as formerly, tho they
never acted so extravagantly as the others. And I dare appeal to all the Irish
Protestants, if the greatest part of the ruin of that miserable Country be not
due to the Plunderings, Abuses, and want of Discipline, in King William's Army;
which, though Protestant, and Reformers, did far outdoe the wild Irish in
desolating the Country, without regard to Friend or Foe: And I have heard many
Irish Protestants affirm, That their Preservation and Protection was due to K.
James's own particular Care over them.

As to the Proceedings of the Irish Parliament, he did so much wrestle against
them, was so little Master of himself and Actions, and so much in the hands of
Irish, that he is rather to be pitied than blamed for them: And it is very hard
and unreasonable, that when a King is forced from a Throne by his Protestant
Subjects, and opposed by them in his Endeavors after the recovery of his
Inheritance, and so necessitated to betake himself to the Assistance,
Protection, and Services of Catholics, unless he would Renounce his undoubted
Rights, which neither the Laws of God nor Man oblige him to; that Acts of
Grace, which his Circumstances, and the necessity of their Assistance, forced
from him, should be charged upon him as Crimes. Let us labor for his
Restoration; let us get him into our hands, and deliver him from that cruel
Necessity which carries him farther than his Inclinations would otherwise do;
and whenever he is at liberty to act as an Englishman, he will convince us that
he is such.

The Treatment that Charles I. met with is a sad Instance of the Vanity of all
human Greatness, and a lasting Reproach to our Nation; but reaches a more
pertinent and apposite Reproof to K. William's Conduct, than K. James's. The
most considerable and important points which occasioned those fatal Disputes
betwixt that Prince and his People, were illegal Imprisonments, the undue
refusal of Liberty to Prisoners upon Bail, the free quarterings and Plunderings
of Soldiers, and the unwarrantable exacting of Money from the Subject without
Consent of Parliament. Are not all these illegal and arbitrary practices
frequently repeated in this Government, and without any Precedent from K.
James's Reign?

The many Pages employed by the Author of A Letter to a Friend concerning the
French Invasion, to prove, That the Non-swearing Protestants, as well as
others, can merit nothing by their endeavors for the King's Restoration, but
a bare Pardon at most, discovers more Logic and Method in dividing of his
Text, than true, solid and convincing Reason: For since a few Scottish
Gentlemen, who had acted warmly and vigorously against him, and could
contribute but little to his Service, were able to procure not only Pardon, but
those great and important Securities for their Religion and the Liberties of
their Country, which K. William had refused to the Desires and Addresses of a
Parliament that had given him the Crown, and pre engaged his Consent before the
Gift: Is it to be imagined, That so many worthy Prelates, Lords, Gentlemen, and
inferior Clergy, who have testified so much Zeal, Firmness, and Fidelity, by
their Sufferings, joined with the early Repentance and vigorous Endeavors of
others for his Service, who have been hitherto blinded and misled, will not
prove of more Weight, Importance, and Consideration, with him; be as kindly
treated, and their Country for their sakes: Or rather, will not all Securities
for Religion and Liberty be granted, from a due regard to their Application, as
well as from his own Inclination? Neither is it to be feared that any of their
former Measures, which unhappily and accidentally have contributed toward that
Ferment which begot this Revolution, will be remembered against them; since the
King is sensible how far he himself was imposed upon, as well as his Subjects,
by the Cunning and Artifice of wicked and corrupted Ministers which were about
him. And whatever Jealousies this Author may labor to infuse into the minds of
People, of the firey and lax Principles of the Jacobites, with Relation to the
Protestant Religion, Church of England, and English Liberties; there are
Jacobites, whose Principles are better, more fixed and rational, who have
already, and will upon all occasions never fail to give greater and more
generous Testimonies of their zeal and affection for the Establishment and
Security of those great Concerns, than any can be brought by our present
Ministers and topping Reformers; and who will never be found with this Author
in justifying a Conquest of their native Country.

The Caution which is given us against another Revolution, lest the Monarchy
receive more vigor from a Restoration, than is convenient for the Liberties
of the Subject, which the Author fortifies from an Instance in the Return of
Charles II. at which time, betwixt zeal, flattery, and fear, the King increased
in Power, and the People lost their Liberties; concludes very strongly against
himself, and for what I have been all along pressing. If we do but consider the
true reason of those Concessions made in favor of the Monarchy, upon the
Return of K. Charles, the Nation was so wearied out, exhausted and undone, by
the Tyrannies and Executions, Taxes, Imprisonments, and other arbitrary Courses
against their Liberties and Properties, that were practiced during that Anarchy
which intervened betwixt the Murder of the Father and Return of the Son, that
upon a Prospect of some Relief, by the reestablishment of the ancient Monarchy,
the People fell into such Raptures of Joy, which never fails of making Subjects
so liberal to Princes, as many times occasions a hearty but late Repentance. If
K. William continue a little longer to oppress our Liberties, and drein our
Purses; or if the Title of Conquest be advanced, we shall be infallibly exposed
to the like hazard again; which cannot be prevented, but by an early Return to
our Duty, whilst we have some Patience, Wit and Money, left, to enable us to
take care of our selves and our Posterity.

The hard and difficult Questions which this Author thinks he has gravelled us
with, and the obligation of the Oaths of Allegiance to K. William, comes next
to be considered. The first Question is, Whether we think our selves bound in
Conscience to fight for Popery against the Protestant Faith. I Answer not; nor
does this Answer make any thing for King William, since in no Sense can the
fighting for the Restoration of King James be called the fighting for Popery
against the Protestant Religion; for it is both K. James's Interest and his
Inclination to return upon a Protestant Foot; and by assisting him in it, we
vindicate the Honor of our Religion, and rescue it from the Dangers which
threatens it from this Reign.

The second Question is, Whether we think our selves bound in Conscience to
fight for our Prince against the Laws and Liberties of our Country. I Answer
in the Negative; and we do assure the World, That it is from a tender regard to
our Laws and Liberties, as well as from a sense of Duty, to repair the injury
done our Exiled Prince, that we resolve to contribute to his return. The
ancient Constitution was broke in upon by the Abdication, and our Laws, Rights
and Liberties, have been more eminently and signally overrun during the P. of
Orange's Kingship, than by any of our most Violent and Arbitrary Princes, even
when he was under the greatest Obligation, clearest and distinct Barriers
placed against it; and we are possessed with reasonable ^^ars, nay a certainty
of having 'em ^^i^e ruined and extinguished by his future Conduct, which lays
an Obligation upon all true English Men to repair these Breaches made upon the
Constitution, and to vindi^^^^ and restore their oppressed and ^^ined Laws and
Liberties, by returning K. James and the P. of O. into their proper and
respective Stations.

But we are desired and pressed to have some Care of the Protestant Religion,
and Church of Christ, which will be visibly endang^red by the King's
Restoration all Europe over; and a due regard for the Rights and Liberties of
all the Princes in Europe, which will be sacrificed by it; that this ought to
be more tenderly minded by us, since we are Citizens of the World; and so the
good of Mankind, or the greatest part of it, lays a more sacred Obligation
upon us, and is to be preferred to the particular Interest of our own Prince
and Country. The security of Religion is a Duty never to be forgotten by good
Protestants, and is never to be endangered and desperately hazarded by honest
Men. But, alas! this has been little regarded by our late Reformers. Have they
not quite unhinged our Constitution, of which the Protestant Religion was
become apart? Have they not already, and are they not in a fair way to ruin
our Laws and Liberties, which are the best Fences about our Religion? After we
are become Slaves, we may quickly be made any thing else; the multitude of new
Converts in France, is an undeniable Instance of this. Have they not
unnecessarily exposed the Protestant Religion, to the hazard of a rude and
uncertain War; from the commencement of which, we can form no great hopes of a
Successful Issue, and that in Conjunction with Allies, who are the greatest
Enemies of our Religion; who when their particular Interests have been served
by our Blood and Treasure, will certainly give us the slip, and nick some
Opportunity, which our present Circumstances can never furnish them with, of
Establishing themselves at the Expense of our Religious, and Civil Rights and
Liberties? And finally, have we not dethroned our King, upon the account of his
Religion; by which we have commenced a religious War, which may come to be
fatally retorted upon us, and may endanger the whole Protestant Religion in
Europe.

A religious War is carefully to be avoided by Protestants, since they are the
weakest; and no Pretense ought to be furnished to the Catholics for the like
Measure: For tho particular Animosities and Interest seem to divide them at
present, how quickly may these be adjusted by the Necessities of one of the
contending Parties, and how easy will it be then for the Pope to unite them
together under the Banners of Religion, to give us, and the Protestants of
Europe, a Rowland for our Oliver? This is no Chimera or Dream; but we may
probably expect to see and feel it. A far weaker Pretense, viz. the Union
established amongst the Protestants of Germany, at Leipsick and Smalcald, gave
Birth to the Catholic League there; which overrun all the Protestants, forced
several Princes and Cities from their Communion, and endangered Denmark. It is
upon such weighty Considerations, and to prevent the danger which threatens the
Protestant Religion both at home and abroad, from our late Measures, that all
true Englishmen and good Protestants ought to endeavor the Restoration of our
King.

As to the Caution given us to beware how we sacrifice the Rights and Liberties
of all the Princes in Europe; the greatest part of the Princes and States of
Europe are not engaged in this War against France, and consequently in no
danger by it: The two Northern Crowns, Moscovy and Poland, Portugal, all the
Princes and States of Italy, except Savoy, together with the Switzers, are in
perfect Peace with France; and so the Supposition of this Author is absolutely
false; the Original and Ground of this War is purely private Contests betwixt
the Crown of France and House of Austria, and such other Princes as that House
can draw into their Interest. Do we not see that the Princes of Germany
themselves, who seem to have the most immediate Concern in it, and should
understand and be more alarmed at the Consequences of it than we, do but make
Merchandise of their Assistance, and engage in and withdraw from this War, as
it contributes most to their particular Interests, and according as they are
best paid by the several Principals? Do not the Northern Crowns, whose
Territories and Provinces lie more exposed to the Consequences of this War than
our Islands, maintain an exact Neutrality, which will give their Subjects
Possession of the best part of the Trade of Europe? We are the only Fools who
have been prevailed upon to engage inconsiderately in this War, to be at the
greatest Charge of it, to drein our Blood and Treasure, and to hazard our
Religion and Liberties by it, without so much as proposing any Return to
balance this Expense and Danger. Our Conduct is such an Instance of Folly and
Madness, as amazeth the present, and will not find Credit in future Ages.

As to the Maxim established by the Author, upon which he builds all his fine
Reasoning, it is false and Phanatical to perfection. Can any Man in his right
Wits assert That the Interest of our Prince and Country must give place to the
Interests of other States, suppose them to be the greatest part of Mankind?
Much less then to those of the House of Austria, which is the present Case.
Must the Interest of the British Monarchy be postponed to the Interest of the
Mohammedan and Pagan Countries, which make the greatest part of Mankind: Or must
the Interest of Britain, and so of the Protestant Religion, which makes a part
of it, give way to the Interest of the Pope and Catholic Princes, which make
the greatest part of Europe? We may quickly guess what our Fate would be by
following such a Rule, and may easily be persuaded that the Cause must be very
bad, which requires such wretched Maxims and Reasonings to ^^pport it.

The last Question is, Whether we would think our selves bound to sight (...)
him, did we believe he would promote the same Designs he did before; and what
we would think our selves obliged to do in the like case, and under the same
Circumstances, after he had remounted the Throne. The Answer is plain and
obvious: By this Revolution, and the Consequences of it, the Prince of Orange's
Ambition, and share in these Measures with which K. James was loaded, being
sufficiently discovered to the World; together with the Roguery of those
Ministers, who to serve the Prince's Design forced the King unwillingly enough
upon those Steps which we complained of, with a design to ruin him; by the
Restoration, and Punishment of th^s^ Mi^^ste^^, the King and People both will
be safe from any repeated Assaults of the Prince's Ambition, being so well
cautioned by the first; and succeeding Ministers will be terrified from such
Infidelities for the future. The Author supposes a Case which will not
probably fall out, and so is not weighty enough to restrain us from assisting
our King in the recovery of his Rights, which positive Duty obliges us unto.
And whenever the like Case occurs, such corrupt Ministers, who advise such
Measures, will become a more justifiable and easier Sacrifice, for the averting
such Dangers, than our ancient Government and Constitution. And it is pleasant
enough to imagine that wise and thinking Men can be imposed upon to continue
under much more weighty Oppressions, gr ater and more visible Dangers,
threatening both Religion and Liberty, by K. William's Government, from a fear
we may again fall under those lesser Evi^s which we suffered under K. James,
and which were due rather to the Contrivances of the P. of O. than the King's
own depraved Inclinations. And whereas it is complained, That such Pangs of
Loyalty are unseasonable now, and should rather have been employed for keeping
him in his Throne, than restoring him to it; why, truly few People did suspect
that the Prince did really design what he so seriously and solemnly declared
against; and every Man was struck into a State Lethargy by the suddenness of
the Prince's Attempt, the wonderful Succ^ss it m^^ with in the beginning, and
the charmi^g Wh^^l^e of securing Liberty and Property; which we are sadly and
severely rowzed from at last, by unspeakable Oppressions, by the expiring
Groans of Liberty and Property, and by the dreadful View of those Miseries,
which threaten us from all hands and in all Events.

As to the Obligations we lie under from the Oaths of Allegiance to the present
Government, the Author himself acknowlegeth, That if we be convinced that our
Oaths to King James are still binding upon us, the Obligation of the second is
voided by it, which is a plain enough Answer to his own Argument; especially
when we consider, that K. William's manifest Infractions of that Original
Contract which we made with him, upon the maintaining and preserving of which
our Allegiance was expressly founded, does evidently and unanswerably dissolve
and make void the Obligation of our Oaths, and much better solves all Scruples
upon that head, than Dr. Sherlock's Providential Reasoning. And whereas it is
asserted by this Author, That Allegiance can never be expounded to a lower
Sense, than to live peaceably under the present Government, tho we will not
sight for it, and not to attempt any thing against their Persons or Crowns, not
to hold Correspondence with their Enemies, nor to give any assistance to K.
James for the recovery of his Thrones, in this he has forgotten their own
Practice: For our Reformers have taught us, That Allegiance may be expounded to
a much lower Sense, even to the Abdicating the Monarch to whom the Allegiance
was due, to the filling of his Throne, and transferring of that Allegiance to
another; and would take it very ill to be charged with Perjury for it. Quis
tulerit Gracchos de seditione loquentes?

We are exhorted by our Authors to beware of contributing toward K. James's
return, lest we engage our Country in a Civil War, and all the dreadful
Consequences of it; the Destruction of our People, the utter Consumption of our
Estates, the burning of our Houses, the Ravishing of our Wives and Daughters,
the Extirpation of Families by Sword or Halter, and the utter Ruining our
Cities, Towns and Villages, are the infallible Consequences of it. The mighty
deluge of Blood which was shed, and the unspeakable Miseries which overwhelmed
this Nation, during the struggle betwixt the Two Roses, and our Contests with
King Charles I, are undeniable Proofs, and may convince us how fatal and
destructive it is to beget and establish a Competition of Titles to the Crown,
and to dethrone Monarchs: And the Calamities which overrun France and Germany
by the Civil Wars, which begun upon the Account of Religion, may let us see how
displeasing it is to God Almighty, to have Religion made a cover for ambitious
and private Designs. This Civil War is already Commenced, and we have
established those Grounds and s^wen that Seed, from which we shall not fail to
r^ap a plentiful Harvest of Blood and Ruin, without a speed^ and vigorous
Prevention: Nay we have been so fond of entailing certain Misery upon our
Selves and Posterities, that we have coupled together two of the strongest
Motives in the World for a rude and lasting War; viz. repeated Breaches in the
Royal Line and Succession, and the vacating the Throne upon the pretense of
Religion; either of which seperately has never failed to ruin whole Nations,
Provinces and Cities. It is obvious at whose Door this is to be Charged; they
who forced away their King, upon the account of his Religion, inverted the
Nature of our Monarchy and the Succession, and refused all Treaties and
Securities which were offered them, have laid infallible Foundations for those
Mischiefs; and they who wish and labor for the return of the King, are the
only true and skilful Physicians who clearly discover, and are willing to apply
the most proper, nay only Cure, which remains for our Disease: And the Authors
Reasonings from the Miseries of a Civil War, does evidently Arraign their own
Practices; and concludes most forcibly against themselves as the Promoters of
it, since it is not to be supposed, that a just Right and Title is to give
place to Force and Usurpation, and fall a S^crifice to those Necessities which
we first bring our selves under, and then plead for our Excuse.

In the last place we are cautioned against the King's return, from the
intolerable Payments we must come under, for refunding those Sums which he has
borrowed of France, to maintain Himself, to keep Ireland, and to discharge the
Forces that come to thrust him on us; which will prove a Ten times greater Tax
for many Years, than those we pay for the support of this Government, which are
not considerable, reckoning the abatement of Chimney-Money; and are much easier
than what the French are accustomed to; and that we have paid as much formerly
for assisting France to ruin Europe, and maintain Vice at home; and so may be
very well satisfied with our present Payments which delivers Europe, and
secures our native Country and Religion from utter Destruction. Our celebrated
Authors could not have finished their fine Pieces with Reasonings, which more
perfectly resembled the Pretenses, Motives, and Grounds of this Revolution, by
their Weakness, Falsehood, and Prevarications.

How well our present Payments secure our native Country and Religion from
Destruction, may app^ar from the ruin of Ireland, the Plunderings and free
Quarters practiced in Britain, the Breaches made upon our ancient Monarchy and
Constitution, whereby a War is entailed upon Us and our Posterity; from the
Violences done to our Laws, Rights and Liberties, and Original Contract made
with K. William; and from the present visible and eminent Dangers which our
Religion and Liberties are threatened with, by any probable Issue of this War,
under a Prince, who has quite overturned the Liberties of his own native
Country, made fair advances toward the ruin of ours; and was never yet
Successful in any Enterprise he undertook, except when he invaded his Father in
Law, contrary to all Divine and Humane Rules, (which perhaps God designed as a
Scourge to these Nations for our Sins,) and when he fought Luxemburgh's
Outguards, at St. Denis, with the Peace in his Pocket, contrary to the public
Faith and Law of Nations, as if he were Predestined to be Successful only in
Crimes, but unfortunate in heroic, brave, and generous Actions; such as
restraining the ambitious Encroachments of Princes, and vindicating the Rights
and Liberties of oppressed Nations; having always practiced in his own Case,
what he pretended to reform in another's.

How little the Deliverance of Europe is carried on by our present Payments, is
but too evident from the growing Successes of France in Flanders, and the
taking their most considerable Towns and Fortresses in the sight and under the
nose of our present Monarch and those mighty Consederate Armies. It is equally
false, to insinuate, That our Payments during King Charles the Second's Reign
bore any proportion with the Taxes under this; and that they were employed only
for assisting France, to ruin Europe: For the Subsidies we have already paid
to this K. (which Sir Edward S^ymer, who might very well know it, assured the
House of Commons, did amount to 18 Millions, before the last Impositions which
were granted) do far exceed all the Taxes paid to K. Charles, joined with the
several Payments made to our Edwards, our Henry's, and our Elizabeth, who
raised the Honor and Reputation of this Nation so high, and spread our
Conquests so far: And it was to King Charles his Authority and Mediation, the
Peaces of Aix-la-Chapelle and Nimiguen were due, which put then a Stop to the
French Carreer: And I am afraid our present Payments will very hardly bring
about a Peace again, upon the Foot of those Treaties; and we are to take it as
a very great Favor, for which we are to be thankful to God and our present
King, if the Taxes we pay during this Government, fall any thing short of the
French Oppressions; and Four Millions a Year, over and above an Allowance for
the Abatement of Chimney-Money and the ordinary Revenues of the Crown, are but
inconsiderable Payments in the opinion of these Authors. It seems their Court
Preferments are great and rich, that they are so little sensible of those
Taxes, which are already become so heavy to this Nation, and of which we see no
end.

But the growing Debt to the French King for those Sums already spent upon K.
^ames 's Subsistence, and the defense of Ireland, and to be farther Exp^nded
for his Restoration, will quite sink and undo this Nation. It appears that
these Authors take it for granted, That the mercenary Temper of the Dutch, in
demanding and obtaining Sati^faction for their Expenses, which (...) of a
tender regard forsooth to our Liberties they bestowed upon our Deliverance,
will be exactly copied by other Princes: But this is the first Instance of such
Merchandise; and it is not to be believed, that great Princes who study Fame,
and tenderly regard their Honor and Glory, will imitate so base an Example. But
suppose they should; our Author is as wide in his Estimate of this Expense, as
in his other Reasonings. We are frightened with a Charge Ten times bigger, for
many Years, than our present Payments, and yet will very much fall short of the
half of one Years Tax we pay now. The Sums spent upon the King's Subsistence
and Ireland, does not amount to Three hundred thousand Lu^dores; and as for the
Charge of his return I wish, and heartily pray, that all true English Men would
unanimously concur together, to prevent the pretense of demanding any such
Charges, the necessity of Foreign Troops, and even the remotest Fears of French
Popery and Slavery, by returning our King with as general a Consent as he was
forced from us; which will vindicate the Protestant Religion from the reproach
of Deposing Principles, and establish it for the nature; will rese^^e the
ancient Monarchy, and Constitution of this Nation upon its old Basi^, will
repair the Injury done to our lawful King, whereby we may legaly obtain those
Securities for our Religion and Liberties, which we are Courting unsucces fully
amidst so many despera^e D^^g^rs and Diff^^^l^^s; will infallibly relieve us
from the weighty Oppressions and manifest Infractions of our choicest and most
valuable Rights, which we at present feel, and have so much reason to be
apprehensive of for the future; will deliver us from the heavy Burden of so
many Taxes, which we have already paid, and which yet must be continued if we
design to support a crazy and unjust Settlement any longer; which, after all
our Blood and Expense must certainly fall to the ground, and give place to the
natural Force and Weight of our ancient Government and Monarchy; to the just
Title and undoubted Rights of our lawful Sovereign and his Posterity; to the
Love, Affections, and native Inclinations of English Men when the present fit
is over; and to the Interests of our Neighboring Princes and States, which lie
visibly cross unto it, so soon as their present Differences are at an end: And
lastly, by this Method we shall be secured against those fatal Influences upon
our Liberties, which never fail to accompany all forced, irresistible, and
unexpected returns of Exiled Monarchs.

I do humbly beseech Almighty God, That of his Infinite Mercy, for the good of
these Nations and of all Europe, he would open the Prince of Orange's Eyes,
give him a sight and discovery of the Vanity as well as Injustice of possessing
his Father's Throne; and incline his Heart to establish Religion and Liberty
among us, and give Peace to all Europe, by doing an Act which would bury in
Oblivion the famed Instances of Dioclesian and Charles V. and immortalize his
Name, even by restoring his old Father to his Right and Inheritance. Was it
really the Danger our Religion and Liberties were in which put him upon coming
to Britain, this would be an infallible way fully to secure them by new Laws
and Concessions, against which there lay no Objection: Or was it to put himself
at the head of the British Forces, thereby to give a Check to the towering
Ambition of the French Monarch, this would more effectually do it; for either
that King would think himself obliged, out of Gratitude to a Prince who is
truly a Martyr for a supposed French League, to give a reasonable Peace to
Europe, in order to King James's Restoration; or by a Refusal, our King was at
Liberty to consult his own Interest, and to unite with the Consederates by the
Advice of Parliament; which would make such a general and vigorous Application
of the English Forces that way, without any fear of Domestic Distraction, as
would quickly oblige that great Monarch to give ear to Reason, and a Peace to
his Neighbors: And the Glory of having given Peace to Europe, and subdued
himself, would place the Prince of Orange's Name upon the highest Pinnacles of
Fame, furnish the greatest Character imaginable for History, give a great and
noble Example to future Ages, declare him the Benefactor of the Christian
World, and oblige all British Subjects to acknowledge, that he had most
generously contributed his best Endeavors for the securing of the Protestant
Religion, and the free Enjoyment of all our Laws, Rights and Liberties, under a
just and legal Government, according to his Declaration.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. Col. 1. Line 23. r. upon a Review of that bl ssed Occasion. p. 8. c.
1. l. 37. de^e in. p. 10. c. 2. l. 9. after Troops, add to support (...) p. 13.
c. 2. l. 16. (...) it, r. th y. p. 14. c. 2. l. 39 r. easy. p. 21. c. 1. l.
38. r. was not with. p. 22. c. 1. l. ^^. l^^e anoth r. p. 26. c. 1. l. 13. dele
our. p. 27. c. 2. l. 21. r. Princes. p. 32. c. 1. l. 13. r. the. p. ^2. c. 1.
l. 30 dele upon whole Counties. p. 37. c. 1. l. 6. after in add the. dele are.
l. 23. r. Towns. p. 41. c. 2. l. 3. r. scr^ening. p. 43. c. 2 l. 4. dele and
his Designs. p. 4^. c. 2. l. 9. r. instanc. p. 54 c. 2. l. 32. (...) fail to
furnish.


