AN ENQUIRY INTO THE New Opinions (Chiefly) Propagated by the Presbyterians of
Scotland; Together also with some Animadversions on a Late Book, Entitled, A
Defense of the Vindications of the Kirk:

In a LETTER to a Friend at EDINBURGH.

By A. M. D. D.

Jeremiah 6.16. -- Ask for the Old Paths, where is the good way, and walk
therein, and ye shall find rest for your Souls: but they said, we will not walk
therein. LONDON: Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul'
s Churchyard, 1696.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE.
THE Introduction, inviting all the true Sons of the Church (especially the
Afflicted Clergy) to the most serious Exercise of true Repentance and
Humiliation, P. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. The Doctrines and Principles that we
contend for against the later Sectaries are Primitive, Catholic, and Orthodox.
p 9, 10, 11.
CHAP. I.
The Insufficiency of those Pleas and Arguments managed by the Presbyterians,
against the Catholic Church, in Defense of their New Doctrine of Parity, p. 12,
13, 14. Their Arguments reduced to three general Heads, p. 15. 1. Their Pleas
from the Pretended immediate Institution of our Savior, considered, p. 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21. 2. Their Arguments from the Confusion of Names, observable in
the New Testament, proved to be Vain and Sophistical, p. 22, 23, 24, 25, etc.
3. Their Arguments from the Testimony of Ecclesiastical Writters examined, p.
39, 40. The Testimony of St. Clement the Apostolical Bishop of Rome, Vindicated
from the Wilful Mistakes of Presbyterians, p. 41, 42, 43, 44, etc. The
Testimony of St. Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna and Disciple of St. John the
Apostle, enquired into particularly, p. 49, 50, 51. The Testimony from Hermas
impartially viewed, and the Disingenuity of Monsiour Blondel reproved, p. 52,
53, 54, etc. Pope Pius his Epistle to Justus Viennensis Censured as Spurious;
and if it was Genuine, cannot serve the Presbyterian Design, p. 56. The
Instance of Marcion the Heretic as unfit to support the New Doctrine, as the
former Testimony from the Spurious Epistle of Pope Pius, p. 57. The Testimony
from Justin Martyr impertinently alleged by our Adversaries, p. 58, 59. The
Testimony of the Gallican Martyrs, p. 62, 63. The Testimony of St. Cyprian, p.
64. The Testimony from the Authority of St. Jerome, p. 65. The Error of St.
Jerome discovered to be very different from the New Doctrine of the
Presbyterians, p. 66. St. Jerome never acknowledged any Interval, after the
Death of the Apostles in which Ecclesiastical Affairs were managed, Communi
Presbyterorum Consilio. Ibid and Seqq. St. Jerome taught, that Episcopacy was
the Apostolical remedy of Schism, from p. 65. to p. 80. The Testimony from the
Authority of Saint Austin, examined. Saint Austin reasoned from the Succession
of single Persons governing the Church of Rome from the days of the Apostles,
and by this Argument overthrew the Doctrine and Schism of the Donatists, p. 81.
to p. 94.
CHAP. II.
Of the Succession of Bishops from the Apostles, p. 94. Some Presbyterian
Concessions preliminary to the true State of the Controversy, p. 95, 96. The
Apostolical Office considered, with regard to its Permanent and Essential
Nature* 2ly. As it was adorned with Extraordinary and miraculous Advantages.
The First was to continue for ever in the Church, the Second was Transient and
Occasional, with regard to the first Plantations of Christianity. The
Apostolical and Episcopal Office the same in its Original Nature, Essence, and
Design, p 98, 99, 100, 101, etc. The true State of the Controversy, whether
the Apostles left the Government of Particular Churches to single Successors,
or to a College of Presbyters acting in Parity and Equality, p. 105, 106, The
first is affirmed by all Records, whether we consider the inspired Writings of
the Apostles, or the Ecclesiastical Histories of after Ages, p. 107, etc. The
true Notion of an Evangelist altogether different from the Permanent Office of
Timothy or Titus, p. 111. Saint James the Just, Established Bishop of Jerusalem
by the Apostles, and he in that City was the Center of Unity, and Episcopal
Succession in that See, p. 112, 113. The Episcopal Power lodged in his person,
ib. The Angels of the Asiatic Churches, Bishops in the strictest Sense, p. 114,
etc. The whole Question reduced to three Enquiries, p. 118, etc. The Force of
the Primitive Argument against Heretics, from the Succession of single
Persons, p. 123, 124, 125. The Ancients could not be deceived in an affair of
this Nature, p. 128, 129. The Impossibility of changing the Ecclesiastical
Government from Parity to Prelacy, in the Primitive Ages, all things duly
considered, p. 136, 137. This proved at length from the Concessions of the
Learned Presbyterians, Salmasius, blondel, and Bochartus, Ibid. The Peevishness
of our Adversaries in this Controversy, p. 150. The Epistles of St. Ignatius
overthrow the Pretenses of Parity, even upon Salmasius his own Hypothesis, P.
152, 153, etc. The whole Controversy reduced to Nine plain Queries, p. 157,
158, 159, 160. The Power of Bishops over the Subordinate Clergy and Laymen, in
the Primitive Ages, p. 161. The Presbyterian exception against large Diocesses
discussed, p. 162, 163, 164. Saint James the Just, a Diocesan Bishop in the
Strictest Sense, p. 164, 165.
CHAP. III.
Of several other New Opinions propagated by the Presbyterians of Scotland, p.
168. Their Doctrine concerning the Holy Days of our Savior's Nativity,
Resurrection, and Ascension, Ibid. Anniversary Solemnities not founded upon any
Divine or Express Institution observed in the Jewish and Christian Church, p.
172, etc. Presbyterian Exceptions removed, p. 175, 176, 177. This further
Prosecuted from several other Considerations, p. 179, 180, etc. The Festivity
of Christmas more particularly considered, p. 185. The Vindicator's Mistakes
exposed, by the Anniversary Commemoration of the Martyrs, celebrated by the
first Christians, p. 188, etc. The New Explications of the Vindicator insisted
on, p. 196, etc. Some other ridiculous Fancies examined, viz, That Christmas
was observed in honor of Julius Caesar, p. 205. The Testimony cited from
Buchanan cannot serve the Presbyterian Design, p. 207, 208.
CHAP. IV.
Of the Presbyterian Notion of Schism, and their fabulous Stories concerning a
Presbyterian Church in Scotland, in the first Ages of Christianity, p. 211.
Several Considerations proposed to prove our Scottish Presbyterians Schismatics
from the Catholic Church, in the strictest Sense of that Word, p. 213, 214,
etc. A Particular Enquiry into that Fabulous Story propagated by our
Adversaries, viz. That there was a Presbyterian Church in Scotland in the First
Ages of Christianity, p. 228, 229. The Authors cited by the Vindicator of the
Kirk, to support this Dream, particularly considered, p. 230. The Authority of
Prosper mistaken, and the Testimony cited by our Adversaries, from his
Chronicon Consulare, more narrowly enquired into, p. 245, etc.
CHAP. V.
The Presbyterian Doctrine concerning Rites and Ceremonies examined. p. 250,
251. Their Notions contradict the Practice of all civilized Nations, Ibid. The
frequent Allusions to uncommanded significant Ceremonies practiced in the
Worship of God, that we meet with in the Holy Scriptures, prove such Ceremonies
Lawful beyond all Contradiction, p. 254, etc. Several Exceptions, offered by
the Vindicator, removed, p. 256, 257. The Orthodox Principle Proved from an
Allusion to the Ceremony of Immersion, practiced in the Apostolical Church of
Rome, proved from Romans 6.4. page 265. Of Presbyterian Ordinations, and how
little can be said in their Defense, p. 276, etc. The Doctrine of
Non-Resistance, truly Understood, is safe and Christian in it self, and in all
its tendencies, p. 284, 285. The Enthusiastic Singularities of the later
Presbyterians, in rejecting all Public Forms, in the Solemn Worship of God,
reproved, p. 289, 290, 291, etc. Calvin's three Arguments for Public Liturgies
are Solid and Unanswerable, p. 293, 294, 295. The Vindicator's usual Reproach,
Viz, That the Clergy of our Church are Superstitious, examined, p. 295, etc.
The Nature of Superstition explained, and a Parallel insisted on, between the
Superstitious Usages of the Ancient Heretics, and the Modern Practices of the
later Sectaries, p. 296, 297, 298, etc. The Vindicator's Attempt to Justify
his Unaccountable Paradox forced upon the words of St. Jerome, from some
Expositions offered by the Learned Grotius, Chastised and Exposed, and the
Vanity of that Comparison demonstrated, p. 305, 306, 307.
The Conclusion
Exhorting all the true Sons of the Church to Pray for the Peace and Unity of
its Members.

It is expected the Reader will Pardon some Points and Comma's that are
misplaced. The Errors that disturb the Sense most, are these following.
PAge 16. l. 20. r. New. p. 20. marg. r. locum. p. 55. l. 20. r. Praecipue. p.
60. marg. for Hadriani, r. Saturnini. p. 74. l. 21. r. genuine, p. 81. l. 26.
r. needs. p. 84. l. 17. r. Hieronymo. p. 92. l. 15. r. Smectimnuus. p. 116. l.
3. after Angel, add, as it is rendered by the Septuagint. p. 138. l. 21. r.
Centesimum. p. 159. l. 2. r. a. p. 162. l. 5. r. Saeculi, p. 182. l. 19. r.
acuteness. p. 189. l. 7. r. accurate. p. 199. l 3. r. foppish. p. 253. l. 28.
r. Treatises. p. 255. l. 25. after unguarded, add, and not Supported. p. 291.
l. 13. after that, add, it. p. 319. l. 2. r. Shadow.

AN ENQUIRY INTO THE New Opinions, etc.
Sir,
I Thought that our Enemies had made an end of their Libels, but I see that it
is not so easy for them to forbear the practices that we complain of. The
malignity of Faction is endless, and there is nothing so apt to be oppressed
and reviled as Truth and Innocence. We must (in these days of Atheism and
Confusion) arm our selves against Calumnies and Contradictions: and if we are
not guarded by Resolution and Fortitude, we must desert (not only the Peculiar
Ministries of the Priesthood, but) the Profession of Christianity it self. We
are surrounded on all hands by the most ungenerous and spiteful Adversaries,
the open and scandalous Sensualities of some, and the spiritual Raveries of
others, lay siege to the Foundations of our Faith, and it is with great
difficulty that the public Worship of God is not quite extinguished, as it is
indeed despised and ridiculed: So grievous is our present Calamity, that the
contending Parties amongst us do impute our Disasters to different Causes, and
therefore we are the further removed from out true Cure. If we were so
impartial as to acknowledge our Iniquities with Sorrow and Remorse, we would
quickly find the Exercise of Contrition and Repentance more proper to remove
the marks of God's Anger, than the other Methods that are most pleasing to
Flesh and Blood.

There is nothing more Essential to Natural Religion than the belief of God's
wise and watchful Providence. It interposes in the meanest. Accidents of humane
Life, and much more in the remarkable Ruins and Calamities of public Societies
and Churches: And if we do not hear the Voice of the Rod, and of him that has
appointed it, he has still more terrible Plaues in reserve for us than the
spoiling of our Goods, or the affronting of our Persons. Let us therefore draw
near unto him by our fervent Prayers, and ingenuous Humiliations: for the most
Innocent amongst us may find in the view of his Life several Actions and
Omissions very displeasing to our Heavenly Father, as well as unsuitable to our
Baptismal Vows and Engagements; therefore the Hand of God is stretched out
against us, and he is provoked to let loose amongst us a Spirit of Error and
Confusion: and though we may be very Innocent as to the Accusations of those
who have wickedly combined to defame us, yet who of us can understand his
Errors?

If all things without us are in such disorder; then is it high time for us to
look within our selves, and to fix our Thoughts on their true Objects: If we
are exposed to the sadest Toslings and Uncertainties, we must endeavor to
establish the Tranquillity of our mind? If we know not where to lay our head,
if we have no property upon Earth, the natural Conclusion is, to seek those
things that are above. If here we are persecuted and oppressed, we must carry
our thoughts and desires to that invisible Sanctuary that yields true Ease and
Repose under all pressures and afflictions.

It is worth our while to enquire why we, who have been dedicated to the
services of the Altar, are more particularly struck at than others. It is not
so much our business to complain of our Persecutors, as to look unto him that
smites us: and if he (by the discipline of so many crosses) oblige us to
consider more narrowly the frame of our Souls, we may with greater ease part
with our, former Conveniences. Let every one of us retire into himself, and
open up the several foldings of his own Conscience, and endeavor hereafter to
regulate our Actions by true and Christian Principles knowing that all things
are naked and open to the Eyes of him with whom we have to do, and to whom we
are shortly to give an account of our time and talents, and of all things that
we have done in the body whether they be good or evil. If we must suffer, let
us imitate the Captain of our Salvation: this is Edifying to the Church, and it
establishes the Composure of our own mind. Let us canvass and examine the
Doctrines and Practices for which we suffer, and enquire whether they be not
the Principles of the Catholic and Primitive Church in her first and purest
ages.

We must not think that we are discharged from the peculiar Offices of our
Ministry, because we are forced from our Residence, and exposed to all sorts of
Indignities. We must firmly believe that all things work together for good to
them that love God: and that our Patience and Meekness may be of greater use to
the Church than if we had been allowed to continue in our former Stations. We
see how much holy things are contemned in our days, how triumphantly Atheism
and Impiety lift up their Banners every where. Let us endeavor as much as is
possible to preserve some Remains of Religion amongst the People. Let us assert
the ancient Order and Piety that made the Christian Church so beautiful in
former Ages.

The Apostle informs us, that the time would come when men could not endure
sound Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4.
but after their own lust shall they heap to themselves Teachers having itching
Ears, and they shall turn away their Ears from the truth, and shall be turned
unto fables.

The great Founder of our Religion sent his Apostles by found Doctrine to
enlighten the World, and they conveyed this Spiritual Authority unto others who
should transmit it by an orderly Succession; and as their Mission was Heavenly
in its Original, so their Doctrine was pure and holy in all its Tendencies.
They considered themselves as the Ambas*adors of Jesus Christ, and Delivered
their Commission without any Mixture or Hypocrisy. They treated the People with
all Humility and Tenderness, but in the mean time took great care to mortify
their Lusts and their Passions; but when they grew wanton and headstrong, and
thought themselves too wise to be led by their Spiritual Guides and Rulers,
then they would have teachers of their own, Men chosen by themselves, such as
were taught to calculate their Doctrines to popular Fancies and Humors, such
as would prostitute the Gospel, to promote Error and Delusion, and make the
Kingdom of Light subservient to that of Darkness, and instead of serving our
blessed Savior, they became Slaves to the People, by whom they were originally
employed: and because they were so unhappily successful as to gratify their
Lusts, they were therefore voted the most edifying teachers.

The Primitive Ministers of Religion had their immediate Commission from
Heaven, accordingly they endeavored by all means to restore the Image of God
in the Souls of Men, to raise their Thoughts and Designs to that Happiness and
Treasure which the World cannot give, which God truth promised and made sure by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. The other had their authority
from Men, and therefore they must needs please the People who sent them. They
must reconcile the Rules and Morals of the Gospel to the Wicked Practices and
designs of the World: they must change the strictest Maxims of the Evangel into
looser Theorems, and the severe Discipline of the Ancient Church unto all
License and Luxury, the true faith that works by love unto airy Notions and
Mistakes. Thus the People were pleased, and the Gospel was defeated, the Church
is ruined, and God dishonored.

Every Man in his own station is obliged to contend for the Faith once
delivered to the Saints. When the Foundations of Ecclesiastical Unity are
shaken loose, and the Ancient Constitutions trampled upon with great Insolence
and Impiety, then the hedge of t^^e Religion is not only Invaded but
Demolished, and without those Sacred Vehicles it must Evaporate into Giddiness
and Enthusiasm; the Extravagance of these last days is boundless as it
Skeptical, and Christianity it self is more dangerously wounded by the
Delusions of some that are Baptized, than by the open Blasphemies of Infidels:
The last may be assaulted by Reason, (at least in their more Lucid Intervals)
but the first are altogether inaccessible: we must not presume to instruct them
who pretend to extraordinary Illuminations, their Errors are made strong by
their vanity, they plead a Divine Right to every New Opipinion, and if we
approach them in the ancient Paths of Modesty and Humility, they look down upon
us with Scorn and Indignation; Nay, they are inflexible to the plainest and
most convincing arguments.

I have frequently, with Grief and Sorrow, considered the Decays of Religion,
and the Difficulties of our Employment. We must pull down strong Holds and
lofty Imaginations, and grapple with the rudest Oppositions; the Avenues of
Men's Souls are blockaded by passion and prejudices and they are fortified in
their Error, not only by the Corruption of their Nature, but by the artifice of
Seducers, their itching Ears are pleased, their Lusts are gratified, their
Passions are made more unruly, their Envy, Hatred, and Malice are indulged; and
they are allowed to distinguish themselves from all others by special Titles of
Division and Singularity, by which alone they think to make their Calling and
Election sure.

Yet notwithstanding that we are thus resisted by the Multitude of their
Follies and Delusions, we must not give over by Faintness and Despondency. We
must plead with them, who have left the Unity of the Church, by the words of
Truth and Soberness, and exhort others to continue in that Doctrine that was
revealed by our Savior, taught by his Apostles, and received by all Churches
in the first and best Ages, that the present Generation may not rise in
Judgment against us for our Silence, nor Posterity censure our Cowardice. We
must not be ashamed of the truth, even when it is contradicted with all
possible Violence and Fury.

I address this short Treatise to you, with a design rather to assert the
Truth, than to reply to what has been lately published by the Vindicator of
the Kirk of Scotland, against a certain Book, Entitled, Apology for the
Clergy, etc. though I think it necessary to make some of his Mistakes a little
more apparent.

There are certain Practices and Rituals received by the Christian Church, in
all Ages, which are not determined expressly in the Holy Scriptures in so many
Letters and Syllables, yet by the plainest and most undeniable Consequences,
are agreeable to its general Rules, and the Uniform belief of all Christians;
and they that deny those Usages, or the Lawfulness of those Rituals, venture
upon untrodden Paths, and do foolishly condemn the Wisdom of all former Ages.

The special Providence of God has so watched over the Church, that, since the
first Plantations of Christianity, we have preserved to us some Records and
Monuments of its Doctrine and Practices. The Books of such as have been learned
in every age do plainly demonstrate that the first Christians were agreed
amongst themselves in the great Articles of Religion, and in the general Rules
of Ecclesiastical Discipline and Order, and by this Uniformity of Doctrine and
Rituals they strengthened themselves against Infidels and Heretics. There is
nothing more opposite to the spirit of true Religion than Stubborness and
Petulance, and when we despise those Constitutions that have been universally
received amongst Christians, we overthrow the Foundations of Peace and Charity,
and consequently we exclude our selves from the visible fellowship of Christ's
Household and Family.

When we consider the Schisms and Tumults of particular Churches, the
confusions of so many Revolutions, the shakings of so many Nations, the
boldness and activity of Heretics, we have reason to adore the Goodness of
God, that so many Monuments of Ecclesiastical Antiquity are preserved; and
whatever is uniformly determined by the Wisest and the best of Christians
(their learn'dst Bishops and Presbyters) must be received as the Infallible
truth of God, else we have no certain Standard to distinguish the Catholic
Church in former Ages from the combinations of Heretics: these are new in
their several Errors and Delusions, and upon that very account of their Novelty
were exposed and refuted by the Ancients: they neither agreed amongst
themselves, nor with the Orthodox. But the Uniform Voice of Christendom in the
first and purest Ages, is the best Key to the Doctrine and Practice of the
Apostles and their Successors.

If it appear then that the Opinions which we oppose, and are propagated by the
Presbyterian Societies are such as were never entertained in the Christian
Church for fourteen hundred Years after our Savior's Incarnation, then I leave
it to every sober Christian to consider, whether he may safely continue in the
communion of that Party that despises the whole Catholic Church both Ancient
and Modern.

CHAP. I.
The Novelty and Insufficiency of those Pleas and Arguments managed by the
Presbyterians in defense of their New Doctrine of Parity.
THE first Opinion that I charge with Error and Novelty amongst our
Countrymen, is this, That they affirm, upon all Occasions, that our Savior
has appointed his Church, under the New Testament (whether Provincial,
National, or Oecomenic) to be governed by the several classes of Presbyters
acting in perfect Parity, and owning no Subordination to any higher Officer in
the Ecclesiastical Senate above a Presbyter in the modern and current Notion of
the word, Such a Doctrine must be of dangerous consequence, because it is
altogether new, and never propagated in any part of the Christian Church until
these last days of Separation and Singularity. In this Opinion they differ, not
only from the Uniform testimony of Antiquity, but also from the first
Presbyterians amongst ourselves, who declare in their Confession of Faith, that
all Church-Polity is variable: so far they were at that time from asserting
that indispensible, divine, and unalterable right of Parity.

All that the first Presbyterians pleaded was, that their new form was
allowable, and not repugnant to the Economy of the New Testament and Primitive
Institution; and that it came very near to the Original Model of Churches, but
they never thought to advance such a bold and rash Assertion as to affirm, That
the Christain Church, by the Original Authority of our Savior and his
Apostles, ought to be governed in all Ages by a Parity of Presbyters; or that
there was no other Officer in the Church could pretend to any share of
Ecclesiastical Government above a Presbyter.

When a Society of Men set up for Divine, Absolute, and Infallible Right, they
ought to bring plain Proofs for what they say, else they must needs be looked
upon as Impostors, or at least self-conceited and designing Men. To propagate a
Doctrine under the notion of a probable Opinion (though it should happen to be
an Error) is consistent with Modesty, and the practice of Learned Men in all
Ages; But to affirm a new Notion to be established by Divine Right, and to
require Obedience to that Scheme, as a thing that is due to Supreme and
Infallible Authority, is much worse than Speculative Enthusiasm. If a man only
entertains himself with his Visions and Fancies, he alone suffers by it: but if
I meet with a company of headstrong Fellows, who must needs persuade me that
they see so many Armies in the Air fighting, and with the exactest Discipline
of War; nay, their Banners, the shape and color of their Horses, their several
Squadrons, and the whole order of their Encampment, and will certainly knock me
in the head unless I take my Oath upon it that I see all this, who never saw
any such thing in my Life. I think I have reason to complain that my
Circumstances, are very unlucky, I had certainly rather fall into the hands of
High-waymen, than amongst those Spiritual Robbers, who divest me of my Senses,
and the exercise of my Reason.

If you inform our Country men that their New Doctrine is thus represented,
they will tell you that none but wicked men oppose their Government; that it is
Established upon the express Institution of our Savior, that it has been
asserted and proved by several Learned Men of their Party beyond contradiction.
But if you ask by what particular argument you may be convinced of the Truth of
their New Doctrine, then they begin to lead you into a Labyrinth of dark and
intricate Consequences, obscure and perplexed Probabilities; several Texts of
Scripture they will allege, but sadly wrested and distorted from their genuine
Meaning and Design, and the uniform Suffrages of all the Ancients: And if you
are not satisfied with such proofs as they advance, you must be contented to
submit to their Censure, and the New Discipline must be Obeyed wherever their
Power is equal to their Pretenses.

I can give you but a short History of their Arguments by which they endeavor
to Establish their Divine Right of Parity. When you read their Books I think
all their pleas of whatever kind or force may be reduced to these three heads.
First, either they pretend that this Parity of Presbyters is expressly commanded
by our Savior; or, secondly, They endeavor to support it by consequences from
several Texts of Scripture; or thirdly, from the Testimonies of the ancient
Writers of the Church.

First I say, they pretend that this Parity of Presbyters (exclusive of the
Superiority or Jurisdiction of a Bishop) is expressly commanded by our Savior.
This indeed promises veryfair; For if our Savior has plainly and positively
Commanded that Ecclesiastical Affairs shall be managed in all Churches and Ages
communi Presbytero'um consilio, and by such a College of Presbyters as excludes
the Authority and Jurisdiction of a Bishop, then, without all Controversy, all
Christians are obliged to submit to it. The Consequence is plain and
undeniable; and because our Countrymen do insist upon this more frequently
than any of the foreign Presbyterians, we ought to hear them calmly and
deliberately; and when they plead the Authority of our Blessed Savior we must
view those Texts with reverence and attention, and see if any thing can be
inferred from them that may probably support the now Scheme of Presbytery.

The Parallel Texts of Scripture are, Matthew. 20. 25. Vid. Dickson in Matt. and
Answer to the Irenicum, by G. R.
But Jesus called them unto him and said, ye know that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise
authority upon them. v. 26. But it shall not be so great among you, but
whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister. V. 27. And
whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant. v.28. Even as the
Son of Man came not to be ministered unto but to minister, and to give his life
a ransom for many. See also Mark 10. v. 42, 43, 44, 45. and Luke 22. 25. From
these parallel Places they plead, that the Officers of Chirist's House were by
his own express. Command established in a perfect Equality, even in such a
Parity as excludes the Power and Jurisdiction of any higher Order than that of
a Presbyter in the modern Notion.

Let us now examine, whether there be any Foundation for their Inference in the
Texts last mentioned.

In the first place, we find that our Blessed Savior supposes Degrees of
Subordination amongst his own Disciples, as well as all other Societies, and
therefore he directs the Ecclesiastics, who would climb to the Highest Places
in the Church, to take other Methods than those that are most usual amongst the
Grandees of the World: He that deserved Preferment in the Church was to be the
Servant of all, so that this Text refers to the Method of Promotion, and not to
the Extirpation of their Jurisdiction. They were not to aspire to Honor and
Dignity by Force and Violence, or the other Arts that are so fashionable in
Secular Courts, but rather by all the Acts of Modesty, Humility, and
Self-denial.

Next, let me ask, whether the Apostles understood this Precept of our Savior
in the sense of our Adversaries or not. If they did, (as it is alleged) how
came they to exercise Jurisdiction over all Subordinate Ecclesiastics, during
their Life time, in all the Churches they Planted? Did they go cross to the
Institution of our Savior, who perfectly understood his meaning, and to whom
the Precept was Originally delivered.

But that which Baffles and Exposes this Argument to all Intents and Purposes,
is this, that he did that himself among them, which now he commanded them to do
to one another, and therefore the doing of this toward one another in
Obedience to the Command now under consideration, could not infer a Parity,
unless they Blasphemously infer that Christ and his Apostles were equal: for
when you read the Text with attention, you see that our Savior recommends what
he Enjoins from his own Constant and Visible Practice amongst them, viz. that
he himself, who was their Lord and Master, was their Servant, and therefore it
became the Greatest among them, in imitation of him, to be Modest, Calm, and
Humble toward all their Subordinate Brethren, and this qualified them more
than any other thing for Ecclesiastical Promotions.

It is very sad that any should be so much Infatuated with their new Schems of
Parity, as to allege such Texts, which (if understood in their Sense) Degrades
our Blessed Savior to the Degree of one of his Disciples; for what he
Commanded the Apostles, he Practiced among them himself. And this is the
strongest Motive to engage their Obedience; therefore I may reasonably infer,
that whatever it was that our Savior commanded in those places of Scripture,
it must of necessity be toto coelo different from all Parity and Equality. He
Commanded them, that they should not exercise their Jurisdiction as the Lords
of the Gentiles did, by a Spirit of Pride and Domination, but rather by the
more Christian and engaging Behavior of Charity and Humility. He that was to
be the Greatest among them, was to be their Servant, in Imitation of that
Heavenly Pattern that was set them by our Blessed Lord and Savior. S. Paul
thought himself obliged to answer his Episcopal Character after this manner,
when the Care of all the Churches lay upon him, when he employed his
Apostolical Power to promote the Edification of all Men: and all the Fathers of
the Church, who were advanced above their Brethren to Ecclesiastical Power and
Jurisdiction, had this Evangelical Notion of their Dignity, that they were the
Servants of all others.

From what has been said one may easily see, that there is no Ground, no not a
Shadow of any Argument for the New Doctrine in these Texts of Scripture. It is
true, that Salmasius glances at this way of Reasoning in his Walo Messalinus,
but he lays no great stress upon it. That which is most to our purpose is, vid.
Bez. in (...).
that Beza himself, in his larger Notes upon the New Testament, asserts, that
all kind of Jurisdiction is not forbidden in these Texts, but that only which
is joined with imperious Bitterness and Domination.

Let it be further considered, that the Hierarchy and Subordination of Priests
was Established by Divine Authority in the lewish Church: and if our Savior
had pulled down that ancient Polity, and commanded an Equality amongst the
Presbyters of the New Testament, he would not have stated the Opposition
between his own Disciples and the Lords of the Gentiles, but rather between the
Priests of the Mosaie Economy and the Disciples of the New Testament. When he
reproved the corrupt glosses that were introduced into the Church by the
Scribes and Pharisees, and taught them Purer and more Heavenly Strains of
Morality, he states the Opposition between the current Doctrine received
amongst the Jews, and that which he himself Taught and Recommended; and there
is no doubt to be made, if he had forbidden the several Degrees and
Subordinations of Priests, and Established a perfect Equality, he would have
stated a plain Opposition between the Model of the Temple, and the other
Platform that was to succeed in the Christian Church.

As for the other Text that is ordinarily cited to serve the same design, 1
Pet. 5.2, 3. It is but the Apostle's Commentary on our Savior's Words and
Commandment, and it forbids the Spirit of Pride and Insolence, as a thing very
unsuitable to all Power and Authority in the Church. Thus such Texts have been
understood from the beginning, and it is one strong Prejudice against the new
Exposition, that it was never heard of until these latter days.

Secondly, If the Presbyterians cannot Establish their Divine Right upon
express Texts of Scripture, they will support it (as they think) by the
Clearest and most immediate Consequence, and this is Equivalent to the most
Positive Command and Institution. Vid. Smectim. Jus divin. Minister Anglican.
The Unbishoping Timothy and Titus.
The Argument from the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter fill all their Books
from top to bottom: And if this be in it self Lame and Sophistical, Altar
Damascen.
they must despair to Establish the pretended Equality of Presbyters in the
Ecclesiastical Government. Durh. Dissert. on the Revel.


The Argument most insisted on in favor of their Parity, (exclusive of
Episcopal Jurisdiction) is built upon the Homonomy of Bishop and Presbyter in
the Language of the New Testament, or because the Clergy are Dichotomiz'd only
into Bishops and Deacons in some Texts of Scripture, and in some Ancient
Writers of the Primitive Church. Hence they exclude the Authority of a Bishop
above a Presbyter, though the Offices themselves be as much distinguished as is
possible in several Texts of the New Testament. And if this Argument alone
appear Childish and Sophistical, they have not another Sanctuary to flee to; so
my present Business is to Examine the force of it. v. Cotel. Not. inpriorem
Epist S. Clem. p. 96. in quibus fus^ and solid dem^nstratur argumentum a
confusione nominum nequaquam Jurisdictionem and Authoritatem Episcoporum supra
Presbyteros labefactare posse.
There is not one of their number with whom you Engage in this Controversy,
but immediately he will tell you, that there is no distinction between Bishop
and Presbyter in the Scriptures, and therefore they conclude that their
Argument a Confusione Nominum against the Superiority of a Bishop is very Solid
and Demonstrative. To this purpose they cite Act. 20. 17. 28. Philip. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3. and several other places.

Whether a Bishop be of a Higher Order than a Presbyter does not now fall under
our Enquiry, nor is it in it self very material. Sometimes they might be
considered of the same Order with regard to the Priesthood common to either, by
which both Bishops and Presbyters were distinguished from the body of the
People, and other Subordinate Officers of the Church, though at other times,
when Authority and Jurisdiction is named, the Bishop, (with regard to his
Dignity and Power) is always reckoned above a Presbyter.

Here we are carefully to Observe, that when the Inspired Writers Dichotomiz'd
the Clergy into two Orders, they but followed the Dialect and Example of the
Jews, who thus divided their Ministers also into Priests and Levites, though
the Highest Order was again Subdivided both by the Jews and the Christians,
when the Priests were considered with regard to that Subordination established
among themselves, and without any regard to the Body of the People. This is
very agreeable to the Language of the Ancient Jews, as well as to the Idiom of
the Hellenistical Tribes of the Apostolical Age: The first confounded the name
of the High Priest with that of a Priest, without any other distinguishing
Charcteristic or Discrimination. For Proof of this see Levit. 1. 7, 8. V.
Doctiss. Bevereg. cod. canon Eccles. primit lib.2. c. 11.
And the Sons of Aaron the Priest shall put fire upon the Altar, and lay the
wood in order upon the fire. v. 8. And the Priests Aaron's Sons shall lay the
parts, the head and the fat in order upon the wood that is on the fire which is
upon the Altar.

Here we plainly find that in the first Establishment of the Mosaic Economy
(in which the Patriarchal Subordination of Priests was still retained) the High
Priest is named by the same appellative (without any distinction of Order or
Jurisdiction) that the other Priests were named by: and the Title of a Priest
was promiseuously applied, without any distinction or marks of Eminence to the
High Priest as well as to the Subordinate. Yet it was never questioned but that
there were extraordinary Privileges and Dignities reserved to the High Priest
amongst the Jews, though thus placed amongst the other Priests without any
Nominal Distinction: nor do we find the Title of High Priest ever affixed to
the particular name of Aaron or Eleazar in all the Pentateuch, nor is the word
High Priest it self mentioned in the Books of Moses, but either twice or
thrice, and that only with regard to the Administration of after days. Yet this
Homonomy of names could not be reasonably pleaded then against the
Subordination of other Priests to Aaron, nor against the Deference due to his
Pontifical Character. Was it then to be expected that the Apostles or
Apostolical Men (when they occasionally mentioned the Presbyters of the New
Testament) might not make use of the current Language and Pharaseology of their
own Countrymen, who divided their Clergy into Priests and Levites, as if there
were no more but two Orders, even when the meanest of the Jews knew that the
Dignity of the High Priest was very honorable and distinguished from all
Subordinate Priests by all marks of Eminence and Authority?

It is true, that in the Hagiographical and Prophetical Writings, the High
Priest is very frequently distinguished by his Proper and Special Character;
yet in the beginning of the Jewish Economy neither Aaron nor Eleazar were
called Highpriests when they are particularly named, and if in those days any
had been so mad as to have inferred from this confusio Nominum an Equality
between all Priests, he would certainly have been exposed: for the Offices
themselves were sufficiently distinguished by those Special Ministries and
Jurisdictions that were peculiarly appropriated to the one, and denied to the
other, such as were visible to the observation of the meanest among the Jews.

We do not at all deny but that Bishops might be called Presbyters in the days
of the Apostles, and justly so too, though they had other Presbyters under
their Government and Inspection: for the use of the Word Presbyter was another
thing then than now, if we consider it in its full Latitude and Extent* With us
it signifies such Priests as assist the Bishop in his Ecclesiastical
Administrations, and are accountable to him for their Performances: And though
all Presbyters are not Bishops, yet all Bishops are Presbyters; and to infer an
Equality of Offices from the promiscuous Use of Names, I think, is neither good
Logic nor good History.

We do not now Plead, (as some Ignorant People may pretend) that there ought to
be Bishop above Presbyters because there was a High Priest among the Jews, but
rather thus, that the Hierarchy that obtained in the Patriarchal and Jewish
Economy was never abrogated in the New; and though we meet with the same
Dichotomies of the Clergy in the New Testament, as are frequently seen in the
Old, we ought not to conclude from thence, that there was an Equality among
them of the Higher Order in that Division, no more than there was a Parity
amongst the Priests of the Old Testment, for that same Highest Order, or (...),
was again divided into two, viz. the Supreme and Subordinate.

And not only they, but the Jews also of the Apostolical Age divided their
Clergy into two Classes when they spoke of them, only as in Opposition to the
People, they made no other distinction amongst them than that of Priests and
Levites: But then again, upon other Occasions they Subdivided the Priests into
the Highest and Subordinate Order, Vid. Clariss. Dodwell dissert. Cypr. p. 205.
when they considered the Hierarchy in it self, and distinguished every (...)
of the Priesthood from one another, of this we have clear Instances from Philo
the Jew.

Was it not then reasonable, that the Apostles should speak the Language of the
Age in which they lived, and that of their Predecessors? Whether then the
Clergy be divided into their several Classes by a Biparite or Triparite
division, both is very Agreeable to the Custom of the Jews. If they compared
the Priests amongst themselves, and reckoned up their Distinctions and
Subordinations to one another, then they were Divided by a Tipartite Division;
but if they spoke of them with regard to the People, then the Bipartite
Division was more Convenient so that the Community of Names was very observable
when the Offices themselves were as truly Separated and Distinguished a they
could be. In like manner the first Presbyter, or (...), in the Apostolical Age,
he that was Vested with a Prostasia, was a much above the Subordinate
Presbyters as the High Priest among the Jews was above other Priests, with whom
nevertheless he was frequently Subordinate Presbuyters as the High Priest among
the Jews was above other Priests, with whom nevertheless he was frequently
Ranked, without any Nominal Distinction or Discrimination.

Nay Salmasius himself grants, that even when the pretended Equality prevailed,
Walo Mess.
there was a Praeses to whom the Protocathedria, or Locus in Cosessu Primarius,
was constantly due, and that during life. And there are such mainfest and
palpable Evidences of this peculiar Honor and Jurisdiction due to the one of
the Ecclesiastical Senate in the Apostolical Age, that the Learned Sticklers
for Parity cannot deny it. The Apocalyptic Angels (amongst whom we justly
reckon S. Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna) the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and the
Catalogues of Bishops suceeding the Apostles in several Sees, (gathered at
least toward the middle of the (Second Century) make it Evident beyond all
Contradiction.

It is impossible to let us see from any Ancient Record either Genuine or
Suppositious, that there was ever any thing of Moment Canonically determined in
the Ecclesiastical Meetings without their Bishop his particular Advice and
Authority. And since Clemens Romanus, Origin, and S. Cyprian do compare the
Evangelical Priesthood and Ministrations with the Aaronical, how is it that we
can pretend to Conclude an Equality amongst the Presbyters of the New Testament
from the Dichotomies used in Christian Writings, no more than we can Dream of a
Parity among the Jewish Priests, because they are frequently Dichotomiz'd,
especially since the Ancient who sometimes divide the Clergy only into two
Orders, do again upon other occasions Subdivide the Highest Order, and
distinguish the Bishop from all Subordinate Presbyters.

It is true, that Clemens Romanus a Writer of the Apostolical Age, Divides the
Clergy into two Orders, but so he Divides also the Jewish Ministers of the
Sanctuary into Priests and Levites, which no Man will allow as a Proof of the
Equality of Priests under the Old Testament; but I shall have Opportunity
hereafter to consider the Testimony alleged by Blondel from S. Clemens's
Epistle to the Corinthians more particularly in its proper Place. I have
formerly said, that the most Ancient Writers, who Dichotomize the Clergy when
they speak of them with regard to the Laity, do yet distinguish them by a
Tripartite Division, when the Hierarchy is considered in it self, and with
regard to that Prostasia and Jurisdiction which distinguishes one Priest from
another. Tertul. de Baptismo.
Tertullian in his Book de Baptismo, has these Words, Jus quidem dandi
baptismum habet summus Sacerdos qui est Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri and
Diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi Authoritate, qua salva salva pax est: Yet
Monsieur Blondel runs away with another Testimony cited from his Apologeticks,
as if he had found there a perfect Equality of Presbyters, because the Seniores
are said to be in the Government, than which there cannot be a more absurd
Consequence, for he neither affirmed that those Seniores were all Equal among
themselves, nor is it certain, whether by the Seniores he understood all
Presbyters in General, or those only who were advanced to the Episcopal
Dignity; for it was no part of his Business in an Apology Addressed to the
Heathens to insist on the Subordinations of one Priest unto another, for he
only pleaded that there was nothing in the Christian Meetings contrary to the
strictest Rules of Morality and Decency, and that they were Men of Approved and
Exemplary Lives, who were advanced to any share of the Ecclesiastical
Government.

Clemens Alexandrinus is brought as a Witness to serve the same Design,
Stromat. Lib. 6.
but then unluckily he reckons up the three Orders of the Clergy, and calls
them Imitations of the Angelical Glory, (...).

Upon this Occasion it is needless to name S. Cyprian, who Asserts the
Jurisdiction and Prerogative of the Episcopal Power upon all Occasions with
great Courage and Assurance; and S. Polycarp the Famous Doctor of the Asiatic
Church, Bishop of Smyrna, and Disciple of Saint John, who flourished long
before S. Cyprian, though he Divides the Clergy into two Orders in his Epistle
to the Philippians, yet he honorably mentions and recommends the Epistles of
S. Ignatius, in which the Apostolical Hierarchy of Bishop, Presbyter, and
Deacon is so often and so expressly mentioned: and S. Polycarp in the Epigraphe
of that Epistle distinguishes himself from his Subordinate Presbyters,
according to the Modest and Usual S^ile of those days, Pelycarp and the
Presbyters that are with him, who, if he had stood on a Level with those
Presbyters, would never have distinguished himself from the Community of his
Brethren by his proper Name placed at such a distance, yet with Visible (but
very Modest) Marks of Distiction and Precedence, according to the humble
Practice of those Glorious Martyrs.

From what has been said, it is very evident, that there can be nothing more
Foolish and Extravagant than to conclude a Parity among Priests, because some
Ancient Christians used the Jewish Phraseology, for even these upon other
Occasions frequently Assert the Jurisdiction of one Bishop over many
Presbyters: and Hermas, who was Contemporary with Clemens Romanus, reproves the
Ambition of some in his own time, who strove for the first Dignity and
Preferment. And if there was no such Precedence then in the Church, there was
no ground for his Reprehension. Pastor Herma.


The sum of these Reasonings amounts to this, that when the Hellenist Jews
would distinguish the High Priest from the Levites, they thought the common
Name of a priest was sufficient, Apud clariss. Dodwell. disertat: Cyprian p. 205
as is evident from several places in Phylo the Jew. And as it was unreasonable
to conclued from thence that he had not a singular Authority and Jurisdiction
over subordinate Priests, so Nowadays an Argument founded upon the same
Topic, is equally Impertinent and Sophistical. When the priests were compared
among themselves one with another, then their Dignities and Subordinations
might be seasonably mentioned. If we compare the priests of the New Testament
with the Deacons, we need say no more than Priests and Deacons; but when we
compare the Priests among themselves, we must acknowledge their several
Subordinations.

The Priests under the Old Testament were only allowed to offer the Sacrifices,
and by their Offering of Sacrifices, were distinguished from the Levites: So
under the New Testament, the Priests, both of the highest and subordinate
Order, offer the Eucharistical Sacrifice, and by so doing, are sufficiently
distinguished from Deacons; yet this is no Argument against the Subordination
of one Priest unto another. Thus we see there was the same Reason for those
Dichotomies of the Clergy, both under the Old and New Testament.

From what has been said we may easily see that the Jews used such Dichotomies
of their Clergy, both under the Mosaic Economy, and in the Apostolical Age,
when the superiority of the High Priest was past all Contradiction: And there
can be a very good account given of this Phraseology, and way of speaking from
the different Considerations that engaged both Jewish and Christian Writers to
use the Bipartite or Tripartite Division of the Clergy; for the very same
Christian Writers, who only mentioned two Orders, do in other places reckon up
the Hierarchy of Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon, as plainly as is possible. From
these Considerations, I say, we may easily perceive, that the Argument pleaded
against Episcopacy, founded upon such Dichotomies, is not only weak, but very
Foolish and Extravagant.

Yet Blondel, Salmasius, and Daille, Men of great Learning and Reputation,
employed much Reading and Artifice to support their New Hypothesis by this
Argument, and to wrest so many places of the Fathers, to promote an Opinion
which was never heard of before the Days of Aerius; tho it must be confessed,
that Men of extraordinary Learning have been imposed upon by the same
fallacies, particularly our Countryman, Sir Thomas Craig, in his Book de
Success. Reg. Angl. But if he had read the ancient Monuments of Ecclesiastical
Antiquity, with that accurate Attention wherewith he perused the vast Volums of
Civilians, Canonists, and Historians, he had certainly been of another Mind.

So visible is the Confusion of Names in the New Testament, that Apostle,
Bishop, and Presbyter, are sometimes mentioned without any remarkable
Distinction, yet so as the Government of one amongst many, is particularly
Demonstrated. Our Savior himself is called an Apostle, Heb. 3.1. sometimes the
Word seems to be restrained to the Number of Twelve, and Matthias, upon the
Apostasy of Judas, is chosen to fill up the Number of the Twelve Apostles; but
in the same Apostolical Writings, the Name of an Apostle is bestowed upon
several others besides the Twelve, ^ Cotel in prie^ Epist.
as S. S. Barnabas, Clemen. ad Corinth.
Paul Andronicus, Junias, Epaphroditus, and others. Our Savior is called a
Bishop, 1 Pet. 2. 25. 1 Cor. 15. 7.
Again the Government of the Apostles is called their Episcopacy, 1 Act. 20.
sometimes the Name of Bishop is attributed to such Priests as were of the first
Order, invested with Apostolical Power and Jurisdiction, 1 Timothy chap. 3. Tit.
1. 7. these places are so understood by all the Fathers. Again the Bishops
mentioned, 1. Philip. 1 are understood by St. Chrysostom, Oecumenius,
Theophilact, and Theodoret, to be the Priests of the second Order; for they
concluded Epaphroditus to have been then Bishop of Philippi, as may be
reasonably collected from Philip. 2. 25. Our English Version follows Beza, and
understands it as if Epaphroditus had been a Messenger sent by the Philippians
to S. Paul; but Salmasius is much more ingenuous, W^^^ M^^.
and acknowledges, That the Word Apostle in the sacred Scriptures never
signifies any other than legatum Dei ad homines.

And this is very agreeable to the Opinion of Theodoret, who thought that when
the Bishops were named in the Apostolic Age, so as to be distinguished from
subordinate Priests, they were then called Apostles, tho upon other occasions
they were promiscuously Named without any distinction. I only mention this
transiently, not insisting upon it. My business at present is to prove that the
Community of Names was so familiar in the Language of the Apostolical Age, that
no Man can conclude from thence a Community of Offices. St. Peter calls himself
a Presbyter, so St. John the Apostle, and the Presbytery mentioned in the first
of Timothy, 4. 14. was a Senate composed of Apostles and other Presbyters,
whether of the first or second Rank is not certain, but that S. Paul himself
was one of them is evident from the second Epist. to Timothy, 1. 6. In the
first, Timothy is exhorted not to neglect the Gift which was given him with the
laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery. In the last he is put in mind to stir
up the same Gift which he received by the laying on of St. Paul's Hands. And in
the beginning of Christianity (as S. Chrysostom Witnesses) both Bishops and
Presbyters were sometimes called Deacons, which may be justly concluded from
Coloss. 4. 17. and the Apostles themselves are called (...) and in the first of
the Acts, their Apostolical Ministry, to which Matthias was assumed, is called
their Deaconship, 1 Act. 17.

Now I take it for granted, that if any Man pretend to infer a Community of
Offices, from the Community of Names, which we meet with in the Holy
Scriptures; he must needs confound the highest Order of the Church (even the
Apostolical Dignity) with the lowest Rank of Ecclesiastical Officers. Yet this
is certain that the several Offices were carefully separated in those Days; tho
the Humility of such as were uppermost, taught them not to be very forward to
distinguish themselves from their subordinate Brethren, by Titles of Eminence
and Jurisdiction; and the Bishops in the second Century transcribed the same
Copy in their Behavior, who, tho they were careful to preserve the necessary
Distinction between the Priests of the first and second Order, yet they studied
the most modest Expressions of Humility and Condescension, as may be seen from
the forecited Inscription of S. Polycarp's Epistle to the Philippians, that
Apostolic Martyr and Prince of the Asiatick Church.

I have considered this Argument the more carefully, in that I find it over and
over again in all the Writings of our Ecclesiastic Levellers, as their first
and last Refuge to which they flee to; and yet there is not any thing more
Frivolous and Trifling; for the Names of the lowest Officers in the Christian
Church, were frequently assumed by the highest, and distinction of Offices is
rather inferred from their Practices, Peculiar Ministries, and Acts of
Jurisdiction, than from any Names that we can fix upon.

Thirdly, If they cannot establish their New Doctrine of Parity neither upon
the express Commandment of our Savior, nor upon the Consequences they manage a
confusione nominum, they endeavor to support it by some Testimonies of the
Primitive Fathers. When the Government and Revenues of the Church were
sacrilegiously invaded by Atheists and Enthusiasts under Oliver Cromwell, the
Learned Blondel employed all his skill to make the Ancients contradict
themselves and all contemporary Records. When his Aplog. prosenten, Hieronym.
Amstol. 1646.
Book appeared, the Presbyterians concluded (before ever they Read it) that all
was Pure and Undeniable Demonstration; and our Countrymen think they need
return no other answer to any thing that is written against them, than to say
that Episcopacy, and all that may be said in its defense, is quite Ruined and
Destroyed by Monsieur Blondel, and Salmasius. And tho there are but very few of
them that ever read them, and that every Line of their Writings, that has the
least color of Argument, was frequently Answered and Exposed, yet such is the
Power of Prejudice and Partiality, that they shut their Eyes against the
clearest Evidences that are produced by their Adversaries. It Is enough for them
to say that Blondel has written a Book in their Defense, of 549 pages; and
this in their Opinion may bar all Disputations of that Nature. When we bid them
name the place that they think proves their New Doctrine most plausibly, they
refuse any such close Engagement; they will tell you that Jerome was of their
Opinion, and that their Learned Champion Blondel has sufficiently proved that
this ancient Monk was a Presbyterian.

I must not transscribe the Accurate and unanswerable Dissertations of several
Learned Men, who have sufficiently exposed the Writings of Blondel and
Salmasius on this Head, particularly the incomparable Bishop of Chester, Vind.
St. Ignat.
yet I may be allowed to examine some of the most remarkable Testimonies from
Antiquity that are alleged by those Men to support their Doctrine of Parity,
that the Reader may have a Sample of their Partialities and Prepossessions, and
if none of the first Worthies of the Christian Church appear for the New
Doctrine of Parity, we may safely infer, that there are little hopes to defend
their cause by the Suffrages of after Ages.

And in the next place I will particularly examine Blondel's Argument from the
Authority of St. Jerome and Demonstrate that he mistakes or (which is much more
probable) hides and misrepresents the Doctrine of that Learned Father; and if
St. Jerome be not his Friend, he and his Associates may despair of any other.

First, I will examine some of the most remarkable Testimonies from Antiquity,
and the first that is named is S. Clement in his famous Epistle to the
Corinthians. This is the Celebrated S. Clement, so Honorably mentioned by S.
Paul himself, Adversus Hereses, lib. 3. cap. 3.
Philip. 4. 3. together with some others, whose Names are Written in the Book
of Life, who was fellow Labourer with the Apostles, V. Doctiss. Cav. Hist.
liter. p. 18.
and Third Bishop of Rome by the Testimony of Irenaeus, and probably sat in the
Chair of Rome from the Year 64, until the Year 81, or 83. He wrote his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, to compose the scandalous Divisions and Schisms
that had risen among them by the Pride and Vanity of some turbulent Brethren,
who valued themselves upon the miraculous Gifts of the Spirit, to the Contempt
of their ordinary Ecclesiastical Governors. It is thought by some, that this
Epistle was written toward the end of Nero's Persecution, before he was
advanced to the Sea of Rome.

It is very observable that Blondel before he produces any Testimony from S.
Clement, acknowledges, Blondel Apolog. p. 9. Plerique Latinorum (Hieronymo
test) secundumpost Petrum fuisse putaverunt; ut ante annum Domini 65, ad
Romanae Ecclesiae clavum sedissenecesse sit.
that by the universal consent of the Ancients this very S, Clement succeeded
S. Peter in the Government of the Sea of Rome; and tho they vary as to his
Order of Succession, yet all of them agree as to the thing it self.

His first Argument for Parity is founded on S. Clement's Inscription of his
Epist. to the Corinthians. (...). From this Inscription he concludes that the
Church of Rome was then Governed by a College of Presbyters, because the whole
Church of Rome wrote to the whole Church of Corinth, not mentioning the
Distinction of the Clergy from the Laity; when the Learned Blondel Reasoned at
this rate, he designed (it seems) to please the Independent Party, (who were
then most Numerous and Potent in England) rather than the Presbyterians. Apol.
pro sent Hier. p. 9.
For if his Argument proves any thing, it proves too much, viz. That the Laity
has an equal share of Jurisdiction in the Administration of Ecclesiastical
Affairs; with Bishops and Presbyters? And thus he might conclude, that when S.
Paul wrote an Epistle together with Sosthenes, Timotheus, Sylvanus, and all the
Brethren that were with him, that he had no greater Authority in the
Ecclesiastical Senate, than the meanest of the Laity.

Our Learned Countryman Junius, gives a far more reasonable Account of this
Ancient Simplicity, of the Writings of the Apostolical Age, than such Childish
Reasonings; and he tells us that St. Clement did not prefix his Name, ut
modestiae and humilitatis posteris aetatibus exemplar imitandum proponeret, and
this was very subservient to his Design, that he might Teach the Corinthians,
(whom he exhorts to Concord and Humility) by his own Example, that true and
undisguised Modesty, which was then so visible in the Practice of the first
Christians, when both Clergy and Laity were of one Heart, and one Mind.

The next attempt that Blondel makes to support his imaginary Parity in the
Primitive Church, page, 9. 10. (...).
is from St. Clement's dividing the Clergy into Bishops and Deacons, according
to the current Phraseology that prevailed in the Apostolical Age. When they
considered the Clergy only, in opposition to the body of the People. I have
answered this already, when I examined their Argument, founded upon such
Dichotomies: But when we consider this particular place of S. Clement, with
regard to that Latitude, and Promiscuous use of Names, that was very current in
those Days, the Word Deacon may be understood to comprehend all those Ministers
of Religion (whether Presbyters in the modern Notion, or Deacons, who by the
first Institution, were obliged to attend upon Tables,) and then his Argument
vanishes into nothing; nay rather it is a strong confirmation of that which he
would most willingly destroy; Vid. doctiss, Bevereg. cod. Can. Eccles. Prim.
lib. 2. p. 314.
for by Bishops and Deacons, we may understand Apostles, Bishops, Presbyters,
and Attendants upon Tables; for the Word Deacons in the Language of the Holy
Scriptures, is taken in the greatest Latitude that may be, not only for such as
were appointed by the Apostles, particularly to the Ministry of Tables, but
also the Apostles themselves, the highest Officers in the Christian Church, are
called Deacons. 1 Cor. 3. 5.
Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but Deacons, by whom they believed, even
as the Lord gave to every Man? And again, 2. Cor. 3. 6.
who has made us able Deacons of the New Testament, etc. And upon other
occasions they are called (...), etc. And those who were ordained to the
special Ministry or Tables, were Originally constituted, that the Apostles
themselves might not be diverted from the Ministry of Deaconship of the Word.
Acts. 6. 4. Coloss. 4. 7. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 2. Coloss. 4. 17. Vid. etiam. Bevereg.
ubi supra.
And Tychicus is called a faithful Deacon, as also Timothy, so likewise.
Arthippus is commanded to take heed to his Deaconship, tho it be not expressly
determined, what room he held in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, weather he was
Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacons; nay such was the Latitude of the Word Deacon, in
the Apostolical Age, that it was applied promiscuously to all the three Order
of the Christain Hierarchy. So that if we understand St. Clement according to
the current extent of the Word, we may safely judge him to have meant by
Bishops, the Ecclesiastical Governors, and by Deacons, all subordinate
Ministers of Religion, whether such as were promoted the Priesthood, or the
Deacons who were confined to their Attendance upon Tables. What advantage then
does Monsieur Blondel gain to his cause; for though Presbyters in the modern
Notion, are not perhaps the only Persons who may be understood by the Word
Deacon, yet they may be comprehended as well as other Ministers of a lower Rank.

Let it be observed also, that S. Clement speaks not of the Ecclesiastical
Polity, such as it was brought to perfection after wards by the Apostles, but
rather of the first beginnings of the Christian Church, immediately after the
Resurrection of our Savior. For tho all the Degrees and Subordinations of the
Apostolical Government, were founded upon divine Right; yet they were not in
one moment established in their True and Everlasting Figure, but had their
beginning, as the Jewish Church went on from lessen steps to that more perfect
Scheme that was to continue until the coming of the Messiah. This is certain,
that before the Apostles left the World, they established such an
Ecclesiastical Government as ought to continue in the Church, until the second
coming of our Savioar.

But let us suppose that where we meet with such Dichetomies in other Authors,
such a Parity as is intended by the Presbyterians, may be understood; yet when
we view the Text of St. Clement more narrowly, we must not presume to make any
such Inference, for the very same St. Clement Dichotomizies the Jewish Clergy
who are known to have had their High Priest, Chief Priests, Priests, Page
(mihi) 40, 41.
and Levites; yet he comprehends them all in this short and Bipartite Division.
For speaking of Jacob he has these Words, (...). And must we from hence
conclude that there was a Parity amongst the Priests of the Old Testament,
because they are thus distinguished from the Laity without mentioning the
several Gradations of the Hierarchy amongst themselves? Nay so little do our
Adversaries gain by straining the Language of St. Clement, contrary to the
Latitude and Simplicity of the Apostolical Age; that the same Author
comprehends all Ministers of Religion, Page 10. Edit. Jun.(...).
under one general Word, whether Prophets, Apostles, Bishops, Presbyters, or
Deacons, and not only does he thus speak of the Priests of the true Religion,
but also of the * Egyptian Priests, who are known to have had their several
subordinations.

But that which is most material to our purpose, is that the same St. Clement,
when he exhorts the Corinthians to Christian Order and Harmony, sets before
them the beautiful Subordinations under the Temple-Service, how the High
Priest, Priests, and Levites, were distinguished by their (...), and immediately
recommends to the Corinthians, P^ (mihi) 52, 53.
that every one of them should continue (...). Now when we consider the
Primitive method of Reasoning from Jewish Precedents, St. Clement had never
talked at this rate, if the Jurisdiction of one over many Priests, had been
abolished under the New Testament, and Jerome himself (on whose Writings M.
Blondel endeavors to establish his Opinion) in his Epistle to Evagrius, V.
Cotel. Not. in Pr. S. Clemen. Epist. col. 95.
gives light to this place of St. Clements, Et ut sciamus traditiones
Apostolicas sumptas de veteri testamento quod Aaron and filii ejus atque
Levitae in templo fuerunt, hoc sibi Episcopi and Presbyteri and Diaconi
vendicent in Ecclesia. For without all Controversy, those traditions descended
from the Jewish Church to the Christian, as their true inheritance.

Nay St. Clement himself expressly distinguishes the (...) from the (...), and
the last may signify Office and Age, both together. Nor can it be an Objection
of any weight, that the first (who were there Spiritual Governors) are
mentioned in the plural Number, since this was an Encyclical Epistle Addressed
to Corinth, as the principal City, and from thence transmitted to its
dependencies. How considerable the City of Corinth was in those Days, every
body knows; and S. Chrysostom informs us, Apud Jun. Not. in Clemen. p. 12.
that it was Populous and magnificent, in regard of its Riches and Wisdom,
(...): So far was S. Clement from intending a Parity of Priests, by his
promiscuous use of words, that he himself distinguishes plainly the spiritual
Governors from the body of subordinate Presbyters; and it is surprising to
observe how much Men may be blinded with prejudice contrary to the Universal
suffrage of the Ancients, who place S. Clement so early in the Apostolical
Succession of the Chair of Rome; the Reader may see them all in one view,
prefixed to Junius his Edition of his Epistle to the Corinthians.

A second Witness made to appear an evidence for Parity, is the venerable S.
Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, who by Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. and Polycarpus
aut^^^non solum ab Apostolis edoctus and conversatus cum multis excis, qui
dominum nostrum viderunt, sed etiam ab Apostolis in Asia, in ea quae est
Smyrnis Ecclesia constitututs Episcopus, qurm and nos vidimus in prima nostra
aetate.
Ireneus Bishop of Lions, is said to have been taught by the Apostles, to have
conversed with many who had seen our Savior, and that he himself saw him in
his younger Days, and that he knew him to have been constituted Bishop of
Smyrna, by the Apostles. This is he who by Catalog ^pt. Eccles.
S. Jerome is called totius Asiae princeps: One would think that when they name
S. Polycarp, they had discovered some clear Testimony in his Writings to build
their Hypothesis upon, but instead of this, nothing but a wretched consequence
founded upon the Bipartite Division of the Clergy, mentioned in his Epistle to
the Philippians. And yet the Epigraphe of S. Polycarp's Epistle clearly
distinguishes him from his Presbyters, who were then with him, which runs thus,
Polycarp and the Presbyters that are with him to the Church of God which is at
Philippi. And if he had not been vested with Episcopal Jurisdiction and
Eminence, amongst those Presbyters, how was it agreeable to the primitive
Modesty and self Denial, to have named himself only in the frontispiece of this
Epistle, and to mention none of his Brethern, save only by the general name of
Presbyters? This is mighty uneasy to Blondel and the evidence of Truth forces
from him the following words, Apol. p. I^.
id tamen in S. Martyris epistola peculiare apparet, quod eam pr. vatim suo and
Presbyterorum nomine ad philippensium fraternitatem dedit ac sibi quandam supra
Presbyteros (...), reservasse videtur ut jam tum in Episcopali apice
constitutum reliquos Smyrnensium Presbyteros gradu superasse conjicere liceat.

There are two things that baffle this shadow of an Argument brought from the
Epistle of S. Polycarp. The first is that Irenaeus, who was intimately
acquainted with him, and knew him to have been taught by S. John the Apostle,
and by him ordained Bishop of Smyrna, does refute the Heresies of the
Valentintans, from the unanimous Doctrine preserved amongst the single
successors of S. Polycarp downwards to that very Period in which he wrote. For
if the Ecclesiastical Power of the Church of Smyrna, had been equally lodged in
the College of Presbyters, his Argument against the Heretics, from the
Succession of single Persons, teaching the same Doctrine first delivered by S.
John, and conveyed by S. Polycarp to the following Bishops; I say such an
Argument so managed, could have no force, nor was it possible for Irenaeus to
have used it.

The next is this, that in the same Epistle of S. Polycarp to the Philippians,
the Epistles of S. Ignatius are zealously recommended, and we need not inform
the Reader how much the Divine Institution, Power, and Jurisdiction of Bishops
above Presbyters is asserted in those Epistles of which I am to speak in due
time. The Question then concerning S. Polycarp is, whether we are to believe S.
Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, who was fully acquainted with the manner of his
Education, Apostolical Doctrine, and promotion to the Sea of Smyrna, rather
than the dark and groundless conjectures of later Ages. And from this single
Instance alone, we see how inflexible and Stubborn the Power of prejudice is,
how far it drives Men against Light and Conviction, and darkens all their
Intellectuals in defiance of common Sense and Reason.

A third Witness alleged by Blondel is Hermas, (I only name some few of those
that are nearest to the Apostles) I do not now enquire into the Authority of
this Book. It is most probable that it was written toward the end of the
Apostolical Age; Vid. Test. Veterum ad frontem editionis, Oxon.
and some of the Ancients of great Authority make him to be the same that is
mentioned by S. Paul, Romans 16. 14. It is without all Controversy, a Book of
great Antiquity, as appears by the Citations out of him, still preserved in
some Authentic Monuments, particularly Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Tertullian, and Origin. There are two palpable evidences that Episcopacy was
the Ecclesiastical Government that obtained in the Christian Church, when this
Book was written. The first is from the second Vision of the first Book, where
the sending of the Encyclical Epistle in exteras civitates, is insinuated to be
the peculiar Privilege of S. Clement, then Bishop of Rome. The other
insinuation is from the second Book, and 12th Mandat. Paragr. 2. where he
reproves the preposterous Ambition of such as would thrust themselves into the
highest dignities, contrary to the Evangelical Methods of Humility and
self-denial, exaltat enim se, and vult primam Cathedram habere. If there be no
Power, there can be no Abuse of it, and therefore he reproves that insatiable
thirst of Preferment that puts some amongst them upon Projects and Designs,
contrary to the command of our Savior who taught us, that he that deserved the
Ecclesiastical Promotion was to be the Servant of all, and therefore many of
the Primitive Bishops fled and hid themselves upon the first Motion of their
being named to the Episcopal Dignity. And the other Citation from Book the
third, Similitud 8. insinuates the very same thing that I intend, viz., a
Principatus then established as the fixed Government of the Church which some
were too too hasty to grasp.


