AN ACCOUNT OF Denmark, AS It was in the Year 1692.

Pauci prudentia, honesta ab deterioribus, utilia ab noxiis discernunt; plures
aliorum eventis docentur. Tacit. lib. 4o Ann.

Vincit amor patriae -- Virg.

The Third Edition Corrected.

LONDON: Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Queen's Head against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1694.

THE CONTENTS.
CHap. 1. Of the Territories belonging to the King of Denmark, and their
Situation. p. 1. Chap. 2. Of Denmark in particular, and the Island of Zealand.
6 Chap. 3. Of the Sound. 15 Chap. 4. Of the other Islands and Jutland. 25 Chap.
5. Of the rest of the King of Denmark's Countries. 29 Chap. 6. Of their Form of
Government. 38 Chap. 7. The Manner how the Kingdom of Denmark became Hereditary
and Absolute. 44 Chap. 8.The Condition, Customs, and Temper of the People. 68
Chap. 9. Of the Revenue. 92 Chap. 10. Of the Army, Fleet, and Fortresses. 116
Chap. 11. Of the Court. 137 Chap. 12. The Disposition and Inclinations of the
King of Denmark toward his Neighbors. 173 Chap. 13. The Manner of
Dispossessing and restoring the Duke of Holstein Gottorp. 184 Chap. 14. The
Interests of Denmark in relation to other Princes. 201 Chap. 15. Of the Laws,
Courts of Justice, etc. 212 Chap. 16. The State of Religion, of the Clergy and
Learning. 228 Chap. 17. The Conclusion. 235
THE PREFACE.
HEalth and Liberty are without dispute the greatest natural Blessings Mankind
is capable of enjoying; I say natural, because the contrary states are purely
accidental, and arise from Nature debauched, depraved or enforced. Yet these
Blessings are seldom sufficiently valued whilst enjoyed; like the daily
advantages of the Sun and Air, they seem scarce regarded because so common, by
those that are in possession of them.

But as an Italian that passes a Winter in Groenland, will soon be convinced
through his want of the kind Influences of that glorious Planet, how much
Misery he endures, in comparison of those who dwell in his Native Country, so
he that knows by Experience the trouble of a languishing Sickness, or the loss
of his Liberty, will presently begin to have a right esteem of that which
formerly he scarce thought worth his notice.

This Experience is either what a Man learns by that which befalls himself, or
by making Observations on the condition of other People: The first is the
common guide to the generality of Mankind, who are not apt to look beyond
themselves, unless with St. Thomas they feel as well as see, they will not
believe. Thus in the instance of bodily Health, we find those that have been
always accustomed to it, have scarce any Notion of the Misery of the contrary
state, and therefore are careless in shunning those Excesses which might bring
Diseases upon them; the sad Examples seen every day of miserable sick
Debauchees, being not sufficient to deter others from lewdness. But the second
sort of Experience is the Instructress of wise Men: For the Prudent will not
fail to benefit themselves by the Accidents that befall others, both in their
Health and Liberty, by avoiding the occasions of them: And this is one of the
great Advantages of Society, that not only the Assistance, but even the
Misfortunes of others, may be of use to us.

Want of Liberty is a Disease in any Society or Body Politic, like want of
Health in a particular Person; and as the best way to understand the nature of
any Distemper aright, is to consider it in several Patients, since the same
Disease may proceed from different causes, so the disorders in Society are best
perceived by observing the Nature and Effects of them in our several
Neighbors: Wherefore Travel seems as necessary to one who desires to be useful
to his Country, as practicing upon other Men's Distempers is to make an able
Physician: For although a Man may see too frequently the Misery of such as are
deprived of Health without quitting his own Country, yet (thanks to Providence)
he must go out of these Kingdoms who would know experimentally the want of
Public Liberty. He that Travels into a Climate infected with this Disease (and
he can find sew that are not) does not only see, but in some measure feel the
Grievances occasioned by it in the several Inconveniences of living, in some
proportion with the Natives; so as to relish better upon his return (which we
suppose depends upon his choice) the freedom and ease of his own home
Constitution; and may make good use of this Experience without having paid too
dear for it: But a Man cannot transmigrate himself for a while into a
distempered Body as he may Travel into an Enslaved Country, with equal facility
of getting rid of each of them again.

Thus it is a great, yet rare advantage to learn rightly how to prize Health
without the expense of being Sick, but one may easily and cheaply grow sensible
of the true value of Liberty by Traveling into such Countries for a Season as
do not enjoy it.

And this can be done by no Nation in the World so commodiously as the English:
The affluence of their Fortunes and Easiness in their private Affairs are
evidently greater than those of other People of Europe; so that generally
speaking, none are in a condition to spend more freely, or may propose to reap
greater benefit by Travel, and yet none have practiced it less.

In other Countries some Princes and Men of the first quality may have Purses
strong enough to bear the expense, but few of the midling sort venture upon it;
and those are commonly either Military Men, who have other designs in view than
the knowledge of the World; or the Unfortunate, who choose it as a diversion or
a refuge, and who have their Heads too full of their own Miseries, to be at
leisure to make their Observations on others. And besides, we often see the
like Arbitrary Practices at home (they having been always trained up in
Servitude) does so far vitiate their Reason, as to put them out of a capacity
of judging aright: for it is not only possible, but very usual, that People may
be so seasoned to and hardened in Slavery, as not only to have lost the very
Taste of Liberty, but even to love the contrary State: as Men overrun with the
Spleen take pleasure in their Distemper.

But in England there are very many Gentlemen, whose Estates will afford them
either to travel in Person, or to send abroad such of their Sons for four or
five Years as have the most solid Judgments, in which time they may acquire
such Manners, and make such Observations as shall render them useful to their
Country; and thereby advance their private Fortunes, more than what is saved by
keeping them at home would amount to.

The Method which has been generally followed by us in sending young Gentlemen
to Travel can hardly answer any of these ends: on the contrary it has hitherto
been so mischievous, that it is well traveling has been so little in fashion.
We send them abroad Children, and bring them home great Boys, and the returns
they make for the Expenses laid out by their Parents, are suitable to their
Age: That of the Languages is the very best, but the most common is an affected
Foppishness, or a filthy Disease. for which they sometimes exchange their
Religion: Besides, the Pageantry, Luxury, and Licentiousness of the more
Arbitrary Courts have bribed them into an Opinion of that very Form of
Government: Like Idiots, who part with their Bread for a glittering piece of
Tinsel, they prefer gilded Slavery to coarse domestic Liberty, and exclaim
against their old fashioned Countrymen, who will not reform their Constitution
according to the new foreign Mode. But the Traveling recommended here is that
of Men, who set out so well stocked with the Knowledge of their own Country, as
to be able to compare it with others, whereby they may both supply it where
they find it wanting, and set a true value on it where it excels: with this help
such Travelers could not fail of becoming serviceable to the Public, in
contributing daily toward the bettering of our Constitution, though without
doubt it be already one of the best in the World.

For it were as fond to imagine we need not go abroad, and learn of others,
because we have perhaps better Laws and Customs already then Foreigners, as it
were not to Trade abroad, because we dwell in one of the plentifullest Parts of
the World. But as our Merchants bring every day from barren Countries many
useful things, which our own good one does not produce; so if the same care
were taken to supply us with exact Accounts of the Constitutions, Manners, and
Condition of other Nations, we might without doubt find out many things for our
purpose, which now our mere Ignorance keeps us from being sensible that we
want. The Athenians, Spartans, and Romans did not think themselves too wise to
follow this Method, they were at great Expense to procure the Laws of other
Nations, thereby to improve their own: and we know they throve by it, since few
Governments are so ill constituted, as not to have some good Customs. We find
admirable Regulations in Denmark, and we read of others among the Savage
Americans fit to serve for Models to the most civilized Europeans.

But although the Constitution of our Government were too perfect already to
receive any Improvement, yet the best Methods conducing to the peaceable
Conservation of its present Form, are well worth every English Man's enquiry;
neither are these so easily to be found in this Age, which were judged so
difficult, (if not altogether impracticable) by the greatest of Politicians in
his time. Cunctas Nationes and Urbes populus aut primores aut singuli regunt;
delecta exhis, and constituta Reipublicae sorma laudari facilius quam evenire,
vel fi evenit haud diuturna esse potest. Tacit. lib. 4. Annal.
It Is true, the Wisdom of our Ancestors, or their good Fortune, has hitherto
made these our Kingdoms an Exception to his general Maxim; yet we all know how
many grievous Tempests (which as often threatened Shipwreck) this Vessel of our
Commonwealth has undergone. The perpetual Contests between the Kings and the
People (whilst those endeavored to acquire a greater Power than was legally
due, and these to preserve or recover their just Liberties) have been the
contending Billows that have kept it afloat; so that all we pretended to by the
late Revolution (bought with so great Expense, yet not too dearly paid for) was
to be as we were, and that every one should have his own again; the effecting
of which may be called a piece of good Luck, and that is the best can be said of
it. But must frequent Blood-lettings be indispensibly necessary to preserve our
Constitution? Is it not possible for us to render vain and untrue that Sarcasm
of Foreigners, who object to us that our English Kings have either too little
Power, or too much, and that therefore we must expect no settled or lasting
Peace? Shall we for ever retain the ill Character they give us of the most
mutable and inconstant Nation of the World? Which however we do not deserve, no
more than England does that of Regnum Diabolorum, so common in unconsidering
Foreigners Mouths? Methinks a Method to preserve our Commonwealth in its legal
State of Freedom, without the necessity of a Civil War once or twice every Age,
were a benefit worth searching for, though we went to the furthest Corners of
the World in quest of it.

Besides the Knowledge of the present State of our Neighbor Nations (which is
best acquired by Travel) is more incumbent on the Gentlemen of England than any
others; since they make so considerable a part of our Government in Parliament,
where foreign Business comes frequently under Consideration, and at present
more then ever.

It Is none of the smallest Advantages which his Majesty has procured us by his
accession to the Crown, that we make a greater Figure in the World than
formerly; we have more foreign Alliances, are become the Head of more than a
Protestant League, and have a right to intermeddle in the Affairs of Europe,
beyond what we ever pretended to in any of the preceding Reigns: For it is a
true, though but a Melancholy Reflection, that our late Kings half undid us, and
bred us up as narrow spirited as they could, made us consider our selves as
proscribed from the World; in every sense toto divisos orb Britannos. And
indeed they had withdrawn us from the World so long till the World had almost
overlooked us; we seldom were permitted to cast an Eye farther than France or
Holland, and then too we were carefully watched: But at present Matters are
otherwise; we have a Prince that has raised us to our natural Station, the Eyes
of most part of the World are now upon us, and take their Measures from our
Councils: We find every day occasion to inform our selves of the Strength and
Interests of the several Princes of Europe. And perhaps one great reason why we
live up no better to the mighty Post we are advanced to, nor maintain our
Character in it with great Reputation, is because our Education has been below
it, and we have been too much locked up at home, when we should have been
acquainting our selves with the Affairs of the World abroad.

We have lately bought the Experience of this Truth too dear, not to be now
sensible of it. It Is not very long ago since nothing was more generally
believed (even by Men of the best Sense) then that the Power of England was so
unquestionably established at Sea, that no Force could possibly shake it, that
the English Valor and Manner of Fighting was so far beyond all others, that
nothing was more desirable than a French War. Should any one have been so
regardless of his Reputation, as at that time to have represented the French an
overmatch for the united Forces of England and Holland; or have said that we
should live to see our selves insulted on our own Coasts and our Trade
endangered by them, that we should be in Apprehensions every Year of an
Invasion and a French Conquest: such a venturesome Man must have expected to
have passed for a very Traveller, or at best for an illnatur'd or unthinking
Person, who little considered what the irresistible Force of an English Arm
was; But our late Experience has reclaimed us from these Mistakes; our Fathers
and Grandfathers told us indeed these things when they were true, when our
Yeomanry and Commonalty were evey day exercised in drawing the Longbow and
handling the Brown-bill, with other Weapons then in use, wherein we excelled
all the World; but we have lived upon the Credit of those Times too long, and
superciliously neglected our formidable Neighbor and Enemy, whilst he was
improving his Strength, and we through the Encouragement, and by design of our
late Rulers were enervating our own.

The Ecclesiastics of most Religions, who are allowed to understand and
prosecute their own Interests best of any People, though they be generally
Persons whose Function obliges them to a sedentary and studious Course of Life,
have not omitted to draw such Advantages from Travel as conduce to their Honor
and Profit. These Men, whose conversing with Books makes them know more then
others, have yet found their Account in sending some of the most judicious of
their Members and Fraternities to fetch home Knowledge and Experience from the
remotest parts of the World. The College De propaganda fide was established
under pretense indeed of serving Religion, but we know the Founders of it are
no farther slaves to Religion than 'twill be serviceable to them, neither was
it so much through zeal for Conversions, as to increase their Revenues, and
learn Foreign Policies in Church and State Affairs. The Jesuits have brought
several Maxims, as well as Sums, from as far off as China and Japan, thereby
improving their Knowledge, so as to outwit their Friends at home, and by
following their Example in this. I am sure we can run no hazard, at least of
passing for Fools. These Men (whose firm adherence to the most exquisite
Tyranny is manifest by their indefatigable endeavors in behalf of the French
King's Interests, as formerly of the House of Austria's, whilst it was in its
height) have by these Arts engrossed to themselves the Education of the Youth
in all Popish Countries. The Lutheran Priests (who have an entire dependence on
their Kings and Princes) are entrusted with the like in those Countries which
observe the Confession of Ausburg. They also send abroad some of their
hopefullest young Students, several of which may be met with at Oxford,
Cambridge, and Paris: The use they make of Travel being not only to improve
their Knowledge in Sciences, but to learn fit Methods to please their
Sovereigns at the expense of the Peoples Liberties. Now in former Ages, whilst
the Ecclesiastics were both ignorant and scandalously wicked, they were not
esteemed by the Laity, and consequently had not so much power to do mischief:
But since that through a Reformation of Manners, and Knowledge of the World,
they have recovered credit, and that the restored Learning of Europe is
principally lodged among them, they have gained a much greater influence both
on the Opinions and Practices of their Disciples, and promoted a pernicious
Doctrine with all the success they themselves could desire. But the same Travel
will afford the best Antidote for this Poison, and teach a Gentleman, who makes
right use of it, by what steps Slavery has within these last 200 Years crept
upon Europe, most of the Protestant, as well as Popish Countries having in a
manner quite lost the precious Jewel Liberty. This cannot be attributed to any
more probable cause than the enslaving the Spirits of the People, as a
preparative to that of their Bodies; for since those Foreign Princes think it
their Interest that Subjects should obey without Reserve, and all Priests, who
depend upon the Prince, are for their own sakes obliged to promote what he
esteems his Interest, it is plain, the Education of Youth, on which is laid the
very Foundation Stones of the public Liberty, has been of late years committed
to the sole management of such as make it their business to undermine it; and
must needs do so, unless they will be false to their Fortunes, and make the
Character of Priest give place to that of true Patriot.

It Is confessed that in their Schools and Universities, excellent Rules for
attaining Languages and Sciences are made use of with greater success than any
heretofore: Those Youths especially, who have been bred among the Jesuits, are
justly remarked to excel others of equal Parts instructed elsewhere: But still
this is only a training up in the knowledge of Words and Languages, whereof
there is seldom any occasion, as if the Pupils were intended to be made
Schoolmasters; whilst the weightier Matters of true Learning, whereof one has
occasion every hour; such as good Principles, Morals, the improvement of
Reason, the love of Justice, the value of Liberty, the duty owing to ones
Country and the Laws, are either quite omitted, or slightly passed over:
Indeed they forget not to recommend frequently to them what they call the Queen
of all Virtues, viz. Submission to Superiors, and an entire blind Obedience to
Authority, without instructing them in the due measures of it, rather teaching
them that it is without all bounds: Thus the Spirits of Men are from the
beginning inured to Subjection, and deprived of the right Notion of a generous
and legal Freedom; which few among them (so hardly are the prejudices of
Education shaken off) grow sensible of, till they become of some Age and
Maturity, or have unlearned by good Company and Travel those dangerous passive
Doctrines they sucked in at the Schools and Universities: But most have the
Misfortune to carry these slavish Opinions with them to their Graves.

Had these Countries, whilst they were free, committed the Government of their
Youth to Philosophers instead of Priests, they had in all probability preserved
themselves from the Yoke of Bondage to this day, whereas now they not only
endure it, but approve of it likewise. -- tantum relligio potuit.

The Greeks and Romans instituted their Academies to quite another purpose, the
whole Education of their Youth tended to make them as useful to the Society
they lived in as possible. There they were trained up to Exercise and Labor,
to accustom them to an active Life: No Vice was more infamous than Sloth, nor
any Man more contemptible than him that was too lazy to do all the Good he
could; the Lectures of their Philosophers served to quicken them up to this.
They recommended above all things the Duty to their Country, the preservation
of the Laws and the public Liberty; subservient to which they preached up
Moral Virtues, such as Fortitude, Temperance, Justice, a contempt of Death,
etc. Sometimes they made use of pious Cheats, as Elisian Fields, and an
Assurance of Future Happiness, if they died in the Cause of their Country; and
even deceived their Hearers into Greatness: Hence proceeded all those Noble
Characters wherewith their Histories are so stocked: Hence it was that their
Philosophers were deservedly looked upon as Supports of the State, they had
their dependence wholly upon it; and as they could have no Interest distinct
from it, they laid out themselves toward the advancing and promoting the good
of it, insomuch that we find the very good Fortune of their Commonwealths often
lasted no longer than they did. The managers of our modern Education have not
been quite so public Spirited, for it has been, as I have shown, for the most
part in the hands of Men who have a distinct Interest from the public;
therefore it is not to be wondered at, if like the rest of the World, they have
been biased by it, and directed their principal Designs toward the advancing
their own Fortunes.

Good Learning as well as Travel is a great Antidote against the Plague of
Tyranny. The Books that are left us of the Ancients (from whence, as from
Fountains, we draw all that we are now Masters of) are full of Doctrines,
Sentences, and Examples exhorting to the Conservation or Recovery of the
public Liberty, which was once valued above Life. The Hero's there celebrated
are for the most part such as had destroyed or expelled Tyrants; and though
Brutus be generally de claimed against by modern Schoolboys, he was then
esteemed the true Pattern and Model of exact Virtue. Such was Cato of Utica,
with others of like stamp. The more any person is conversant with good Books,
the more shall he find the practices of these Great Men in this particular
founded upon Reason, Justice, and Truth; and unanimously approved of by most of
the succeeding Wisemen which the World has produced.

But instead of Books which inform the Judgment, those are commonly read in the
Schools abroad, wherein an Elegancy of Latin and Greek Style is more sought
after than the matter contained in them: So that such as treat a little boldly
of public Liberty occur to the reading of few, and those grown Men, rather
through Chance or their Curiosity, than the recommendation of their Instructors.

'Twas not to learn Foreign Languages that the Grecian and Roman Youths went
for so long together to the Academies and Lectures of their Philosophers. 'Twas
not then, as now with us, when the Character of a Scholar is to be Skilled in
Words; when one who is well versed in the dark Terms and Subtilties of the
Schools passes for a profound Philosopher, by which we seem so far to have
perverted the Notion of Learning, that a Man may be reputed a most
extraordinary Scholar, and at the same time be the most useless Thing in the
World; much less was it to learn their own Mother Tongues, the Greek and Latin,
which we hunt after so eagerly for many Years together, (not as being the
Vehicles of good Sense, but as if they had some intrinsic Virtue.) 'Twas to
learn how and when to speak pertinently, how to act like a Man to subdue the
Passions, to be public Spirited, to despise Death, Torments, and Reproach,
Riches and the Smiles of Princes, as well as their Frowns, if they stood
between them and their Duty. This manner of Education produced Men of another
stamp than appears now upon the Theater of the World; such as we are scarce
worthy to mention, and must never hope to imitate, till the like manner of
Institution grows again into Reputation; which in Enslaved Countries it is never
likely to do, as long as the Ecclesiastics, who have an opposite Interest,
keep not only the Education of Youth, but the Consciences of old Men in their
Hands.

To serve by-ends, and because Priests thought they should find their own
account in it, they calculated those unintelligible Doctrines of Passive
Obedience and Jus Divinum; that the People ought to pay an absolute Obedience
to a limited Government; fall down and worship the work of their own Hands, as
if it dropped from Heaven; together with other as profitable Doctrines, which no
doubt many are by this time ashamed of, though they think it below them to
condescend so far as to confess themselves to have been in the wrong. For this
Notion of Jus Divinum of Kings and Princes was never known in these Northern
Parts of the World till these latter Ages of Slavery: Even in the Eastern
Countries, though they adore their Kings as Gods, yet they never fancied they
received their Right to Reign immediately from Heaven. The single Example in
Scripture so much insisted on, viz. the Reign of Saul over the Jews, and
Samuel's Description of what a King would be, not what he lawfully might be;
proves either nothing at all, or the contrary to what some would have it; for
besides that there are many Relations of Fact in the Old Testament, not
condemned there, which it would not be only inconvenient, but sinful for us to
imitate: Whoever peruses the whole Story of Saul and his Successor, will
therein find more substantial Arguments against the Jus Divinum and
NonResistance, than for it: But we shall leave this, both as being too large an
Argument for the compass of a Preface, and as being already fully handled by
more able Pens.

All Europe was in a manner a free Country till very lately insomuch that the
Europaeans were, and still are, distinguished in the Eastern Parts of the World
by the name of Franks. In the beginning small Territories, or Congregations of
People, chose valiant and wise Men to be their Captains or Judges, and as often
Deposed them upon Mis-management. These Captains (doing their Duty well and
faithfully) were the Originals of all our Kings and Princes, which at first,
and for a long time were every where Elective. According to their own Warlike
Temper, or that of the People which they governed, they (upon the Score of
Revenge, Ambition, or being overthronged with Multitudes at home) encroached
upon their Neighbors; till from petty Principalities their Countries waxed to
mighty Kingdoms. Spain alone consisting of twelve or thirteen till the other day,
and one part of our Island of no less than seven: Each of these was at first
made through an Union of many petty Lordships. Italy from several small
Commonwealths was at length swallowed up by the Emperors, Popes, Kings of
Spain, Dukes of Florence, and other lesser Tyrants. Yet it is to be remarked
that the ancient State of Europe is best preserved in Italy even to this day,
notwithstanding the Encroachments which have been there made on the Peoples
Liberties; of which one Reason may be, that the Republics, which are more in
number and quality in that Spot of Ground than in all Europe besides, keep
their Ecclesiastics within their due bounds, and make use of that natural Wit
which Providence and a happy Climate has given them, to curb those, who if they
had Power would curb all the World.

Every one ought to know how great the Rights of the People were very lately in
the Elective Kingdoms of Sweden and Denmark; how Germany was freer than any
other part of Europe, till at length 'twas Lorded by Captains, which (in
process of time grew Princes and Electors) and by Bishops with Temporal
Authority, who may thank Charles the Great (a very bigoted Prince) for their
double Sword of Flesh and Spirit.

If it be objected, that Princes have acquired a Right to be absolute and
arbitrary where the Subjects have given up their Liberties, there are some in
the World who venture to answer, That no People in their right Wits, (that is)
not guided by Fear or Tumult, can be supposed to confer an absolute Dominion,
or to give away the Freedom of themselves and their Posterity for all
Generations; that such a Donation ought to be esteemed of no greater validity
than the Gift of an Estate by a Child or a Madman from his lawful Successor;
that the People can no more part with their legal Liberties, then Kings can
alienate their Crowns: That nothing which even the Representative Body of the
People does, which shall afterward tend to the detriment of the Universality
can then be obligatory, because many things good and profitable at the time of
making those Laws may be the quite contrary afterward, and as soon as any Law
grows apparently mischievous to the whole Body that made it, or their
Successors, it ought by them to be repealed, and would certainly be so in
Countries where frequent free Assemblies of the States are in use. That if
these Assemblies be hindered, or corrupted by sinister Practices, the obliging
quality of such a Law determines of it self through its own nature, it being
supposed that the true Representatives of the People would have annulled it,
had they been permitted to meet and act freely: That the Acts of one general
Parliament, though a free one, are not perpetually obliging, since that as well
as particular Persons is liable to mistakes; but the Acts of an eternal
Succession of Parliaments, who make, confirm, change, or repeal Laws at their
pleasure.

These are hard Sayings in the Opinion of many; but thus much we are sure of,
whoever goes about to destroy or diminish the Right of the People in the
disposal of the Crown, at the same time subverts their Majesty's Title to it:
It Is therefore seasonable now or never to assert both; notwithstanding the
prevarication of those who dare act under and receive benefit by this
Revolution which they contributed nothing to, but which the People through
God's Assistance procured for themselves; yet will not dive into the Merits of
the Cause, nor own the Lawfulness of the Fact; but either cautiously avoid the
Argument, or if it comes cross their way, mumble it as tenderly as the Ass did
the Thistle, which caused the Philosopher to laugh, who never did it in his
Life but that once; so this manner of Behavior would move both the Laughter
and Indignation of all understanding Persons, Lovers of their Countries legal
Liberties, for none are forced to fall under greater Absurdities, or to make
more terrible Blunders in Divinity, Politics, and good Sense, than such as
would fain reconcile present Interest to their old beloved Maxims -- res est
ridicula and nimis jocosa; Catull. But Heaven be praised, the Nation is almost
freed from the gross Error of that slavish Doctrine, in spite of the Endeavors
of such as would keep it alive, like hot Embers covered over with Ashes, ready
to be blown up again into a flame upon the first occasion.

In Russia and Muscovy the Government is as Tyrannical as in any of the more
Eastern Monarchies, the Priests there have very much contributed both to make
and keep it so. To the end that the People may be kept in the requisite Temper
of Obedience, none are permitted to Travel upon pain of Death, except such as
have special License, which are exceeding few; neither are any Gentlemen of
those Countries to be met with abroad, but public Ministers and their Retinue:
The Cause of this severe Prohibition is, least such Travelers should see the
Liberty of other Nations, and be tempted to covet the like for themselves at
home, which might occasion Innovations in the State. The same reason which
induces Tyrants to prohibit Traveling, should encourage the People of free
Countries to practice it, in order to learn the Methods of preserving that
which once lost is very difficultly recovered; for Tyranny usually steals upon
a State by degrees, and is (as a wise Man said) like a hectic Fever, which at
first is easy to be cured, but hardly can be known; after it is thoroughly known
it becomes almost incurable. Now travel best of all other Methods discovers (at
least expense) the Symptoms of this pernicious Disease, as well as its dismal
Effects when grown to a head; and it is certainly of greater Importance to
understand how to preserve a sound Constitution, than how to repair a crazed
one, though this also be a beneficial piece of Knowledge.

In our own Universities, which are without controversy the best in the World,
whether we consider their Revenues, their Buildings, or their Learning, there
are traveling Fellowships established; which in a Country where the Clergy's
Interest is not distinct from that of the Laity, is so far from being
prejudicial to the legal Liberties of the People, that it tends to the
Conservation of them; for such worthy Men as are employed abroad, may bring
home generous Notions of Liberty, and make admirable Remarks on the contrary
State; which being inculcated from the Pulpit, and enforced by the learned
Arguments of able Divines, must needs overthrow those servile Opinions, which
of late have been too much backed by God's Authority, almost to the ruin of a
Free People.

I do not hereby mean to reflect on the Order which generally has the
government of our Youth; we have had the Experience of many among them who have
given proof of a freer Education and useful Learning: And without question the
chief Posts of the Gown of both kinds were never better filled than at present.
I only lament the ill Contrivance of their Constitution, for while Interest
draws one way, and Honesty another, when a Man may make his Fortune by
forgetting his Duty to his Country, but shall always stick at Mark while he
serves it; it is scarcely to be hoped Men should hold out against such
Temptations, unless they be more gifted with Honesty than the generality of
Mankind are. And since they continue still upon the same bottom, it must be
expected the same, or other as mischievous Doctrines will every day be
broached: whereas if they were once set upon the same foot the Philosophers of
old were, if Honesty and the Duty to their Country were made their private
Interest, and the way to thrive; we should soon see them shift hands, and the
Spirit of those Philosophers revive again in them.

The Constitution of our Universities, as to Learning, seems as unfortunately
regulated as it is to Politics. We receive the directions of our Studies
there, from Statutes made by those who understood nothing of the Matter, who
had a quite different Notion and Taste of Learning from what the World has at
present: It seems as ridiculous to take Patterns for the gentile Learning of
this Age from the old fashioned Learning of the Times wherein the University
Statutes were compiled, as it would be for one who would appear well dressed at
Court, to make his Clothes after the Mode in Henry the VIII's day: But it is of
infinitely worse consequence; for the Prejudices and wrong Notions, the
stiffness and positiveness in Opinion, the litigiousness and wrangling, all
which the old Philosophy breeds, besides the narrow Spiritedness, and not
enduring of Contradiction, which are generally contracted by a Monastic Life,
require a great deal of time to get rid of, and until they be filed off by
Conversation in the World abroad, a Man's Learning does but render him more
useless and unfit for Society.

I dare appeal to common Experience, whether those excellent Men that of late
Years have been preferred in our Church (then which Set of Divines England
scarce ever knew a better) be not for the most part such as have been very
conversant with the World; and if they have not all traveled out of this
Kingdom, have at least spent the best part of their days in this Epitom of the
World, the City of London, where they have learnt Christian Liberty as well as
other Christian Virtues. The great difference between these and others of
narrow Opiniastre Tempers caused by their Monk-like Education is discernable by
every Body, and puts it out of all doubt, that such who have seen most, of what
Profession soever they be, prove the most honest and virtuous Men, and fittest
for Humane Society: these embrace better Notions relating to the Public, weigh
Opinions before they adhere to them, have a larger Stock of Charity, a clearer
Manner of distinguishing between Just and Unjust, understand better the Laws of
our own Land, as well as the Privileges and Frailties of Human Nature; And all
this in a degree far excelling the most zealous learned religious Person who
has been brought up in his Cell, and is therefore what we call a Bigot, stiff
in an Opinion, merely because he has been used to it, and is ashamed to be
thought capable of being deceived.

Lawyers, whose manner of Breeding is much abroad in the World, and who are
used to promiscuous Conversation, have been observed in most places to be great
Favorers of Liberty, because their knowledge of ancient Practice, and the just
Title which the People have to their Privileges (which they meet with every
where in their course of Reading) makes them less scrupulous of committing what
some Divines miscal a Sin in those that endeavor to preserve or recover them;
the Oversights of some few Gentlemen of this honorable Profession are
therefore the less excusable; for I must confess, among other things, that
Motto, A Deo Rex, a Rege Lex -- wherein the Divine Right of the impious Will of
a Tyrant is as strongly asserted as could be in the compass of a Ring, has
occasioned frequent Reflections, not much in favor of those that made use of
it.

Thus I have touched upon the Manner of Education necessary to the beginning
and finishing a Gentleman, who is to be useful to his Country, which I suppose
ought to be the principal end of it. And I cannot but believe, if in our Schools
our Youth were bred up to understand the Meaning of the Authors they are made
to read, as well as the Syntax of the Words. If there were as much care taken
to inculcate the good Maxims, and recommend the noble Characters the old
Historians are so full of, as there is to hammer into their Heads the true
Grammar of them, and the fineness of the Phrase: If in our Universities a
proportionable Care were taken to furnish them with noble and generous
Learning: If after this they were duly informed in the Laws and Affairs of
their own Country, trained up in good Conversation and useful Knowledge at
home, and then sent abroad when their Heads began to be well settled, when the
heat of Youth was worn off, and their Judgments ripe enough to make
Observation: I say, I cannot but believe that with this manner of Institution a
very moderate Understanding might do wonders, and the coming home fully
instructed in the Constitutions of other Governments, would make a Man but the
more resolute to maintain his own.

For the advantage of a free Government above its contrary needs no other help
to make it appear, then only to be exposed to a considerate View with it: The
difference may be seen written in the very Faces of the several People, as well
as in their manner of Living; and when we find nothing but Misery in the
fruitfullest Countries subject to Arbitrary Power, but always a Face of plenty
and Cheerfulness in Countries naturally unfruitful, which have preserved their
Liberties, there is no further room left for Argument, and one cannot be long
in determining which is most eligible. This Observation is so obvious that it is
hard for any that Travels not to make it; therefore it is a sufficient reason
why all our Gentry should go abroad. An English Man should be shown the Misery
of the enslaved Parts of the World, to make him in Love with the Happiness of
his own Country; as the Spartans exposed their drunken Servants to their
Children, to make them in love with Sobriety.

But the more polished and delicious Countries of France, Spain, or Italy, are
not the places where this Observation may be made to greatest advantage; the
Manner of Living, Goodness of the Air and Diet, the Magnificence of the
Buildings, Pleasantness of the Gardens, pompous Equipage of some great Persons,
dazzle the Eyes of most Travelers, and cast a disguise upon the Slavery of
those Parts; and as they render this Evil more supportable to the Natives, so
they almost quite hide it from the view of a Cursory Traveller, amusing him too
much from considering the Calamities which accompany so much Splendor, and so
many Natural Blessings: or from reflecting how much more happy the Condition of
the People would be with better usage. But in the Northern Kingdoms and
Provinces there appears little or nothing to divert the Mind from contemplating
Slavery in its own Colors, without any of its Ornaments. And since, for that
reason, few of our Gentlemen find temptation enough to Travel into those Parts,
and we have hardly any tolerable Relation of them extant, though we have
frequent occasions of being concerned with them, I thought it might be of use
to publish the following Account of Denmark, which I took care to be informed
of upon the place with the greatest Exactness possible, and have related fairly
and impartially, which may save the Curious the labor and expense of that
Voyage.

That Kingdom has often had the Misfortune to be governed by French Counsels.
At the time when Mr. Algernoon Sydney was Ambassador at that Court, Monsieur
Terlon, the French Ambassador, had the Confidence to tear out of the Book of
Motto's in the King's Library, this Verse, which Mr. Sydney (according to the
liberty allowed to all noble Strangers) had written in it: -- manus haec
inimica tyrannis
Ense petit placidam sub liberate quietem. --
though Monsieur Terlon understood not a word of Latin, he was told by others
the Meaning of that Sentence, which he considered as a Libel upon the French
Government, and upon such as was then a setting up in Denmark by French
Assistance, or Example.

To conclude; A considering English Traveller will find by experience, that at
present nothing is so generally studied by the Sovereign Princes of the World,
as the Arts of War, and the keeping of their own Countries in the desired
Subjection. The Arts of Peace, whereby the Increase and Prosperity of their
Subjects might be promoted, being either entirely neglected or faintly
prosecuted; he will further be convinced what great reason he has to bless
Providence for his being born, and continuing yet a Freeman: He will find that
the securing this inestimable Blessing to himself, and transmitting it to late
Posterity, is a Duty he owes to his Country; the right performance of which
does in a great measure depend upon a good Education of our Youth, and the
Preservation of our Constitution upon its true and natural Basis, The Original
Contract. All other Foundations being false, nonsensical, and rotten;
derogatory to the present Government, and absolutely destructive to the legal
Liberties of the English Nation.

Salus populi suprema lex esto. AN ACCOUNT OF Denmark, AS It was in the Year
1692.
CHAP. I.
Of the Territories belonging to the King of Denmark, and their Situation.

IF we consider the Extent of the King of Denmark's Dominions, he may with
Justice be reckoned among the greatest Princes of Europe; but if we have regard
to the importance and value of them, he may be put in Balance with the King of
Portugal, and possibly be found lighter.

His Style is King of Denmark and Norway, of the Goths and Vandals, Duke of
Sleswick and Holstein, Stormar, and Ditmarsh; Earl in Oldenburg and
Delmenhorst; all which Countries he actually possesses either in whole or in
part: so that except that of the Goths and Vandals, which Title both he and the
King of Sweden use, and which the Crown of Denmark has retained ever since it
was Master of Sweden (as we in England do that of France) all the rest are
substantial and not empty Titles.

My design is to acquaint you with the present State of these Countries, and to
offer nothing but what I have either Collected from sensible grave Persons, or
what my own Knowledge and Experience has confirmed to be Truth.

Since the late Wars between that famous Captain Charles Gustavus of Sweden,
and Frederic the Third, which ended in a Peace Anno 1660. Denmark has been
forced to sit down with the loss of all its Territories which lay on the other
side of the Baltic Sea; Schonen, Halland, and Bleking remaining to the Swedes,
notwithstanding frequent Struggles to recover them. These three (especially
Schonen) were the best Provinces belonging to Denmark, and therefore are still
looked upon with a very envious Eye by the Danes: And for this very reason it is
reported, that the Windows of Cronenburgh Castle, whose Prospect lay toward
Schonen, were walled up, that so hateful an Object might not cause continual
heart-burnings.

Denmark therefore, as it is thus clipped, is at present bounded on all sides
with the Sea, except one small Neck of Land, where it joins to Holstein; the
German Ocean washes it on the West and North-west; the entrance into the
Baltic, called the Categate on the North, and North-East; the Baltic on the
East; and the River Eyder on the South; which having its source very near the
East Sea, takes his course Westward, and falls into the Ocean at Toningen, a
strong Town of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp's: So that if a Channel were made
of about three Danish Miles from that River to Kiel, 'twould be a perfect
Island. I include in this Account the Duchy of Sleswick as part of Denmark,
but not the Duchy of Holstein; because the former was a Fief of that Crown,
the latter of the Empire.

All Denmark therefore comprehending its Islands, as I have thus bounded it,
lies in length between the degrees of 54gr. 45min. and 58gr. 15min. North
Latitude, the breadth not being proportionable; and may at a large Computation
be reckoned to amount to the bigness of two thirds of the Kingdom of Ireland.

Norway, which lies North from Denmark, and is separated from it by that Sea
which is usually called the Categate, is a vast and barren Country, full of
Mountains and Firr-trees; it reaches from 59 to 71 degrees of North Latitude;
but is very narrow in respect to its length. It is bounded on the West and
North by the Ocean, on the East by Sweden and the Territories belonging to it;
on the South by the Sea lying between it and Denmark. The Sea is so deep about
it, that there is no Anchorage for Ships; and therefore its Coasts are
accounted the most dangerous of any in Europe to run with in the Night, or in a
Storm; on which if you chance to be driven, there is no scaping, the Shore
being all along high Rocks, at the very foot of which one may find 200 Fathom
Water.

Holstein, which includes Ditmarsh and Stormar, is bounded by the Duchy of
Sleswick on the North, the Duchy of Saxe Lawenburg on the South-East, the
River Elbe on the South-West, the rest of it is washed by the Ocean and Baltic
Sea. It lies between the 54th and 55th degrees of North Latitude.

Oldenburg and Delmenhorst are two Counties in Germany that lie together,
detached from all the rest of the King of Denmark's Countries; the two Rivers,
Elb and Weser, and the Duchy of Bremen, interposing between them and Holstein.
They are bounded on the North-East by the Weser, on the West by East-Friesland
and the County of Embden, on the South by part of the Bishopric of Munster.
They are a small Territory of about 35 English Miles in Diameter; the middle of
which is in the Latitude of 53 degrees and a half.

The rest of the King of Denmark's Territories not mentioned in the enumeration
of his Titles, are the Islands of Feroe, and Iseland in the Northern Ocean. St.
Thomas, one of the Caribbe Islands in the West Indies. A Fort upon the Coast of
Guinea, called Christiansburg; and another in the East Indies, called
Tranquebar. He has likewise a Toll at Elfleet upon the River Weser.

Thus much may serve in general touching the Dominions of that King; which have
this great inconveniency, that they are mightily disjoined and separated from
each other; it being certain, that a State which is confined by many
Principalities is weak, exposed to many dangers, and requires a more than
ordinary Expense, as well as Prudence, to preserve it entire: And it is to this
principally that the Conquests which the Swedes have gained upon them may be
ascribed.

CHAP. II.
Of Denmark in particular, and the Island of Zealand.

THIS being the most considerable, and in value four parts in five of all the
Territories belonging to the Crown of Denmark, I shall give a more particular
account of it than of the rest. Others, I know, have given us the Genealogies
and Succession of its Kings, ancient Names, Inhabitants, Conquests, etc. my
business is only to inform how it stands at this day, and to enter no further
into the former History, or the Geography of the Country, than is necessary to
the understanding the present State of it.

Denmark then, properly so called, consists of many Islands in the Baltic Sea,
and of that part of the Continent which is now called Jutland: The Duchy of
Sleswick, which I reckoned in the former Chapter as part of it, shall be
treated of by it self, because it is divided between the King and the Duke of
Holstein Gottorp; whereas these abovementioned are wholly the King's. Jutland
is the biggest and most fertile Country, but the Islands are more considerable
in regard of their Situation, especially Zealand; because Copenhagen, the Chief
City of Denmark, is seated in it, and the famous passage of the Sound is
bordered by its Shore, where, on the narrowest part the Town of Elsinor stands:
wherefore I shall begin with a description of them, and first of Zealand.

It is almost of a Circular Figure, and contains about 180 English Miles in
Circumference; I cannot commend its Fertility, there being no Bread corn
growing in any part of it except Rye, which indeed is in good quantity, and
whereof most of their Bread is made. There are few Meadows in it, and yet there
is no want of good Hay: Most of their Grass, which is short and sweet, grows by
the sides of their Corn Fields, or in some scattered spots of Marish Grounds.
It has no Rivers, nor above half a score Brooks that are able to turn a Mill;
to supply this, there is a great number of fine Lakes sufficiently stored with
Fish. The Air is but indifferent, especially in and near Copenhagen; which is
occasioned by the frequent Fogs and low Situation; yet Colds of the Lungs are
very rare here; this I attribute to the pureness of their firing, which is
Beech-wood, the only sort of Timber trees which abound in this Island. About
one fourth part of it is Forest, lying open for the King's Hunting and his
Game, such as Staggs, Wild-Boars, Roe-Bucks, etc. these are such Sacred things
that no Body dares touch them, though they find them in whole Herds destroying
their Corn, to the infinite yearly damage of the poor Peasants.

The Face of the Land is pleasant in many places, abounding with little Hills,
Woods and Lakes in a very agreeable diversity. For Seaports, that most
excellent one belonging to Copenhagen must make amends for the want of them,
not only in this, but many other of the Islands; there being few others, that I
know of, capable of harboring a Vessel of 200 Tuns.

Neither is this a sensible want, because there are no Commodities in this
Island for Exportation: In good years, that is, wet ones (for the Soil being
altogether Sandy, requires frequent Rains, even thus far North) there may be
some overplus of Rye; and I have been told, that about forty years ago, ten or
twelve Dutch Flyboats found yearly their Lading at Kiog, a pretty flourishing
Town at that time, within twenty English Miles of Copenhagen; but of late they
seem to be well satisfied if the Product of the Isle maintains in this sort of
Grain the Inhabitants of it: Not that the numbers of these are increased, but
Husbandry is not so much encouraged now as when the Taxes of the poor Country
People were less frequent and grievous.

The Cattle here are generally small and lean; kept within doors seven or eight
Months in the Year; where their Feeding is partly Hay, partly Brewers Grains,
Roots, Weeds, and such Trash as their Owners can provide for them. In Summer
time their Beef is sweet and juicy; but Weather Mutton was a rare thing till of
late; nor is it common now, they being not used to Geld their Sheep; and
therefore 'twas usually eaten while it was Lamb.

The feeding of the Commonalty generally throughout all Denmark is very mean;
the Burgers and Citizens sustaining themselves with Rye-bread, Salt-flesh,
Stock Fish, Bacon, and very bad Cheese; insomuch that the Inspectors of our
Markets in England, who use to destroy or send to the Prisons all such Victuals
as are not judged wholesome, would (if they found them no better provided than at
Copenhagen) go near to empty the Markets, and leave little to either Buyer or
Seller. The Peasants live on Roots, white Meats, and Rye-bread; seldom tasting
fresh Fish, and scarce ever Flesh, unless on some extraordinary Festivals, as
on St. Martin's Eve, when each Family in Denmark, without sail, makes merry
with a roasted Goose at Supper.

Here, and in all Denmark, are but two Seasons of the Year, Winter and Summer;
those two other more agreeable ones of Spring and Autumn not being commonly
known; the Spring never, and the Autumn seldom; you immediately leap from
extremity of Heat to extremity of Cold; and so on the contrary, when Winter is
over, from Cold to Heat. During the three Months of June, July, and August, the
Heat is much more intense than in England, and very sultry in the Nights, but
it is a gloomy Heat, and People generally perceive some interposition of thick
Vapors between them and the Sun. In Copenhagen, during these three Months,
they are constantly troubled with the Plague of Flies, which they endeavor to
destroy by a poisoned Water; upon the laying of which in their Kitchins and
Chambers, I have seen whole Bushels of dead Flies swept together in one Room.

The Baltic Sea near this City is very ill stored with good Fish; neither did
I ever know any Sea-Town of that Consequence worse served with it: Whether it
be that the Sea wants its requisite saltness, (being rather to be esteemed
brackish than salt) or that the People are not industrious enough to take them;
but I rather believe the former.

The principal things of this Island, and indeed of all Denmark, are the City
of Copenhagen, and the Passage of the Sound. I will begin with the City, the
rather because when I have done with that I have little more to say of any
other in the King of Denmark's Dominions; there being no other belonging to him
much better than our Town of St. Albans.

Copenhagen is no ancient City, nor a very large one; it approaches in bigness
nearest to Bristol of any of our English Cities; but it increases in Buildings
every day, notwithstanding the many discouragements it lies under. The
Fortifications of it enclose a great deal more Ground than is built upon; and
many small Buildings, which upon a further increase of its Riches, will be
pulled down. Its Situation for Trade is one of the best in the World, because
of the excellency of its Port; so that without doubt, were Copenhagen a free
City, it would be the Mart and Staple of all the Traffic of the Baltic. This
Port is enclosed by the Bulwarks of the Town, the entrance into it being so
narrow, that but one Ship can pass at a time; which entrance is every Night
shut up with a strong Boom; the Citadel on one side, and a good Block-house
well furnished with Cannon on the other, Commands the Mouth of it. Within this
Haven rides the Navy Royal, every Ship having his place assigned to it; a
wooden Gallery ranges round the whole Enclosure where the Fleet lies, laid over
the Water in such manner, that all the Ships may be viewed near at hand as
easily and commodiously as if they lay on dry Land. This Harbor is capacious
enough to hold 500 Sail, where neither Wind nor Enemies can do them the least
mischief. The Road without is very good and safe; being fenced from the Sea by
a large Sand Bank, on the Points of which float always a couple of Buoys to
direct all Ships that come in or go out. Here are no Tides to fear; But always
a sufficient depth of Water: Sometimes indeed, according as the Winds blow in
or out of the Baltic, there sets a Current; but it is not frequent, nor
dangerous. To conclude, this Port may justly be reckoned in all respects one of
the best in the whole World.

The Town is strong, being situated in a flat Marish Soil, not commanded by any
height; the Air is bad by reason of the stink of the Channels which are cut
through it. The Works of it are only of Earth and Sodds, yet raised according
to the Rules of Modern Fortification, and in tolerable good Repair. The
Buildings both in this City and elsewhere, are generally very mean, being
Cagework, and having the Intervals between the Timbers filled up with Brick.
It Is observable, that all the good Public Buildings in it, such as the Change,
Arsenal, Round-Steeple, etc. were built by King Christian the Fourth, the
present King's Grandfather, and a very brave, though not a Fortunate Prince;
who did more with less Revenues than all the succeeding Princes; the Monarchy
being at that time neither Hereditary nor Absolute. He used often to say, That
he knew the Purses of his Subjects would be always open for his and the
Kingdoms just Occasions; and that he had rather they were his Cash-keepers than
a HighTreasurer, who might abuse him. Although the principal Decorations of
this Town are owing to him, yet he either forgot or delayed the Building of a
Palace for himself and his Successors, and no Body has undertaken it since;
though certainly in no Kingdom is there greater occasion; this King's House of
Residence being for Situation, Meanness, and Inconvenience the worst in the
World; and as singular for badness as the Port is for goodness. Several of the
Noblemen, as his High Excellency Guldenlieu, the great Admiral Juel, with
others, being infinitely better lodged than the whole Royal Family: Yet to make
amends for this, his Majesty has near him an excellent Stable of Horses; and
handsome large Gardens, with a good Garden-House, called Rosenburg, some
distance from the Palace, at the other end of the Town.

CHAP. III.
Of the Sound.

THIS Passage or Straight called the Sound, or Ore-sound, which has so great a
Reputation in these Northern Parts of the World, lies between this Island of
Zealand and the firm Land of Schonen. On Denmark side, where it is narrowest,
stands the Town of Elsinore, and the strong Fortress of Cronenburg; near which
is a tolerable good Road for Ships. On Sweden side is the Town of Helsinburg
with a demolished Castle, whereof only one old Tower remains, sufficient to
hold half a dozen great Guns to repay the Salutes of Men of War which pass
through.

Betwixt these two do pass and repass all Vessels that Trade into the Baltic;
so that next that of Gibraltar, one may justly reckon this Straight the most
important and frequented of any in Europe. The loss of Schonen, though it was
considerable in regard of the largeness and fruitfulness of the Province, yet
it was more so in respect to the Dominion of this great Passage; for although
the Danes, by the Treaty of Peace, have expressly retained their Title to it,
and receive Toll from all Ships that pass except Swedes, yet they do not esteem
the Security of that Title so firm as they would wish; for being not Masters of
the Land on both sides, they may have the Right, but not the Power to assert it
upon occasion, and seem only to enjoy it at present according to their good
Behavior; their stronger Neighbor the Swede being able to make use of the
first Opportunity given him to their Prejudice.

This Toll, being very considerable, and of late years occasioning many
Disputes which are not yet determined, I thought it might not be amiss to set
down in this place, what I have learnt of the Original and Nature of it, after
having made as strict Enquiry as was possible from the most ancient, and most
understanding Persons I could meet with.

The most rational Account then is, That it was at first laid by the Consent of
the Traders into the Baltic, who were willing to allow a small matter for each
Ship that passed, toward the maintaining of Lights on certain places of that
Coast, for the better direction of Sailers in dark Nights: Hereupon this
Passage of the Sound became the most practiced; that other of the Great Belt
being in a little time quite neglected; as well because of the great
Convenience of those Lights to the Shipping that passed in and out of the
East-Sea, as because of an Agreement made that no Ships should pass the other
way, to the end that all might pay their shares; it being unreasonable that
such Ships should have the benefit of those Lights in dark or stormy Winter
Nights, who avoided paying toward the maintaining of those Fires, by passing
another way. Besides, if this manner of avoiding the Payment had been allowed,
the Revenue would have been so insignificant, considering the small Sum which
each Ship was to pay, that the Lights could not have been maintained by it; and
the Danes were not willing to be at the Charge solely for the use and benefit
of their own Trading Ships, in regard they were Masters of so few as made it
not worth their while; the Lubeckers, Dantzickers, and Merchants of other
Hans-Towns, being the greatest Traders at that time in the Northern Parts of
Europe, by which they arrived to a great height of Power and Riches.

But there being no fixed Rule or Treaty whereby to be governed with regard to
the different Bulk of the Ships belonging to so many several Nations, the Danes
began in process of time to grow Arbitrary, and exacted more or less Sums,
according to the strength or weakness of those they had to deal with, or
according to their Friendship or Discontent with those Princes and States to
whom the several Ships belonged: Therefore the Emperor Charles the Fifth, to
ascertain this Toll, concluded a Treaty with the King of Denmark, which was
signed at Spire on the Rhine, and was in behalf of his Subjects of the
Seventeen Provinces of the Low Countries, who had great Traffic in the
Baltic; and agreed that as a Toll-Custom in the Sound, every Ship of 200 Tuns
and under, should pay two Rose Nobles at its Entrance or Return from the
Baltic, and every Ship above 200 Tuns three Rose Nobles.

This Agreement remained in force till such time as the United Provinces shook
off the Spanish Yoke, and then the Danes taking the advantage of those Wars,
raised their Toll to an extravagant height, the troublesome Times not affording
leisure to the Dutch to mind the redressing of such a Mischief.

However, about the Year 1600. they joined themselves with the City of Lubeck,
in opposition to such an exorbitant Toll as was taken from both of them; so
that from thenceforth the Dutch paid more or less, according as Fortune was
favorable or adverse to them, but generally little.

Anno 1647. the first Treaty was made between Denmark and the United Provinces
(as Sovereigns) for this Toll; and they were obliged to pay a certain Sum for
each Ship; this Treaty was to last Forty years; after the expiration of which,
if in the mean time no new Treaty were made, that of Spire was to be in force.

This Treaty of 1647. expired 1687. and the Danes agreed to make an interim
Treaty, till such time as the many Differences between them and the Hollanders
in this and other Matters could be adjusted at leisure, and concluded in a more
lasting and solemn one.

This interim Treaty, which was but for Four years, expired in the Year 1691.
so that no new Treaty being made and finished during that time, it is evident
that only the ancient Treaty of Spire remains in force, and no other.

The English Treaties with Denmark are grounded on those between the Dutch and
that Kingdom, and have reference to them; with a Covenant that we shall be
treated tanquam gens amicissima; excepting always Sweden, whose Ships pay no
Toll at all.

So that at present both the English and Dutch have occasion for new Treaties
with Denmark in this and other Affairs of Trade, unless it be agreed by all
Parties that the Treaty of Spire shall for so much remain in vigor hereafter.

From this short History of the Original of this Imposition it appears, how
slightly grounded the King of Denmark's Title is to this Right of exacting the
Toll of the Sound; which from an easy Contribution which Merchants chose to
pay for their own Convenience, and whereof the King of Denmark was only
Treasurer or Trustee, to see it fairly laid out for the common use, is grown to
be a heavy Imposition upon Trade, as well as a kind of servile acknowledgment
of his Sovereignty of those Seas; and is purely owing to his taking an
Advantage of the Difficulties of the Hollanders during their Wars with Spain,
and the Connivance of King James the First in prejudice of the English; who
favored the Danes upon account of his Marriage to a Daughter of that Crown;
upon whose two Examples all the lesser States were forced to submit. Nor can it
be conceived how it could be otherwise brought about; since it is very well
known, that the Passage of the Sound is not the only one to the Baltic Sea,
there being two others called the Greater and Lesser Belts; and that of the
Greater Belt so commodious and large, that during the late Wars the whole Dutch
Fleet chose to pass through it, and continue in it for four or five Months
together; and the Danish Strength at Sea never appeared yet so formidable as to
be able to oblige the English and Dutch to choose, which Passage it pleased:
Besides, the breadth of the Sound in the narrowest part is four English Miles
over; and every where of a sufficient depth; so that his Castles could not
Command the Channel when he was Master of both sides; much less now that he has
but one. So that it is plain, this pretended Sovereignty is very precarious,
being partly founded on a Breach of Trust, as well as the Carelessness of some
of the Princes concerned in it, to the great Injury of Trade: And the Spaniards
may, with as much right, lay claim to the Sovereignty of the Streights of
Gibralter, where there is but one Passage; or the Swede, who is now Master of
one of the Castles on the Sound, demand another Toll of all Ships, since both
are better able to support their Claims.

For the further clearing of this Point, and to show how it agrees with the
Account I have already given, I have thought fit to insert in this place the
Copy of a Letter from a very understanding Person, March 31. 1691.

SIR,
THE Duties or Customs in the Sound were of old times no more than a Rose Noble
for each Ship, Loading included; but within these hundred Years, some say since
King James of Scotland came to the Crown of England, and winked at it, the
Kings of Denmark having the Lands on both sides the Passage, began to impose
Taxes on the Merchandise, and raise higher those which were formerly on the
Ships; which the Lubeckers, who were then powerful, refused to pay.

Anno 1640. the King caused a Book of Rates to be printed, whereof I have one,
according to which a Ship of 100 Lasts, or 200 Tuns, (which is the same thing,)
did pay as follows: For 100 Last of Salt to the East 300 Rix Dollars; for the
Ship and petty Charges on the Salt 34 Rix Dollars, 24 Stivers; and for 100 Last
of Rye from the East 150 R. D. for Ship and petty Charges, as above, 34 R. D.
24 Stivers. So that the Charges of a Ship of this Burden, with its Lading
forward and backward was 519 Rix Dollars.

Hereupon the Hollanders made an Alliance with the Swedes, who Anno 1643. by
the way of Germany invaded Denmark, and the Dutch lent them Ships; then the
King Prints another Book of Rates more favorable, demanding for 100 Last of
Spanish Salt 100 Rix Dollars, for 100 Last of Rye 75 R. D. Ships Charges in and
out, as above, 69 R. D. the whole amounting to 244 R. D. But this was neither
done time enough, nor the Rates lowered enough. The Hollanders, by their Treaty
with Denmark of 1646. or thereabouts, brought them thus, The 100 Last of Salt
to 50 Rix Dollars, 100 Last of Rye to 50 R. D. Ships, and other petty Charges,
nothing: in all for each Ship 100 Rix Dollars. And by reason of this untimely
heightning of their Customs it is, that the Kings of Denmark have lost so many
Territories to the Swedes.

But to Answer your Demand more fully, it was in those days, that is, about the
Year 1640. that the Customs of the OreSound yielded per Ann. from 240000 Rix
Dollars to 300000 R. D. But since 1645. they have not at any time rendered
above 150000 R. D. nor ever so much, except in time of War with the Swedes,
when all did pay without Exemption. During the last War, I remember it yielded
but 143000 Rix Dollars; but before that War, and since (the Swedish Ships
freeing all Goods that are carried in them, and the Swedish Goods in Foreign
Ships being also free by Treaty) it has not yielded above 80000 Rix Dollars per
Annum; and the last Year past it did not reach to full 70000 Rix Dollars.


The Court of Denmark is not to be blamed therefore for being wonderful jealous
of any Infraction of this their pretended Sovereignty, as People are most
careful and suspicious in behalf of an Estate wherein their Title is weak, it
being so much the Interest not only of the English and Dutch, but also of the
Swede, to have it set right, both to encourage Trade to his own Country, and to
lessen the Revenue of his Neighbor; neither can it be said, that the English
and Dutch did ever entirely yield the Point; for though they agreed to pay a
small Toll on Merchandise, yet no manner of searching or stopping is to be
allowed, or has ever been. The Danes are now obliged to take the Master of the
Vessel's word for the quality and quantity of the Lading; and thought it
prudence never to press this Point further, least we should grow angry, and
make too narrow an Inspection both into their Original Right, and into their
Ability to maintain it: For whilst we and the Dutch are content to pay this
Toll, all the other petty Princes and States do it without Murmur, but if we
once broke the Chain, they would shake off their part of it likewise.

CHAP. IV.
Of the other Islands, and Jutland.

THE most considerable Islands next to that of Zealand, are, Funen or Fionia,
Laland, Langland, Falstria, Mune, Samsoe, Arroe, Bornholm, and Amack; there are
besides many other small ones of less note.

Funen is second to Zealand, whether its bigness or the goodness of its Soil be
considered; it has plenty of Corn, Hogs, Lakes, and Woods; the chief Town of it
is Odensee, a well-seated, and formerly a flourishing little City, but at
present much fallen to decay. This Island produces nothing for the Merchant to
export, except some few Horses, the Inhabitants usually consuming their own
Commodities. This is a principal Government, called a Stifts Ampt. The present
Governor is Mr. Winterfelt.

Laland is a small, but plentiful Island, producing all sorts of Corn in
abundance, and particularly Wheat, wherewith it supplies the City of
Copenhagen, and all other parts of Denmark, where it is a rarity. The
Hollanders buy yearly, and ship off great quantities of Corn from hence. This
likewise is a Stifts Ampt, having several of the lesser Islands under its
Jurisdiction. The Governor of it is Mr. Geugh, who formerly had a Public
Character, and resided a long time in England.

Falstria, Langland, and Mune are fertile Islands; the two first Export yearly
some Corn. Arroe and Alsen abound in Annis-seeds, which are much used to season
their Meat, and mix with their Bread. Bornholm, Samsoe, with the other Islands,
nourish Cattle, and afford Corn for the use of the Inhabitants. But Amack
deserves to be particularly remembered; this little Island joins close to the
City of Copenhagen, from which it is only separated by a small Arm of the Sea,
which is passed over by a Drawbridge, and exceeds in fruitfulness any spot of
Ground in Denmark. This Land was given many Years ago to several Families of
North Hollanders, who were planted there to make Butter and Cheese for the
Court; the Descendants of whom retain to this day the Habit, Language, and
Customs of their Predecessors, together with their Cleanliness and Industry;
neither will they mix with the Danes, but intermarry with each other. They had
formerly extraordinary Privileges granted to them, whereof some continue to
this time, but others are retrenched; and by degrees it is to be feared they
will be treated like the other Subjects.

This Island of Amaek, through the Industry of these laborious People, is as it
were the Kitchen-Garden of Copenhagen, and supplies its Markets plentifully
with all sorts of Roots and Herbs; besides Butter, Milk, great quantities of
Corn, and some Hay; whatever it produces being the best in its kind that is to
be found in the whole Kingdom.

Jutland, part of the ancient Cimbrica Chersonesus, is the biggest part of the
Kingdom of Denmark, and may amount to about two thirds of the whole. It is
divided into four Stifts Ampts, or principal Governments. The present
Governors are, the Count de Frize, the upper Marshall Speckhan, Monsieur
Edmund Schele, now Envoy Extraordinary to his Majesty from the King of Denmark,
etc.

This is a plentiful Country, abounding more especially in Cattle; it wants
good Seaports toward the Ocean, notwithstanding which the Hollanders
transport yearly great quantities of lean Cows and Oxen from hence to their
more fertile Soil, where in a short time they grow so prodigiously fat, through
better feeding, in the rich Grounds of Holland, that a vast Profit is made by
this Traffic. The Horses and Swine of this Country are excellent, and in great
numbers. It affords Corn in sufficient quantity for the use of its own People.
The Land is more Fertile near the Seacoasts; the Inland being full of Heaths,
Lakes, and Woods. In short, it is the best Country the King of Denmark is
Master of, and appears to be least declining, because most remote from
Copenhagen. -- Procul a Jove, Procul a Fulmine. It being observed, that in
limited Monarchies and Commonwealths, a Neighborhood to the Seat of the
Government, is advantageous to the Subjects, whilst the distant Provinces are
less thriving, and more liable to Oppression: but in Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Kingdoms the quite contrary happens.

CHAP. V.
Of the rest of the King of Denmark's Countries.

THE Duchy of Sleswick is in general a very good Country; its convenient
Situation between two Seas, the Ocean and the Baltic, rendering it considerable
for Trade, although the natural Commodities, fit for Exportation, are in no
great quantity. Some Corn, Cattle, Horses, and Wood for Firing it affords to
its Neighbors, over and above a sufficient store of each for its own
Inhabitants. It is divided between the King and the Duke of Holstein. The
principal Town which gives Name to the Duchy, belongs to the Duke of Holstein,
who resides near it in his Palace of Gottorp, one of the most delicious Seats
that is to be seen in all the Northern Parts of Europe; nothing can be more
Pleasant and Romantic than the Situation of this Castle. It stands in an
Island, surrounded by a large Lake made by the River Sley, whose rising Banks
are clothed with fine Woods, the Waters clear and full of Fish, carry Vessels
of small Burden to and from the Baltic Sea, into which it empties it self. The
Gardens are large, with great Cost and Art cut out of the diclivity of a Hill
on the other side the Lake, and are as well dissposed and laid out with
Fountains, Parterres, Walks, and Waterworks as many of the most famous Villa's
in Italy. A noble large Park, or rather Forest, full of Deer, Wild-boars, and
all sorts of Game, joins close to this Garden, cut through with pleasant Walks
and Ridings.

This Residence of the Duke of Holstein suffered much during the Misfortunes of
its Master; many of the Improvements being not only suffered to run to ruin
and decay, but industriously and as some say, by order, pulled down and
destroyed; which at present, since the Re-establishment of the Duke, are
repairing and restoring to their former Splendor. Among several other things
of value, none had better luck than an admirable Library, being a choice
Collection of Books which many Dukes of Holstein had of a long time been
gathering; this escaped, and in the Year 1692. I saw it with the rest of the
Rarities of this place in a good Condition, and tending to a better.

Holstein is divided among several of the Branches of that Family, all whose
Descendants call themselves Dukes of Holstein; and according to the German
Custom, (as well younger Brothers as elder) assume the Title and Quality of
Princes: only the chief and estated Men of these several Branches are
distinguished by the Additional Title of the Place of their Residence; as the
Duke of Holstein Ploen, Holstein Sunderburg, Holstein, Norburg, etc. the Cadets
of each, contenting themselves with the bare Title of Princes, till they come
to be Proprietors of Land; whose Denomination they may add to that of Duke. But
the King of Denmark, (who is likewise Duke of Holstein) and the Duke of
Holstein Gottorp, are possessed of the greatest part of it, and both hold it as
a Fief of the Empire.

Here, as well as in Sleswick, the Jurisdictions and Interests of these two
Princes are very much intermixed; so that the People scarce know whose Subjects
to reckon themselves, since they often swear Allegiance, and pay Tribute to
both. In some Towns and Balliages both the King and Duke elect the Yearly
Magistrates, and divide the Revenue; in others they do this by turns: So that
upon any Quarrel or Difference between these two Princes, the poor People are
strangely divided, and in a most miserable Condition; their Inclination leading
them to the Duke's Interest, who being the weaker, finds it his Advantage to
use them better; but their fear causing them to appear for the King as the
stronger, though more Arbitrary.

This Country is very fruitful and pleasant; excellently well seated for Trade,
lying between the two Seas, and having the advantage of the Neighborhood of
the River Elbe, and of Hamburg; which being a free City, and consequently a
rich one, imparts a large share of its Blessings to the Territories of those
Princes which lie any thing near it. This is apparent enough in the visible
Prosperity of such Lands and People as are within a Day's Journey or more of
that City, above such as lie remote from its Influence. The Inhabitants of
Holstein use to brag that it resembles England in its variety of Hills,
Meadows, Woods, Rivers, and Cornfields; as also that we are beholding to them
and their Neighborhood for our Original; the People of those Parts called
Angles, having planted, and at the same time given the Name of Anglia to our
Island.

The Danes, when they travel abroad, choose to call themselves Holsteiners,
thinking it more honorable to be born within the Confines of the Empire, than
otherwise.

Stormar and Ditmarsh lie the nearest to the River Elbe, and are for the most
part low and rich Countries, the Soil being fat, and in most places resembling
Holland, as well in its Fertility as manner of Improvement. These Countries
enjoy also the benfit of having Hamburg and the River near them, with the
additional Advantage of the Ocean; though it sometimes proves too troublesome a
Neighbor, and overflows great part of their lower Grounds, notwithstanding the
Banks and Digues that are raised to keep it out.

It Is to be noted as a great natural defect, that the King of Denmark has not
in all his Dominions one Navigable River for Vessels of any considerable Burden
(for I do not count the River Eyder as such) unless we reckon the Elbe, which
is rather to be esteemed one of the Confines and Boundaries of his Territories,
than any way belonging to him; yet he has often, and does even to this day,
endeavor to set up and establish a Toll at Glucstadt, being not without hopes,
that taking the advantage of the Necessity of the Empire, during this expensive
War, he may engage it to consent to this Toll against all other Considerations:
But the Neighboring Princes, the English and Dutch, and above all the City of
Hamburg, will hardly be brought over to comply with an Innovation so
prejudicial to their Trade and Interests.

Oldenburg for the most part is a flat Marish Country; much exposed to the
Inundations of the Ocean; the Banks which should keep it in its due Bounds, not
being maintained in good repair. It abounds in Cattle, and has a good Breed of
Horses, which are much sought after for Coaches, by reason of their Color,
which is a yellowish Cream Color. They are generally wall-ey'd, and
tender-hoof'd, not able to last long, or endure hard labor. The Town of
Oldenburg is but a very indifferent one, and its Castle much out of Repair.
Upon the Death of the late Prince Anthony, this County came to be annexed to
the Crown of Denmark.

Delmenhorst is a more rising Ground, and pretty well wooded. Both these lie
together, and the Inhabitants are used the more gently, by reason of their
distance from his other Territories.

Of Norway little can be said; but that it is divided into two great Provinces,
the Southern and Northern; whereof one small County, called Yempterland,
formerly belonging to the King of Denmark, is now in the Possession of the
Swedes. His High Excellency Guldenlieu (which is the Title usually given him by
the Danes) is Viceroy, or as they call him Stadt holder of the whole. It is
sub-divided into four Stifts Ampts, or Principal Governments; Viz. Dronthem,
Bergen, Christiania, and Larwick. The Governors are young Guldenlieu, natural
Son to the present King, and Monsieur Stocfleet late Envoy extraordinary from
Denmark to Sweden, etc.. It is a very barren Country, affording neither Corn
nor Cattle sufficient for the subsistence of its Inhabitants, although they be
not numerous in proportion to its vast extent. There are Silver Mines in it,
but whether the working of them turns to account is a question. The Commodities
which it yields fit for Exportation are Timber of all kinds, The Exportation of
OakTimber is forbidden.
especially Firr, Stockfish, Masts for Ships, and Iron; of these it has a
tolerable store; most of which the English and Dutch purchase yearly with ready
Money: And herein Norway exceeds the other Dominions of the King of Denmark,
that it affords Commodities for Exportation, which none of the rest do in any
quantity. The Inhabitants are a hardy, laborious, and honest sort of People;
they are esteemed by others, and esteem themselves much superior to the Danes,
whom they call upbraidingly Jutes.

Island and Feroe are miserable Islands in the North Ocean; Corn will scarce
grow in either of them, but they have good stocks of Cattle. No Trade is
permitted them but with the Danes; the Inhabitants are great Players at Chess.
It were worth some curious Man's enquiry how such a studious and difficult Game
should get thus far Northward, and become so generally used.

The King of Denmark's Factories in the East and West Indies, and in Guinea are
esteemed of very little worth and consideration; yet I have seen several
East India Ships return home to Copenhagen well laden with the Merchandise of
those Countries; and there is an East India Company lately set up, whereof most
of the Men of Quality are Members and Adventurers: But whether the Lading of
those Ships I mentioned were the lawful Product of Trade, or acquired by other
means, will in time be worth the inquiry of those Kingdoms and States whose
Interest it is to preserve in the Indians and Persians a good Opinion of the
honesty and fair dealing of the Europeans.

And thus I have said as much as I think requisite touching the Situation,
Extent, and Qualities of the Lands and Dominions belonging to the King of
Denmark, which amounts in general to this, that they are very large, disjoined,
and intermixed, producing but a moderate Plenty of Necessaries for the
Inhabitants, but few Commodities for the Merchant, and no Manufactures, if we
except a little Iron. Whether these Defects in Countries well situated and
indifferent fertile be altogether natural or partly accidental, will better
appear when I treat of the Form of the Government, and the present Condition,
Customs, and Manners of the Natives; but because these last do in a manner
depend upon, and are influenced by the former, I shall choose to begin with it.

CHAP. VI.
Of their Form of Government.

THE Ancient Form of Government here was the same which the Goths and Vandals
established in most, Furono veramente tutti i Re da principio Capi e non Re, di
Republiche e non di regni: ma poi il lungo uso ha fatto che i popoli si siano
disposti all habito dell' intiera ubbidienza, come apunte suole assuefarsi una
pianta e un corpo humano a vivere, in terreno e sotto clima diverso dal suo
natural. Card. Bentivoglio. Relatione delle Provincie Unite di Flandra, lib. 3.
if not all, Parts of Europe, whither they carried their Conquests, and which
in England is retained to this day for the most part. It Is said of the Romans,
That those Provinces which they Conquered were amply recompensed, for the loss
of their Liberty, by being reduced from their Barbarity to Civility; by the
Introduction of Arts, Learning, Commerce, and Politeness. I know not whether
this manner of Arguing has not more of Pomp than Truth in it; but with much
greater reason may it be said that all Europe was beholding to these People for
introducing or restoring a Constitution of Government far excelling all others
that we know of in the World. It Is to the ancient Inhabitants of these
Countries, with other neighboring Provinces, that we owe the Original of
Parliaments, formerly so common, but lost within this last Age in all Kingdoms
but those of Poland, Great Britain, and Ireland.

Denmark therefore was till within these Two and Thirty years governed by a
King chosen by the People of all sorts, even the Boors had their Voices, which
King Waldemar the Third acknowledged in that memorable answer of his to the
Popes Nuncio, who pretended to a great power over him. Naturam habemus a Deo,
regnum a subditis, Divitias a parentibus, Religionem a Romana Ecclesia; quam si
nobis invides, renuntiamus per praesentes. The Estates of the Realm being
convened to that intent, were to Elect for their Prince such a Person as to
them appeared Personable, Valiant, Just, Merciful, Affable, a Maintainer of the
Laws, a Lover of the People, Prudent, and Adorned with all other Virtues fit
for Government, and requisite for the great Trust reposed in him; yet with due
regard had to the Family of the preceding Kings. If within that Line they found
a Person thus qualified, or esteemed to be so, they thought it but a piece of
just Gratitude to prefer him before any other to this high Dignity, and were
pleased when they had reason to choose the Eldest Son of their former King,
rather than any of the younger, as well because they had regard to Priority of
Birth, when all other Virtues were equal, as because the greatness of his
Paternal Estate might put him above the reach of Temptations to be covetous or
dishonest, and enable him in some degree to support the Dignity of his Office.
But if after such a Choice they found themselves mistaken, and that they had
advanced a Cruel, Vicious, Tyrannical, Covetous, or Wasteful Person, they
frequently Deposed him, oftentimes Banished, sometimes Destroyed him; and this
either formally, by making him Answer before the Representative Body of the
People; or if by ill Practices, such as making of Parties, levying of Soldiers,
contracting of Alliances to support himself in opposition to the Peoples
Rights, he was grown too powerful to be legally contended with, they dispatched
him without any more Ceremony the best way they could, and Elected presently a
better Man in his room; sometimes the next of Kin to him, sometimes the Valiant
Man that had exposed himself so far as to undertake the Expulsion or the
killing of the Tyrant; at other times a private Person of a good Reputation,
who possibly least dreamt of such an Advancement.

Frequent Meetings of the Estates was a part of the very Fundamental
Constitution: In those Meetings all Matters relating to good Government were
transacted; good Laws were enacted, all Affairs belonging to Peace or War,
Alliances, disposal of great Offices, Contracts of Marriages for the Royal
Family, etc. were debated. The imposing of Taxes, or demanding of Benevolences
was purely accidental; no constant Tribute being ever paid, nor any Money
levied on the People, unless either to maintain a necessary War with the advice
and consent of the Nation, or now and then by way of Free-gift, to help to
raise a Daughters Portion: the King's ordinary Revenue at that time consisting
only in the Rents of his Lands and Demesnes, in his Herds of Cattle, Forests,
Services of Tenants in manuring and cultivating his Grounds, etc. Customs upon
Merchandise being an Imposition of late crept into this part of the World; so
that he lived like one of our Modern Noblemen, upon the Revenues of his own
Estate, and eat not through the Sweat of his Subjects Brows.

His business was to see a due and impartial Administration of Justice executed
according to the Laws; nay, often to sit and do it himself; to be watchful and
vigilant for the welfare of his People, to Command in Person their Armies in
time of War, to encourage Industry, Religion, Arts and Learning; and it was his
Interest, as well as Duty, to keep fair with his Nobility and Gentry, and to be
careful of the Plenty and Prosperity of his Commons.

This was the Ancient Form of Government in this Kingdom, which continued with
very little variation (excepting that the Power of the Nobles increased too
much) till about Two and Thirty years ago, when at one instant the whole Face
of Affairs was changed: So that the Kings have ever since been, and at present
are, Absolute and Arbitrary; not the least remnant of Liberty remaining to the
Subject; all Meetings of the Estates in Parliament entirely abolished, nay, the
very Name of Estates and Liberty quite forgotten, as if there never had been
any such thing; the very first and principal Article in the present Danish Law
being, That the King has the Privilege reserved to himself to explain the Law,
nay, to alter and change it as he shall find good.

It is easy for any considering Person to guess the Consequences of this,
which are, frequent and arbitrary Taxes, and commonly very excessive ones, even
in Times of Peace; little regard being had to the Occasion of them: So that the
value of Estates in most parts of the Kingdom is fallen three Fourths. And it
is worse near the Capital City under the Eye and Hand of the Government, than
in remoter Provinces: Poverty in the Gentry, which necessarily causes extremity
of Misery in the Peasants, Partiality in the distribution of Justice when
Favorites are concerned; with many other Mischiefs which shall be hereafter
more particularly mentioned; being the constant Effects of Arbitrary Rule in
this and all other Countries wherein it has prevailed.

And because it is astonishing to consider how a free and rich People (for so
they were formerly) should be persuaded entirely to part with their Liberties,
I thought it very proper to give an account by what steps so great a Change and
Revolution was brought about: The Particulars of which I have received not only
from Eyewitnesses, but also from some of the principal Promoters and Actors in
it.

CHAP. VII.
The Manner how the Kingdom of Denmark became Hereditary and Absolute.

AFTER the Conclusion of the Peace between the two Northern Crowns Anno 1660.
some considerable care and time was necessary to redress the Disorders
occasioned by so terrible a War. Denmark had been most violently shaken; and
although the Fury of the Tempest was over, the Agitation caused by it still
continued: The Army was not yet disbanded, nor could be for want of Money to
discharge its Arrears; this caused frequent Insolences in the Soldiers, with a
further Oppression of the Burgers and poor Country People, who had been in a
manner already ruined by the Miseries attending the War. The Nobility, though
Lords and Masters, were full of Discontents, and the Clergy not in the
condition they wished.

To redress all which Grievances, and reduce Affairs into some Order, by
procuring Money for the Payment and Disbanding of the Army, the King thought
fit to appoint a Meeting of the Three Estates at Copenhagen, viz the Nobility,
Commonalty, and Clergy; which accordingly followed about the beginning of
October: After some few days Session (during which the Nobility, according to
their usual practice debated how the Sums of Money requisite might with
greatest ease and convenience be levied upon the Commons, without the least,
intention of bearing any proportionable share themselves.) Several Disputes
arose, and many sharp Expressions passed between them and the Commons; on the
one hand the Nobility were for maintaining their ancient Prerogative of paying
nothing by way of Tax, but only by voluntary Contribution; and showed
themselves too stiff at a time when the Country was exhausted, and most of the
remaining Riches lodged in their hands: They seemed to make use of this
Occasion, not only to vindicate, but even to widen and enlarge their
Privileges above the other two Estates, by laying Impositions on them at
pleasure, which weight they themselves would not touch with one of their
Fingers any further, than as they thought fitting. On the other hand, the
Clergy^ for their late adherance to the interest of their Country, and the
Burgers for the vigorous Defense of their City, thought they might justly
pretend to new Merit, and be considered at least as good Subjects in a State,
which they themselves had so valiantly defended. They remembered the great
Promises made them when dangerous Enterprises were to be taken in hand, and how
successfully they had executed them; thereby saving from a Foreign Yoke, not
only the City of Copenhagen, but the whole Kingdom, the Royal Family, nay those
very Nobles that now dealt so hardly with them: They judged it therefore
reasonable, that the Sums of Money necessary should be levied proportionably,
and that the Nobility who enjoyed all the Lands, should at least pay their
share of the Taxes, since they had suffered less in the common Calamity, as
well as done less to prevent the progress of it.

This manner of arguing was very displeasing to the Nobles, and begat much Heat
and many bitter Replies on both sides: At length a principal Senator called
Otto Craeg, stood up, and in great Anger told the President of the City, That
the Commons neither understood nor considered the Privileges of the Nobility,
who at all times had been exempted from Taxes, nor the true Condition of
themselves, who were no other than Slaves; [the word in the Danish is unfree]
so that their best way was to keep within their own Bounds, and acquiesce in
such Measures as ancient Practice had warranted, and which they were resolved
to maintain. This word Slaves put all the Burgers and Clergy in disorder,
causing a loud Murmur in the Hall; which Nanson the President of the City of
Copenhagen, and Speaker of the House of Commons, perceiving, and finding a fit
occasion of putting in practice a Design before concerted (though but weakly)
between him and the Bishop; in great Choler rose out of his Seat, and swore an
Oath, That the Commons were no Slaves, nor would from thenceforth be called so
by the Nobility, which they should soon prove to their cost: And thereupon
breaking up the Assembly in disorder, and departing out of the Hall, was
followed by all the Clergy and Burgers; the Nobles being left alone to consult
among themselves at their leisure, after a little while adjourned to a private
House near the Court. In the mean time the Commons, being provoked to the
highest degree, and resolving to put their Threats in Execution, marched
processionally by Couples, a Clergyman and a Commoner, from the great Hall or
Parliament House to the Brewers-Hall, which was the convenientest place they
could pitch upon to sit apart from the Nobles, the Bishop of Copenhagen, and
the President of the City leading them: It was there thought necessary to
consider speedily of the most effectual Means to suppress the intolerable Pride
of the Nobility, and how to mend their own Condition: After many Debates they
concluded, That they should immediately wait upon the King, and offer him their
Votes and Assistance to be absolute Monarch of the Realm, as also that the
Crown should descend by inheritance to his Family, which hitherto had gone by
Election. They promised themselves the King would have so great Obligations to
them for this piece of Service, that he would grant and confirm such
Privileges, as should put them above the degree of Slaves. They knew he had
hitherto been curbed by the Nobility to a great Measure; and now saw their own
force, being able (since they had Arms in their Hands, and the concurrence of
the Soldiers) to perform what they undertook: At the worst, they supposed they
should only change many Masters for one, and could better bear hardships from a
King than from inferior Persons: Or if their Case were not bettered, at least
they thought it some comfort to have more Company in it; besides the
satisfaction of Revenge on those that had hitherto not only used them ill, but
insulted over them so lately. They knew the King, and had seen him bear with an
admirable Patience and Constancy all his Calamities; were persuaded that he was
a Valiant Prince, who had often exposed his Person for the sake of the Public,
and therefore thought they could never do enough to show their Gratitude; which
is the usual Temper of the People upon any benefit received from their Prince.

Scarce was this proposed but it was agreed to; and nothing but the
unseasonableness of the time, (it being now near night) deferred the immediate
Execution of it; but all the necessary Measures were taken against next
Morning. The Clergy had a further drift in this Change of Government; for
having been hitherto kept under by the Nobility, they forecasted to have no
other Superior but the King, whose new Authority they engaged to maintain by
the influence they had on the Consciences of the People; expecting with reason
the like Favor and Protection from the King, together with an increase of
their Power; since he was in a great measure obliged to them for his own; and
the benefits were likely to be mutual for the future, the one having the force,
the other the tie of Religion in their Possession. Which Contract subsists to
this very day, to the great advantage of both sides.

The Court all this while was not ignorant of what passed; there wanted no
Spies nor Messengers to give notice of the Discontents of the Commons, Hannibal
Seestede, a cunning Man, was prime Minister; and the Bishop or Superintendent
Swan, with Nanson the Speaker of the House of Commons, were his Creatures:
These had formerly in secret laid with him the Design, which was now upon the
point of disclosing, though their hopes were hardly raised so high, as to
promise themselves such mighty Success. The whole Night passed in Brigues and
Messages, the Commons anger was to be kept up to the requisite height, and the
Resolution they had taken the Night before not to be suffered to cool, but
persisted in betimes next Morning. The Queen, a Woman of Intrigue and high
Spirit, wrought strongly in it by all manner of ways, whilst the King, either
through doubt of the Event, or sense of the Dishonesty and Crime of the Action,
in procuring after such a manner the absolute Dominion of a free Country, could
hardly be brought to comply with it. He declared that indeed he should be
pleased the Sovereignty were entailed on his Family, provided it were done by
Universal Consent; but to become Absolute and Arbitrary, was neither his
desire, nor did he think it for the benefit of the Kingdom; that he was
satisfied he should not make ill use of such an unlimited Authority; but no
body knew what Successors he might have; that it was therefore dangerous both
for them to give, and for him to receive such a Power as might be abused in
future times to the utter ruin of the Nation. But these Reflections, whether
they were real, or only pretenses, whether caused by the Piety or Weakness of
the King, were soon overruled by the more Ambitious and Masculine Spirit of the
Queen, who desired him to sit still, and see how she and her Emissaries would
work for him; told him, That the Plot was well laid, and had begun to operate
prosperously; that he must not obstruct his own and his Families good Fortune;
and in fine, so far prevailed on him, that he seemed with fear to consent to,
and permit that which most think he very much desired: Having however by this
show of unwillingness, left open to himself a door of Reconciliation with his
People, in case the business did not succeed.

All this while the Nobles either had none, or but small intimation of the
Designs of the Commons, they had been used so long to slight and tyrannize over
them, that they were not now sensible of any impending danger from thence,
contemning their Threats as well as their Persons, and imagining they would
have repented next day, and complied with all that should be demanded of them;
but the Plot was deeper laid than they supposed; for not only the prime
Minister, but some other Members of their own Body, who had Employments
depending on the Court, were engaged in it. This inadvertency, with the want of
requisite Courage upon occasion, brought upon them the Mischief on a sudden; so
that except two or three who were more than ordinary doubtful of what might
happen, and slipped out of Town that Night, the rest were altogether fearless of
danger, till the very instant that the Evil was remediless.

Schack the Governor of the Town had been gained by the Court to favor the
Design, which he performed effectually, though not with so servile an intention
as others; for when the King, upon the first news of the Resolution of the
Commons, did often openly promise that he would in Gratitude and Recompense
declare them all Free as soon as it lay in his power, by the Gift they were
about to make him; and the People were willing to trust the King's goodness,
and to depend on the performance of this Promise, encouraged thereunto by the
Clergy, who alleged it a thing unbeseeming and dishonorable to require any
other Security from the King than his bare Word; yet Schack urged vehemently
that the Commons should insist to have this Promise under the King's Hand, and
make themselves sure of the Reward for so considerable a Present as they were
going to make, whilst they had so fair an opportunity in their hands. But all
his Instances were in vain; they were in the giving humor, and resolved to do
it generously, trusting the King for the performance of his Word: A thing which
they have since often, though too late repented of.

Next Morning the Nobles met in the Council-House, and the other two Estates in
the Brewers-Hall; the Resolution of the Commons could not be kept so secret,
but by this time some warm rumors of it had reached the Nobility; but scarce
had they leisure to consider what was fittest to be done on that occasion, when
they were informed that the Commons were marching toward them: For the Bishop
and the President had so well performed their Parts, and urged the necessity of
speedily executing what had been resolved the day before, that all time was
judged lost which was not employed in putting it in practice; they immediately
agreed to go to the Council-House, and there propound to the Nobility their
design, desiring their Concurrence in such a necessary Work for the welfare of
the Kingdom. They marched through the Streets with great Gravity, and Silence,
by Couples, as before, whilst the Mobb by repeated Shouts applauded what they
were going to do. And thus they came to the House where the Nobles were
assembled, who had scarce warning sufficient to receive them.

The President Nanson made a short Harangue, setting forth that they had
considered the state of the Nation, and that they found the only Remedy for the
many Disorders which afflicted it, was to make the Crown Hereditary, and to
give more Power to the King than hitherto he had enjoyed; that this Resolution
was already taken by the Commons and Clergy, in which if the Nobility should
think fitting to concur, they were ready to accompany them to the King, and
make him a tender of an Hereditary and Sovereign Dominion; if not, that they
were going themselves, and the matter should be done without them: That a
speedy Resolution was necessary, for they had already sent word to the Court of
their coming, and his Majesty expected them in the Hall of his Palace;
therefore desired to be informed in few words what they resolved to do.

The suddenness of such a Proposition, and briskness in the manner of its
delivery, caused a general astonishment in the Nobles; one might have seen
those who but the day before carried it so proudly, in an instant fall to an
excess of Complacency, and betray their Fear by their Speeches and
Countenances, as they formerly had done their Arrogance. The Mischief no sooner
appeared to them, but they saw it was unavoidable; there was no leisure allowed
them to consult; and to deny their compliance, or even to delay it, was
dangerous. To give up at once their beloved Power, and submit their Necks to a
heavy Yoke, was an intolerable Grievance: But they saw they were no longer the
Masters; the Commons were armed, the Army and Clergy against them; and they
found now too late, that that which the day before they had considered only as
the Effort of an unconstant giddy Multitude, was guided by wiser Heads, and
supported by Encouragements from Court; nay possibly by some of their own Body:
They suspected each other, and no Man knew whether his next Neighbor was not
in the Plot against the Public Liberty. It is easy to imagine what distracted
thoughts afflicted them on a sudden; they were altogether unprepared for such a
dismal stroke: But some Answer must be given, and that speedily. Such a one as
they had a mind to give, they durst not; for they were assembled in a Fortified
Town, remote from their several Countries and Interests (where they had
governed like so many Princes) in the power of those who could, and certainly
would be revenged in case they proved refractory. The best way therefore was to
seem to approve of what they could not hinder. They answer that the Proposition
made to them by the Commons was not displeasing, but the manner of it wanted
the requisite Formalities; that previous deliberation was necessary to an
Affair of so great moment; that they could not but take it ill, a Resolution of
such Consequence should be concluded on by the Commons without the least
acquainting of the Nobility with it, who were the Chief Estate of the Realm:
That they also aspired to the Honor of bearing their part in bestowing such a
material Gift on the King and his Posterity, but desired that the Matter might
be proceeded on with that gravity, and solemnity, which the nature of it
required. That it was not fit such a weighty Transaction should have the
appearance of a Tumult, and seemed forced rather than a free Choice. The
Conclusion of all was, That they hoped the Commons would a little defer the
putting in Execution their Design; and in the mean time consult with them, till
the Affair were done orderly, and with unanimous Approbation, as well as to
mutual Advantage.

This was with great vehemence by the President denied. He replied, These were
Shifts only to gain time, that the Nobles might be in a Condition to frustrate
the Intention of the Commons; that the Point was already agreed, and the
Resolution taken; that they came not thither to consider, but to act; if the
Nobles would join with them, they were ready; if not, they would do what was to
be done alone; and doubted not but his Majesty would make his use of it.

During these Disputes the Nobility had privily sent some of their Body to
Court to acquaint the King, that the Commons were now at their House, and had
made them sudden Proposals, out of form, but such as they should rather concur
with, than be averse to; that they were ready to join with them in offering an
Hereditary Crown to his Majesty, and the Heirs Males of his Family for ever;
which they hoped his Majesty would accept in good part: But desired to proceed
in the usual Methods, which such weighty Affairs merited, viz. by Conferences
and Deliberations, that it night appear rather an effect of their just
Sentiments of his Majesty's Valor and Conduct, than the sudden Motions of a
Tumultuous Assembly.

The King, with a great deal of mildness, as if he had been wholly unconcerned
and passive in the Case, replied; That he was obliged to them for their Designs
in favor of Him, and the Royal Family; that he hoped what they were about
would tend to the benefit of the Nation; but that a Crown intailed only on the
Heirs Males could not be so acceptable to him, as if it were given without that
Limitation; that the Government of Females had neither been a new thing at
home, nor unprosperous in Neighboring Countries: That they might consider of
it, and since it was their Gift, he would not prescribe, but it could not be
accepted by him unless it were more general.

In the mean time the Commons grew impatient, the Answer given them was not
satisfactory, and the Nobles had not yet resolved on an entire Compliance, nor
were ready to accompany them, because they had not yet an account of the
Success of their Members sent to sound the Mind of the Court. The Clergy and
Burgers therefore, led on by their Bishop and President, proceed without them
to the Palace, and were met by the prime Minister, and conducted by him to the
Hall of Audience, whither after some short time the King came to them. The
Bishop makes a long Speech, setting forth the Praises of his Majesty, and the
Cause of their waiting on him; concluding with an offer, in the name of
themselves, the two most numerous, and if he pleased most powerful Estates, of
an Hereditary and Absolute Dominion; together with the assistance of their
Hands and Purses, in case any Body should go about to obstruct so necessary and
laudable a Design for the good of the Country. The King told them in short,
That he thanked them; and in case an Universal Consent established this good
Desire of theirs, he would accept the Present they made him; but that the
Concurrence of the Nobles was necessary; which he doubted not of in the least,
when they had time to make the offer with the necessary Formalities: That he
assured the Commons of his Royal Protection, and should not be unmindful of
their Kindness, by easing them of their Grievances, and by encouraging Subjects
who had behaved themselves so valiantly, and deserved so well from him.
Concluding with his Advice to them to continue their Session till such time as
Matters were brought to perfection, and he could receive their Gift with the
Solemnity that was fitting. And thereupon dismissed them.

But the Nobles were all this while in a grievous distraction; they saw the
Commons were gone to the King without them: Their Messengers brought News back
that their Proposition of entailing the Crown on the Heirs Males, was not
pleasing, because a greater Advantage was in prospect; that this offer was
looked upon to proceed from Persons that would not have bestowed any thing, if
they could have helped it. That it was thought they pretended to merit in
giving only a part, when it was not in their power to hinder the taking the
whole. In this irresolution they broke up; and since they were to meet again at
Noon upon another Solemn Occasion, they resolved at that time to consider how
to proceed in an Affair so delicate.

Monsieur Schele a Senator, and principal Man of the Country, was that
Afternoon to be buried in great Pomp; his Body had lain some Months in State,
and according to the Custom, was to be accompanied to its Interment by all the
Nobility then in Town; this being a Parliament time was chosen for the
Ceremony, because the Nobles were all together, and a magnificent Dinner was
prepared, as is usual on the like occasions: In the height of their
Entertainment an Officer comes into the Room, and whispers some of the
principal Men that the City Gates were shut, and the Keys carried to Court: For
the King having been informed by the Governor, that two or three had privily
slipped out of Town the Night before, and being resolved that no more should
Escape out of the Net, till he had done his business, had ordered the Governor
that Morning to lock the Gates, and to let no Person in or out without special
Order. The Governor sent one Bill, the Town Major, to put this in Execution;
who as soon as he had done it, came to the House where they were met, and sat
down at Table among the Senators. This dismal News of the Officer was presently
whispered round the Company; who immediately applied themselves to him to know
what the meaning was of such an unusual Proceeding at the time of a General
Convention; They asked him what destiny was appointed them, whether they were
there to be Massacred, or what else was to be done with them? The Town-Major
calmly answered, That he believed there was no Danger toward them, that such
violent Measures would not be taken by so gracious a King; though he had indeed
given the Orders himself for the shutting the Gates; and that no Body was to
stir out of Town without leave; but that this needed not disturb or hinder them
from finishing the Work of the Day, and pursuing the Public, as well as their
Private Occasions. There wanted no more than this Confirmation from the Officer
to overthrow all the Resolution, and Consultations of the Nobles; the dread of
losing their Lives took away all thoughts of their Liberty. They immediately
dispatched Messengers both to the Court, and the Commons, to give notice of
their disposition to comply with what was formerly proposed; assuring them
likewise, that they were ready to agree to all that should be asked of them.

But the King, who had began and played his Game so well hitherto, determined
to pursue it to the utmost, and would not suffer the Gates to be opened, till
the whole Ceremony of the Inauguration was concluded, and the Homage done in
due form, and therefore ordered they should stay, till in the Face of the
People, and the Army, they had sworn Fealty, and divested themselves of all
Right, as well as Power, to cause any Disturbance, or Alteration for the future.

Three days time was requisite to prepare Matters for that fatal hour, wherein
they were to make a formal Surrender of their Liberty; the Scaffolds were
raised in the place before the Castle, and adorned with Tapestry; Orders were
given for the Soldiery, and Burgers to appear in Arms under their respective
Officers: And when all things were ready, on the 27th of October in the
Morning, the King, Queen, and Royal Family mounted on a Theater erected for
that purpose, and being placed in Chairs of State under Canopies of Velvet,
received publicly the Homage of all the Senators, Nobility, Clergy, and
Commons; which was performed kneeling. The Oath, which they were obliged to
take, was in these words:

I A. B. do Promise, and Declare, that I will be True, and Faithful to Your
Majesty, as my most Gracious King and Lord, as also to Your Royal Family; that
I will Endeavor, and Promote Your Majesty's Interest in all things, and to the
best of my Power defend you from all Danger, and Harm; and that I will
faithfully serve Your Majesty as a Man of Honor, and an Hereditary Subject
ought to do. So help me God, etc.

This Oath they were all obliged to pronounce aloud, and some Men of Quality
that were sick, or pretended to be so, were brought in Chairs. Among others one
Gersdorf, a Principal Senator, who was the only Man that opened his Mouth in
the behalf of their Expiring Liberties, saying, That he hoped, and trusted,
that his Majesty designed nothing but the Good of his People, and not to govern
them after the Turkish manner; but wished his Majesty's Successors might follow
the Example, which his Majesty would undoubtedly set them, and make use of that
unlimited Power for the good, and not the harm of his Subjects. Not one of the
rest spoke a word, or seemed to murmur in the least at what was done; and it is
observable, that among so many Great Men, who a few days before seemed to have
Spirits suitable to their Birth and Qualities, none had the Courage during
those three last days, either by Remonstrance, or any other way, to oppose in
any manner what was doing. And I have heard very intelligent Persons, who were
at that time near the King, affirm, That had the Nobles showed ever so little
Courage in asserting their Privileges, the King would not have pursued his
Point so far as to desire an Arbitrary Dominion: For he was in continual doubt,
and dread of the Event, and began to waver very much in his Resolutions; so
that their Liberties seem purely lost for want of some to appear for them.

From the Theater, those that had done Homage, went to the Council-House, where
the Nobles were called over by Name; and ordered to Subscribe the
abovementioned Declaration, which they all did.

Thus this great Affair was finished, and the Kingdom of Denmark in Four Days
time changed from an Estate little differing from Aristocracy, to as absolute a
Monarchy as any is at present in the World. The Commons have since experienced,
that the little Finger of an Absolute Prince can be heavier than the Loins of
many Nobles. Theonly comfort they have left them being to see their former
Oppressors in almost as miserable a Condition as themselves; whilst all the
Citizens of Copenhagen have by it obtained the insignificant Privilege of
wearing Swords: So that at this day not a Cobbler, or Barber stirs abroad
without a Tilter at his side, let his Purse be never so empty. The Clergy, who
always make sure Bargains, were the only Gainers in this Point; and are still
much encouraged by the Court, as the Instruments that first promoted, and now
keep the People in a due Temper of Slavery; the Passive Obedience Principle
riding Triumphant in this unhappy Kingdom.

It was but Justice, that the Court should pay well the principal Contrivers of
this great Revolution; and therefore notwithstanding the general want of Money,
Hannibal Seestede had a Present of 200000 Crowns. Swan the Superintendent, or
Bishop, was made Archbishop, and had 30000 Crowns. The President or Speaker
Nanson, 20000 Crowns. And to the People remained the Glory of having forged
their own Chains, and the Advantage of Obeying without reserve. A happiness
which I suppose no English Man will ever envy them.

CHAP. VIII.
The Condition, Customs, and Temper of the People.

ALL these do so necessarily depend upon, and are influenced by the Nature and
Change of Government, that it is easily imagined, the present Condition of these
People of all Ranks must be most deplorable; at least it appears so to an
English Man, who sees it, possibly more than to them that suffer it: For
Slavery, like a sickly Constitution, grows in time so habitual, that it seems
no Burden nor Disease; it creates a kind of laziness, and idle despondency,
which puts Men beyond hopes and fears: It mortifies Ambition, Emulation, and
other troublesome, as well as active qualities, which Liberty and Freedom
beget; and instead of them affords only a dull kind of Pleasure of being
careless and insensible.

In former Times, and even till the late Alteration in the Government, the
Nobility or Gentry (for they are here the same thing) lived in great Affluence
and Prosperity; their Country Seats were large and magnificent, their
Hospitality extraordinary, because their Plenty was so too; they lived for the
most part at home, and spent their Revenues among their Neighbors and Tenants,
by whom they were considered, and respected as so many petty Princes. In times
of Convention of the Estates, which ordinarily happened once a year, they met
their King with Retinues almost as large as his; they frequently eat, and drank
at the same Table with him, and in the debate of Public Affairs, their
Suffrages were of greatest weight, and usually carried the Point: For the
Commons were willing in a great measure to be directed by them, because they
much depended on them. In process of time this Excess of Power, as you have
heard, made most of them grow insolent, which was the chief occasion of their
fall, together with the loss of the Liberties of the whole Country. So that now
they are sunk to a very low Condition, and diminish daily both in Number and
Credit; their Estates scarce paying the Taxes imposed on them: Which makes them
grind the Faces of their poor Tenants to get an Overplus for their own
Subsistence. Nay, I have been assured by some Gentlemen of good Repute, who
formerly were Masters of great Estates, that they have offered to make an
absolute Surrender to the King of large Possessions in the Island of Zealand,
rather than pay the Taxes; which offer, though pressed with earnestness, would
by no means be accepted. And upon my further enquiry into the Reason of it, I
have been informed, that Estates belonging to those Gentlemen, who made this
offer, lying in other places, which had the good Fortune to be taxed less than
the full value of the Income, were liable to pay the Taxes of any other Estate
appertaining to the same Person, in case that other Estate were not able; so
that some have been seen with a great deal of joy declaring that the King had
been so gracious as to take their Estates from them.

Through these, and several other means, many of the ancient Families are
fallen to decay; their Country Habitations, which were like Palaces, being
ruinous, they are forced to live meanly, and obscurely in some corner of them:
Unless it be their good Fortune to procure an Employment, Civil or Military, at
Court, which is the thing they are most Ambitious of; it being indeed necessary
to secure to their Families any tolerable Subsistence, or to afford them some
shelter from the Exactions, and Injustices of the Collectors. The Civil
Employments are in no great number, nor of great value; as they seldom are in a
poor Country governed by an Army; so that few are provided for this way: The
greatest part patiently enduring their Poverty at home; where, in a short time,
their Spirits, as well as their Estates, grow so mean, that you would scarce
believe them to be Gentlemen, either by Discourse or Garb.

Ancient Riches and Valor were the only Title to Nobility formerly in this
Country; the Nobles and Gentry being, as I said before, the same thing. None
took either their Degree, or Patents of Honor from the King: But of late years
to supply the want of Riches, some few Titles of Baron or Count, and nothing
higher, have been given to Favorites; who enjoy not the same Privileges by
those Titles, as our Lords in England do, but content themselves with a few
Airy insignificant ones, which distingush them from the Common People; there
are not many, even of this kind of Nobility, I believe fifteen or twenty are
the most; these are such, who are most easy in their Fortunes, and are obliged
(that they may preserve them) to keep in with the Court by all manner of ways;
as indeed all are, who have a mind to live and eat Bread.

It Is only this kind of Nobility with Titles, that have liberty to make a Will
or Testament, and thereby to dispose of any Estate otherwise than as the Law
has already determined, that it shall fall of course: Unless such Will be
during the Life of the Testator, approved of and signed by the King; and then
it shall be of force, and valid.

It Is almost needless to mention that there is no buying, or selling of Land
here; for where an Estate is a Charge, there will be few Buyers. Neither do I
remember any one Alienation of Lands for Money, during all the time I stayed in
that Country, except some Estates, which the Queen purchased; where she paid
after the rate of 16000 Crowns for that which Thirty Years ago was valued at
60000 Crowns. There were indeed some Persons, who took Lands from the King in
lieu of Money, which they had lent the Crown; and among these I remember to
have heard of two, Monsieur Texera a rich Jew of Hamburg, and Monsieur
Marseilles, a Dutch Merchant, who was formerly established at Copenhagen. These
were forced to take Lands, or Nothing, for their Debts, which amounted to some
Hundred Thousands of Crowns; yet did these Lands yield them so little Income,
by reason of the Taxes imposed on them, though they were vast Tracts of fertile
Ground, that they would willingly have parted with them (as I was informed) for
one fifth part of their Principal.

However, in case it should happen that one who has a mind to transplant
himself to another place, could find a Purchaser for his Estate, the Law is,
That one third part of such Purchase-Money shall accrue to the King; and indeed
if there were not such a severe Law against Alienations, it is possible most of
the present Possessors would quit the Country the first Opportunity.

The King assumes to himself the Power of disposing of all Heirs and Heiresses
of any Consideration, as it is practiced in France: Not that there is any Law
for it, but upon pain of his Displeasure; which here is too weighty to be born.

Military Employments are mightily coveted by the Native Gentry, almost as much
as the Civil; and purely for the same reason that the Priests Office was among
the Jews, viz. That they may eat a piece of Bread. For it is a sure way to find
Soldiers (as long as there are Men in a Kingdom) to imitate the French King's
practice in this particular, make the Gentry poor, and render Traffic
unprofitable or dishonorable, Men of Birth must live, and one half of the
Nation, by giving up themselves to Slavery, will contribute their Assistance
afterward to put Chains upon the other.

Yet in Denmark the Natives are considered much less than Strangers, and are
more out of the Road of Preferment, whether it be that the Court can better
trust Strangers, whose Fortunes they make, than the Posterity of such whose
Fortunes they have ruined: Or whether they think their very Parts and Courage
to be diminished in proportion to their Estates and Liberty, (which appears to
be plainly the case of their common People) or for what other reason; certain
it is, that all sorts of Places, Civil and Military, are filled more by
Foreigners than Gentlemen of the Country: And in their disposal of Offices it
is remarkable, that such as are of ordinary Birth and Fortunes, are much sooner
preferred than those of contrary qualities: So that here may be found several
in the most profitable and honorable Employments who have formerly been
Serving-men, and such like; and these prove the best Executors of the Will and
Pleasure of Arbitrary Power, and therefore are caressed accordingly. There is
one further advantage in the promotion of these kind of Men; that after they
are grown rich by Extortion, and have sucked the Blood of the Poor, when
Clamours grow loud against them, the Court can with ease squeeze these Leaches,
laying all the blame of its own Oppression at their Doors; and this without the
danger of causing the discontent of any of the Nobles, upon the score of
Kindred or Alliance.

The difficulty of procuring a comfortable Subsistence, and the little security
of enjoying what shall be acquired through Industry, is a great cause of
Prodigality, not only in the Gentry, whose Condition is more easy, but also in
the very Burgers and Peasants: they are sensible that they live but from Hand
to Mouth, and therefore as soon as they get a little Money they spend it. They
live to day as the Poet advises, not knowing but what they now have may be
taken from them tomorrow. And therefore expensiveness in Coaches, Retinue,
Clothes, etc. is no where more common, nor more extravagant in proportion to
their Income, than in this Country. Parsimony is often, not only a cause, but a
sign of Riches; the more a wealthy Man has, the more he endeavors to acquire,
and to increase his stock: But here the Courtier buys no Land, but remits his
Money to the Bank of Amsterdam, or of Hamburgh; the Gentleman spends presently
on himself and his Pleasures all that he can get, for fear he should have the
Reputation of being Rich, and his Money be taken from him by Taxes, before he
has eaten or drank for it; the Merchant and Burger do the like, and subsist
purely upon Credit; there being very few of this sort in the King's Dominions
that can be called rich, or worth 100000 Rix Dollars. The Peasant or Boor, as
soon as he gets a Rix Dollar, lays it out in Brandy with all haste, lest his
Landlord, whose Slave he is, should hear of it, and take it from him. Thus --

Torva leaena lupum sequitur, lupus ipse capellam. The Trading Towns and
Villages, (if we except Copenhagen, whose Situation and Haven make it thrive a
little in spite of ill usage) are all fallen to decay. Those Buroughs which
formerly lent good Sums of Money to the Prince upon extraordinary Public
Occasions, and furnished the Hollanders yearly with ten or twelve great
Fly-boats Lading of Corn, being now not in a condition to raise 100 Rix
Dollars, or to Lade one small Ship of Rye; as may be instanced in Kiog, once a
flourisning little Seaport-Town, twenty Miles from Copenhagen, which in King
Christian the Fourth's time raised for that King's Service, in four and twenty
hours time, 200000 Rix Dollars; yet upon occasion of the last Poll Tax, I heard
that the Collectors were forced to take from this and other Towns (in lieu of
Money) old Feather beds, Bedsteads, Brass, Pewter, Wooden Chairs, etc. which
they violently took from the Poor People, who were unable to pay, leaving them
destitute of all manner of Necessaries for the use of Living.

Some Manufactures have been endeavored to be introduced, not so much with a
design of benefiting the Public, as private Courtiers, and great Men who were
the Undertakers, and expected to profit thereby: particularly that of Silks and
Drinking glasses; but in a little time all came to nothing; it being a very
sure Rule, that Trade will not be forced in a place where real Encouragements
and Advantages are not to be found, and where Property is not secured; the very
Credit of the Subject being as slender as his Riches are uncertain.

If this be the Case of the Gentleman and Burger, what can be expected to be
that of the poor Peasant or Boor? In Zealand they are all as absolute Slaves as
the Negroes are in Barbados, but with this difference, that their Fare is not
so good. Neither they, nor their Posterity, to all Generations, can leave the
Land to which they belong; the Gentlemen counting their Riches by their Stocks
of Boors, as here with us by our Stocks of Cattle; and the more they have of
these, the richer they are. In case of Purchase, they are sold as belonging to
the Free hold, just as Timber Trees are with us. There is no computing there by
numbers of Acres, but by numbers of Boors, who, with all that belongs to them,
appertain to the Proprietor of the Land. Yeomanry, which is the strength of
England, is a state not known or heard of in Denmark; but these poor Drudges,
after they have labored with all their might to raise the King's Taxes, must
pay the Overplus of the Profit of the Lands, and their own Toil, to their
Landlords, who are almost as poor as themselves. If any of these Wretches prove
to be of a diligent and improving Temper, who endeavors to live a little
better than his Fellows, and to that end has repaired his Farm-house, making it
convenient, neat, or pleasant, it is forty to one but he is presently
transplanted from thence to a naked and uncomfortable Habitation, to the end
that his griping Landlord may get more Rent, by placing another on the Land
that is thus improved: so that in some years it is likely there will be few or
no Farm-Houses, when those already built are fallen through Age or Neglect.

Another Grievance is, the Quartering and paying of the Soldiers. This was once
known in England, when the Lord Dane or Danish Soldier, quartered in the
English Yeoman's House, and domineered to purpose. Whence came the Nickname of
Lazy Loydane.
Those that know what a vexatious thing it is (over and above the Charge) to be
constantly plagued with insolent Inmates, who Lord it wherever they dwell,
will soon allow this to be a Mischief scarce supportable.

And although this Country have a tendency to be extremely populous, the Women
being exceeding fruitful, which is sufficiently proved by the vast Swarms that
in former Ages, from these Northern parts, overran all Europe; yet at present
it is but competently Peopled; vexation of Spirit, ill Diet, and Poverty, being
great Obstructions to Procreation. Within Man's Memory the Peasants lived very
happily; there was scarce any Family of them that was not Owner of a large
piece of Plate or two, besides Silver Spoons, Gold Rings, and other odd Knacks,
which they are fond of to this day, (and whenever they have any Money, will lay
it out in suchlike things, because they dare not trust themselves with the
keeping of Money, the inclination to spend it presently is so general) but now
it is a great rarity to find in a Boor's House any thing made of Silver; or
indeed any other Utensil of Value, unless it be Feather-Beds, whereof there are
better, and in greater plenty than in any place I ever saw; and which are made
use of, not only to lie upon, but also to cover with instead of Blankets.

Among all the Hardships which are imposed on these poor Peasants, that which
seemed to me one of the greatest, was the Obligation they lie under to furnish
the King, Royal Family, and all their Attendants, their Baggage and Furniture,
with Horses, and Traveling Wagons, whenever he makes any Progress (which he
often does either to Jutland or Holstein) or takes any lesser Journey in
Zealand; nay, although it be only to his Country-Houses of Fredericksburg and
Yagersburg. In these Cases all the Peasants that lie near the Road, or in that
District, are summoned to attend with their Horses and Wagons at certain
Stages, where they are to relieve each other; and this they often do, always at
their own Charges for Man's, and Horse-meat, for two or three days together, no
regard being had to the Season of Harvest, (which is the usual traveling time)
or to any other Convenience of these poor Wretches. I have frequently seen them
with hundreds of Wagons in a Company, attending the Arrival of the Court,
bewailing their sad Condition; and as soon as the King came up, and his
Coaches, with those of the other Persons of Quality, were fitted with six or
eight Boors Horses each, (for they are little bigger than Calves) then every
Lacquey seizes on his Boor and Wagon, for his own proper use; at which time,
unless his Pleasure be in all things complied with, the poor trembling Peasant
(who drives on, and takes all patiently, without replying one word) is so
beaten and abused, that it has often moved my Pity and Indignation to see it.
Neither is it only when the King himself travels, that the Boors are put to
this trouble, but whenever he pleases to give his Warrant to any Person of
Quality, or Officer, that has a Journey to make, they are obliged to this
Service and Attendance.

Apoplexies and the Falling Sickness are the Epidemical Distempers here; one
shall hardly pass through the Streets of Copenhagen, without seeing one or two
poor Creatures grovelling on the Ground in a Fit, and foaming at the Mouth, with
a Circle of Gazers and Assistants about them: I know not what to impute this
to, unless to the ill Diet of the Common sort, which is generally Salt-meats,
Stock Fish, and suchlike. Apoplexies among the better sort, often proceed
either from excessive Drinking, or from Discontent; it being very usual here to
have them die of a Slacht, as they call it, which is an Apoplexy, proceeding
from Discontent and Trouble of Mind. But by way of amends for these ugly
Distempers, there are few or none that are troubled with Coughs, Catarrhs,
Consumptions, or such like Diseases of the Lungs; so that in the midst of
Winter in the Churches, which are very much frequented, there is no noise to
interrupt the Attention due to the Preacher. I am persuaded their warm Stoves,
with the Plenty and Pureness of their Firing, (which is Beech-wood) contributes
as much to their freedom from these kinds of Maladies, as the grosness and
unwholsomness of our Coals in London does to our being so universally troubled
with them; notwithstanding the ingenious Sir William Petty be of another
Opinion: for in all other respects of Air and Situation, we have much the
advantage of them.

The Tables of the better sort are usually well furnished with Dishes, yet I
cannot commend the Cheer; because the Flesh is generally lean, and (except the
Beef and Veal) ill tasted, especially the tame Fowl, the fatning of which is an
Art not known by above two or three, who have been taught it by an English
Poulterer, lately set up at Copenhenhagen. Wether Mutton is very scarce, and
seldom good. Wild Ducks hardly to be eaten; and Plovers never. Here are no wild
Pheasants, Woodcocks, Rabbits, or Fallow Deer. Red Deer there are, but they are
the King's Game, and not to be bought for Money. The Hares are good, and the
Bacon is excellent. Now and then you meet with a Cheureuil, or small Roe Buck
in the Market, but it is generally lean. Seafish is scarce, and not good, but
the River-fish makes amends, here being the best Carp, Perch, and Craw-fish
that are to be found any where. One cannot expect extraordinary Fruits thus far
North; yet the Gentry do not want such as are very tolerable, being extremely
addicted to Gardning; and several of the Nobility being so curious, as to have
Melons, Grapes, Peaches, and all sorts of Sallads very early, and in great
perfection. The Butter is very good, but the Cheese stark naught. In general,
their way of Cookery would hardly be pleasing to an English Man.

They are much addicted to drinking; the Liquors that are most in vogue with
Persons of Condition, are Rhenish Wine, Cherry Brandy, and all sorts of French
Wine. The Men are fond of them, and the fair Sex does not refuse them. The poor
People, who are able to indulge themselves, do it in bad Beer, and Danish
Brandy, which is made of Barley.

The Gentlemen and Officers go very fine in their Dress after the French mode;
but the Ladies Winter-dress is Danish, very becoming, and convenient. The
Burgers, Servants, and even Peasants, are neat and cleanly; they love change of
ordinary white Linen, which is here made cheap; the Women-kind employing their
leisure time in Spinning. All these People have a degree of Vanity; Pride and
Poverty being often Companions to each other.

Their Marriages are usually preceded by Contracts, which will last sometimes
three, four, or more years, before they proceed to a public Wedding by the
Minister; though often the young Couple grow better acquainted before these
Formalities are dispatched. The Gentry give Portions with their Daughters; but
the Burgers and Peasants, if they be able, give Clothes, some Housholdstuff,
and a great Wedding Dinner, but nothing else till they die.

Sumptuous Burials and Monuments are much in request with the Nobility; and it
is usual to keep the Corpse of a Person of Quality in a Vault, or the Chancel of
some Church, for several Years together, till a fit opportunity to celebrate
the Funeral. The poorer sort are buried in great thick Chests; and in the
Towns, there are about a dozen of common Mourners belonging to each Parish, who
are obliged to carry, and attend them to their Graves.

The Common People are mean spirited, not Warlike in their Tempers, as
formerly; inclined to gross Cheating, and to suspect that others have a design
to cheat them; therefore unwilling to go out of a road they have been
accustomed to: insomuch that if you offer them great profit for a thing which
they have not been used formerly to sell, they will refuse to part with it, as
suspecting that you fee an advantage in such a Purchase, which as yet is
unknown to them, but which they hope to find out. I remember one instance:
Seeing great Flocks of Green Geese in the Fields near the Town, I sent to buy
some, but they being never used to sell, or eat Geese, in that Country, till
they are big and old; it was not possible to persuade any body to part with one
of them, though double the price of a big one were offered for each. They asked
what we desired to buy them for? What we would do with them? etc. for they
could not be persuaded, any one would be so foolish as to eat them whilst
young, or little; after a Week, an old Woman, to whom Money had been offered
for a dozen, came and brought four to sell, saying, That neither she, nor her
Geese, had thriven since she had refused to sell them at a good price; for the
Kite had the night before killed eight of her stock, and that now the remaining
four were at my service. Thus the Superstition of this old Woman procured us
the first Green Geese that I believe were ever eaten in Denmark; but after that
they had taken notice that we fatted, and killed them for eating, they furnished
us with them as often as desired. I would not omit this silly Story, because it
gives a more lively Idea of the Temper of the Common People, than any
Description I could make. In their Markets they will ask the same price for
stinking Meat, as for fresh; for lean, as for fat, if it be of a kind. And the
sure way not to obtain, is to seem to value, and to ask importunately, a thing
which otherwise they themselves would desire should be done. This last Remark
is not peculiar to the Common People only.

I do not see that they are good at imitating the Inventions of other
Countries; and for inventing themselves, I believe none here, since the famous
Tycho Brahe, ever pretended to it. Few or no Books are written, but what some
of the Clergy compose of Religion. Not so much as a Song, or a Tune, was made,
during three Years that I stayed there. Their Seasons of Jollity are very rare,
and since the fatal Opera about four years ago, wherein many hundred Persons
were burnt together in the old Queen's House, they content themselves with
running at the Goose on Shrove-Tuesdays, and taking their pleasure upon Sledds
in the Winter, well wrapped up in Wool or Furr. A Divertisement much in
request in this Court, and among all kinds of People. Perhaps it will be
thought too nice here to remark, That no body presumes to go in a Sledd, till
the King and Court has begun; That the King passes over a new Bridge the first.
And that the Clocks of Copenhagen strike the hours after the Court Clock.

It Is a difficult matter for Strangers to find conveniences of Lodging or
Eating in Denmark; even in Copenhagen are few or no Lodgings to be Let in
private Houses; and in the Taverns one must be content to Eat and Drink in a
public Room, into which any other Company may enter, and do the like at
another Table; unless one pretends to higher matters than ordinary.

The Language is very ungrateful, and not unlike the Irish in its whining
complaining Tone. The King, great Men, Gentry, and many Burghers, make use of
the High Dutch in their ordinary Discourse, and of French to Strangers. I have
heard several in high Employment, boast that they could not speak Danish. Yet
very many of the Monosyllables in this Tongue are the same with the English;
and without doubt we owe the Original of them to the Danes, and have retained
them ever since they were Masters of our Country.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Revenue.

THE Revenue of the King of Denmark arises from three Heads: First, The Taxes
and Impositions of his own Subjects: Secondly, Customs paid by Foreigners:
Thirdly, Rents of his own Estate, Crown Lands, and Confiscations. Each of these
shall be treated of apart.

The Taxes paid by his own Subjects, are in some Cases fixed, and constant, in
others arbitrary. When I distinguish between these two, it is not meant that
the King's Power is limited in any wise; but only that he chooses, in some
Taxes, to follow Rules and Measures established by himself, in all others he
varies often.

Of the first sort are, First, The Customs, or Toll, for Import and Export:
Secondly, The Excise, commonly called the Consumption; which is upon Tobacco,
Wine, Salt, Grain, etc. and all Eatables and Drinkables brought into any Town
of the King of Denmark's Dominions to be spent. These are the great Taxes, and
the last is severe enough. There are besides, of this kind, smaller Taxes; as
that 3 dly upon Marriages, where every couple Marrying, pay so much for the
License, according to their quality; this is pretty high, and comes in some
Cases to a good number of Rix Dollars for a License. 4 thly, A Tax for marked
Paper, whereon all Bonds, and Contracts, Copies of Judicial Proceedings,
Grants, Passports, etc. must be written, otherwise they are invalid. And this
is an uneasy Tax; there being of this kind of Paper, which amounts to several
Rix Dollars a Sheet. Fisthly, Taxes for Brewing, Grinding, and other things,
which shall be hereafter spoken of. But these, and such like, are certain; that
is to say, every one knows how much he is to pay, according to an Ordonnance at
present in force; which however may be altered as the King pleases.

Of the second sort are Impositions upon Land; which is reckoned, not by Acres,
but Farms; viz. so much for every proportion of Land that will bear the sowing
of a Tun of hard Corn. Wheat and Rye are called hard Corn, and according to the
Fertility of the Land, Seasonableness of the Year, Ability of the Landlord,
each Farm is taxed higher or lower; but seldom too low.

Secondly, Poll-money, which is sometimes raised twice in a year, and is
imposed according to the Substance of the Person taxed; which is guessed at,
not fixed, as in other places, where all of a Rank pay equally.

Thirdly, Fortification-Tax, or Money raised for, or upon pretense of making
Fortifications for the Defense of the Kingdom, etc.

Fourthly, Marriage-Tax, when a Daughter of Denmark is to be disposed of; whose
Portion commonly is but 100000 Crowns: but under this Name, occasion is taken
to raise more.

Fifthly, Trade-money, wherein every Trades man is taxed for the liberty of
exercising his Trade, according to the Gain which it is computed he makes by
it: and he is moreover obliged to quarter Soldiers.

Sixthly, Ground-Rent for all Houses in Copenhagen, or any other Towns in
Denmark; which are taxed by the King, when he pleases, according to the
goodness of the House, the ability of the Possessor, or the greatness of the
Sum he intends to levy at that time.

In Holstein and Sleswick the Lands are taxed by Ploughs; each Plough paying so
much a Month.

To begin with those of the first sort, whereof the Rates are known and fixed;
it would be convenient, in speaking of the Customs and Excise, to transcribe
the whole Book of Rates, but I fear to be too tedious; however not to be
wanting in any thing material, and to give a taste, whereby to guess at the
rest; and measure Hercules by his Foot, some Particulars shall be set down,
whereof to make a right Judgment, a due regard must be had always, not only to
the Plenty and Scarcity of Money in a (...)ountry, but also to the goodness of
a Commodity. For instance, when I speak of a fat Ox, it must not be imagined
that we mean such as are usual in our English Markets; but rather such as we
see come from Wales or Scotland. And so of other things in the Consumption Tax.
And a Rix Dollar, considering the scarcity of Money, ought to be computed to go
further than three crowns with us. Import Customs.
RD. Stiv. I Ship pound of Iron Bars imported, pays 02 00 of wrought Iron 05 16
of Copper 00 32 of Wire one sort 15 00 of Wire another sort 20 00 of Pewter
Vessels 15 00 of Pewter unwrought 00 18 of Lead 00 12 100 weight of Steel 00 24
one pound of Quicksilver 00 02 one Ell of Cloth of any value 00 (...) one Ell
of plain Silks 00 (...) one Hat 00 3(...) One piece of Kersey of 20 Else 01 08
12 pair of Worsted Stockings 01 12 50 Else of plain Ribband 00 24 24 Else of
Ribband with Gold or silver in them, 00 13 12 pair of Gloves 00 24 one Wastcoat
knit 00 12 one other Wastcoat 01 05 one Horse 01 32 one dozen of Knives 00 33
one Last of Coals 00 15 100 of Lemons 00 08 100 pound of Capers 00 40 of
Currants 01 02 of Raisins 00 32 of Cinnamon 06 00 of Confections 04 08 of Cork
03 00 of Nutmegs 04 08 of Sealing-wax 04 08 Customs or Toll. Consumption or
Excise. RD. Stiv. RD. Stiv. One Barrel of Tallow 03 00 01 16 one pound of
Tobacco Leaves 00 00 00 03 one pound of Tobacco Rolls or Snuft 00 04 00 03 One
Barrel of Barley 00 20 besides the consumption. one Barrel of Flower of all
sorts 00 26 one Barrel of salt Beef 01 05 one Ream of Paper 00 05 one Barrel of
Butter 03 00 00 32 one Ship-pound of Cheese 03 00 00 14 one Last of Span Salt
15 00 00 36 one Last of French Salt 08 00 00 36 one Last of Lunenburg Salt 24
00 00 36 one Hogshead of French Wine 06 32 05 00 one Hogshead of Vinegar 04 32
03 00 one Ahm of Rhenish, Canary, or other Strong Wines 08 00 06 00 one Ahm of
French or Rhenish Brandy. 10 32 03 16 one Hogshead of Sider 04 32 02 16 one
Barrel of salt Herrings 01 32 00 04 of salt Salmon 01 32 00 12 of Beer 02 00 00
32 Feathers one Lispound 02 12 00 02 Excise or Consumption. RD. Stiv. An Ox
brought into any Town pays at the Gate 01 16 But into Copenhagen 02 00 One Calf
into Copenhagen 00 16 elsewhere 00 08 A Sheep, Swine, or Goat 00 06 A Chevreuil
00 32 A Pigg 00 01 A Hare 00 04 A Turkey 00 03 A Goose 00 01^ A pair of Pigeons
00 01^ of Ducks 00 02 of Partridges 00 04 of Blackbirds or Thrushes 00 01
Twenty Eggs 00 00^ Twenty dried Eeles, Breams, or the like 00 02 Twenty
Pickerels dried 00 01 One Salmon 00 06 One Pail of Milk 00 02 One Barrel of
salted Flesh or 01 00 Tripes which comes in by Land to Copenhagen 01 00 to
other Towns 00 32 The like by Sea to Copenhagen 00 32 to other Towns 00 24 One
side of smoked or salted Pork 00 02 One Barrel of Tongues 01 00 One Firkin of
Honey 00 24 One Barrel of Beans or Pease 00 08 of Parsnips or Turnips 00 01^
One Bushel of Nuts 00 02 Four Bunches of Onions 00 00^ One Barrel of Hopps 00
06 One Firkin of Soap 00 12 of Mustard Seed 00 04 of Hempseed or Linseed 00 01^
A Horse-load of Hay entering the Gates 00 02 A Horse-load of Charcoal 00 04 of
Straw 00 02 of green Keal or Colworts 00 01 of Turf or Wood by Land 00 01 of
Beech wood by Sea 00 04 of short Wood 00 02 of Birch-wood 00 01 of Bark 00 02
Planks, Oak-boards, and Firrdeals exported, pay One per Cent. per Last,
according to the Ships burden. Custom. RD. Stiv. A Mast for a Ship of 28 Palms
long, pays 30 00 of 21 Palms 11 00 of 13 Palms 01 24 Between 12 and 8 Palms per
dozen 02 24 Under 5 Palms per dozen 00 12 The rest proportionably Consumption
or Excise. RD. Stiv. One Doe-skin undressed 00 02 dressed 00 04 Ten
Calves-skins 00 02 Ten Sheepskins 00 01 One Ox-hide 00 02 Tanned 00 04 Ten
Hides of English Leather 00 24 One Barrel of Rye ground for 00 16 Bread, pays
to the King for the grinding ground for Brandy 00 32 One Barrel of Wheat ground
for flower 00 40 of Malt for a Brewer 00 32 for a private House 01 00 of Oats
for Grout 00 08

A Rix Dollar is something short of an English Crown in value; a Stiver is more
than an English Penny. 48 Stivers make a Rix Dollar. One Lispound is the same
with that we call a Stone. One Ship-pound is 20 Lispound. A Danish Ell is a
third less than an English, or thereabouts.

There are public Mills appointed and farmed to certain persons by the King,
where all the Inhabitants of Copenhagen are bound to grind upon a Penalty, and
to pay the Sums abovementioned for grinding: it being not permitted to any
private Person or Brewer to grind his own Malt, nor Baker his own Bread-corn.

I need say no more of the Tax for Marriage Licenses, or that for the use of
marked Paper in Bonds and Contracts, than has been already mentioned.

Those of the second sort, viz. Land Tax, House-Tax, Poll-Money, and
Fortification-Money, which are sometimes laid high, and sometimes low, can have
no settled estimate made of them; however, I shall endeavor to compute them in
the summing up the total of the Revenue, according to what they have yielded of
late years, which was pretty high; and according to the utmost they can bear at
present, or may probably for the future.

Some years ago, since the last War with Sweden, the King caused a Valuation
and a Register to be made of all the Houses in the Cities and Buroughs within
his Dominions, as likewise an admeasurement of all Lands in the Country, that
he might the better proportion the Taxes he should have occasion to levy. These
are now applotted and raised according to the very utmost of the Peoples
Abilities; neither do I believe that in case of a War or other exigency, they
could possibly bear a greater burden; for in the Country the Gentleman and
Peasant are in a manner ruined; in the Cities and Buroughs, Houses pay yearly
for Ground-Tax four per Cent. of the whole value that the Ground is rated at,
if it were to be purchased; and this is estimated by Commissioners appointed
for that purpose, according to the quantity of the Ground, or the convenience
of the Station: moreover, for every hundred Rix Dollars which the Ground of any
House is rated at, the Inhabitants are obliged to quarter one Soldier. Thus a
Rhenish-Wine Vintner at Copenhagen, and he none of the richest, has the Ground
of his House valued at 900 Rix Dollars, he consequently pays 36 Rix Dollars
yearly for Ground-tax, and quarters nine Soldiers upon the account of his
House, and three more upon the account of his Trade. The like proportion is
observed toward all others, with respect to their Houses and Trades.

Here is commonly one Poll-Tax at least every year; or if it chance to miss one
year, it is usually doubled the next. The lowest Assessment is according to the
following proportion, vi.z a Burgher esteemed worth eight or ten thousand Rix
Dollars, pays for himself four Rix Dollars, for his Wife four Rix Dollars, for
every Child two Rix Dollars, for every Servant one Rix Dollar, for every Horse
one Rix Dollar. An ordinary Alehouse-keeper pays for himself one Rix Dollar,
for his Wife one Rix Dollar, for every Child 24 Stivers, for every Servant 16
Stivers.

About two years ago there was a Poll-Tax higher than ordinary; and at that
time this proportion was observed: One of the Farmers of the Customs paid for
himself 24 Rix Dollars, for his Wife 16 Rix Dollars, for her Maid two Rix
Dollars, for every other Servant one Rix Dollar. A Burger esteemed worth six or
eight thousand Rix Dollars paid for himself six Rix Dollars, for his Wife four
Rix Dollars, for every Child two Rix Dollars, for every Servant one Rix Dollar;
and thus did others according to their several Abilities.

The Fortification Schatt is a Tax with a witness: in that which was levied in
the Year 91, these were the Rules for payment. All the King's Servants paid 20
per Cent. of their yearly Salaries. All the Officers of the Army, beginning
with Captains, and so upwards, 30 per Cent. of their Pay. (These used to be
freed from former Taxes of this kind.) The Nobility and Gentry paid in
proportion to their Rank and Estate. The highest, as Count Guldenlieu, etc.
from seven hundred to one thousand Rix Dollars each. Burgers were taxed
according to their supposed Abilities; the richer sort from one hundred to four
hundred Rix Dollars, each; the middle sort of Merchants worth six or eight
thousand Rix Dollars paid forty Rix Dollars; an Apothecary sixty eight Rix
Dollars; a Vintner fifty five Rix Dollars; ordinary Burgers eight or ten Rix
Dollars each: the poorer sort one or two Rix Dollars, and so forth. This sort
of Tax has been accounted equal with another called the Kriegs Sture, imposed
at the beginning of the War; and that amounted to near seven hundred thousand
Rix Dollars in all. But it is most certain, the People are not now able to pay
it as they were then, and consequently it will not be so much by a great deal.

When the King's only Daughter was about to be married to the present Elector
of Saxony, a Marriage-Tax was intended, and had certainly been levied in case
the Marriage had gone forward: but the one, as well as the other, is now no
more spoken of, though no Kingdom in Europe can boast of a more deserving
Princess.

I suppose by this time an English Reader has taken a Surfeit of this Account
of Taxes which the Subjects of Denmark do pay; but it ought to be a great
Satisfaction to him to reflect, that through the Happiness of our Constitution,
and the Prudence and Valor of our King, the People of this Nation, though
enjoying ten times more natural and acquired Advantages than the Danes, which
causes more than ten times their affluence; do not for all that pay toward the
carrying on the most necessary and just War, the third part in proportion to
what the King of Denmark's Subjects do in time of a profound Peace: Pax
servientibus gravior est quam liberis bellum. Tacit. Lib. An. 10.

The second Head from whence proceeds a considerable Branch of this King's
Revenue, is the Customs or Toll paid by Foreigners.

These pay something more for imported Goods than the Natives and Burgers, and
more Anchorage-money in the Ports. The Danes, from their own Ports to their own
Ports, paying four Stivers per Last; from Foreign Ports ten Stivers per Last,
whereas Foreign Ships pay twelve Stivers. But that which is most considerable
to the King, is the Toll paid by all Strangers (except the Swedes) that pass
the Sound; and the Customs of Norway.

I have in another place given an ample Account of the Original and Progress of
this Toll, together with the Copy of a Letter which makes a Computation of the
present Revenue arising from thence; so that I shall not need to repeat what I
formerly said; only in general, that it is much fallen from what it was in the
time of the last War, when all that passed paid; it came then to about 143000
Rix Dollars yearly. In the Years 1690, and 1691, it amounted not to much more
than 65000 Rix Dollars, at which rate we may judge it likely to continue. This
belongs to the King's Privy Purse, and comes not under the Management of the
Treasurer.

The Revenues of Norway arise chiefly from the Tenths of Timber and Tar, of
Fish and Oil, and the Customs of the same; which being bought and exported by
Foreign Merchants, the Sums that come from thence into the King's Coffers are
principally owing to them. It is true, there are Silver Mines, and Iron, and
one of Copper, but these are of small value. The Excise, and the other Taxes of
the Natives, are the same with those of Denmark; which these of Norway are
better enabled to pay, because of their Foreign Trade; although this also is
considerably diminished since their late Quarrel with the Dutch; who thereupon
gave over their Traffic with them, and transferred it for some time to Sweden.
These Differences have indeed been since adjusted, but it is a hard matter to
reduce Trade thoroughly into the former Channel, when once it has taken another
course. The Danes are of opinion, that neither the English nor Dutch can
possibly want the Norway Trade for their Naval Stores: but if a right use were
made of our Plantations in the West Indies, they may chance to find themselves
mistaken.

It may not be amiss to mention in this place, though it be something foreign
to the Matter in hand; that just before the present War with France, the
Trading Ships belonging to all the King of Denmark's Dominions, were computed
to amount to about four hundred, besides little Barks that bring Wood, etc.
because the number of them had been lessened almost two thirds within thirty
years. But at present, since the Trade of Europe has been in a manner carried
on by the Neutral Princes, it cannot otherwise be, but that the number must be
considerably increased within these four years; though as yet it comes not up
to what it formerly did.

To conclude with Norway, which is divided into the Southern and Northern
Provinces. The whole Revenue from the first of these amounts yearly to between
five and six hundred thousand Rix Dollars; and from the last to between two and
three hundred thousand Rix Dollars; and so the Total may be communibus annis
800000 Rix Dollars.

The exactest Computation that I have known made of the English, Dutch and
French Trades to these Parts in Times of Peace, ran thus: Of English there
passed the Sound yearly, from two hundred Vessels to three hundred; of Dutch
from one thousand to eleven hundred; of French from ten to twelve; and the like
proportion to Norway. By which it is easily judged, that the Friendship and
Trade of France ought to come in no competition with that of England and
Holland; since the King of Denmark owes so large a share of his best Revenue to
these last, and so little to the other.

The third and least considerable Branch of the Revenue arises from the Rents
of the Crown Lands, and confiscated Estates. The latter are in the King's
hands, either upon account of forfeiture for Treason, and other Crimes, or by
reason of Debt and Non-payment of Taxes; and it is to be supposed these will
increase every day in proportion to the Poverty of the Country; since, as I
formerly said, many would be glad, rather to surrender their Estates to the
King, than pay the Taxes imposed on them.

But notwithstanding this Addition of Lands, the King is so far from being the
richer, that he is the poorer for it: for upon the King's becoming possessor of
any Man's Estate, immediately the great pains and care ceases which was
formerly taken to improve it, and make it yield as much as it could; and it
becomes almost desolate, either through the negligence or little encouragement
of the Tenants: generally it turns to Forest, and contributes to his
Diversion, though little to his Purse; and the Houses run to decay. So do the
Royal Palaces, whereof there are a great many on the Crown Lands, few of them,
except Fredericksburg, being in a Condition to be dwelt in. For which reason it
is a hard matter to make a just Calculation what yearly Revenue these afford:
and that which they do yield goes for the most part among the Courtiers, who
have the Government of the King's Houses, the Supervisorships of his Parks,
Forests, and Farms, with the Services of his Boors, and Tenants. So that I
believe we should rather over, then under reckon them, if we compute the clear
yearly profit of these to amount to 200000 Rix Dollars.

I endeavored to know from an exact and understanding Person there, how much
the running Cash of those Kingdoms might probably be: Whose Answer was in these
Words: It is very difficult to make any rational Computation of the running
Cash of these Kingdoms; but certainly it is but very little, and not near the
hundredth part of that of England: for excepting a very few, none have any Cash
by them; the Trading People, through whose hands it runs, being generally Men
of no Substance, but indebted over Head and Ears to their Creditors at
Amsterdam and Hamburg, it comes no sooner in, but it is paid out. Moreover, the
Cash of the Nation runs yearly out, by what the Officers of the Army, who are
Foreigners, can clear; for all that they transport to other Countries: likewise
by what diverse of the Ministers of State can scrape together; since it is
observed, that few or none of them purchase any Lands, but place their Money in
the Banks of Amsterdam and Hamburg. Furthermore, by what the overbalance of
Trade carries away; for this Country consumes more of Foreign Commodities, than
its own Product can countervail. And all this makes me believe, that there is
but an inconsiderable running Cash here; and very much of that which runs among
the People is Brass-money, which is not worth any ones while to Export:
Besides, the very Silver Coin has a great mixture of Brass in it.

From the whole I conclude, that there is a moral Impossibility all these Taxes
and Impositions should continue. The weight of them is already so great, that
the Natives have reason rather to wish for, than defend their Country from an
Invader; because they have little or no Property to lose, and may probably
thereby mend their Condition, when there is scarce a possibility of making it
worse. There seems to be a great sense of this in the Court, and therefore an
Army composed of Foreigners is depended on. Here follow the Particulars of the
Revenue. Rix Dollars. Toll of the Sound 65000 All the rest of the Toll of
Denmark farmed at 165000 The Consumption or Excise of Copenhagen, farmed at
140000 The Consumption of the rest of Denmark 140000 Smaller Taxes in Denmark
100000 Poll-Tax, Fortification-Tax, Ground-Rents, Hardcorn-Tax 1000000 All the
Revenue of Norway 700000 King's Estate, Crown Lands, etc. 200000 Iseland farmed
for 27000 Oldenburg and Delmenhorst 80000 Toll upon the Weser 5000 Feroe,
Greenland, etc. 0 Rix Dollars 2622000

It must be observed, that the Poll-Tax, and the Fortification-Tax, are never
both raised the same year; so that there must be deducted out of that Sum about
400000 Rix Dollars in lieu of one of those Taxes; and then the Sum total of the
whole Revenue of the King of Denmark will amount every year to about two
Millions two hundred twenty two thousand Rix Dollars.

CHAP. X.
Of the Army, Fleet, and Fortresses.

HAving done with the Revenue, I come in the next place to show how those Sums
are expended: And it is certain, that the levying of them is not more grievous
to the Subject than the Reason for which they are levied, viz. the Maintenance
of a great standing Army: so that the People are Contributors to their own
Misery; and their Purses are drained in order to their Slavery. Thus the King
of France makes the rich Towns he takes be at the Charge of building Cittadels
to keep themselves in awe: and it is that Master of the Art of Reigning, as his
Flatterers call him, that has instructed the Court of Denmark, as well as the
other Princes and States of Europe, the pernicious Secret of making one part of
the People, both the Bridle and Scourge of the other; which in time must needs
end in a general Desolation.

The King of Denmark has been but too apt a Pupil to such a Master, and has
endeavored even to exceed his Original; which he finds to his cost at this
day, in raising more Men than his Country can maintain. Soldiers are, through
I know not what mistaken Policy, esteemed the Riches of the Northern Kings, and
other German Princes; for when they make an estimate of each others Wealth, it
is not by the usual and ancient manner of Computation, the Fertility or Extent
of the Territory, the Traffic, Industry, Number, or Riches of the People; but
by so many Horse and Foot. For the subsistence of which they are forced, after
they have eaten up their own Subjects, to make use of a hundred cruel and
unjust Shifts, to the Ruin of their Neighbors. And when they cannot accomplish
such a destructive Project in the manner they wish, then they are constrained
to foment Quarrels between more potent Princes, that they may have the
opportunity of selling to one or other those Forces which themselves cannot
possibly maintain: so that at present Soldiers are grown to be as saleable
Ware, as Sheep or Oxen, and are as little concerned when they are sold; for
provided the Officers be rendered content by the Purchaser, in having liberty to
plunder the laborious and honest Country People in their Marches, and a fat
Winter-quarter, with Permission to defraud their own Men of their Pay: the
common Soldier goes with no more sense than a Beast to the Slaughter; having no
such Sentiment, as Love of Honor, Country, Religion, Liberty, or any thing
more than mere fear of being hanged for a Deserter.

But this mischievous Custom of Princes esteeming Soldiers the only true
Riches, was first begun and established by the French King, and is grown
general by his Care to cultivate this Opinion in the Minds of the German
Princes, whose poor Countries he foresees will be soon ruined by such a
practice. This he principally aims at, and it has brought Matters to such a
pass, that War and Destruction are grown absolutely necessary. For as all Men
that lay up Wealth never think they have enough; so these that consider
Soldiers as the only Riclies, never cease enlarging their Number, till they are
necessitated for their Subsistence, either to come to Blows with their
Neighbors, or to create Animosities between other; wherein they have found the
knack of being employed, and receiving Pay without interessing themselves in
the Quarrel. Where this will end, God Almighty knows, and can only prevent the
apparent Mischiefs threatened by it, viz. the universal Misery and Depopulation
of Europe. For since this Practice is grown so general, none of these Kings or
Princes, though endowed with a more peaceable Spirit and better Judgment than
the rest, dares lead the Dance, and disarm, for fear of his Armed Neighbors,
whose Necessities make them wait only for an opportunity to fall upon him that
is worst provided to make Resistance: And this is none of the least Calamities
which the French Tyranny has forced upon the World, having reduced all the
Princes and Commonwealths of it to this hard choice; either to submit
themselves to an intolerable Foreign Yoke, or maintain Vipers at home to gnaw
their own Bowels.

But the Consequences of these unjust Practices have been more pernicious to
Denmark, than to the French King that set the Example; the Toad may emulate the
Ox, and swell, but he shall sooner burst, than equal him. The one goes on in a
course of prosperous Tyranny; but the other through an ill Calculation of his
own Strength, which is no way proportionable to his Ambition, never hitherto
throve in any of his Attempts upon his Neighbors. Hamburg is yet a Free City,
and the Duke of Holstein restored to his Possessions; whilst Schonen, Halland,
Bleking, and Yempterland remain in the Possession of the Swedes; who in taking
up Arms for their own Defense, have had the Fortune to revenge the Injury. And
the Danes are constrained to acquiesce in the Loss of those their best
Provinces, without any rational hopes of ever recovering them.

A List of the Horse and Foot in the Service of the King of Denmark, which
belonged particularly to Denmark, Holstein, and Oldenburg.
HORSE
Men. REgiment of Danish Guards, consisting of six Troops, 75 Men in each
Troop, Lieutenant General Pless Colonel, with Officers of all sorts 500
Regiment of Holstein Guards, consisting of nine Troops, each fifty with the
Officers, Colonel Bass 450 Col. Berensdorf s Regiment, nine Troops 450 Col.
John Rantzaw nine Troops 450 Col. Rave nine Troops 450 Col. Swanwedle nine
Troops 450 Col. Bassum nine Troops 450 Col. Nemerson nine Troops 450 Col. Hulst
nine Troops 450 Col. Sturk nine Troops 450 Col. Otto Rantzaw nine Troops 450
Col. Gam nine Troops 450 Total 5450
DRAGOONS.
Men. Baron Lyondale Colonel 500 Raised most in Norway.
Col. Be 500 Col. Habercas 500 Total 1500
FOOT.
Regiment of Guards, Duke of Wirtemberg Colonel 1400 Note, that these 7
Regiments were greater before that Battalions were taken out of each of them
which were sold to his Majesty, and now serve under the Duke of Wirtemberg's
Command in Flanders.
Queen's Regiment, Col. Passaw 1200 Prince Royal's Regiment, Col. Crage 1200
Prince George's Regiment, Count Alefeldt 1100 Prince Christian's Regiment,
Brig. Elemberg 1000 Zealand Regiment, Col Tramp 1200 Funen Regiment, Col.
Brown 1100 Lieutenant General Schack's Regiment 1800 Lamsdorf's Regiment 1200
Regiment of Curlanders, Col. Pottcamer 1000 Marine Regiment, Col. Gersdorf 1000
Oldenburg Regiment, Col. Bieulo 2000 Total 15200
Note, That by virtue of a Treaty concluded with the Emperor, there were sent
lately into Hungary part of the forenamed Troops under the Command of Col.
Rantzaw; Viz.

One Battalion of Lieutenant General Schack's Regiment.

One Battalion of Col. Pottcamer's Regiment.

One Regiment of Horse taken from the former Colonel, and given to one
Colonel Wire.

Colonel Bee's Regiment of Dragoons, which may be deducted from the Sum Total
at the end.

Men. Fuzeliers, Canoniers, and Bombardiers in Denmark, Norway, Holstein, etc.
1800 Sum Total of the Foot besides Officers 17000
A List of the Forces in Norway.
One Regiment of Horse consisting of 9 Troops, Commanded by Col. Rechle 456 One
Regiment of Dragoons, Commanded by Col. Marshal 800
FOOT.
Bergen Regiment, Col. Ed. Ken 1200 Aggerhuy's Regiment, Col. Housman 1000
Smaland Regiment, Brigadier Tritstaw 1000 Upland Regiment, Col. Brockenhuysen
1000 Westland Regiment, Col. Arnauld 1100 Drontheim Regiment, Col. Schults 1200
A Marine Regiment 600 Two new raised Regiments, one Commanded by Col.
Bunenberg, the other by -- 2000 Two free Companies as Drontheim 200 9300
Reserves 5000
These Reserves are such as receive no Pay in time of Peace, but are like our
Militia, only they have Clothes given them once in two years; and are obliged
to meet and Exercise every Sunday, if the Weather be fair.

So that the King of Denmark's Landforces, consisting of Horse and Dragoons in
Denmark, Holstein, etc. 6950 Foot in the same 17000 Horse and Dragoons in
Norway 1256 Foot in Norway, including the Reserves 14300 In all are 39506 But
if you exclude the Reserves, with about 2500 men that were sent to Hungary, the
Sum total will amount to (besides Officers of the Foot) 32006
A great Regiment of Foot before the Battalions were drawn out of them for the
King of England's Service, consisted of Nineteen Companies, and so it will be
again when these Forces return to Denmark. In the Guards were a great many more.

The charge of one of these great Regiments of Foot amounts to 90000 Rix
Dollars a Year, thus; R.D. St. 1 Captain's pay per Month 20 00 2 Lieutenants,
11 Rix Dollars each 22 00 3 Sergeants pay 4 R.D. bread 32 st. to each in all 18
32 1 Fourier 3 Corporals pay and bread, 3 R. D. 32 Stivers each 11 00 2
Carpenters 10 Gefreiders 3 R.D. 8 St. each 44 16 2 Drummers 88 Common Soldiers
2 R.D. 32 Stivers each 234 32 350 32 For nineteen Companies 6662 32 The
Granadiers have half a Rix Dollar per Man more 54 24 This is per Month 6717 08
And per Year 80606 00 Each Captain has per Month for recruiting, 8 R.D. which
for 19 Companies in 12 Months amounts to 1824 00 The Colonel has more then
his Captain's pay per Month 30 R.D. R.D. Stiv. 2 Lieut. Colonels per Month
more 40 2 Majors per Month more 20 and in a year 1680 00 And to a Regiment are
5 Ensigns 50 per Month 140 Total 84110 00

The Remainder of the 90 thousand Rix Dollars runs up for the other Officers,
Auditor, Quartermaster, Surgeon, Powder, Shot, and other necessary Expenses.

The Common Soldier receives but 17 Stivers a week; the rest goes for Bread,
Quarters, and Clothes, which they have once in three years from head to foot;
and in the midst of those three years, Shoes, Stockins, Breeches, Shirt, and
Cravat. It Is permitted to the Common Soldiers to work where they are quartered;
but then during this permission, their Officers receive all the benefit of
their pay.

The Foot, both Officers and Soldiers, are for the most part Strangers of all
Countries, whom Choice or Fortune brings thither; Germans, Poles, Courlanders,
Dutch, Swedes, Scotch, Irish, and now and then an English Seaman, whom they
make drunk after a long Voyage, and inveigle him by fair Promises, in that
humor, to take some of the King's Money. The Natives are, through their
dispirited temper, thought very improper to make Soldiers; and besides, the
Landlords, whose Slaves they are, can hinder them from entering into the King's
Service, and can remand them, if any should offer so to do; as has been
frequently practiced by them, to avoid Misery at home, and to exchange one
Slavery for another.

The Officers of the Horse receive no more Pay in time of Peace, than those of
the Foot. The Troopers, who are generally Natives, and none of the best
Soldiers, are maintained every one by his Peasant, who is bound to give him and
his Horse, Meat, Drink, House-room, etc besides to the value of six shillings
sterling a Month; half of which Money goes to his Colonel toward his mounting.

The Dragoons are in somewhat a better condition, because they are not obliged
to keep Horses, but in time of War; besides, in Holstein they have larger Pay
than in Denmark.

In Norway the Forces cost but little, in comparison of what they do elsewhere;
for besides the Pay of the Officers, and the Clothing of the Soldiers, not much
Money is expended; each single Soldier having Free Quarter amongst the Boors.
It is to be noted, that the Officers of this Army are, for the most part,
fourteen or eighteen Months in Arrear of Pay; so that the best part of their
Maintenance is out of the Common Soldiers Subsistence Money.

The Names of the General Officers.
Lieutenant-Generals.
Count Wedel Marshall. Count Guldenlieu Viceroy of Norway. Duke of Wirtemberg.
Commandant Schack. Monsieur Plessen of the Horse. Monsieur Dumeny.
Major-Generals.
Monsieur De Cormaillon. Monsieur Maspack of the Horse. Master of the Ordnance
is Coll. Monk.
Thus much shall suffice for the Land. I come now to speak of the Sea-Forces.

The Names of the Admirals, are
Admiral General Monsieur Juel. Vice Admiral Bielk. Vice Admiral Spaan.
Vice Admiral Gedde. Rere-Admiral Hoppe. Rere-Admiral Van Stucken.
There are in Copenhagen 3000 Seamen kept in constant Pay, who go not to Sea
unless in time of War, but have a certain small allowance of Money, with a
constant weekly provision of Salt Flesh, Stock Fish, Meal, Grout, etc. given
them out of the Public Storehouses, for the maintenance of themselves, and
Families. They have moreover several Streets of small Houses, like Baraques,
built regularly for them, by King Christian the Fourth, in one of the
Out-skirts of Copenhagen within the Works; where they live Rent-free, and where
they leave their Wives and Children when they go to Sea. Their business in time
of Peace is to work on the Holm; which is a large Yard with Docks in it, to
build Shipping, over against the King's Palace in Copenhagen. Here they are
employed by turns in all laborious Works belonging to Ships, Guns, Anchors,
Cables, drawing of Timber, etc. and so painful is this Toil esteemed, that
Criminals of the highest kind are usually condemned to work on this Holm for a
certain number of years, or during life, according to the nature of the
Offense. Once a year generaly, to find exercise for these, some of the Men of
War are rigged and equipped with their Guns, etc. and drawn out of Port to fail
up and down, between that and Elsignor, for three or four Weeks, or longer,
according as the good Weather lasts. The pay of these Mariners in Money is but
8 Rix Dollars yearly for each; and as small as it is, it is so ill discharged,
that they mutined several times, of late years, for want of it, and even
besieged the King in his Palace, till some signal Severity toward the
principal Mutiniers quelled them. There is usually a year and a halfs Arrears
owing to them, and often more; which is the better born, because of their
weekly Allowance in Provision; although that be very scanty, especially to such
as have many Children to feed.

The best Seamen belonging to the King of Denmark are the Norwegians; but most
of these are in the Service of the Dutch, and have their Families established
in Holland; from whence it is scarce likely they will ever return home, unless
the Dutch use them worse, or the Danes better than hitherto they have done; for
the Danish Sea-provision is generally very bad.

All the Officers of the Fleet are in constant Pay, as well in time of Peace as
War, which makes them less given to plunder, than those who make use of the
short time they are in Commission to enrich themselves as fast as they can.

A List of the King of Denmark's Fleet.
Ships. Guns. Men Christianus Quintus 100 650 Prince Frederick 84 600 Elephant
84 600 Three Crowns 84 600 Norway Lion 84 600 Prince George 82 600 Cour Prince
82 590 Mercurius 76 510 Mars 76 500 Three Lions 70 490 Drake 70 490 Charlotta
Amelia 68 480 Anna Sophia 66 470 Swan 66 470 Christianus Quartus 64 430
Fredericus Tertius 56 400 Guldenlieu 56 390 Christiania 58 390 Oldenburg 56 360
Lintworm 49 330 Sleswick 42 300 Fero 54 380 Angel 52 300 Delmenhorst 50 300
Swedish Falcon 48 250 Neptune 46 220 Sword-fish 44 210 Tumbler 42 200 Hummer 34
160 Danish Meremaid 30 140 Dragon 28 140 White Falkon 26 120

Small Ships and Snaws.
The Tygar. New Elephant, a Yacht. Phoenix Galley, a Bomb-boat. Minden. Pacan.
Little Elephant, a Yacht. Swermer. The Ape.
No Fireships.

In all 32 Ships. 1927 Guns. 12670 Men.

This Fleet was never set to Sea thus equipped; but this is the Computation the
Danes make of their Sea-Forces; and thus much they say in case of necessity
they are able to perform.

Some of the biggest of these Ships draw more Water by five or six Foot at the
Stern than at the Head, which denotes they are broken-backt; they are all
generally lower Masted than ours, and seem more unweildy. I believe them more
proper for the Baltic than the Ocean; if we except some few of the Cruisers,
and other Ships which Convoy their Merchantmen to France, Spain and Portugal.

Fortresses belonging to the King of Denmark.
ON Bornholm, a Fertile Island in the Baltic Sea, nearest to Sweden of any of
this King's Dominions, are two Fastnesses; one an ancient Castle, the other a
Citadel, according to the Modern manner of Fortification, which commands the
best Road in the Island called Roena.It was finished in the Year 1689. and has
good Bastions and Outworks.

Christian's Oye, about seven English Miles North-west from Bornholm, being a
number of little Islands which enclose a safe Harbor for thirty Sail; the
largest Isle, in form of a Cressent, is well fortified.

In the Island Mune at Stege, a small Town, is an ancient Castle of little
Defense, where there is a Garrison.

In Laland, all that looks like strength, is the Town of Naxkew, and an old
Castle called Allholm; but they are of no great Defense.

In Zealand, first, the Town of Copenhagen is well fortified, but the Works are
only Earth. Secondly, The Castle of Cronenberg near Elsignor, which is now near
finishing, and is faced with Brick. It is an irregular, but good Fortification.
Thirdly, Corsoer, a small Earthen Fortress over against Funen.

In Funen, the Town of Nyburg is pretty well fortified toward the Sea; but
toward the Land the Works are out of repair.

In Holstein there is, first, Glucstadt, a well fortified Town upon the River
Elb, which because of its Neighborhood to Hamburg is kept in a good condition.
Secondly, Cremp, a Town within three English Miles of the former, near the
River Stoer, in no extraordinary repair. Thirdly, Hitlar Scance on an Island,
twelve English Miles from Hamburg. Fourthly, Rendsburg, on the Borders between
Holstein and Sleswick, and on the River Eyder; this Place is now enlarging, the
Bulwarks and Outwarks are facing with Brick; it will be a Royal Fortification,
and is the most considerable Place the King of Denmark has, both for Strength
and Situation. Fifthly, Christian's Prize, or Frederick's Ort, (for it has two
Names) situated at the entrance of the Haven of the City of Kiel on the
Baltic. It is commanded by a Hill one hundred and twelve Roods North from it.

In Jutland, first Fredericia, a very well fortified Town, being a Pass over
the Little Belt. Secondly, Hall, a small Fortress on the North-side the
Entrance of the River that leads to Alburg. Thirdly, at Flatstrand, twenty
English Miles South of the Scagen Point, is a Schance and a small Fort for the
Defense of the Haven.

To the Souhward of the North Cape of Lapland is a Fort of six Bastions, called
Wardhuys. And in Norway there is, first, Drontheim, guarded to the Sea by a
strong Castle, called Monkholm, (where Monsieur Griffenfelt is at present kept
close Prisoner) and to the Land by a strong Citadel. Secondly, Bergen, a very
strong Place toward the Sea, and environed with high Mountains, which make it
inaccessible by Land; 'twas here the Dutch East India Ships sheltered
themselves, when the English Fleet, under the Command of the Earl of Sandwich,
attacked them unsuccessfully. The Danes had passed their word, that they would
deliver them up; but some seasonable Presents which the Hollanders made at
Court, prevailed so far, as to make them break it; which occasioned the
Hollanders Safety, and our Disgrace. Fourthly, Christiania, the Capital of
Norway; it has a strong Citadel. Fifthly, Larwick, a slight Fortification.
Sixthly, Frederickstadt, a place which has good Works, but built on a bad
Foundation. Seventhly, Wingar Castle, a Pass on the Borders of Norway.
Eighthly, Frederick's-hall, a place well fortified, but much commanded by a
Hill one hundred Rood from it. Ninthly, a Fort at Fleckero, near the Town of
Christiansandt.

In the East Indies the King has a small Fortress called Tranquebar, on the
Coast of Coromandel: In Guiney another called Christiansburg; and a third in
the Island of St. Thomas in the West Indies, which commands the only good Port
in all those Parts, wherein Ships take shelter during the Season of the
Hurricanes.

One may easily judge that such an Army and Fleet, which so many Fortresses,
cannot be maintained as they ought, without a very great Purse. The former
Chapter gives a just account of the Revenue; and the Military Expenses may be
guessed at by this: There is over and above all these, the Charge of the Civil
List, the maintenance of the Court, King's Children, Public Ministers, etc.
Whether the Income bears proportion to all these Expenses, and would be
sufficient without the assistance of Foreign Money, is left to the
determination of such as are skilled in Calculating.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Court.

UNDER this Head I comprehend the King, Queen, Royal Family, Ministers of
State, Knights of the Order of the Elephant, and of Dannebrug, with other
principal Officers belonging to the Court.

The present King of Denmark, Christian the Fifth, is but of a moderate
stature, rather lean than corpulent, yet well proportioned, and strongly built;
his Complexion is Sanguin, he wears a black Perriwig; the Lines of the lower
part of his Face are not unlike those of King Charles the Second; his
Constitution has been very robust, capable to endure, and loving to undergo all
manner of fatigue; until that within these few years, having had some fits of
the Gout, he thought it better to dispense with Exercises which might disturb
his Ease; especially there being less need in time of Peace of his taking such
pains as he easily could, and yet would do, were there occasion. He began the
six and fortieth year of his Age the fifteenth of April 1692. His Habit is
usually modest, but gentile; he seldom appears at Court times with either Hat
or Gloves, though always (after the German fashion) with a good Sword girt
close to his side.

As to his qualities, he is a Prince of singular affability and good nature;
temperate if you consider the humor of that Country; being neither luxurious
in his Meat or Drink, and of late years very seldom making any Debauch. His
Amors have not been many, and in those he has continued very constant. He is
Religious as a Prince ought to be, without doting on his Clergy, tho they seem
to adore him; in his own temper a lover of Justice and Moderation; but often
overruled by those about him, to whom he leaves the whole management of
Affairs; because he neither loves, nor has a Genius for business. He speaks
little, unless to his Ministers, and immediate Servants; yet he gives all
opportunity and encouragement to others to entertain him; as it were
emboldening them by a gracious Smile, and advancing toward them. He is Master
of three Languages besides his own, the High and Low Dutch, and the French,
using them with great ease upon occasion. He was not bred up to any sort of
Learning, yet takes a particular delight in Geography; and is never better
pleased than when an exact Chart of any Country, or Delineation of any
Fortress is brought to him: his Genius for the War inclining him to love
Fortification. He is of a clear undoubted Personal Courage, as has been often
demonstrated in the late Wars with Sweden: but eases himself of the greatest
part of the Conduct, which he leaves to his Generals, not relying on his own
Judgment either in occasions of Action or Negotiations; though it is probable
the greatness of his Courage in the one, and the sincerity of his Intentions in
the other, would produce better effects, did he trust himself more, and others
less. In fine, he is a very mild, and gracious Prince, beloved rather than
reverenced by his People; who are sensible that the present Form of Government,
concurring with a King of a severe temper, would be altogether intolerable. His
Motto under his Arms and Cipher is, Pietate and Justitia; and his Subjects do
really believe the preservation of these to be his true Inclinations; and that
all hardships that fall upon them, have their rise from the Ministry. Therefore
they complain of his permitting, rather than his acting, and attribute all the
Evils they endure, to the easiness of his Temper, and unhappiness of their
present Constitution; which is not redressed by any Advantages derived from his
Education.

The Queen, Charlotta Amelia, is a Princess that deserves to be mentioned with
all honor, even tho she were not of that high Quality. She is fair, and well
shaped; her Complexion being a mixture of Phlegmatic and Sanguin; and although she
be in the forty first year of her Age, continues still handsome; her Carriage
is very engaging, affable, and free; her great Accomplishments secure to her
the Hearts of her Subjects, notwithstanding her differing from them in
Religion, and stop the mouths of the bigoted Lutherans, which would be apt
enough to exclaim against her, did not a most unreproachable Life set her above
Malice. They have made several Attempts to wound the Calvinist Religion through
her sides; but she has hitherto frustrated them all, and preserved not only her
self, but the little French Protestand Church (lately founded in Copenhagen by
her Bounty, and subsisting through her Protection) from all the Assaults made
against it by Persons in Power. And this she does the more effectually, through
a prudent compliance with the King in matters indifferent, going frequently
with him to the Lutheran Service and Sermons: thereby not only showing the
charitable and good Opinion she has of the Public established Worship, but
getting a greater freedom of going every Afternoon to hear the French Ministers
in her own Church. She is the common Refuge of distressed People, who never
fail of their account in approaching her. Neither is Access to her difficult;
she often prevents those that have need, and does good before she be sought
unto. In short, she is Sister to the present Landgrave of Hesse Cassel; worthy
of such a Brother, and the illustrious Stock from whence she proceeds.

The King of Denmark has five Children; four Princes and one Princess. Prince
Frederick the eldest, who is also called the Prince Royal, is about twenty
years old; it were to be wished his Education had been more conformable to his
quality; for his former Governor being somewhat pedantick, had infused a little
stiffness and formality into the Pupil, which People that judge by outward
Appearances, are apt to misconstrue Pride; but doubtless his Travels have
reformed that ill habit. Prince Christian, the second Son, is about eighteen
years of Age, of a more lively and affable temper than his elder Brother, as
well as taller, and of a more robust Constitution; much addicted to Hunting,
and riding the great Horse; he longs for nothing more than to see and show
himself to the World. Prince Charles, the third Son, is about nine years old,
and Prince William, the Fourth, about six. The former is a very forward hopeful
Youth; the latter does not yet stir out of the Nursery, so that no Judgment can
be made of him.

The Princess -- is about sixteen, a very beautiful sweet tempered and
well-educated Lady; she was contracted to the present Elector of Saxony her own
Cousin Germain; but the Match was afterward broken off.

The King has besides these, two Natural Sons by Mrs. Mote, a Citizen's
Daughter of Copenhagen, whom he had made Countess of Samsoe (an Island which he
has given to her) the sends her moreover, as it is confidently reported 1000
Rix Dollars every Saturday Night. The young Gentlemen, her Sons, are very
handsome and hopeful. The eldest is in the Service of France, where he has a
Regiment of Horse, and is called young Guldenlieu, to distinguish him from the
Elder, who is Viceroy of Norway; the King gives him the Revenue of the
Post Office. This Appellation of Guldenlieu is appropriated to the Bastard Sons
of the Kings; I know not whether it began with the present Viceroy of Norway,
or not; but it is likely to continue hereafter, and a young Guldenlieu will
become as necessary an Ornament to the Court, as an Heir of the Crown.

The second of the King's Sons, by the Countess of Samsoe, is designed for the
Sea; and to that end has been sent several Voyages in a Man of War under the
Direction of a trusty Person, in order to fit him to be one day Admiral-General.

His high Excellency, Court Guldenlieu, Viceroy of Norway, and Natural Brother
to the King, will be more properly mentioned here, as one of the Royal Family,
than when we come to speak of the Ministers; for tho he be one of them, yet he
cares not to embark himself deep in the Public Affairs, having formerly, in
some Occurrences, burnt his Fingers; he thinks it wisdom rather to enjoy his
Divertisements, and the favor of the King, which he now firmly possesses. His
Father, King Frederick, loved him so well, that he once thought of making him
King of Norway; which has been remembered to his prejudice, and obliges him to
carry himself with great care, under a Government so Arbitrary as this is. He
is about fifty six years of Age, has been one of the handsomest, and continues
one of the finest Gentlemen that Denmark has produced: having to his Natural
Accomplishments, added all the advantages of Travel, and Knowledge of the
World. He is a Man of Pleasure, and understands it in all its Refinements; his
Palace, his Gardens, his Entertainment, manner of accosting, etc. excelling by
many degrees any thing that can be found elsewhere in that Kingdom. He was
formerly Ambassador Extraordinary from King Frederick his Father to King
Charles the Second, who showed such a particular esteem for him, that he made
him the Partner of his Pleasures. And this is returned by so deep a sense of
that King's Kindness, that he scarce ever mentions his Name without great
concern. He speaks a little English, and is very obliging to any Person that
belongs to this Country, in gratitude for the great Civilities he received
here.

The King of Denmark's Court, as to Pomp and Magnificence, can hardly be called
a Royal one; the Luxury and Extravagance of the more Southern Courts of Europe
having not reached thus far North, no more than their Riches. It is true
indeed, since their good correspondence with France, their Manners are somewhat
refined above what they formerly were; they affect French Modes, French
Servants, and French Officers in the Army; whereof they have one Lieutenant
General, and one Major General, who have quitted France for fighting Duels
there. And this is either really true, or at least the pretense of such as seek
Service in Foreign Countries on purpose to do the business of France, whose
interest they always cultivate industriously, tho they seem never so much in
disgrace with their Prince.

In this Court no Ensigns of Majesty appear; let the occasion be never so
solemn, except such as are Military, all those which a standing Army can
afford, such as Horse and Foot Guards, Trabands, which answer our Beef-eaters,
Kettle-Drums, and Trumpets, etc. are there is perfection, and used every day as
much as in a Camp: but Badges of Peace, viz. Sword of State, Heralds, Maces,
Chancellor's Purse, etc. are not known.

The King sits down to Dinner with his Queen, Children, Relations, prime
Ministers, and General Officers of the Army, till the round Table be filled,
The Court Marshall invites whom he thinks fit to eat with the King, speaking
sometimes to one, sometimes to another, till all have had their turns in that
honor. A Page in Livery says Grace before and after Meat, for no Chaplain
appears either here, or in any other of the Protestant Courts abroad, but in
the Pulpit. There is a plentiful Table; but the Meat dressed after their own
manner. The King's particular Diet every day, is a Loin of roasted Veal, and
his Drink Rhenish-Wine; whereof a silver Beakerfull stands at every one's
Plate, which generally serves for the whole Meal. The Attendants are one or two
Gentlemen, and the rest Livery Servants. No Ceremony of the Knee is used to the
King. The Kettle Drums and Trumpets, which are ranged in a large place before
the Palace, proclaim aloud the very Minute when he sits down to Table. Sunday
is his Fasting day, and by his Example, is so to many of the Courtiers.

Court times, wherein those that have business, may most easily have Audience,
are an hour before Dinner constantly, and sometimes before Supper. At such
times the King's Children, Domestic and Foreign Ministers, Officers of the
Army, and Household, appear in the Antichamber and Bedchamber: these compose the
Court, and seldom amount to above the number of twenty or thirty. Few or no
Gentlemen, that have not Employments, are seen at Court, or in Copenhagen, for
Reasons formerly given.

The Officers of the Household are, The Marshal, who regulates the Affairs of
the Family, and gives the King notice when Dinner or Supper is ready. The
Comptroller of the Kitchen, who places the Dishes of Meat upon the Table, and
is likewise Master of the Ordnance. The Master of the Horse, who looks after
the King's Stables, and Studs of Mares, whereof the King has very many, and
very good, especially those of one Breed particular to him, which are light
Iron-Grey, with black Heads, Tails, and Mains. But one forms a nearer Idea of
the Grandeur and Revenue belonging to these several Offices, by imagining them
like the same in the Families of some of our English Noblemen, rather than of
those belonging to Whitehall.

The Master of the Ceremonies is obliged by his Employment to be a constant
Attender at Court.

But the principal Favorite of the King is Monsieur Knute, a Mecklenburger,
and only Gentleman of the Bedchamber. He has been bred up all along with the
King, as his Confident and Companion in his Pleasures; is a civil well-natur'd
Gentleman, speaks no Language but his own, and loves least of all the French;
meddles rarely with public business, yet when he undertakes any thing with the
King, seldom fails of Success. There are several Grooms of the Bedchamber
subordinate to him. And the Queen has many Gentlemen, Sons of Persons of the
best Quality, which are Attendants upon her, and eight Maids of Honor.

The King's Ministers are, first, Monsieur de Guldenlieu, who has the
precedence at the Council Board, and in all other Commissions where he is
employed with the rest; but business, as I intimated before, being not his
Talent, or at least not his Choice, it is rather out of respect to his quality,
than otherwise, that he is reckoned among them.

Secondly, Count Raventlau, Great Master of the Game, which is the Employment
of greatest Profit in the King's Gift, after the Viceroyship of Norway: he is a
Native of Holstein, and is looked upon as Prime Minister; therefore all Foreign
Ministers address themselves to him. He takes it not ill to be styled so; tho
he seems upon some occasions modestly to decline it. He is very affable civil,
and of easy access; a Man of Pleasure, and an admirer of the fair Sex, as well
as Monsieur de Galdenlieu: his Parts and Learning are of a moderate size; tho
of late, through a more diligent application to business he be much improved;
so that he seems to fill worthily enough the Post wherein his Master has placed
him. He is about Three and forty years of Age, his Complexion fair, and his
Constitution robust; his Inclinations were but indifferent toward the French
(as being convinced that the low Ebb of his Country's Prosperity, and his
Master's Honor, were in a great measure owing to their Counsels and Practices)
till within this year or two, that private Interest has reconciled him to that
Court: the benefit of the French Traffic, during this War (wherein he is
deeply concerned, as well by several Ships of his own, as by giving Protection
to others that manage that Trade) has made him think that it is his Master's
Advantage, as well as his, to keep firm Friendship with France. On the other
hand, the English obstructing that Traffic, by taking and confiscating several
Ships wherein he was concerned, seem to have quite lost his favor. Yet after
all, it is believed, if he could procure the same, or equivalent Advantages for
himself and his Master, his Inclinations would more willingly lead him to
accept of them from England than France; but the unhappy Circumstances of this
present Conjuncture do render that matter scarce possible.

Thirdly, Baron Juel, younger Brother to the Admiral General, and a Dane by
Birth, about sixty years old; he is very corpulent, and of a phlegmatic
Complexion; more easy in his Fortunes than any about Court, which is in part
owing to his remarkable parcimonious temper. The Danes look on him as one of
the cunningest men among them, who under the disguise of a seeming Simplicity
covers a great deal of Craft. His words are very few and smooth, and his
behavior Civil. It is thought that he sees with regret the Misery his Country
is reduced to, as being one of the Stock of old Nobility, who have suffered by
the change of the Constitution: yet his Advice cannot be wanted, where there is
such a scarcity of good Heads; and therefore he is employed in all difficult
Affairs, which he manages with great dexterity and success.

Fourthly, Monsieur Ehrenschild, a German by birth, and formerly Secretary to
Monsieur Terlon the French Ambassador at this Court, which makes him French in
his Inclinations to this day. The King enobled him, and gave him the Name of
Ehrenschild, instead of that of Beerman, by which he was formerly known. He is
about 65 years old, of a weakly constitution, and therefore most commonly
resides at Hamburg, under pretense that the Air is necessary for his Health;
but in reality to manage the King's Affairs with that Town; wherein is
constantly maintained a Faction, which must have Life kept in it by the
Residence of a Minister of Quality. Moreover, that City being conveniently
seated for the Correspondence with all Germany, from whence a nearer inspection
may be made into the proceedings of the neighboring Princes, as well as the
management of the French Traffic during this War; it is thought necessary to
keep an able Man there: this Monsieur Ehrenschild has been bred a Scholar after
the German way, and is well skilled in negotiating; wherein he has been
constantly employed since he first entered into business. He is esteemed a
Cunning man, but has no great reputation of Integrity; he affects to find out
difficulties, and is excellently skilled in prolonging a business. The Foreign
Ministers call him by the Name of Fater difficultatum, and say that he has a
peculiar knack in finding nodum in scirpo. Therefore they care not for Treating
with him, because he values Argumentation, and seeks Sophisms rather than
Truth, or the Decision of the Matter. You can never bring him to say such a
thing is, thought it be as clear as the Sun; but cela peut estre: thereby
leaving always a Hole open to creep out at. He hoards up all his Money, or puts
it in the Banks of Hamburg and Amsterdam, having small prospect of a future
happy establishment for his Family in Denmark. And this is the common Maxim of
all the most intelligent Heads in that Kingdom, as appears by their making few
or no Purchases.

Fifthly, Monsieur Plessen, a Gentleman of Mecklenburg, and formerly the
Manager of Prince George's Revenue in Denmark. He is now the Ober-Rent Master,
or Comptroller of the Finances, in the room of Monsieur Branat, lately removed
from that Employment. The State of the Finances and Expenses were very much
embroiled, and the King some Millions of Crowns in Debt when he undertook the
difficult Task of setting things right; which it is generally thought he will
accomplish as far as they are capable: and 'twas high time to set seriously
about redressing Affairs, for the King's Credit both at Hamburg, and every
where else, was in a manner absolutely lost, through the ill Payment of all
Assignments. He is about Six and forty years old, of a Melancholy Complexion,
and weakly Constitution; is esteemed to have a good Judgment, and to understand
the World; tho his Distempers make him sometimes particular in his Humor. He
speaks four or five Languages, and English among the rest. His Inclinations
seem to be rather English than French; as well on the account of his Dependence
on Prince George, as because he is convinced it is more the Interest of his
Master to be well with England and Holland, than with France. He appears to be
disinteressed, and is very easy in his Fortunes, which consist most in ready
Money. In short, he is a Man of Business, and seems to be more dowright in his
manner of dealing than many of the rest.

These Five compose the King's whole Privy Council. Four of them are constantly
at Court, and the fifth at Hamburg; by the weekly Advices of whom the others do
for the most part regulate all their Deliberations.

The King in this Council determines all Affairs; deliberates of Peace or War,
of Alliances, and other Treaties; of Taxes, Fortifications, Trade, etc. without
the intervention of any other Person, unless it be the Secretaries of State;
who are yet esteemed here rather as Ministerial Officers and Assistants, than
principal Counselors. There are four of these Secretaries that are not
Secretaries of State, in the sense that ours in England are, that is to say,
Prime Ministers; but carry the Pen, and have the management of the business
relating to their several Provinces; the first is the Secretary for the Affairs
of Denmark, and is at present Monsieur

The second for the Affairs of Norway, is Monsieur Mote, Brother to the King's
Mistress the Countess of Samsoe. The third for Foreign Affairs, is Monsieur
Jessen; and the fourth, who is Secretary at War, is Monsieur Harboe. When any
thing which concerns the Province of any of these is debated at Council, the
Secretary it belongs to is to be present; but Monsieur Jessen never misses,
because there is always business relating to Foreign Affairs; and the usual
times of the sitting of the Council being after the Posts come in, his
Employment is to read all the Letters, and to make Remarks on them. This
renders his Office more considerable than that of the other Secretaries, and
makes him enter into the Secrets of the Cabinet, which pass for the most part
through his sole management. He has also liberty to speak his Sentiments; and
because he has been bred a Latin Scholar, that, as well as his Employment,
entitles him to the penning of all Treaties with Foreign Ministers. Therefore
he is constantly one of the Commissioners appointed to treat with them; and to
whom they are to have recourse almost as necessarily as to the Prime Minister,
who suffers himself to be in a great measure guided by this Secretary. He is
about forty, of a civil behavior and humility, even to affectation; speaks
four or five Languages very well, and very much; whereby he sometimes gives
advantages to those that have business with him. He has but a moderate
reputation for Sincerity, or Parts; yet so much used to the Road of Public
Affairs, that he cannot be wanted, because they have no fitter Man to put in
his place. He is Son-in-Law to Monsieur Ehrenschild, by whom he is much
governed, and of the same Inclinations as to France. This Affinity is a great
support to his Fortune, as long as that old Gentleman lives; and his diligence
in his Employment, (if there were nothing else) will secure to him his Post and
his Princes Favor; provided always that he keep fair with the Prime Minister,
(as at present he does) and act in concert with him.

The ordinary Diversions of the Court are Progresses, which are made once a
year at least, to Sleswick, or Holstein, either to make a review of some
Troops, or to see the Fortifications at Rendsburg; besides smaller Journies to
Laland, and elsewhere, up and down the Country. These are of no Expense to the
Treasury, because the traveling Wagons and Horses are found by the Boors, who
are also to pay their Personal Attendance, and be ready for all necessary
Services. During five or six Weeks every Summer, the Court removes to
Jagersburg, a small Hunting-House, situated upon a little Lake within four
English Miles of Copenhagen, and not far from the Sea: and for five or six
Weeks more it resides at Fredericksburg, the chief Country Palace of the Kings
of Denmark, about twenty English Miles from Copenhagen, began by Christian the
Fourth, and finished by this King's Father, Frederick the Third: this is that
House which the Danes boast so much of, and tell wonders of the quantity of
Money it cost in building. It is seated in the midst of a Lake, the Foundations
of it being laid in the Water, which probably occasioned the greatest part of
the Expense; you pass into it over several Draw Bridges. This watery Situation
is so moist and cold a Country, cannot be approved by the Critical in Seats,
especially when the rising Grounds about this Lake (which are clothed with fine
Woods) afforded much better places both for health and prospect: but it is the
humor of all this Kingdom, to build in the midst of Lakes; which I suppose was
at first practiced upon the score of Security. This Palace, notwithstanding the
great cost they talk of, is far from being magnificent, or well contrived; for
the Rooms are low, the Apartments ill disposed, the fine Chapel much too long
in proportion to its breadth, and has a Gallery over it, which has one of the
worst contrived Entrances that can be imagined. In fine, it falls far short of
many of our Noblemens Countrey-Houses in England; yet is esteemed by the Danes
as a Nonesuch. There is indeed a fine Park about it, well filled with Red
Deer; having large Ponds, high Trees in great quantity, a good Bathing-House,
and other Country Embellishments; so that it is by far to be preferred to all
the rest of the King's Houses, which except these two last mentioned, are for
the most part out of repair: that of the Fortress of Cronenburg near Flsignor,
and of Coldingen in Jutland, with others, being scarce habitable even during
one Fortnight in the Summer Quarter.

At Fredericksburg the Court spends most of its time in Stag-hunting, for there
are few Fallow-Deer in Denmark; during which Sport the King allows great
freedom to his Domestics and Ministers, who commonly do all accompany him
wherever he goes; insomuch that he seems to lay aside all Majesty, and the
Formalities of it for that Season; they eat and drink together, the latter
sometimes to Excess, after a hard days hunting; when as soon as Dinner is done,
they adjourn to the Wine-Cellar. About five or six in the Afternoon the
Hunting-Assizes are solemnly held in the great Court before the Palace, the
Stag is drawn into the midst of it by the Huntsmen, who are all clothed in
Red, having their great Brass Hunting-horns about their Necks; and it is there
broken up with great Ceremony, whilst the Hounds attend with much Noise and
Impatience. One that is likeliest to give a good Gratuity to the Huntsmen, is
invited to take Essay, and presented with the Deer's foot. Then Proclamation is
made, if any can inform the King (who is both Supreme Judge and Executioner) of
any Transgression against the known Laws of Hunting that day committed, let him
stand forth and accuse; the accused is generally found guilty; and then two of
the Gentlemen lead him to the Stag, and make him kneel down between the Horns,
turning down his Head with his Buttocks up, and remove the Skirts of his Coat,
which might intercept the blows; then comes his Majesty, and with a small long
Wand gives the Offender some Lashes on his Posteriors, whilst in the mean time
the Huntsmen with their Brass Horns, and the Dogs with their loud Openings,
proclaim the King's Justice, and the Criminal's Punishment. The whole Scene
affording Diversion to the Queen, Ladies, and other Spectators, who are always
assisting, and stand in a Circle about the Place of Execution. This is as often
repeated as there happen to be Delinquents; who as soon as the Chastisement is
over, rise up and make their Obeisance,

-- proudly boasting Hudib.

Of their magnificent Rib-roasting.
After all is done, the Hounds are permitted to fall to, and eat the Deer.

At another season Swan-hunting is the Royal Pastime; the wild Swans haunt a
certain small Island not far from Copenhagen, and breed there; about the time
that the Young ones are near as big as the Old, before their Feathers are grown
long enough to fly, the King with the Queen, Ladies, and others of the Court,
go to the killing of them; the Foreign Ministers are usually invited to take
part in this sport: every Person of Condition has a Pinnace allotted to him,
and when they come near the haunt, they surround the place, and enclose a great
multitude of young Swans, which they destroy with Guns till they have killed
some thousands. What is killed by the whole Company is brought to the Court,
which challenges the Feathers and Down of these Birds, the Flesh of them being
good for nothing.

On Shrove-Tuesdays the King, Queen, Royal Family, Home and Foreign Ministers,
and all the other Persons abovementioned, that usually compose the Court,
cloth themselves in the habit of the North-Holland Boors, with great
Trunk-hose, short Doublets, and large blue Thrum-Caps; the Ladies in blue
Petticoats, and odd Head-dresses, etc. Thus accoutred they get up in their
Wagons, a Man before and a Woman behind, which they drive themselves, and go to
a Country Village called Amak, about three English miles from Town; there they
dance to Bagpipes, and squeaking Fiddles, and have a Country Dinner, which
they eat out of Earthen and Wooden Platters, with wooden Spoons, etc. and
having passed the day in these Divertisements, where all are equal, and little
regard had to Majesty, or other Quality: at Night they drive in like manner
home again; and are entertained at a Comedy and Magnificent Supper by the
Viceroy Guldenlieu, spending the Remainder of the Night in Dancing in the same
Habits, which they putnot off all that day.

Every Winter, as soon as the Snow is firm enough to bear, the Danes take great
delight in going in Sleds. The King and Court first giving the Example, and
making several Tours about the Town in great Pomp, with Kettle-Drums and
Trumpets; the Horses which draw the Sleds being richly adorned with Trappings,
and Harness full of small Bells, to give warning to such as stand in the way.
After the Court has been abroad, the Burgers and others trot about the Streets
all night, wrapped up in their Fur Gowns, with each his Female in the Sled with
him; and this they esteem a great and pleasant Pastime.

In traveling to Fredericksburg, Yugersburg, and many other places from
Copenhagen, there are two Highways; one the common Road, which is usually bad;
the other the King's Highway, very fair and even, peculiar to the Court, and
such as it has a mind to favor in bestowing on them a Key to open the several
Gates that are upon it.

In this Chapter of the Court, it will not be improper to take notice that
there are in Denmark two Orders of Knighthood, viz. that of the Elephant, and
that of Dannebrug; the former is very honorable, and the Companions of it are
of the highest Quality, or extraordinary Merit. Their Badge is an Elephant with
a Castle on its back, set with Diamonds, and hung on a watered Sky-colored
Ribband, worn as the George is in England. The later is the honorary Reward of
inferior Gentlemen or Noblemen: their Badge is a white Ribband with red Edges,
worn over the contrary shoulder with a small Cross of Diamonds hung to it, and
an Embroidery on the Breast of their Coats like a Star, in which is the Motto,
Pi^tate and Justitia. They say that the Order of the Elephant was instituted
about Two hundred and ten years ago by King Christian the First, at the Wedding
of his Son.

A List of the present Companions of it follows.
The King Sovereign of the Order. PRince Royal. Prince Christian. Prince
Charles. Prince George. The King of Sweden. Elector of Brandenburg. Elector of
Saxony. Viceroy Guldenlieu. Duke of Holstein. Duke of Holstein his Brother.
Landgrave of Hesse. Count Rantzaw of Bredenberg. Duke of Holstein Ploen. Duke
of Holstein Norburg. Duke of Holstein Brieg. Landgrave of Hesse Hombourg.
Markgrave of Anspach. Markgrave of Baden Durlach. Duke of Ostfrize. Duke of
Saxe Cobourg. Prince Frederick of Saxe. Duke of Wirtemberg. The Marshall Count
Wedell. Count Reventlau. Count Alefeldt. General Admiral Juel. Baron Juel.
Justin Hoeg under Viceroy of Norway. Godtske van Buckvalt, a Gentleman of
Holstein. Monsieur de Ginkle, Earl of Athlone.
They pretend that the Order of Dannebrug is more Ancient, and recount many
Fables of its Original, viz. That one King Dan saw a white Cross with red
Edges, descend from Heaven, and thereupon instituted the Order, and gave it
this compound Name, from Dan and Brug, which signifies Painting. The Knights of
this Order are almost as common here, as Baronets with us, and therefore I omit
their Names.

The following Ordonnance for Rank and Precedence was published in Danish and
French, Anno 1680. But most of the Offices therein marked are now vacant.

ORDONNANCE Pur les RANGS DU Royaume de Dannemarck.
I.
LES Enfans Naturels des Rois.
II.
1. *Le Grand Chancelier. 2. * Le Grand Tresorier dit Schatzmeister. 3. * Le
Grand Connetable de Norwegue. 4. * Le General Marechal de Camp. 5. Le General
Admiral. 6. Les Comtes qui sont Conseillers Privez. 7. Les Chevaliers de l'
Elephant qui sont Conseillers Privez, ou qui tienent meme rang avec eux. 8.
*Les autres Connetables. 9. Le Vice-Chancelier. 10. *Le Vice-Tresorier. 11. Les
Vice-Connetables. 12. Les autres Conseillers Privez.
III.
1. *Le Grand Maistre de l'Artillerie. 2. *Le Grand Marechal Lieutenant. 3. Le
General Admiral Lieutenant. 4. Les Generaux de Cavalerie, and d'Infanterie. 5.
Les Generaux Lieutenans de Cavalerie and d'Infanterie.
IV.
1. Les Comtes qui sont fais Comtes ou Naturalisez par le Roy. 2. Les Barons
qui sont fais Barons ou Naturalises par le Roy. Et en suite les Chevaliers de
D'Hannebroug ou Cordons Blancs.
V.
1. * Le Grand Marechal de la Cour. 2. * Le Premier Secretaire Prive, and de
Etat. 3. Le Premier Gentilhomme de la Chamber. 4. Le Grand Maistres des
Ecuries. 5. Le Grand Veneur. 6. * Le Grand Echanson.
VI.
1. Les Conseillers d'Etat. 2. Les Conseillers de la Justice. 3. Les
Commandeurs des Diocezes, and le Tresorier.
VII.
1. Les Generaux Majors, les Admiraux, le General Commissaire de l'Armee, les
Colonels des Gardes du Corpse ou Trabans. 2. Les Brigadiers. 3. Le Marechal de
la Cour.
VIII.
1. Les Conseillers de la Chancellerie. Les Envoyez Extraordinaires du Roy, and
le Maistre des Ceremonies. 2. Les Conseillers de la Chamber des Comptes, le
Procureur General. 3. Les Conseillers de Guerre. 4. Les Conseillers de
l'Admiraute. 5. Les Conseillers de Commerce.
IX.
1. Le sur Intendant de Seelande. 2. Le Confesseur du Roy. 3. Le Recteur de
l'Accademie l'annee qu'il est Recteur, le President de la Ville de Copen.
X.
1. Les Colonels des Regimens des Gardes a Cheval, and a Pied, les
Vice-Admiraux, les Colonels de l'Artillerie. 2. Les autres Colonels de
Cavalerie ou d'Infanterie. 3. Les Lieutenans Colonels des Gardes du Corpse ou
Trabans, and apres eux les Bailliffs.
XI.
1. Les Gentilshommes de la Chamber du Roy, and de la Reine. 2. Le Maistre de
l'Ecurie. 3. Le Veneur du Roy. 4. Le Secretaire de la Chamber du Roy. 5. Le
Secretaire de la Milice. 6. Le Grand Payeur.
XII.
1. Les assesseurs de la haute Justice; les Conseillers d'Assistance en
Norwegue, and les sur Intendans des autres Provinces. 2. Les Juges Provinciaux.
XIII.
1. Les Generaux Auditeurs, les Maistres Generaux des quartiers. 2. Les
Lieutenans Colonels, Scoutbynachts, and Majors des Gardes du Corpse a Trabans.
XIV.
1. Les Assesseurs de la Chancelerie, and de la Justice de la Cour de Norwegue.
2. Les Assesseurs du Consistoire, les Bourgmeisters de Copenhague, and le
Medicin du Roy. 3.Les Assesseurs de la Chamber des Comptes, and apres eux les
Commissaires des Provinces. 4.Les Assesseurs du College de Guerre. 5.Les
Assesseurs du College de l'Admiraute. 6.Les Assesseurs du College du Commerce.
XV.
Les Maistres de Cuisine, les Gentilshommes de la Cour, les Generaux Adjutans,
les Majors, les Capitains des Gardes a Cheval, les Capitaines Commandeurs des
Vaisseaux.
XVI.
1.Les Secretaires de la Chancellerie, and de la Justice. 2.Le Secretaire de la
Chamber des Comptes. 3.Le Secretaire du College de Guerre. 4.Le Secretaire de
l'Admiraute. 5.Le Secretaire du Commerce.
Ilya a observer que quand plusiers charges sont nommees ensemble. Et qu'elles
ne sont pas distinguees de quelque numero a part. Ils prendront le rang enter
eux selon qu'ils sont premiers en charge.

Les Ministres du Roy qui possedent quelques charges qui ne sont pas nommees
dans cette Ordonnance retiendront meme rang, qu'ils ont eu Jusques icy, and
Ceux a qui le Roy a deja done ou donnera le Rang deConseiller Prive jouiront
du meme Rang que s'ils l'Etoint effectivement.

Ceux qui possedent effectivement quelques charges auront le Rang avaunt ceux
qui en ont seulement le titre, and ne font point de fonction.

Ceux que le Roy dispense de ne plus exercer leur charges, retiendront pourtant
le meme Rang qu'ils avoient eu exercant leurs charges, and si quelqu'un prand
une autre charge de moindre Rang que sa premiere n'etoit, il retiendra pourtant
le Rang de la premiere.

Les Femmes se regleront ainsi qu'apres les Comtesses suivront les
Gouvernantes, and Demoiselles de la Chamber, and de la Cour pendant qu'elles
sont en service, aprez else les Femmes de Conseillers Privez and qui tiennent
Rang avec eux, ensuite les Baronesses and autres Femmes selon la Condition de
leurs maris tant de leur vivant qu'aprez leur mort, pendant quelles demeurent
veufves.

La Noblesse qui n'a point de charge, and les Capitaines de Cavalerie and
d'Infanterie, and autres Persons Ecclesiastiques and Seculiers tiendront le
pas enter eux comme ils ont fait auparavant.

Surquoy tous auront a se Regler souspeine de la perte de la faveur Royale. Et
si quelqu'n contre toute Esperance se trouve de propre Authorite qui face
quelque chose contre cette Ordonnance, payera tout aussitost qu'il sera
Convaincu d'un tell Crime l'amande de mill Reicsthalers. Et outre sera
poursuive par le General fiscal du Roy, comme violateur des Ordres Royaux fait
a Copenhag le 31 Decembre 1680.

CHAP. XII.
The Disposition and Inclinations of the King of Denmark toward his Neighbors.

THE Kingdoms and States which border upon the King of Denmark, are toward the
North and Northeast, the Territories belonging to Sweden; toward the South,
the Duke of Holstein's part of Sleswick and Holstein, the City of Hamburg, and
the Duchy of Bremen. Toward the West and Southwest, England, and Scotland;
which are separated from them by the main Ocean. Toward the South-east the
Dukedoms of Saxe Lawenburg, of Mecklenburg and of Lunenburg. The Dominions of
Brandenburgh, etc. lie also this way not far distant from them.

Between the King of Denmark, and most of these Neighbors, it may be said in
general, that there always is a reciprocal Jealousy and Distrust, which often
breaks out into open Hostilities; with those nearer more frequently, with the
remoter more seldom, according as the occasions of quarrel or revenge do happen.

England.
The interposition of a vast Ocean has hitherto kept the Danes in pretty good
terms with England and Scotland, and the Trade they have with those Kingdoms is
very considerable to them; their Maritime Forces are in no measure sufficient
to cope with us and others concerned, otherwise they have had a good mind to
challenge the sole right of the Groenland Whale-fishing; as pretending that
Country to be a discovery of theirs, and therefore to belong to them.

Since the present Wars with France, and our strict Union with the Hollanders,
they have shown themselves extreme jealous of our Greatness at Sea, fearing
lest we should ingross and command the whole Trade of the World; and therefore
have favored France on all occasions, as much as they durst, furnishing it
with Naval Stores, and other Commodities which it wants. And for this reason
(notwithstanding their scarcity of Money) they will hardly be persuaded either
to lend or sell any more Forces to the Confederates. Neither is it to be
doubted, but that as well to keep the balance of the Sea Power even, as to
secure the liberty of their Commerce, which brings them in great Gains, they
will leave no Stone unturned to do us a Mischief, in order to humble us to such
a degree as may put them out of fears, that we shall give law to the Ocean. To
this end they have entered into stricter Alliances with Sweden of late, for a
mutual Vindication of open Commerce, than the natural Animosities between those
Northern Crowns did seem to admit of; but the present apparent necessity of
restraining within Bounds our growing united Power at Sea, works more
prevalently with them both, than the ancient hatred which they retain for each
other; and which may break out again, as soon as they are out of fear of us.

For Sweden Sweden.
is the most powerful, most dreaded, and nearest Neighbor of Denmark; the
Territories of that King lie as it were at the Gates of Copenhagen, the Capital
City, and may be seen from the very Bedchamber of this King, ever since the
Danes lost three of their best Provinces on the other side the Baltic; so that
as well the Resentment of past Injuries, as the dread of future Mischiefs from
the greatness of Sweden on the one side; the consciousness of being violent
possessors of another Right, the certainty of their being hated and envied for
those Acquisitions, the fear of losing them in case Denmark grow powerful on
the other, are unsurmountable Obstacles to any firm Friendship between these
two Crowns. The ancient Quarrel, like a Wound ill healed, is but skinned over,
and festers at the bottom, although our equally disobliging them in the
interruption of their Traffic, has made a greater step toward their mutual
Reconciliation, than was thought to be practicable. But whenever we please to
caress the one at the expense of the other, this seeming Knot will discover the
weakness of its contexture, and probably dissolve of it self.

Neither is the Alliance by the King of Sweden's having married the other's
Sister, Quae apud concordes vincula caritatis, i^citamenta irarum apud infensos
erant. Tacit.
of any moment toward a good Correspondence, but rather the contrary. The King
of Sweden, tho a very virtuous Prince, shows coldness and indifference enough
(upon this account, as it is thought) toward his Queen, who is a very
accomplished Princess; and either has, or thinks he has reason to avoid a
further Matrimonial Tie with the Dane: therefore he chose rather to Contract
his only Daughter with the young Prince of Holstein Gottorp, whose Estates are
in a manner wasted and ruined, than with the Prince Royal of Denmark; for
having but one Son, in case of whose death this Daughter would be Heiress of
his Crown, he thinks it not prudence to leave it to so near a hazard and
probability, that the Dane may be one day Master of both Kingdoms.

Upon the Foundation of this mutual Jealousy, are built the Friendships and
Enmities which each of them (but especially Denmark) have with most of their
other Neighbors, and the rest of the German Princes. And upon this account it
is principally that the Animosity is so great between this Crown and the
Princes of Lunenburg; Duke of Lunenburg.
with whom, on the contrary, the Swede has always kept a good Correspondence,
that upon occasion of any Attack made on his Territories in the Circle of Lower
Saxony, or in Pomerania, (which are looked upon by the rest of the German
Princes with an evil Eye) he may secure to himself the Assistance of that
powerful Family against the Dane or Brandenburger; therefore the neighborhood
of the Lunenburg Princes will always be grievous to, and suspected by Denmark,
which will obstruct by all means it can, the Accessions either of Territories
or Honors to that Family. So that it is not to be supposed that the Dane will
quietly sit down with the Duke of Zell's thrusting himself into the possession
of the Duchy of Saxe Lawenburg, which borders immediately upon Holstein; nor
with the determination of the Imperial Diet in favor of the Ninth Electorate
conferred on the Duke of Hannover. On the other hand it is thought that the
Swede, in order to the further curbing of Denmark, will uphold the Lunenburg
Family in its Acquisitions; in the matter of the Electorate openly and
aboveboard; in the other of Saxe Lawenburg secretly, because of the invalidity
of the Title of that Family to that Duchy; which seems to be no longer good
than it can be maintained by force or connivance.

The Princes of Lunenburg have also hitherto seconded the Swedes Intentions, in
being the Guardians of Hamburg, Hamburg.
upon which City the King of Denmark casts a longing Look, and has made
frequent Attempts. His pretensions to it as part of his Duchy of Holstein, are
none of the weakest, but his Arms and Councils in order to the Reduction of it
under his Power, have been unsuccessful. He encourages his new Town of Altena
(which is built close under its Walls) as a Rival, and which one day may be a
curb to it. And in truth, this rich City has great reason to be jealous of such
a Neighbor, whose chiefest Ambition is to destroy its Liberty, and render
himself its Master. But the Duke of Zell (whose Territories lie next) has
always some Forces posted near enough to prevent the King of Denmark's Designs
upon it; therefore this City pays a great deal of respect to those Princes,
whom it looks on as its best Protectors. With the other German Princes it keeps
also as good a Correspondence as possible; and they on their part show an
affection to the Liberty of that City, the Reduction of which, under the Power
of the Danes, would be extremely inconvenient to them, as well upon the score
of the Trade of great part of Germany, whereof it is the Seat and Principal
Mart by its convenient Situation on the River Elb; as upon the score of the
great Addition such a Conquest would make to the Power of the Danes; who are
usually ill Neighbors when they are weak, but would be insupportable were
their Force proportionable to their Inclinations.

Nor would the Brandenburgers Brandenburg.
wish that this City, or the Town of Lubeck, should have any Master, but would
endeavor to their utmost to frustrate Attempts upon them, and yet the Elector
of Brandenburg is esteemed the firmest Ally the King of Denmark has; for their
common interest to prevent the Greatness of the Swedes, (whereof they are
equally jealous and fearful) unites these two Princes stronger than any tie of
Blood could do. The Ducal Prussia, and that part of Pomerania which belongs to
Brandenburg, lies open to the Swedes; and the least transport of Forces from
Sweden to Germany side of the Baltic gives a terrible Alarm to all the
Neighbors. They cannot forget the strange Successes of Gustavus Adolphus, nor
the Encroachments of Sweden in the late Wars; neither can they be otherwise
persuaded, but that there is always impending danger of the like Attempts from
the same Nation, abounding in Soldiers, and ruled by a frugal, diligent, and
active young King. So that, as I said before, their common danger makes them
strangely concur in this design of keeping the Swede within his due Bounds,
although in other matters some disagreement may happen between them; as may be
more particularly instanced in the Affair of St. Thomas's Island, and in the
Brandenburgers endeavors to force the Dane to a Restitution of the Duke of
Holstein Gotorp to his Country; which was so happily accomplished by his
Majesty of Great Britain, the very first year of his Exaltation to the Throne.

The Duke of Holstein Duke of Holstein.
Gotorp (whom I have purposely mentioned last of those Princes that confine
with Denmark, that I may have an opportunity to speak more amply concerning his
Case) is nearly related to the King of Denmark, both by Consanguinity and
Affinity. They are of the same Family of Oldenburg; the Ancestor of the present
Duke refused the Kingdom of Denmark, in favor of the Ancestor of the King;
whom he recommended to the Peoples Election. This Duke is married to the King's
Sister, by whom he has Issue a very hopeful Prince; his Territories are
intermixed both in Sleswick and Holstein with the King's, but much to his
disquiet and inconvenience; for Ambition knows no bounds, especially when
joined with Power sufficient to oppress a weak Opponent. The King thought it
for his Interest (and that is esteemed reason enough with most Princes) to be
Master of the whole Country; which the Duke being sensible of, and convinced
that the first convenient opportunity would be taken to dispossess him, to
secure himself, cultivated as strong a Friendship as he could with the King of
Sweden his Brother in-Law, and one who upon many accounts was bound to hinder
the Greatness of the Danes. Yet this Confederacy reached no farther, nor was
ever intended to be made use of by the Duke otherwise than as a Defensive
Guard, the Reputation whereof might possibly shelter him from Oppression. For
the Duke was of himself much too weak to oppose the King, and the Succors of
the Swede too far distant to frustrate a sudden Attempt, to which he lay
constantly exposed. But in regard that at long run this Alliance would stand
him in greatest stead (as he has found by Experience) it was always most
carefully cherished and maintained on the Duke's part, and no less on the
King's, who did, and ever will think it of great advantage to him to uphold the
Duke of Holstein in his lawful Rights; and no less detrimental to his Enemy;
this Duke being the severest Thorn in the Foot of the King of Denmark, and the
greatest Mortification to him that can possibly be imagined; who now of a near
Kinsman and Brother, by his ill usage has made an utter Enemy, that
(notwithstanding the present Composure of Differences) can neither trust him,
nor be trusted by him. For the better understanding of which it will not be
amiss in another Chapter to give a short account of the Proceedings in that
whole Matter.

CHAP. XIII.
The manner of dispossessing, and restoring the Duke of Holstein Gottorp.

THE Affairs between the King and Duke being on the terms abovementioned, that
is to say, Ambition and Reason of State guiding the Designs of one Party, Fear
and Weakness of the other, Hatred and Distrust of both; there seemed to be
wanting nothing but a fair Opportunity to put in practice what had been long
projected by the Danes, which at length happened in the year 1675.

Among other Differences which remained to be adjusted between the King and
Duke, the Succession to the Counties of Oldenburg and Lelmenhorst was the
greatest; this was at length left to the determination of the Imperial Court;
but whilst it was under debate there, several meetings between the Ministers of
Denmark and those of Gottorp were appointed, in order to an amicable composure
of this and all other Quarrels; which Meetings were principally sought after by
the King, with all the seeming desires of Amity, and Appearances of Friendship
imaginable, the better to lull the Duke into Security, and a Persuasion of the
Sincerity of his Intentions. Sometimes an Equivalent for the sole possession of
those Counties was proposed and hearkened to, and the whole Matter seemed to
want nothing but fair drawing up, and the Ratification. At other times fresh
Disputes arose touching the Taxes of the Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein,
whereof the King challenged the greater part to himself, in proportion to the
share of Forces which he maintained for Defense of the Country. On the other
side, the Duke insisted on it, that the Taxes ought equally to be divided; and
if the King kept up more Troops than were necessary, that did not any way
prejudice his right to an equal share of the Revenues, especially since the
King's undertakings were managed neither with any previous Communication with,
or consent of the Duke; nor were agreed unto by the States of the Dukedom, both
which by ancient Treaties ought to have been done. But this Ball was either
kept up, or let fall, according to the Circumstances of Affairs abroad, which
the Danes had a watchful Eye upon, at the same time that they treated with the
Duke.

For the Swedes having taken the part of France against the Empire, were at
this time engaged in a War with the Elector of Brandenburg. And the Danes who
had long since resolved to break with Sweden, thought no time so proper as this
to revenge their ancient Quarrel, and to regain their lost Provinces. But
looking upon the Duke of Holstein as a Friend to Sweden, and a main Obstacle to
their Intentions, they durst not march their Army out of the Country, till
they had so ordered Matters as to apprehend no danger from him.

A deep Dissimulation was necessary to the carrying on this Design upon the
Swedes and House of Gottorp; and was made use of with so much Address, that the
Swedish Ambassador, who was then residing at Copenhagen, and negotiating a
Marriage for the King his Master with the Daughter of Denmark, was caressed in
an extraordinary manner, and treated with the greatest Demonstrations of
Friendship possible: And at the same time the Prime Minister of Denmark wrote
most obligingly to the Duke's Resident then at Hamburg, That he was ready to
meet him half way, and would join endeavors with him to adjust all
Differences, and establish a firm Correspondence between their Masters, which
he said he desired above all things. He added moreover, that when willing Minds
met together about the Composure of Differences, a few hours would put an end
to that which had been transacting many years; and therefore conjured him to
meet him. The King also did often declare himself to this purpose to the Duke's
Ministers, That he would acknowledge, as a great Obligation conferred on him,
the furthering an Accommodation between him and the Duke.

It Is the Custom of the King of Denmark to make once a Year a Voyage into
Holstein, where he assembles and takes a review of his Troops. This is done not
only upon the score of Diversion, and to see that the Forces be in good
Condition; but also to use the neighboring Princes and Hamburgh to such a
practice; that when they see it performed several years without any ill
Consequence, or Attempts upon them, they may take the less Umbrage, and be less
upon their Guard, whenever he should have any real Design. About this time the
King was beginning such a Journey, in order to put his Projects in Execution;
and to lull the Duke into a deeper Security, writes to him very kind Letters,
desiring him not to be concerned at it, since he had no other end in it than
formerly in the like Voyages, unless it were to put a final determination to
all Differences between them to their mutual satisfaction. The Duke was so
pleased by these Assurances under the King's Hand, that he went in Person to
meet his Majesty, accompanied by his Brother the Bishop of Lubeck, and many
others of the Nobility; and afterward treated him very splendidly at a House
of his upon the Road near his Residence of Gottorp; the King then caressing
him, and desiring him earnestly to come and see him at Rendsburg (a fortified
Town about fourteen English miles from thence) near which the Rendezvous of the
Troops was appointed. Toward the conclusion of this Feast several large
Healths were drank to the future good Agreement, with so much appearing
Sincerity, that the good Duke thought he had no reason to doubt the reality of
it; but ordered his Chief Minister to wait upon the King and his Ministers at
Rendsburg; where they so far accommodated all Matters, that the whole Affair
was supposed near its Conclusion.

Upon this the Duke sends three of his chief Counselors, empowered by a
special Commission, to treat and conclude at Rendsburg; with whom three of the
King's Council met, and conferred. The business of the Conference was
principally about the Exchange of other Lands for the Counties of Oldenburg and
Delmenhorst; but in it the King's Commissioners took occasion to renew the
Debate about the division of the Taxes, whereof, as I have said before, the
King challenged the greater part: This did a little surprise and displease the
Duke's Commissioners, who thought it foreign to the matter in hand, and would
not hearken to Proposals of that nature.

At the very same time, and during this Conference, the King's Prime Minister
wrote to the Duke's, That he thought it necessary for both Princes, that the
Duke of Gottorp would please to come to Rendsburg to the King, who was ready to
conclude a Treaty; because the Presence of so near a Relation would contribute
more than any thing else to a Friendly Composure of all these matters. And the
Duke, as well upon the account of the former Invitation, as upon this fresh
one, withal to show his forwardness toward a Peace, resolves upon the Visit;
first sending a Gentleman to acquaint the King with his intention, and desiring
his permission to come and wait upon him. The King's Answer was, That he should
be heartily welcome, and his Chief Minister also, whom he desired to bring
along with him. Thus the Duke being fully persuaded that all was meant
honorably, on the 25 th. of June began his Journey, accompanied by his
Minister and other Nobility, and arrived at Rendsburg; where he was welcomed by
a discharge of all the Cannon of that Fortress, and other demonstrations of Joy.

The next day, being the 26th. of June 1675. a fatal one to that unfortunate
Prince and his Family, an Express arrives with Letters of the great Defeat
given the Swedes by the Brandenburgers at Fehr Berlin: this was what the Danes
wished and waited for; but could scarce promise themselves it should succeed so
fully according to their expectations, or nick the time so justly as it did.
They thought Heaven it self concurred with their Intentions; and not to be
wanting on their parts, immediately give orders to shut the Town Gates, to call
a Council of War, to send their Soldiers up and down, and seize all the Duke's
Towns and Fortresses. These Orders were as suddenly executed: the Duke's Troop
of Guards were disarmed, himself confined a Prisoner to his Apartment; his
Dinner, which he thought to have eaten with the King, was brought in to him by
Officers and Soldiers, who watched him so narrowly that he could not stir; the
poor Duke exclaiming in the mean while, and complaining that he was ill used;
that he was a Sovereign Prince of the Empire, independent of any other Power;
that he was a near Kinsman, a Brother-in-Law, nay, an invited Guest of the
Kings; that all the Laws of Justice, of Blood, of Friendship and Hospitality
were violated by this Action, wherein the King had broken his Parol, and the
Sanctuary of his own House. But all this was in vain; the Duke had no Remedy
prescribed to him, but Patience; the Blow which was begun, must be followed,
and more Evils must succeed that which had already happened.

For the Duke being thus seized, his Ministers were presently sent for, and
told, That now there was an end of all Treating, that the King was Master, and
would act as such: To which purpose he would take possession of the Duke's
whole Country, and put Garrisons into all the strong Places which he thought
proper to secure to himself, because he had an intention to lead his Army
elsewhere against the Swedes; that the Inclinations of the House of Gottorp
were always malevolent toward the King, and by him considered as such; however
if the Duke would fairly and freely renounce his Right to the Lands in
question, the King might, at the Duke's request, be prevailed upon to give him
an hundred and fifty thousand Rix Dollers at Copenhagen for it.

Notwithstanding the Extremity the Duke was reduced to, he could not be brought
to consent to such a severe Condition; but offered, since Matters could be no
better, that the King without prejudice to his Right, should have the Taxes so
much contested, in the manner he desired; that his Majesty should put one half
of the Garrison into the strong Town of Tonningen, provided that all therein
did take the Oaths of Allegiance to both Princes, till such time as the
Exigencies of Affairs would permit the entire Restoration of it to its former
Master: That if the King would dispose of his Country solely, the Duke must
yield to force, but hoped his Right should be reserved entire, and desired that
his Residence and Habitation of Gottorp, which was neither by Nature nor Art
strong enough to be formidable, might be left free to him: Lastly, That the
King would grant him and his liberty to dispose of themselves as they thought
fit.

The Danes Answer was, That these Offers and Demands were no other than
Trifles; That the King would proceed to the Execution of his own Will and
Pleasure by Force and Arms; that neither the Duke, nor any of his, should ever
be restored to their Liberty till he had signed an Instrument there ready drawn
up, to order the Commander of Tonningen to Surrender it to the King; which the
Duke at last, through despair of his Life, was forced to consent to; and
accordingly that Fortress, with all its Cannon and Stores, was delivered up to
the Officer sent by the King for that purpose.

Things being brought to this pass, the Duke was removed to his own House at
Gottorp. His Duchess, who had been all this while at Copenhagen, and as it was
thought consented to all the Injustices acted against her Husband and Family,
was restored to him; but he was in effect a Prisoner still; for Guards were
placed at all the Avenues, every day some new severe Conditions were proposed
to him, and Articles offered him which he was forced to sign: one of which was
a Renunciation of his Supreme and Independent Right over the Dukedom of
Sleswick. Being at last quite tired with so many Violences, not knowing where
they might end, he began to think of his Escape: so that one day taking the
Advantage of his Dutchesses being sent for again by her Mother, the Queen
Dowager of Denmark, he pretended to accompany her part of the way; and by the
means of some trusty Servants, had re-lays of Horses placed in convenient
stations. After a few hours traveling with her, he took his leave of her, and
pretending to hunt, set Spurs to his Horse, and rid away as fast as he could
toward Hamburg.

The Allarm was presently given of the Duke's flight, and many Horsemen were
dispatched after him, which he being aware of, took not the direct Road, but
went about by Kiel; so that, after a narrow escape, he arrived safely where he
designed. This mightily vexed the King, who used all means to get him out of
that City, because Hamburg being so populous a Town, the fame of the Barbarity
exercised against him flew from thence all over Europe. But the Duke had been
taught by former Misfortunes not to trust his Enemy; and as soon as he got to
Hamburg, solemnly protested against the validity of all that he had been
constrained to agree to, whilst he was in Durance; yet withal declared, That he
was as ready as ever to come to an amicable Composure of Differences with the
King, to prevent the ruin of his Subjects, and other Mischiefs; provided the
King would redress some of the greatest Grievances. This Proposition was so
little regarded, that instead of harkening to it, the King ordered the Fortress
of Toningen to be demolished, the Dukedom of Sleswick to be sequestered, the
Magistrates and People to be absolved from their Allegiance to the Duke, and
obliged to an Oath of Fidelity to the King; all the Revenues of the Duke to be
brought into his Treasury; Garrisons to be continued in the Duke's Forts and
Mansion House, and unless the Duke came to accept of the King's terms in
relation to that Fief, that it should for ever be annexed to the Crown of
Denmark.

For the more speedy publication of these new Orders, Proclamations were made
and affixed to that effect in all the Towns of the Dukedom. The Duke on his
part publishing others in opposition to this Usurpation, together with a Solemn
Protestation against all that had been done; concluding with a Command to the
States of the Dukedom, and the rest of his Subjects, to continue firm in their
Loyalty and Obedience to their Natural Prince.

But the King, who was resolved no longer to keep any Measures with him, nor to
preserve that Country in any tolerable condition which he knew not how long he
might enjoy, exacted vast Contributions from the poor Subjects, to the value of
many Millions of Gold, and to the ruin of as flourishing a Province as any in
the Circle of Lower Saxony; thereby disabling the Duke's Subjects from
contributing any thing toward the Subsistence of their Master; who continued
all this while at Hamburg in a state little befitting his high Quality; whilst
he sent his Son abroad to raise the Compassion, and implore the Assistance of
all all the Neighboring German Princes; on which Errand I had the Fortune to
meet him at the Courts of Hannover and Wolfembuttel. He made also strong
Application to the Crown of England, as Guarantee of the Northern Peace, and
caused a full Representation of his disconsolate Condition to be printed in
English, which contains at large most of the Particulars abovementioned; but
all in vain: the Duke continued a Sufferer notwithstanding his many Appeals to
those who ought to have interessed themselves in his behalf: until such time as
the King of Sweden began in earnest to take his Cause in hand. This King having
at last brought the Affairs of his own Kingdom into such a Posture as permitted
him to resent the Injuries done to his near Relation, threatened the Dane with a
War in case he delayed Restitution; and to this effect, in the Year 1689. set a
Fleet to Sea, with intention to second his Threats by Blows; which he might the
better then do, because the chief Support of the Danes in their Injustice, (the
French King) was at that time attacked by the Forces of the Confederates; and
England, by the Accession of his present Majesty to that Crown, was become a
principal Party in so just a War. So that France was likely to have its Hands
full at home. Besides, his Majesty of Great Britain being become Guarantee of
the Northern Peace, thought himself obliged in honor to maintain it; and in
order to that end, gave such Instructions to his Envoy Extraordinary, then
going to the Danish Court, as might induce it to comply with Justice, and
prevent that Effusion of Blood which was threatened. These Remonstrances had
their due weight with the King of Denmark; who at last yielded to the necessity
of his Circumstances, and to the Solicitations of the Elector of Brandenburg,
who pressed among the rest the Restoration of the Duke, and had sent his
Ministers to the Congress for the Accommodation, to propose a Project to that
end; not so much out of kindness to the Family of Gottorp, as for fear the
Swedish Arms should by any just occasion be brought over the Baltic; the event
of which might be fatal to all the Neighborhood, and to the Brandenburgers in
particular. Thus the Danes, with reluctance, consented at last to give up what
they had unjustly detained above thirteen years from its right Owner, after
having raised vast Sums of Money from the Country: for the Duke's part of the
Duchy of Sleswick only, had about 28000 Ploughs in it, each of which were
taxed to pay four Crowns a Month: besides innumerable other Extortions, which
filled the Purses of the Ministers of Denmark, who shared the Revenues among
them. The Swedish and Danish Fleets had been about a Fortnight at Sea, but no
Action had happened between them. After the Accommodation was published, and
the Duke restored, (yet without any reparation of Damages past) the two Fleets
returned to their several Ports, and the Duke to his Habitation of Gottorp,
which he found in a desolate Condition, compared to what he left it in. The
Dutch had a principal Hand in the Conclusion of this Agreement, by the means of
Mine Here Heemskirk their Minister; and his Majesty of Great Britain a large
share of the Glory of redressing a Wrong, which through so many years
possession pleaded a kind of Prescription to warrant it; the very first half
year of his Reign vindicating the Honor of the Crown of England, which was
engaged as Guarrantee; and securing the Peace of the North, in order to the
procuring the Assistance of one, or both of those Princes, toward the humbling
the common Enemy. This he effectually did; for the Danes immediately
afterward, sent by Treaty seven thousand Soldiers, which are yet in his
Majesty's Pay; and the Swedes remain at liberty to continue such of their
Troops in the Dutch Service as formerly were stipulated for, and which (had a
War broken out) they might have been forced to recall.

CHAP. XIV.
The Interests of Denmark in relation to other Princes.

IN treating of the Interests of the King of Denmark in relation to other
Princes or States which do not confine upon his Dominions, and of his
Affections toward them, it will not be necessary to observe strictly the order
and rank which those Princes hold in the World, I shall therefore take them as
they come indifferently.

With the Emperor The Emperor.
the King of Denmark is obliged to keep always a good outward Correspondence,
he being himself a Prince of the Empire, as Duke of Holstein; and the Emperor
having it often in his Power to do him several Kindnesses or Dis-kindnesses.
The King has a great desire to establish a Toll at Glucstadt upon the River
Elb; and although the Emperor's consent would not absolutely secure the
business for him, there being many other Princes, together with all those who
are concerned in the Trade of Hamburg that would obstruct it: yet it would
strike a great stroke, and must always be a necessary Preliminary. He keeps
therefore very fair with his Imperial Majesty, and when pressed by the
Ministers, sends (for valuable considerations) some Troops to serve in Hungary
against the Turks; notwithstanding which he is inwardly troubled at the Power
of the House of Austria, and the Increase of its Dominions; being jealous, as
most of the other German Princes are, that the Greatness of that Family may one
day turn to the detriment of the Liberty of Germany: and therefore is not
displeased at the Successes of the French, or of the Turks. He has been heard
to complain of the neglect which the Imperial Court shows of him, and its
partiality for the Swedes; this occasioned the Emperor's sending a Minister
lately to Reside at Copenhagen, as well as at Stockholm; since which he seems
to be better satisfied. But at the bottom it is to be supposed, that the Dane
is no true Friend of the Emperor's; because he thinks his Imperial Majesty
favors some Interests opposite to his, in conniving at the Lunenburgers
forcible possession of the Dukedom of Saxe-Lawenburg, and bestowing the
Electoral Dignity on that Family; the confirmation of which the King of Denmark
opposes with all his Power.

With Poland Poland.
the King of Denmark has at present little occasion either of Friendship or
Enmity; there being but small Correspondence between them; yet he will rather
choose to keep that Crown his Friend, than otherwise; because it may one day
stand him in stead against the Swedes: And for this reason it is that the
Elector of Brandenburg, whose Interest in that particular is much the same with
Denmark's, maintains a good Correspondence, and Entertains a constant Minister
at Warsaw. Besides, the Port of Dantzick is convenient for all that Trade in
the Baltic, and the Danes bring Corn, as well as other Merchandise from
thence. They keep likewise good Amity with the other Hans Towns.

The King is upon fair terms with the Duke of Courland, Duke of Courland.
who has permitted him to raise Men in his Country, the Commander of which,
one Poteamer, is Brother to that Duke's prime Minister; and the Soldiers are
the best able to live hardily, and to endure Fatigue of any in the World.

It is the Interest of Denmark to be well with the Dutch above all other
Princes in Europe, because of the great Revenue it receives from their
Traffic, and the Toll which they pay in the Sound: Because also in case of a
quarrel with Sweden, or any other extremity, the King of Denmark is certain of
the Assistance of the Hollanders; Holland.
which is always sufficient and ready to protect him, as has been experienced
in the former Wars between the Northern Crowns: for the Dutch will never suffer
the Balance of the North to lean too much to one side, their Interest in the
Trade of the Baltic being so considerable; but will take care to assist the
weaker with proportionable Succors; which the convenience of their Situation,
and their Naval Force permits them to do with greater ease than any other.
Notwithstanding all which Considerations, there are frequent Occasions of
Quarrel between the Dutch and Danes; and the Friendship which the latter have
for the former (especially since this War with France, and the Convention made
with England for the Interruption of all Commerce with that Kingdom) is very
weak and unstable; for besides that an Absolute Monarchy, for other Reasons,
can never thoroughly love a Republic, the Danes are envious at the great Trade
of the Dutch; and count it a Disparagement that Merchants, as they call them,
should have it in their Power to give Law to a Crowned Head. However, at the
bottom, Denmark would not be pleased that Holland should sink under the Force
of its Enemies, but would use its best Endeavors to prevent it, though
possibly not before Matters were reduced to so great an Extremity, as it might
be beyond the Ability of the Danes to afford a timely Remedy.

The King of Denmark loves the Alliance of France, France.
and keeps a stricter Correspondence with that Crown than with any other;
though it be most certain that the Maxims which he has learnt from thence, and
the Practices which followed those Maxims, have been the principal Occasion of
that Kingdom's present ill condition. But the King of France by fair Words,
large Promises, and a little Money seasonably bestowed, has had the knack to
amuse this Court, and to make it act as he pleases; notwithstanding the many
Affronts, the ill Successes, and the universal Misery which through his means
have attended it. The Emissaries of France are thick sown here; nothing pleases
that is not according to the French Pattern, either in Dress, Military
Discipline, or Politics: and it is certain that a fitter could not be followed
by any Arbitrary Prince, provided a due regard were had to the force and
strength to perform in proportion to the Design undertaken. But the want of
this Consideration has been fatal to Denmark; France had told this King, that
Soldiers are the only true Riches of Princes, and this has made him raise more
than he knows what to do with, unless he disturb his Neighbors; which
generally he does for the Interests of France, though at last it turns to his
loss. So that Denmark resembles in this point a Monster that is all Head and no
Body, all Soldiers and no Subjects; and whenever a General Peace comes to be
established in Europe, which shall set open Foreign Trade, and consequently
spoil all the Advantages that his Country enjoys at present, I cannot see what
will become of the Public Affairs here; for the Soldiers when disbanded, being
most of them Strangers, will return to their respective Homes; and the Revenues
of these Kingdoms must sink extremely through the want of People, and their
Poverty. It seems therefore no less than madness for the least and poorest
Kingdom of Europe to think of emulating with Success the richest, greatest, and
the most populous, and to take its Measures from thence; as if there were no
difference between King and King: So have I heard that the little Republic of
St. Marino in Italy, which consists but of one small Town with the Mountain it
stands upon, and is scarce taken notice of by Travelers, takes occasion to
write to the Republic of Venice sometimes, and to style it Our Sister, with as
much Gravity and Pride, as if it equalled the other in Power. But the vanity of
these poor Italians proceeds no farther than words, which does them no harm.

But the true Reasons which renders it the Interest of Denmark to keep well
with France (and they are no weak ones) are first, because they look upon that
Crown as the sole Balance against the Grandeur of the Emperor, and the House
of Austria, whose Power, as I said before, is looked on by all the Princes of
Germany with a very jealous Eye; the late Addition of the Crown of Hungary to
it, with its other Conquests on that side from the Turks, the probability of
the Spanish Dominions falling to some active Branch of it, and the remembrance
what havoc the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and his Successor, made among the
German Princes, when possessed of the like Advantages, makes the Danes as well
as the others, reflect seriously upon what may happen hereafter, should France
be reduced to too low an ebb: A second reason is, because they know no other
Naval Force able to contest the entire Dominion of the Seas with the English
and Dutch; and they are willing to keep the dispute about that Dominion
undetermined between the French and us, that no Laws may be laid upon Traffic,
but that they may reap their share of the Trade of the World; which they think
would be but small, should that Point be once finally decided to our Advantage.
A third Reason and the most forcible is, the Subsidies which the King of
Denmark draws from time to time from France: a little ready money among a
necessitous People, carrying irresistible Charms with it; And this has been the
drift of the French Policy in advising that King to a greater Charge than he
was able to bear, under pretense that they consulted his Honor and Grandeur,
whereas they only consulted their own ends; being sure, after they had rendered
him and his Country Poor, that they could buy him when they pleased. Yet
whenever the French Treasure shall come so far to be exhausted, that a fairer
bidder appears; this piece of Policy will not only fail the French, but turn to
their disadvantage.

With the Kings of Spain and Portugal Spain and Portugal.
the Dane is in a state of indifferency. Their Dominions are so far asunder,
and the business so little which they have with each other, that there happen
few or no occasions, either of a Quarrel or Friendship between them. Yet the
Danes have some small Trade for Salt and Wine with each of these Princes
Subjects; and during this War make some benefit of their Neutrality, by
transporting in their Ships the Effects of French, English, and Dutch from one
Port to another. They have indeed some Pretensions on the Spaniard for Arrears
of Subsidies owing to them ever since the Danes took the part of the
Confederates against France in the former War; but they despair of obtaining
them, unless some unforeseen Accident put them in a way of getting that Debt,
the Accounts of which have hardly ever been adjusted between them.

With the late Elector of Saxony Saxony.
the King of Denmark kept a very good correspondence; the Elector having
married one of the King's Sisters, that Affinity produced as amicable effects
as could be desired; insomuch that it begat a Resolution of a nearer Union of
the two Families in a Match between the present Elector (then Prince) and the
King's only Daughter; this proceeded as far as a formal Contract, and the usual
Marriage presents were Solemnly exchanged in order to Consummation; when on a
sudden the old Elector died last year, as he was leading an Army toward the
Rhine against the French, for the common cause of Europe; the Death of this
Prince, among other Alterations, produced this, that his Successor the present
Elector being thereby become at his own disposal, and having been formerly very
much in love with another Lady, who is the present Electress; refused to
complete his Marriage with the Daughter of Denmark, and sent back the Presents
which were given at the time of the Contract. This Action of his highly
disgusted the King, Queen, and the whole Danish Court; however, there was no
Remedy but patience; the Elector was too remote to fear any Effects of the
Danes displeasure, and resolved to pursue his own Inclinations in the choice of
a Wife, let the World say and do what it would. Accordingly he presently
courted and married where he fancied; leaving the Danes to digest this Affront
as well as they could; which they will scarce forget this great while. So that
it is to be supposed the ancient Knot between the King and the Electoral Family
of Saxe is hereby very much loosened; yet not so far as to proceed to any open
Breach, the Elector's Excuses for this Action having been received and
acccepted of as some sort of satisfaction.

With the Bishop of Munster, the King Bishop of Munster
of Denmark lives in good Amity, by reason of his Neighborhood to the Counties
of Oldenburg and Delmenhorst; and for the most part has a Minister residing in
that Court. The like Friendship is between him and the other Princes of
Germany; particularly with the Landtgrave of Hesse Cassel, who is Brother to
his Queen, and extremely beloved by her.

The King of Denmark has one Brother, viz.

Prince George, born 1653. and married to her Royal Highness the Princess Ann,
Sister to her Majesty of England: And four Sisters, viz.

Anna Sophia, the Widow of the late Elector of Saxony.

Frederica Emilia, the Wife of the Duke of Holstein.

Guillimetta Ernestina, Widow of the Palatine of the Rhine.

Ulrica Eleonora Sabina, the Queen of Sweden.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Laws, Courts of Justice, etc.

SOME Naturalists observe, that there is no Plant or Insect, how venomous or
mean soever, but is good for something toward the use of man if rightly
applied: in like manner it may be said, That several useful Lessons may be
learnt, conducing to the benefit of Mankind, from this Account of Denmark,
provided things be taken by the right handle.

Hitherto we have indeed met with many things in it to be avoided, and little
deserving imitation: but being now to speak of the Danish Laws, I must needs
begin with this good Character of them in general, That for justice, Brevity,
and perspicuity, they exceed all that I know in the World. They are grounded
upon Equity, and are all contained in one Quarto Volume, written in the
Language of the Country, with so much plainness, that no Man, who can write and
read, is so ignorant, but he may presently understand his own Case, and plead
it too if he pleases, without the Assistance of Counsel or Attorney.

Here is none of that Chicane to be found which destroys and raises so many
great Estates in England; a very few Advocates do the business of all the
Litigious Persons in these Kingdoms. Neither are their Fees arbitrary or
exorbitant; no Suit of what importance soever hangs in suspense longer than one
Year and a Month: since a Man may go through all the Courts, and have Execution
done within that time, unless he be wanting to himself.

It may be replied to this, That the scarcity of Money may be the principal
occasion of few Lawsuits and Lawyers. It is not denied, and perhaps a right
sense of this was the first cause of so good a Regulation of Justice: for since
the King was resolved to empty the Pockets of his Subjects, it was not for his
advantage to permit others to do it, and share the Gains with him. However,
thus much may with certainty be averred, That the like Regulation would not
only agree with, but consummate the happiness of a rich Country; and this
Instance of Denmark makes it evident that such a Regulation is practicable.

But to return to our purpose. In Denmark, in the ordinary Proceedings between
Man and Man, there are three Courts, every one of which has power to give a
definitive Sentence, and must either Acquit or Condemn. Yet there lies an
Appeal from the lower to the higher; and if the inferior Judge has wilfully
varied from the positive Law, the Party wronged has Damages given him, both
from the Judge and his Adversary. Here is no removal of Actions from one Court
to another, where the Parties may begin all again; but by way of ordinary
procedure from the lower to the higher. The three Courts are these, first, In
Cities and Towns the Byfoghts Court, to which in the Country does answer the
Herredsfougds Court. Secondly, From thence lies an Appeal to the Landstag or
general head Court for the Province. Thirdly, From thence to the Court called
the Highright in Copenhagen, where the King himself sometimes sits in Person,
and it is always composed of the prime Nobility of the Kingdom. The Judges in
the two former Courts are constituted indeed by the King's Letters Patents
durante beneplacito; but are punishable for any misdemeanors committed, and
condemned to make Reparation to the Party injured for any Injustice by them
done. The City of Copenhagen has this particular Privilege, that the Sentences
past in the Byfoghts Court, instead of passing through the Provincial Court,
are tried by the Burgomaster and Common Council, and so proceed to the highest
Court; which resembles so far our High Court of Chancery, that if any matter
happen so fall in debate, for the decision of which there is not a positive
Article to be found in the Law (which rarely happens) it is there determined by
the King, or by the others present, who are as it were the Keepers of the
King's Conscience: and all this were very well, were it not that the first
Article of the Law reserves to the King the Privilege of explaining or altering
it at his pleasure.

In Matters relating to the Revenue, the Rent-Chamber in Denmark resembles our
Court of Exchequer: which has also a Paymaster General belonging to it; and
sometimes there is a Court composed of some Members of this Rent-Chamber, the
Admiralty, and the College of Commerce; before which lies the Appeals of
Merchants whose Goodshappen to be seized for not having paid the King's Duties.

The Sentences passed in the inferior Courts are sometimes biassed and
partial; but not often, for fear of the highest Court, where great regard is
had to Justice; insomuch that I knew a Judge, who very hardly escaped being
fined for a Sentence passed against an English Merchant; which Sentence was
presently reversed.

Indeed, whilst Monsieur Griffinfeldt and Monsieur Wibbe were Chancellors,
there were mutterings, that the High Court Sentences were not altogether up to
the rigor of the Law; but this is very rare now, unless when a Courtier or
Favorite is interessed in such a Sentence; in which case, or in matters
wherein the King is concerned, you are to expect little Justice, especially if
it relate to Money.

The Salaries of the Judges are but small; they are paid out of the Exchequer,
and do not consist in Fees. The Byfogd may have about one hundred Rix Dollars
yearly; and he pays himself out of the Fines of Delinquents. In the Country the
Herredfogds have each of them the Rent that is due to the King for a Farm that
stands rated at ten Tuns of Hard-corn; he has besides from the Plaintiff and
Defendant for the Sentence he passes, ten Stivers from each. And the Byfogd or
Judge in Cities and Towns, double as much. Moreover, the contesting Parties are
bound to pay the Clerk so much a sheet for the Paper, in which is set down at
large the whole proceeding, and the Allegations of each Party, whether they be
Verbal or by Libel, and at the close of all the Sentence it self. At the
Byfogds Court, and the Landstag, the Judge inserts the Law, and adds the
Reasons upon which his Judgment is founded; but in the High Right no Reason is
given at all, or but very seldom. And that no Clerk may have it in his power to
pick any Man's Pocket by filling up many Sheets of Paper, there are Limits set,
beyond which no man is obliged to pay. Every one may plead his own Cause that
pleases; however, it is the King's Order that the Magistrates take care to have
one or more Advocates (such as they approve of) who are to plead for the Poor,
and for such as cannot plead for themselves: upon the whole matter, the Charges
of the Law are very easy; since a complaint may go through the three Courts
for fifty Rix Dollars, which is less then twelve pound Sterling; unless the Sum
in question be very great, and more than ordinary Evidences to be written on
Sealed Paper. These Laws are so equitable and expeditious, that they are
extremely commended by Merchants and Strangers, who have occasion to have
recourse to them. Neither is the smalness of the Expense any Encouragement to
those that love going to Law; for the Laws themselves provide effectually
against this Mischief, and take away the very Root of Litigiousness: being so
plain and clear, that a troublesome Person never finds his Account in promoting
vexatious Suits, but meets with all the Disappoiutments one would wish him.

In Criminal Matters a great Severity of Justice is practiced. You never hear
of any Person guilty of the Crime of Treason against the King; the Government
has rivetted it self so fast upon the Bottom it now stands, that no Body offers
to wag so much as the Tongue against it. There are no Clippers or Coiners, no
Robbers upon the Highway, nor House-breakers; which convenience of Arbitrary
Government, among the multitude of Mischiefs attending it, I have likewise
observed in France; perhaps because those Princes, who are entire Masters of
their Subjects Purses at pleasure, take more effectual care of them as of their
own, and therefore use such means that none shall plunder or cheat their
People, for the same reason that Folks kill Vermin in Dove-Houses, viz. that
they may make the greater profit themselves. The most usual Capital Crimes are
Manslaughter and Stealing: Execution is done upon Offenders by beheading them
with a Sword at one stroke very dexterously; the Headsman, tho infamous by his
place, so that no Body will come into his Company, yet is commonly rich, having
other advantageous Employments that no Body else dares undertake, viz. the
emptying all the Necessary Houses, the removing all dead Dogs and Horses out of
Houses and Stables, or from before Doors; for no Danish Servant will upon any
terms set a hand to either of these Works, and the Executioner has his own
Rates for these base Offices, which he performs by his under Servant, called
the Racker.

The Advocates are not bred as with us in England in Public Societies, such as
Inns of Court or Chancery; neither take they any degrees of Barrister,
Sergeant, or the like; but may take up the Calling as they please, according to
their Inclinations or Abilities.

There are besides the three ordinary Courts before mentioned, Commissioners of
the Admiralty, which they call the Admiralty-Court; wherein Affairs relating to
the Sea are determined, such as Prizes, Wrecks, Disputes with Privateers, and
the like.

There is likewise a Chancellary, which consists of a number of Clerks, who
write and issue all the King's Orders, give out Citations, transcribe Papers,
make the Latin Projects of Treaties with Foreign Courts, according to the
Directions they receive. In short, they are as it were under-Secretaries, and
were formerly subject to the Government of one whom they called a Chancellor;
but since Monsieur Wibbe's death, that Employment has not been filled: neither
does it resemble our Place of Chancellor in England. The Clerks of this Office
have some small Salary from the King, and have moreover so much for every
Citation to the High Court, and so much for every Order they issue, which they
divide among them.

In Copenhagen there is a Public Officer appointed, called the Polity Master,
whose business is to keep good Orders in Affairs relating to the City; he is to
see that the Merchants sell warrantable Merchandise, that they do not interfere
in one another Trades; and to compose Differences on that account among them;
that the Public Buildings, Draw-bridges, and Canals be kept in repair; that
the Streets be paved, cleansed, and free of the Encumbrances of Bulks and other
Inconveniences. That no prohibited Goods be brought in; that there be always
plenty of Bread-Corn, and sold at a moderate Price; that the requisite
Assistance in case of Fire be at hand. And indeed the Orders taken in this
matter are very good; for there are select Companies appointed to watch and
extinguish the Fire, no others daring to approach within a certain distance,
lest under pretense of bringing help, they take the occasion to plunder. The
Chimney-sweepers are bound to keep a Register of all Chimneys they sweep, that
in case of any ill Accident, those by whose neglect or covetousness it happens,
may be answerable for it.No Torches or Flambeaux are allowed to be carried in
the Streets, by reason of the great quantities of Firr, Timber, and the
constant high Winds which are here; instead of which all Persons, even the
Court it self, make use of large round Lanthorns, carried at the end of long
sticks. The PolityMaster regulates also the price of Traveling in their open
Wagons, and punishes such as exact more than the established rate, if they be
complained of; also such as travel in the King's particular Highway without
permission; and such as make use of Guns and Fowling-Pieces, and bring in
Venison, Fowl, and Hares by stealth, or in times when they are prohibited to be
killed. He takes care also to prevent and suppress Riots and Disturbances of
the Soldiers, who are not permitted to walk the Streets after the Tattoo has
gone about; and in general of all other matters relating to order, quiet, and
decency.

Among other good Regulations in Denmark, I look upon that of the Apothecaries
to be none of the least commendable; for no man is permitted to exercise that
Trade, unless he be appointed by the College of Physicians, and confirmed by
the King himself. There are but two allowed to the City of Copenhagen, and one
to every other considerable Town. Their Shops and Drugs are carefully visited
twice or thrice a year by the Magistrates, accompanied by the Doctors of
Physic; and such Drugs as are either naught or old, are taken from them and
flung away. The prices of all these Drugs are fixed, so that any Child may be
sent to an Apothecaries Shop without hazard of being imposed upon; and nothing
is sold that is not exceeding good, and at very moderate Rates. They sell all
for ready Money, yet keep exact Books of what they sell, to whom, and by whose
Prescription: so that the great Mischief of accidental or wilful Poisoning, so
frequent in other Countries, is either quite avoided; or if practiced, easily
discovered and punished.

The Government in the Country is managed, by dividing it into several
Districts or Governments, called Stifts Ampts, whereof there are in all seven,
of these, four are in Jutland, the other three in the Islands. Each of these is
again subdivided into three lesser Jurisdictions, called Ampts. The
Stifts-Ampts-man, or Governor of a County is commonly one of the best Quality
and Fortune in that part of the Country; and this Charge answers to that of
Lord Lieutenant of our Counties in England, or rather of Intendant in France.
The Ampt-man, or under-Governor of a Hundred, or Balliage, is generally a
Gentleman of lesser Fortune, who resides in the principal Town of his District,
and takes care of all Matters relating to the Public: as convenient quartering
of Soldiers, providing for their March, collecting the King's Revenues, giving
orders to the Peasants when employed about Public Works, or when the King
travels. All this they do themselves, or by inferior Officers, like our
Bailiffs and Constables. These Employments are for the most part given by the
King during life, and are the principal Rewards of such as have well deserved:
he that has served long and faithfully as a Foreign Minister, or in any other
considerable Civil Post, is usually promoted upon a vacancy to be
Stifts-Ampt-man of his Province; provided his Estate and Interest there be some
way correspondent. The Grooms of the King's Bed chamber, and other Officers of
the Court, upon their Marriage, or retiring from Court, are gratified with an
Ampt, and sent to live at home; provided they have served long, and be in any
favor. The King pays to each of these a yearly Salary out of his Treasury; to
a Stifts-Ampts man a thousand Crowns a year, to an Ampt-man four hundred
Crowns. The principal Advantages they reap from these Employments, are these:
First, That being more considered and favored at Court than others, they
escape better at the time of a Public Tax, and can often find means to ease
the Burden off their own Lands by inhancing it upon others; neither will the
Court willingly give ear to Complaints against them. Secondly, They are very
much honored and feared at home, and have the Privilege to domineer over the
Peasants, and other their inferiors without control, unless they do it too
grossly, and beyond measure.

Before I conclude this Chapter, I think it very pertinent to take notice, That
in Denmark there are no Seditions, Mutinies, or Libels against the Government;
but all the People either are or appear to be Lovers of their King,
notwithstanding their ill Treatment, and the hardships they groan under. And I
suppose one principal Reason of this to be the Equality of the Taxes, and the
manner of Taxing. It is not to be imagined by those that see it not, what a
comfort it is to the Sufferers to be ill used alike; for Poverty and Riches
being only such in proportion; provided men be treated like their Neighbors,
they grumble not; that which vexes the Oppressed in most Countries, (especially
the Common People, who are more than ordinary envious) is to see their County,
their Parish, or their House taxed more in proportion than their Neighbors:
and they have reason to be discontented at this, for it brings real Poverty
upon those that are over-taxed; it does not diminish the general Stock of the
Subjects Money, which would keep all Commodities and Necessaries at equal and
moderate Rates; but picks particular men's Pockets, whilst it leaves others rich
and able to profit by the Necessities of the Poor.

It Is a certain sign of an ill Government where there are abundance of Laws;
but it is no certain sign of a good one, where there are but a few, as is plain
in the case of Denmark. However, this Blessing of few and good Laws, is like a
Grain of Consolation to sweeten a World of Bitterness, and enables them to bear
their other Hardships with more Ease and Patience. Tacitus; Corruptissima
Republica plurimae leges.


CHAP. XVI.
The State of Religion, of the Clergy, and Learning, etc.

WHEN the Corruptions of the Roman Church grew so intolerable to many Nations
in Europe, that an Universal Reformation became necessary, Denmark, among the
rest of the Northern Countries (which had been less managed and more abused by
the Priests than the Southern) shook off that yoke, and instead of the
Roman Catholic, embraced the Doctrine and Opinions of Martin Luther. King
Frederick the First, about one hundred and fifty years since, brought these in,
and established them so generally in his Dominions, that at this day there is
no other Religion here professed than the Lutheran, if we will except the
little Reformed French Church of Copenhagen, set up by the Queen, and one
Popish Chapel at Glucstadt, permitted about ten years ago to a few Popish
Families in those parts; which is the first that has been since the
Reformation. This great Unity in belief in the North (for Sweden has it as well
as Denmark) is owing to the Sincerity of those Princes that began the
Reformation there: for it is likely they did it upon a pure religious account,
and therefore went effectually to work in the Conversion of all their Subjects,
using proper means for such a purpose; whereas in England, and elsewhere,
Reasons of State and other Byends, had at least as great a share in it as
Conviction of Conscience; so that the business was done by halves, through the
unsettledness of our Princes in their Opinions, who encouraged or connived at a
dissenting Party, according as their worldly Interests led them. The vast
convenience to any Prince of having all his Subjects of one Opinion, is visible
in Denmark; where there are no Factions nor Disputes about Religion, which
usually have a great influence on any Government; but all are of one Mind, as
to the way of Salvation, and as to the Duty they owe their Sovereign. This cuts
off occasion of Rebellion and Mutiny from many, who otherwise would desire it,
and seem to have reason enough, because of the heavy pressures they lie under.
As long as the Priests are entirely dependant upon the Crown, and the People
absolutely governed by the Priests in Matters of Conscience, as they are here,
the Prince may be as Arbitrary as he pleases, without running any risque from
his Subjects: in due consideration of which benefit, the Clergy are very much
favored, and have full scope given them to be as bigoted as they please;
which indeed they are to a very great degree, having no common Charity for any
that differ from them in Opinion, except the Church of England; and to that
they are very kind, often saying, That there is no Essential Difference between
it and theirs, and wishing that therewere an union of them projected and
perfected: wherein their Design is not so much to reduce our Ecclesiastics to
the low estate theirs are in, as to raise their own to the Splendour and
Revenues of ours; which are the principal Virtues they admire in us. They have
cast off the Opinions of Rome in the Supremacy of the Pope, and other Points;
but they would retain the Grandeur belonging to that Church, and applaud us for
doing both so dexterously: so that I am confident the business of
Consubstantiation would make no difference, did Princes think it worth their
while to promote this Union. On the other side, the Calvinist is hated by them
as much as the Papist; and the reason they give is, because he is against
absolute Monarchy, and has a resisting Principle.

Notwithstanding this Flattery of the Court, they are not admitted into civil
Affairs, nor have any thing to do in the Government: neither are they
encouraged to appear about Court, or on Public Occasions; the Pulpit is their
Province, and it is left free to them. Here they take a vast Liberty of
Reprehending not only Vices, but particular persons of the highest quality,
which no body takes notice of, as long as they keep to their own Trade. The
common People admire them for this boldness, and the best Subsistence of the
Priests in Cities and Towns being voluntary Benevolence, they take care to
cultivate the good Opinion of the Mobb, whom they keep likewise in awe by the
practice of Confession before they Administer the Sacrament, which every one
that receives is obliged to undergo; and this they retain of the Romish Church,
as well as Crucifixes, and other Ceremonies.

There are six Superintendants in Denmark, who take it very kindly to be called
Bishops, and My Lord; viz. one in Zealand, one in Funen, and four in Jutland
There are also four in Norway. These have no Temporalities, keep no
Ecclesiastical Courts, have no Cathedrals, with Prebends, Canons, Deans,
Subdeans, etc. But are only primi inter pares; having the Rank above the
inferior Clergy of their Province, and the inspection into their Doctrine and
Manners. The Revenue of the Bishop of Copenhagen is about Two thousand Rix
Dollars yearly; the other Bishops of Denmark have about Fifteen hundred Rix
Dollars, and of Norway One thousand Rix Dollars; they are allowed to have two
or three Parishes each; their Habit is common with that of the other Ministers,
viz. A plaited black Gown, with short Sleeves, a large stiff Ruff about the
Neck, and a Cap with Edges, like our Masters of Art, except that theirs is
round, and the others square.

Most of them understand English, and draw the very best of their Divinity, as
they confess themselves, out of English Books. Many of them have studied in
Oxford, who are more valued than the others; they are very constant Preachers,
and never read their Sermons, but pronounce them with a great deal of Action.
Holy Days and Fast-days are observed as solemnly as Sundays; and in Copenhagen
the City Gates are close shut during Sermon time, so that no body can go in or
out. The Commonalty are great frequenters of the Churches, which are kept much
more decently, cleanly, and better adorned than with us: so that they look
almost as gaudy as the Popish Churches.

They are all great Lovers of Organs, and have many very good ones, with
skilful Organists, who entertain the Congregation with Music, during half an
hour, either before or after Service.

Denmark has formerly produced very Learned Men, Such as the famous
Mathematician Tycho-Brahe, the Bartholines for Physic and Anatomy, Borichius,
who died lately, and bequeathed a considerable Legacy to the University of
Copenhagen. But at present Learning is there at a very low Ebb; yet Latin is
more commonly spoken by the Clergy than with us. The Books that come out in
Print are very few, and those only some dull Treatises of Controversy against
the Papists and Calvinists. The Belles Lettres, or Gentile Learning are very
much strangers here, and will hardly be introduced till a greater affluence
among the Gentry makes way for them. It is said that Necessity is the Mother of
Invention; which may be true in some degree, but I am sure too much Necessity
depresses the Spirits, and destroys it quite; neither is there any Invention
here, or tolerable Imitation of what is brought in to them by Strangers.

There is but one University, which is at Copenhagen, and that mean enough in
all respects; neither the Building nor Revenues being comparable to those of
the worst of our single Colleges. The Students wear black Cloaks, and live
scattered about the Town, after the manner of those in Leyden. Some of the
Professors live in the House. Every year on the King's Birth day they have a
kind of Act; the King honors them with his presence, and the Rector Magnificus
harangues him with a Latin Speech, full of as fulsome Flattery, as if Louis le
Grand were the Monarch to be entertained, and a fawning Jesuit the Orator. At
certain Periods there are a few Danish Verses sung by the ordinary singing Boys
to very indifferent Music; and so the Farce ends.

There was in this King's Father's time an University at Sora, a Town very
pleasantly situated about Forty miles from the City, where the Lodgings and
Conveniences for studying much exceeded those of Copenhagen: But the King had
occasion for the Revennes; so that now it is desolate, and in its stead only a
small Grammar-shool erected.

The Provisions for the Poor are very inconsiderable; formerly there was a
pretty store of Hospitals scattered up and down the Country, but at present the
Revenues of most of these are diverted to other uses, and those not Public
ones.

To conclude; I never knew any Country where the Minds of the People were more
of one calibre and pitch than here; you shall meet with none of extraordinary
Parts or Qualifications, or excellent in particular Studies and Trades; you see
no Enthusiasts, Madmen, Natural Fools, or fanciful Folks; but a certain
equality of Understanding reigns among them: every one keeps the ordinary
beaten road of sense, which in this Country is neitherthe fairest nor the
foulest, without deviating to the right or left; yet I will add this one Remark
to their praise, that the Common People do generally write and read.

The CONCLUSION.
IT has been a great Mistake among us, That the Popish Religion is the only
one, of all the Christian Sects, proper to introduce and establish Slavery in a
Nation, insomuch that Popery and Slavery have been thought inseparable: not to
derogate from the merit of the RomanCatholick Persuasion, which has been the
Darling of so many Monarchs upon that account; I shall make bold to say that
other Religions, and particularly the Lutheran, has succeeded as effectually in
this Design as ever Popery did.' It Is confessed indeed that Popery would certainly
introduce Slavery, but it is denied that the last cannot come in without the
assistance of the former; and whoever takes the pains to visit the Protestant
Countries abroad, who have lost their Liberty even since they changed their
Religion for a better, will be convinced that it is not Popery as such, but the
Doctrine of a blind Obedience in what Religion soever it be found, that is the
destruction of the Liberty, and consequently of all the Happiness of any
Nation. Nay, I am Persuaded that many are satisfied the late King James's
Attempts to bring in Popery was the principal thing which rescued our Liberties
from being entirely swallowed up; there seeming in his Reign, through the
Interest and Dishonesty of some, the Dissoluteness, Laziness, and Ignorance of
others, to have been (in many men's Opinions) a general tendency toward
Slavery, which would scarcely have been vigorously enough opposed, had he left
the business of Religion untouched; and if once introduced, it had been
maintained more effectually than in the days of Popery; I say more effectually,
because the dependence which the Romish Clergy and Monks have on the Church of
Rome, causes often a clashing of Interests, and derogates from that entire
Obedience the Subjects owe to the Prince, which is preached up by that Church,
as often as the Sovereign acts according to their direction, and down again
whenever he displeases them; whereof we have had frequent Examples in this
Kingdom of England, where there have been Bishops and Abbots in the days of
Popery, as zealous Assertors of the Liberties of the People, as any Laymen
could be, whether out of a true Principle, or not, I will not determine; but
Occasions have been taken by them to raise Tumults and Wars, and in the Scuffle
the Liberties of the People (of which both King and Churchmen strove who
should be the Masters) have escaped untouched: but in Denmark, as well as other
Protestant Countries of the North, through the entire and sole dependence of
the Clergy upon the Prince, without the interfering of the Authority of any
Spiritual Superior, such as that of the Pope among the Romanists: through their
Principles and Doctrine, which are those of unlimited Obedience; through the
Authority they have with the Common People, etc slavery seems to be more
absolutely established than it is in France; as in effect it is more practiced;
for that King's Subjects are better treated; there is a Name of a Parliament at
Paris, and other great Towns, tho they meet for no other end, but to verify the
King's Edicts; there is a formal Demand made of a Benevolence, or Don Gratuit
in some Provinces, which probably they have not the power to deny; there is an
encouragement of Trade, Manufactures, Learning, etc. all tending to the good of
the People. Besides, we see by experience, that that King often has great
quarrels with the Court of Rome, which whenever his power is reduced to a
lower ebb, that his Clergy are not overawed by it, may produce such Divisions
and Disturbances as possibly some Sparks of the People's Liberty may again
proceed from the collision of two such hard Rocks: but in the Countries I have
Spoken of, there is no hope of any Such resource; all is swallowed up in the
King; Temporals and Spirituals, Soul, Body, Estate, and Conscience; the Army
and the Priests are two sure Cards: the Prince that has one of them on his
side, can hardly fail; but he that has both depending on him, need fear nothing
from his own Subjects, let him use them never so ill.

Much has been spoken and written by several Authors of the rigor of the
Turkish Government, let us consider some particulars of it by way of comparison.

The Turks are the Conquerors of the Christians in the Countries they have
overrun, and have a sort of barbarous Right to use them ill; yet they never
persecute them upon account of Conscience; they suffer them for the most part
to inhabit and cultivate their own Lands without disturbance, paying only a
Caratch yearly for Tribute; which as I have been informed by a Minister of his
Imperial Majesty's, amounted in Hungary, Sclavonia, Servia, and Bosnia, only to
about ten Dollars for an ordinary Family in time of Peace, and during a War
nothing. It is true, the Propriety of all Lands in Turkey is in the Grand
Signior; but whether it be not better to be only a Farmer at an easy Rent,
than to have the Name of a Proprietor prietor without a comfortable
Subsistence, and in effect to be Master of Nothing, I leave the Reader to judge.

The forcing away Children from the poor Christian Parents, is accounted a
great hardship, though it be for the worldly Profit and Advancement of those
Children; bating the point of Religion, it is a far less Mischief to deprive
Parents of their Sons and Daughters, in order to maintain them well, than to
leave a heavy Charge upon their Hands, after having taken away the possibility
of Nourishing and Educating them.

The Sun, Soil, Climate, and Situation, with other Natural Advantages of the
Grand Signior's Dominions, as to Profit and Pleasure, are infinitely beyond
those of other Northern Countries that we are acquainted with. In Turkey the
Harbors are always open, except some few places in the Black Sea; whereas here
they are frozen up three or four Months in the Year. There the Fruits, Flesh,
Corn and Herbs, have double the Virtue and Nourishment they have here; the Wine
there is good and plentiful, and the very Water wholesome and pleasant; here the
first is scarce, and the last very bad. In a word, in some Christian Countries
of Europe, there seems to be most of the Mischiefs of a Turkish Government in
an infinitely worse Climate: Besides, we are to consider, that the Turks
themselves, who are Lords and Masters, live well and pleasantly, and it is
their conquered Slaves whom they use in the manner abovementioned.

If it be enquired, Whether Matters are like to last at the same rate they are
now at in Denmark? Though nothing be more fallacious than a Judgment made of
the future, I shall not omit speaking a few words in answer.

Many reasons might persuade one to think, that the Government upon the bottom
it stands cannot last long. As in the first place, that natural Love of
Liberty, which resided formerly in the Northern Nations more eminently than in
other Parts of the World. What can be expected less from the Descendants of the
ancient Goths and Vandals, who propagated and established Liberty in so many
other Countries, than to shake a heavy Yoke off themselves, which their
Forefathers were not able to bear? especially since this Yoke is so
extraordinary grievous, that the Chains which the Neighboring Countries wear,
are but Ornamental ones, if compared with theirs.

Secondly, The freshness and newness of this Alteration of their Condition. It
being no more than thirty two years since it happened; and many remaining yet
alive, who remember the days of Liberty, and in their private Discourses with
their Friends and Children make Comparison between the past and present times,
and condole with them the loss of so great a Blessing; it might seem that the
Opinion of the present Government's not being sufficiently rooted, nor having
gained Authority by length of time to settle, should encourage those that find
themselves grieved, to think of Methods tending to a Change.

Thirdly, The Neighborhood of the Swedes, who have still their Eye upon
Denmark, and long to be sole Monarchs of the North, and Masters of the
Baltick-Sea. Now the Burden being so great as it is, one would think the
Natives, in hopes of Ease, would rather wish for, than defend their Country
from an Invader; because they have little or no Property to lose, and imagine
there is scarce a possibility of changing for the worse.

Fourthly, The numerousness of the Royal Family. There being four Princes, it
will be rare if Concord be maintained among them all, especially since the
younger are like to be but meanly provided for: so that frequent Occasions may
be taken from Quarrels and Disputes (which possibly in future times may arise
among them) of doing something in favor of Liberty.

These Reasons might cause one to make a Judgment, that the Danish Government
could not long subsist as it is. But on the other hand, there are no less
weighty ones which would induce to believe the contrary: For, first, the
ancient Love of Liberty seems to be quite extinct in the North; and in its
place to have succeeded the conveniences of a dull Obedience. A miserable Life
which jogs on at the same heavy rate, has a mixture of Melancholy Ease with it,
which is preferred before those sudden Accidents, and brisk Traverses of
Fortune which Commotions would occasion; especially by a People naturally of an
unactive Body and heavy Spirit, depressed by their Misfortunes, which are now
group up with them, and become their familiar Companions.

In the second place, the Newness of the Alteration of the Government seems to
have little or no influence at present upon the People: for the King has taken
such care by reducing Ancient and Rich Families to a low Estate, by raising new
ones, by making all the People poor in Spirit, as well as Purse; that thirty
two years has had an effect conducing to his purpose, as much as three hundred
could have done: Insomuch that I verily believe, the Danes do now really love
Servitude; and like the Cappadocians of old, could not make use of Liberty if
it were offered them; but would throw it away if they had it, and resume their
Chains. Possibly they would wish them less weighty, but Chains they could not
live without. If there be one or two among so many thousands who are of
contrary Sentiments, they dare not so much as mutter them to their own
Children, nor would be heard with patience if. they did.

Thirdly, The Unity of Religion, and the Opinions, together with the Authority
of the Priests, seems to have cut away the root of Sedition, from whence
Alterations might proceed.

Fourthly, A standing Army composed for the most part of Foreigners, who have
no value for the Natives, nor any concern for their welfare. The Court seems to
have had this in its eye, when it raised and maintained such an Army, but in
process of time the Army is become the People; that is to say, the only thing
worth the King's Care and Affection; and the People nothing, so that no
Designs, tending to a Revolution, are to be feared from them.

Fifthly, The Swedes treat their own Subjects at such a rate as gives the Danes
but little Prospect of benefit by a Change; and besides, there is such a fixed
hatred between these two Nations, by reason of the Injuries they have so often
given and received, that it is thought impossible that the Danes, who have been
for the most part the Aggressors, as well as the sufferers, can ever forgive
them. Many judicious Persons do think however, that the Swede would find means
to overcome these Difficulties, did not the Discontents he has raised at home,
make War dangerous to him, and the interest of almost all the other Princes of
Europe concur in the Preservation of the Danes, under the Domination of their
own King, by obstructing any further Accession of Power and Territories to the
Swedes. And this is certainly such a Bar as cannot be leaped over, so that
little of Alteration seems to be expected in Denmark from hence.

Lastly, Those Jealousies which use to reign in the Families of Princes, are
not so common nor fatal in Germany as elsewhere: The King of Denmark is a
German Prince himself, and it is likely will find such Means of preferring his
younger Sons, as may content them, either by breeding them up to the War (which
is the most ordinary way) or by assigning them Appanages in convenient Places
not liable to dispute; besides, it is no rare thing in Germany to see Princes
satisfied with very moderate Revenues. So that the commonness of the thing
takes away the Discontent which might arise in highborn Spirits, by reason of
the lowness of their Fortunes; and if any Wars be in Europe, thither they all
run to get Bread, and Reputation. What else should we do for a Stock of
Generals in such Havoc as the present Wars make of them? therefore nothing of
Intestine Commotions seems to be reasonably expected from hence, that shall
alter the Form of Government; and from all these Reasons it may be concluded,
That the present State is fixed and durable, and that the People with great
difficulty may perhaps change their Masters, but never their Condition.

FINIS.

