I think this Book fit to be Printed.

June the 4th. 1690. JOHN HOSKYNS. V. P. R. S.

DIOPTRICA NOVA. A TREATISE OF DIOPTRICKS, In Two PARTS. Wherein the Various
Effects and Appearances OF Spherick Glasses, BOTH Unequal and Concave, Single
and Combined, IN TELESCOPES and MICROSCOPES, Together with Their USEFULNESS in
many Concerns of Humane Life, ARE EXPLAINED.

By WILLIAM MOLYNEUX of Dublin Esquire Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

Ex Visibilibus Invisibilia.

London: Printed for BENJ. TOOK, MDCXCII.

To the ILLUSTRIOUS The Royal Society.
THE Design of the ensuing Treatise being the Promotion of a Part of
Physico-Mathematical Knowledge in the English Nation; I know not to whom I can
more properly present it, than to that noble Body of English Philosophers,
whose Foundation by the Royal Charter of King Charles II. is to this very
purpose. How far, and how successfully you have hitherto prosecuted the end of
this excellent Institution, it is needless for me to declare: since the literate
World is already so abundantly stored with your learned Labors, and useful
Discoveries; whereof I could here recount a List of many Hundreds published by
several Members of the Society. But I design not a Panegyric, but an humble
Address for your Favor and Countenance to my present Endeavors: And this I
hope for, with the more Assurance, having already seen your favorable
Acceptance of many Offerings of this kind, and your ready Encouragement of all
such Philosophical Inquiries, as tend to the use of Life, or Advancement of
Arts and Sciences.

And on this Occasion I cannot omit expressing my Sense of that excellent
Method of Experimental Philosophy, which now, by your Example and
Encouragement, does so universally prevail, and is so highly advanced all over
Europe, and other Parts of the World.

It Is wonderful to consider, how the Schools were formerly overrun with a
senseless kind of Iargon, which they called Philosophy; and which men studied
with the greatest Labor and Assiduity, that they might attain the name of Wise
and Learned. This certainly was the greatest Cheat was ever imposed on the mind
of Man: But why say I, imposed? Men drew it on themselves, and run their own
Heads into the Noose: and when they had entangled themselves in a thousand
ridiculous Disputes about empty Questions, they vainly thought they had
attained the Perfection of Philosophers; whilst they had no Ideas in their
Minds answerable to those Noises they made with their Tongues; but took more
pains to deceive both themselves and others, than is requisite for the
Propagation of true Knowledge. And indeed we may well imagine, that, had the
former Ages of the World been at half that Labor and Study for the Advancement
of real Knowledge, which they spent in promoting verbose Stuff; Manking by this
time might have been by many Degrees more wise, and consequently more happy
even in this Life; for Wisdom only makes men so.

But in this last Age the generous Undertakings of the Philosophic Societies
of Europe (to whom your Institution has shown the way, and been an illustrious
Example) have dissipated these dark Mists, and have abdicated this kind of
empty Stuff; which had crept into even Natural Disquisitions; and like a
Leprosy had quite overrun the whole Body of Philosophy, deforming its Beauty,
and ruining its Strength. Men are not satisfied now with noisy Words, and
nothing else; but require more solid Foundations of Knowledge, and believe no
farther than they can find good Proofs.

This great Change, which Philosophy or the Prosecution of Knowledge in general
has received of late years, is manifest in all its Parts; but in none more than
in natural Enquiries. To these you have given a clearly new Turn, wholly
different from the Methods, by which they were formerly prosecuted in the
Schools. And how advantageously the Change has been made, will be evident to
any that considers the one and the other Method.

The Commentators on Aristotle, (who was certainly himself a most diligent and
profound Investigator of Nature) have rendered Physics on heap of froathy
Disputes, managing the whole Knowledge of Body and Motion, Consult Magirus,
Eustathius, Zanardus, Col. Complutensis Com. etc. the common Natural Philosophy
Books read in our Colleges.
of Animals, Plants, and Minerals; of Celestial, Aerial and Terrestrial Bodies;
by Hypothetical Conjectures, confirmed by plausible Arguments of Wit and
Rhetoric, ordered in a Syllogistical form; and answering Objections in like
manner: But never studied to prove their Opinions by Experiments. By which
Method they were as ignorant of the Properties and Affections of Natural
Bodies, as if they were not at all the Subject of their Disquisitions. And yet
these were the great Dictators of Physics for many Ages in our Colleges and
Schools; and no one was accounted worthy the Name of a Philosopher, that would
not on their Authority Jurare in verba. He that could Dispute and distinguish,
about Sympathy, Antipathy, occult Qualities, Antiperistesis, and a Thousand
such other fantastic Terms, was reputed a great Proficient, and deeply versed
in Natures Secrets: tho all the while perhaps he knew not any one of the
admirable Phenomenon of the Magnet, or was not at all versed in the History of
any one Branch in Nature. They Would rumble out indeed the Definition and Divisions
of Comets; but knew nothing of the Laws of their Motions, or other Affections.
They Would tell you the Tides depend on the Influence of the Moon; and when you
proceed farther, and ask, what is this Influence? They Will yet give you a Word
for it, and say, it is an occult Quality: If you inquire, what an occult Quality
is? They Are at a Stand, and having no farther hard Word here to fly to, are
forced to confess it is a Quality they know nothing of. Had they not better at
first have plainly confessed, they know not the Cause of the Tides? no surely;
For tho this had been more becoming modest Philosphers, it would not so well
captivate the Vulgar, and gain to themselves the Repute of deep Knowledge.

Yet this verbose Philosophy is that, which for many Generations prevailed in
the World: This it is, which is enjoined to be read and studied in our Colleges
and Academies, by the Statutes and Charters thereof: which in this Particular,
to the apparent Hindrance of the Advancement of real and useful Knowledge, do
yet remain unaltered in our Universities: wherein the first years of young
Students may be employed with much more Advantage by prosecuting other Methods.
And, My thinks, it were now full time (after so happy a Reformation of our
Errors in Religion, and purging our Seminaries of Learning from the Fopperies
and Superstition of a false Worship) to begin a Reformation of our Human
Literature, by establishing more useful Methods of Education, especially for
the Employment of our more tender years.

But tho this weighty Undertaking has hitherto been deferred in them (the
Reason whereof I leave to the Consideration of the learned and reverend Heads
of our Universities) yet the strong Wits of many in this last Age have broken
all these Fetters; And have happily advanced the true Method of prosecuting
Knowledge upon solid Foundations.

This is manifest in every Branch of Learning. Logic has put on a Countenance
clearly different from what it appeared in formerly: How unlike is its shape in
the Ars Cogitandi, Recherches de la Verite, etc. from what it appears in
Smigletius, and the Commentators on Aristotle? But to none do we owe for a
greater Advancement in this Part of Philosophy, than to the incomparable Mr.
Lock, Who, in his Essay concerning Humane Understanding, has rectified more
received Mistakes, and delivered more profound Truths, established on
Experience and Observation, for the Direction of Man's mind in the Prosecution
of Knowledge, (which I think may be properly termed Logic) than are to be met
with in all the Volumes of the Ancients. He has clearly overthrown all those
Metaphysical Whymsies, which infected men's Brains with a Spice of Madness,
whereby they feigned a Knowledge where they had none, by making a noise with
Sounds, without clear and distinct Significations.

Natural Philosophy is now prosecuted by Observation, Experiment, and History
thereof. And indeed if we consider it rightly, there is really no other sort of
Natural Philosophy, but this only. For by Natural Philosophy, or Physics, do
we mean any thing else, but the Knowledge of the Properties and Affections of
Natural Bodies? And is this to be obtained any otherwise, than by Experiment
and Observation? Can any Man Dispute me into the Knowledge of the Magnet's
Attraction, Direction and Variation; or of the Phenomenon of the Mercurial
Baroscope without Trial and Experiment? Can any Arguments prove that a little
Sulphur, Nitre, and Charcole should produce such a quick and strong Blast as
Gunpowder, before they be actually put together and tried? Men might have
disputed to all Eternity, before their Gibberish could discover the Use of that
ordinary despicable Substance, Iron-Ore: To which, for ought I see, (as a most
ingenious Author has observed) we are beholding for all the Politure and
Plenty; all the Learning, State, and Magnificence of the World, beyond the
Rudeness, Wants, and Ignorance of the ancient savage Americans: Whose Natural
Endowments and Provisions equal those of the most flourishing and polite
Nations; But they wanted the Advantageous Uses of this contemptible Mineral. So
that he, who first discovered the Use of that one poor Mine; or Tubalcain, that
first taught the way of working in Iron, may be deservedly celebrated as the
Father of Arts, and Author of most of the Conveniences of Human Life.

I know some will say, that by Natural Philosophy is meant not only the
Knowledge of the Properties and Uses of Natural Bodies; but also the Assgning
the true Reasons or Causes of these Properties. But in this Particular we are
to proceed with great Caution. I know the Mind of man is of that inquisitive,
prying Nature; that upon any Appearance offered to the Senses, it immediately
falls to the search after the Cause producing this Effect. But indeed in
Natural Disquisitions, it is generally (I may say almost always) to no purpose.
We may make plausible Conjectures, and some sort of feasible Guesses; but
others perhaps may make others, and these also equally probable. But these
deserve not the Name of Natural Philosophy; they serve only for Chat and
Diversion. For the omnipotent Contriver of the Universe has ordered Natures
Operations to be performed by such ^ine Springs, secret Motions, and
inexplicable Ways; that Man in this Life may well despair of attaining the
intimate Knowledge thereof; and must therefore content himself with the
Contemplation of plain matter of Fact, in which he cannot be deceived. But yet,
that we may not wholly suppress this inquisitive Humor, but may only keep it
within just Bounds: It will be granted, That whatever immediate Cause can be
assigned to an Effect; and it can be proved so to be by some convincing
Experiments; and these be often repeated, and diligently examn'd, and found to
agree and conspire together; we may be allowed to found thereon an Hypothesis
or Supposal of this Cause, but no more. We must not positively establish it as
the undoubted, adequate Cause; for this we may miss after our most diligent
Inquiry. However the Experiments we use and demonstrate to sense, for the
establishing our Hypothesis, shall be allowed as unquestionable Verities; and
shall be embraced as so many Steps of Advancement in the Knowledge of Nature.

But of the Uncertainty of Assigning Natural Causes I shall give but one
Instance, and that perhaps as strong as any we shall meet with in Philosophy.
We are apt to think, that the Cause of the Suspension of the Mercury in the
Torricellian Experiment is undoubtedly the Gravitation of the Air: And we prove
it by a most convincing Experiment; for putting the Baroscope into the
Pneumatick Engine, exhaust the Air, and the Mercury immediately subsides. But
when we consider it a little farther, we shall find, That hereby we have
obtaind little more certain Knowledge, than plainly the matter of Fact of this
latter Experiment, and not the adequate Cause of the first Experiment enquired
after. For we can only conclude from hence, that the Equipoise of Liquors is
the Cause of the Mercury's Suspension: But what is the Cause of this Equipoise
of Liquors, or the Cause of the Gravitation of any Liquors, or any Bodies? That
is, What is the Cause of Gravity in general is clearly unknown to us; and
consequently the ultimate Cause of the Mercury's Suspension is not hereby
discovered. It Is true indeed, by this Experiment we have most probably arrived
at the Knowledge of one Link more in the Chain of Natural Causes; but this is
not conclusive; this puts not an end to the Enquiry: For so if one looking at a
Pendulum Clock should enquire, Why the Pendulum does not cease by degrees from
vibrating? And he were answered, That it is kept in motion by the next
immediate Wheel that beats on the Pallats: And this were offered to be proved
by Experiment; for stop the motion of this Wheel, and the Pendulum soon ceases:
Would he not presently be satisfied, and go away secure, that he had discovered
the Cause of the Continuation of the Pendulum's Motion? And yet certainly he
has mistaken one single Link for the whole Chain. For if he proceeded farther;
and had enquired, What moved this Wheel? He would find, the next Wheel, and so
onwards to the Weight or Spring. But here he is at a Loss; for what moves them,
is absolutely unknown.

As to most other Reasons in Natural Philosophy, that usually pass as
satisfactory, and are received as Accounts of Nature's Proceedings: We shall
generally find them little more, than farther Illustrations of the Matter
enquired after in some different Words. Thus if it be asked, What is the Reason
the Sun casts a shadow from some Bodies, viz. those we call opaque, and none
from others, viz. Transparent Bodies? It Is answered, Because by the opaque Body
the Rays of the Sun are stopped in their Progress, and hindered from enlighting
that Part of the Ground or Floor that is behind the Body: In the Transparent
Body the Rays pass freely. This would be taken by several as deep Reasoning;
and yet is really no more than Tautology; as if we should say, the Sun casts a
Shadow, Because he casts a Shadow. But it gives no Account of the Opacity of
one Body, and Transparency of another, which truly the Question requires. If we
ask, How Fire burns? It Is answered, by exciting a violent Motion in the Parts
of the Combustible Matter: Which indeed is no more than the same thing in
different Words. But how Motion is excited or communicated by one Body to
another, is absolutely inexplicable. Yet these Kind of Verbal Reasons do
generally pass in Talk, and serve to amuse as well as the best.

Since therefore we cannot expect to arrive at the intimate Knowledge of
Natures Operations: Let us apply our selves to know as much of Her, as we may
be certain of. And this only is in Matters of Experiment and Trial; wherein by
the infallible Guidance of our Senses, we cannot be deceived. For tho,
Experimentum periculosum, be an ancient Aphorism; yet we must consider of what
Experiments it was pronounced, viz. of those in Medicine and Disease. It agrees
not to all, when diligently enquired into, and often repeated. But when we meet
with any Experiment that is thus fallacious, we are not to rely on it; yet of
this we may be sure, and lay it down as a discovered Certainty, that sometimes
it hits, sometimes it misses; and in this Truth we cannot be deceived, seeing
we have so often found it.

But I have lanch'd out thus far, before I was aware: I must recover my self,
and beg Pardon both for this Digression, and for telling you Things which you
very well know already, at the same time when I offer you a Petition. But my
Desire of propagating this useful Method of Philosophy will excuse my Fault,
and at the same time will recommend me the more to your Favor, who are the
great Patrons thereof, and in Account whereof your Name is deservedly
celebrated all over Europe.

Permit me therefore to lay this Offering at your Feet, it being the
Explication of one of the most noble Instruments of Experimental Philosophy.
Not that I think thereby to add any think considerable to the vast Treasure of
Curiosities you already possess: But that I may have an Opportunity of
declaring to the World, how much I am

Your Devoted Humble Servant, WILLIAM MOLYN^UX.
April 17. 1690.
ADMONITION TO THE READER.
BEFORE the Reader proceed to the following Sheets, I desire he may take notice;

First, That he is not to expect Geometrical Strictness in several Particulars
of this Doctrine. I say, in several Particulars; For many there are, which will
bear the most precise Exactness: Kepler, Cavallerius, Herigon, Dechales,
Honoratus Faber, Gregorius, Barrow, and other Authors have taken this Liberty;
as being more desirous of showing in gross the Properties of Glasses and their
Effects in Telescopes, than of affecting a Nicety, which would be of little Use
in Practice. Thus we shall find in what follows, that many Lines are supposed
equal, which strictly taken are really not so; but yet are so very little
different, that for all use, and ease of Demonstration, they may be taken as
equal. Thus also we suppose very small Angles and their Sines to be
proportional; which precisely is not so, but is so to the smallest and most
insensible Difference. Thus likewise, we sometimes consider not the Glasses
Thickness, but suppose it of the least Thickness imaginable, or of no Thickness
at all; which yet is false, but does hardly prejudice any Demonstration. For
Dioptricks being a part of mixed Mathematics, conversant about material Lines
(or Rays of Light) and the refractive Power of a corporeal Glass, cannot be
delivered with that (...) Geometrica requisite in abstracted Mathematics.

Secondly, The Reader will find some Corollaries and Scholiums hereafter
delivered, which of themselves more properly might have constituted
Propositions. But these did not occur so readily in the course of the Work, And
therefore I chose rather to add them as Corollaries than change the number of
Propositions and Citations. Of this kind are Corol. ad Prop. 8. Corol. ad Prop.
15. etc.

Thirdly, I have presumed to entitle this Work Dioptrica Nova, as being indeed
almost wholly new. Very little being borrowed from others, but what is
requisite to show the former Methods of Authors in demonstrating their
Propositions, and to keep up the Consecution and Series of the Propositions of
this Book. Besides, I can say, that the Geometrical Method of calculating a
Rays Progress, which in many particulars is so amply delivered hereafter, is
wholly new, and never before published. And for the first Intimation thereof, I
must acknowledge my self obliged to my worthy Friend Mr. Flamsteed. Astron. Reg.
who had it from some unpublished Papers of Mr. Gascoignes.

Lastly, I declare, That if in any thing hereafter delivered, I have made any
Mistakes, or not so clearly expressed my self upon Intimation thereof, I shall
be most ready to retract. And therefore if in any thing I have slipped, or made
a false Step, I desire the ingenious and candid Reader either to inform me
thereof, and upon Conviction, I shall submit; or else that he would freely
pardon the Error; Humanum est.

Tho I had begun, and made some Progress in this Work in Latin; yet I thought
it convenient (at least for the present) to alter my Design: There being
nothing in this Part of Mathematics ever yet published in English. And I am
sure there are many ingenious Heads, great Geometers, and Masters in
Mathematics, who are not so well skilled in Latin.

If Foreigners may think this Work deserves their Perusal; in time perhaps I
may satisfy them.

And because I have studied to be as plain as possibly I could, I have chosen
rather to be prolix in many Particulars, than leave any Ambiguity to the most
ordinary Mathematician. And therefore in demonstrating, I often repeat several
Steps tho the least altered; that all things may lie as plain as possible. And
on this Account I hope, the curious and profound Geometers will pardon me; I
know they are used to what is concise and closely put together, much expressed
in a little: But this Method suits not every Reader: And I have chosen to
accommodate mine to the plainest Capacities.

Lastly, in this practical kind of Mathematics, I desire the Reader to have
frequent recourse to Experiments, for these illustrate the Theory and make many
things clear, which otherwise will pass obscurely.

I use the common Notes of Algebra, with two or three new ones introduced by
Branker or Dr. Pell, such as

/ Signifies Divided by, / 2 signifies Divided by 2.

2 With a Line over it signifies the absolute Number 2.

* Is the Note of Multiplication or drawing into.

In the Demonstrations the larger and lesser Margins or Columns are of the same
use as is expressed in Dr. Pell's Algebra. To which I refer the Reader.

April 17. 1690. WILL. MOLYNEUX.



DIOPTRICKS.
Definitions.
1. TAb. 1. Fig. 1. Tab. 1. Fig. 1.
A B C D is a Body of Glass, E F M is perpendicular to A B: suppose G F a Ray
of Light falling inclined on the Glass A D, the Point F is called the Point of
Incidence,

II. The Angle E F G comprehended between the Perpendicular and the Ray, is the
Angle of Incidence (with Barrow, etc.) tho by many Dioptrick Writers it is
called the Angle of Inclination; and its Complement A F G, is usually by them
called the Angle of Incidence. But I shall use the Terms Inclination and
Incidence promiscuously, always designing thereby the Angle comprehended
between the Perpendicular E F and the Ray GF.

Experiments.
I. GF is a Ray of Light falling inclined on the Glass ABCD; this Ray coming
out of a Rare Medium, as Air, into a Dense Medium, as Glass, does not proceed
on its direct Course in a straight Line toward I; but at the Point of
Incidence F it is bent or refracted toward the Perpendicular F M, and becomes
the refracted Ray FH.

II. At H is its Point of Incidence again, from Glass a Dense Medium to Air a
Rare, and in this Passage, it is refracted from the Perpendicular H Z; so that
instead of proceeding directly strait in F H L, it is refracted from the
Perpendicular H Z, and becomes H K: So that if the Surface A B be parallel to
the Surface D C, the Ray becomes again as if it had not been refracted; for now
HK runs parallel to G F. The natural Reason of this Refraction is variously
assigned by diverse, and is properly of a Physical consideration; and what is
offered therein, is little more than Hypothetical Conjecture. I shall not
therefore mix Guesses with Demonstration: The Matter of Fact is manifest from
Ten Thousand repeated Experiments, and this is sufficient to my purpose. But
yet there is such an ingenious Hypothesis concerning this Matter, published in
the Acta Eruditorum Lipsi^e, Anno 1682. Men's. Iunii, page 185. by the Learned
and Ingenious G. G. Lebnutzius, that I cannot omit inserting it in the Second
Part of this Work, Chap. 1.

III. The Ray that falls perpendicular (as suppose E F a Ray) passes
unrefracted, but all inclined Rays are refracted.

Definitions.
III. The Angle I F H, Ta 1. Fi. 1
and K H L comprehended by the Ray directly prolonged, and the refracted Ray is
the Angle of Refraction.

IV. The Angle HFM or ZHK comprised between the refracted Ray and Perpendicular
is the refracted Angle.

V. Diverging Rays are those that spread and separate the farther from each
other, as they flow farther from the Object, Ta. 1. Fig. 2. Ta. 1. Fi. 2.
B is a radiating Point, A B, D B, C B, E B, are diverging Rays.

VI. Converging Rays are those that approach nigher each other, till they
cross, and then become Diverging. Tab. 1. Fig. 3. Tab. 1. Fi. 3.
A, B, are two Radiating Points in the Object AB, the Rays CA, CB, do Converge,
till they cross in C, and then they become Diverging D C, E C.

VII. Parallel Rays are those that flowing from one and the same Point of a
remote Object pass at the same distance, as to sense: But this is not to be
strictly taken; for then the Rays flowing from one and the same Point of an
Object, cannot be parallel, for they always diverge: Yet when an Object is at
such a great distance, and that parcel of Rays which is considered, is so
small, that their Divergence is little or nothing considerable, these Rays are
said to be parallel, Tab. 1. Fig. 4. Ta. 1. Fi. 4.
A is a Point in an Object sending forth its diverging Rays A D, A B, A C, A E;
let B C be the breadth of the Pupil or breadth of an Optic Glass: Here if the
Point A be so remote, and B C be so small, that the Parcel of Rays B A C, do
insensibly run parallel, then these are said to be parallel Rays.

VIII. Those radiating Points or Objects are said to be remote, whose distance
from the Eye or Glass is so great, that the breadth of the Pupil or Glass, in
respect thereto, is inconsiderable.

IX. Those radiating Points or Objects are said to be nigh, when there is a
sensible proportion between the Pupils or Glasses breadth, and the distance; so
that the Rays flowing from any single Point thereof do not run parallel to each
other, but diverge considerably in respect of the Pupils or Glasses breadth.

Experiments.
V. Ta. 1. Fig. 5. Tab. 1. Fi. 5.
Z X Y is a Body of Glass, H B G is perpendicular to Z X, A B is a Ray falling
on this Glass, and the Angle of Inclination or Incidence is H B A = D B G,
Kepler tells us, that under 30 degrees, of Inclination from Air to Glass, the Angle
of Refraction D B C is ^ of the Inclination, therefore the refracted Angle CBG
is of the Inclination. Wherefore we lay down the following Proportions, as
confirmed by Kepler's Experiments, and usually retained by most Optic Writers.

Inclination DBG: refracted CBG:: 3: 2

Inclination DBG: Refraction DBC:: 3: 1

Refraction DBC: refracted CBG:: 1: 2

V. But suppose the Ray CB to proceed from Glass to Air; at B it is refracted
from the Perpendicular B H, and becomes B A; here the Inclination is C B G = H
B I, and then

Incidence H B I: refracted H B A:: 2: 3

Inclination HBI: Refraction IBA:: 2: 1

Refraction I B A: refracted H B A:: 1: 3

These Propositions in the 4th. and 5th. Experiments we shall retain in the
following Demonstrations, for the Ease and Plainness thereof. But in
Calculation we shall observe the Proportion that follows in the 6th. Experiment.

VI. But the most Learned and Ingenious Mr. Isaac Newton of Cambridge
discovered by most accurate Experiments, that these Proportions of Kepler were
not sufficiently exact: For Des Carts first found, that Refractions were not
to be measured by the Proportion of Angles, but by the Proportion of Sines. See
his Dioptricks Cap. 2. Sec. 7. And therefore Mr. Newton applied himself to
discover the Proportion of the Sines, and found, That from Air to Glass, the
Sine A K or D F of the Angle of Incidence A B K or D B G: is to the Sine I H or
C G of the refracted Angle C B G or I B H:: As 300 to 193. ( or near, as 14. to
9.) And on the contrary, that from Glass to Air, the Sine of the Incidence: Is
to the Sine of the refracted Angle:: as 193: to 300, or as 9 to 14. But the
same Mr. Newton in his Dissertations concerning Colors and Light, published in
the Philosophical Transactions, has at large demonstrated, that the Rays of
Light are not all Homogeneous, or of the same sort, but of different Forms and
Figures, so that some are more refracted than others, tho they have the same or
equal Inclinations on the Glass: And therefore there can be no constant
Proportion settled between the Sines of the Incidence and of the refracted
Angles. But the Proportion that comes nearest Truth, for the middle and strong
Rays of Light, is nearly as 300 to 193, or 14 to 9.

VII. As the Sine of the Angle of any one Inclination: To the Sine of its
refracted Angle:: So is the Sine of any other Inclination: To the Sine of its
refracted Angle. Therefore by Experiment, finding the Proportion of the Sines
of any one Inclination, and of its correspondent refracted Angle, this
Proportion will hold in any other Inclination or Incidence. See Des Carts
Dioptr. Cap. 2. Sec. 7. Mersenni Optic. Lib. 7. Prop. 12. Dechales Dioptr. Lib.
1. Prop. 1, 2, etc. See also Cap. 1. Sec. 4. Part 2.

Wherefore the Incidence or Inclination of a Ray being given, it is easy
finding the refracted Angle; for the Proportion is, as 300: To 193:: (or as 14
to 9) So the Sine of the Incidence: To the Sine of the refracted Angle, from
Air to Glass.

Or Mechanically thus, A B K being the given Angle of Incidence, by a Sector
make the Sine there of K A or D F 300 parts (or 14) and take 193 (or 9) of the
same parts, and make therewith C G or H I the Sine of the refracted Angle; then
draw B C, this is the progress of the Ray A B after it enters the Glass.

VIII. The Progress of Light through different Mediums is reciprocal: That is,
Tab. 1. Fig. 1. Ta. 1. Fi. 1
Suppose the luminous Point G in Air, to send from it the Ray G F upon the
Glass A D; this Ray by the Glass is refracted into F H within the Glass. Let us
now imagine the Point H within the Glass, to be a luminous Point, ^ending out
from it self the Ray H F: This Ray upon its Emersion from Glass into Air,
instead of proceeding directly to N, is refracted into F G. And so likewise
supposing the Luminous Point G, to send its Ray G F, which after a double
Refraction on each Surface of the Glass proceeds first in F H, and afterward
in H K; if we conceive K a Luminous Point, sending its Ray K H on the Glass;
this Ray after a double Refraction on the two Surfaces of the Glass shall be
refracted first into H F and then into F G; taking the same reciprocal Progress
in both Cases.

And this is not so properly proved from Experiment (tho that also does
abundantly and most exactly confirm this Truth) but it is manifest and
self-evident from the very Nature of the thing. For whatever physical Reason
there is, which causes the Ray G F proceeding from Air into the Glass A D to be
refracted from its direct Course F I into F H; the same reason there must needs
be to cause the Ray H F, proceeding from the Glass A D into the open Air, to be
refracted from its direct Course F N into F G. For doubtless the Refraction
proceeds from the Disparity of the Mediums (but how or in what manner it is
needless to enquire in this place). Now the difference of the Mediums on their
two determining Surfaces, or a^ the Point of Incidence F, continues the same,
let the Ray proceed from which of them soever. For there is as great a
reciprocal Difference between Glass and Air, as between Air and Glass; and
consequently the Refraction must needs be reciprocal. Vid. Barrow, Lect. Opt.
3. Sect. 3.

Definitions.
X. Whatever Line is perpendicular as to the Tangent of any Curve Line at the
point of Contract, is said to be perpendicular to the same Curve, Tab. 1. Fig.
6 Ta. 1. Fi. 6
D E being a Tangent to the Arch of a Circle A B C, and F G being perpendicular
to D E at the point of Contract F, the Line F G is also perpendicular to the
Curve A B C.



XI. A Line that is inclined to the Tangent of any Curve, is inclined to the
Curve; and the Angle of Inclination to the Curve, is the same with the Angle of
Inclination to the Tangent, F H is inclined to the Curve A B C, by the Angle H
G F, according to which Angle the same Line H F is inclined to the Tangent D E.

XII. K being the Center of the Circle A B C, draw B K parallel to H F, the
Arch BF measures the Inclination of the Line H F to the Curve A B C, or to the
Tangent D E: For the Angle B K F is equal to the Angle H F G. ( Pr. 29. 1. Eucl.

XIII. The Rays that proceed from the middle Point of an Object, when the Glass
is exposed directly before it, are said to fall directly on the Glass; but the
Rays that flow from the Collateral Points of an Object, are said to fall
obliquely on the Glass. Ta. 2. Fig. 1. Tab. 2. Fi. 1.
ABC is a distant Object, sending parallel Rays from each of its Points on the
Glass G K, exposed directly before it. Here the Rays flowing from the Point B,
are said to fall directly on the Glass, as B G, B H, B K. But the Rays flowing
from the Point A, or any other Collateral Point, are said to fall obliquely on
the Glass, as A G, A H, A K. And here it is to be noted, that the Point B is
said to be directly exposed to the Glass, when the Axis of the Glass EHB
directly produced, meets this Point B: But all other Points in the Object are
Collateral Points; for tho they may be directly exposed to some other Points in
the Glass, yet direct and collateral, are here to be understood only in respect
of the Glass Axis or Vertex. Or in short, that Point in an Object is said to be
direct, the Axis of whose Cone of Rays is coincident or the same with the Axis
of the Glass; that Point in an Object is said to be oblique or collateral, the
Axis of whose Cone of Rays falls obliquely to the Axis of the Glass. Vid. Def.
17. 18.

XIV. Suppose the Glass GK exposed in the Hole of a Shutter in a dark Room, and
that thereby the Object ABC were represented on a white Paper in FED (how this
is done we shall see hereafter.) From each Point of this Object there falls a
parcel of Rays on the Surface of the whole Glass; thus from the Point B, there
falls B G, B H, B K. This parcel of Rays is called A Cone of Rays, having its
Vertex in the Point of the Object B, and its Base on the Glass.

XV. To this Cone of Rays there is another Correspondent on the other side the
Glass G E K, which has its Base likewise on the Glass, and its Vertex in a
correspondent Point E of the Representation.

XVI. Both these Cones together (that is B G E K) are called A Pencil of Rays.

XVII. Each Pencil of Rays has one Ray amongst the rest, which is called its
Axis. The Axis of the direct Pencil B G E K is the Ray B H E, which falls
perpendicularly on the Glass, and passes through it unrefracted. But the Axis
of any of the oblique Pencils, as A G F K is some certain Ray, as A H F, which,
tho it fall obliquely, and consequently is refracted by the Glass, yet being
refracted from the perpendicular at its Egress from the Glass, as much as it
was refracted toward the Perpendicular, at its Ingress into the Glass; it may
be taken as not refracted at all; but that part of this Axis which is before
the Glass ( viz. AH between the Object and Glass) and that part of it which is
behind the Glass ( viz. HF between the Representation and the Glass) do run
parallel to each other, or rather in one Right Line; that part of it only which
is within the Glass, being bent out of its strait Course. And that in each
oblique Pencil of Rays (for of the direct Pencil it is manifest) there is such a
certain Ray thus affected, shall appear more fully hereafter. And here we are
to distinguish between the Axis of a Pencil of Rays, and the Axis of the Glass.
See Def. 18.

The Pencils of Rays from various Points are expressed differently in the
Schemes ( viz. by Lines or small Points) for better Illustration, and easier
distinguishing their Progress.

XVIII. Tab. 2. Fig. 3. Tab. 2. Fig. 3.
A E is a Body of Glass, whose Surface A C D is the Segment of a Sphere, the
Center whereof is F. K B a Ray falling on the Glass; through the Center F draw
C F R parallel to K B, C F R is the Axis, and the Point C the Pole or Vertex of
the Glass: Or more generally thus, The Axis of a Glass is that Right Line,
which, being produced both ways, falls on the Centres of the Two Spherick
Surfaces (if the Glass be a double Unequal, or double Concave) or which being
produced both ways, falls on the Center of the Spherick Surface, and
perpendicular to the plain Surface, (if the Glass be a Plano-Convex, or
Plano-Concave.) So that the Axis of a Convex-Glass passes perpendicular to the
thickest part of the complete Glass; and of a Concave to the thinnest part of
the complete Glass. Why Complete is added, vid. Second Part, Chap. 4. Sect. 4.
The Poles of a Glass are those two Points in the Glass through which the Axis
passes.

It Is needless to define what is meant by a Unequal or Concave-Glass, etc. for
every one knows this already.

XIX. The Ray K B falling on the Convexity A C D, parallel to the Axis C R, and
being refracted to B R; so that now it runs no more parallel, but crosses the
Axis in R: the Point R is called the Point of Concourse, or of Convergency, or
the Focus.

1. Supposition.
That from every Physical Point in an Object Rays of Light are diffused in
direct Lines through the Hemisphere round it. Tab. 2. Fig. 3. Ta. 2. Fi. 2.
Thus the Point b in the Object a b c projects from it the Rays b d, b d, b d,
wherever they are not hindered by some Opaque Body intervening. And these Rays
are strait Lines, whilst they pass through a Diaphanous Uniform Medium. But
here we are to conceive a radiating or luminous Point, not in a strict
Mathematical Sense, but in a Physical, considering it as the least part
imaginable in an Object.

2. Supposition.
That the Axis of the Eye, Glass, or Glasses, exposed before an Object be
Perpendicular to the Plane of the Object; or that the Eye, Glass, or Glasses
exposed before an Object, are supposed directly exposed thereto.

3. Supposition or Admonition.
Because in many Authors of Optics, much Perplexity and Error arises from
their confused mentioning of Rays, and applying to them the Epithets of
Diverging, and Converging, and Crossing; without expressing clearly whether
they mean Rays from one and the some Point in an Object, or from Different
Points. Therefore we are to consider in the ensuing Doctrine, whether the Name
Rays do relate to those from one and the same Point, or from different Points.
And that this may be the more easy, I do generally express the Rays from the
same Point to be such, that is, I call them Rays from the same Point.

PROP. I. PROBL.
Tab. 2. Fig. 3. A E is a Body of Glass, whose Surface A B C D is the Segment
of a Sphere, the Center whereof is F. K B is a Ray of Light parallel to the
Axis C F R. There being given C F the Radius of the Convexity, and B O the
Distance of the Ray from the Axis; it is required to find the Point R, wherein
this Ray, after one sole Refraction at the Point of Incidence B, crosses the
Axis C R.

Produce K B at pleasure to H, and draw B F X at pleasure.

1. In the Right Angled Triangle B O F, we have given B O and B F, whence we
may find the Angle B F O = H B F, which is the Incidence.

2. Then say, as 300: to 193:: (or as 14 to 9) so the Sine H I of the Incidence
H B F: to the Sine Z L of the refracted Angle R B F; then H B F - R B F = H B R
= B R F, which is the Angle of Refraction.

3. In the Triangle R B F, all the Angles and one of the Sides B F are known,
whence we may find F R: Which was required.

Example.
FB = FC = 2 Inches, or 20000 Parts, an Inch being 10000. B O = an Inch, or
5000 such Parts. The Angle of Incidence or Inclination B F O = H B F will be
found 14 29'. And the refracted Angle FBR shall be 9 15'. Wherefore B R F = H B
R = 5 14'. Whence the Line FR is found 35341. Then R F + F C = 35341 + 20000 =
55341 = C R.

Corollary.
From this Calculation it is manifest, That in this Case the Point of Concourse
R is distant from the Pole of the Glass C, almost a Diameter and half of the
Convexity: For a Diameter and half is 60000, and CR is 55341, which wants only
about ^ of 60000.

Scholium 1.
This Proposition is the 34th. of Keplers Dioptricks, and in him and other
Opticians, it is usually thus expressed and demonstrated.

The Rays that are parallel to the Axis, and fall so on the Unequal Surface of a
Glass, and at their Ingress are refracted, and so pass forward in Glass only,
are united with the Axis at the distance of almost a Diameter and half of the
Co^vexi^y, supposing the Glass to be a Portion of no more than abo^^ to degrees
of its Convexity, or (which is the same thing) supposing the Inclination of the
most extreme Ray to be but 15 degrees.

This Limitation of 15 degrees Inclination is added, because above 15 degrees
Sines and Angles are not proportional, but under 15 degrees they are nighly
proportional, a double Angle having a double Sine, a treble Angle a treble
Sine, etc.

Wherefore they thus demonstrate this Proposition. Tab. 2. Fig. 3. Ta 2. Fi. 3.
B F C = H B F is the Inclination, H B R = B R F is the Angle of Refraction, R
B F the refracted Angle. But by Experiment 4. R B F the refracted Angle: is to
B R F the Angle of Refraction:: as 2 to 1. Therefore the Sines of these Angles,
being under 15 degrees, shall be as 2: to 1. But in plain Triangles the Sines
of the Angles and the Sides subtending these Angles are proportional; therefore
the Side R F is double F B or F C. Wherefore R C is thrice F C, or equal to
three Semidiameters: Which was to be demonstrated.

Scholium 2.
But a neater way of Expressing and Demonstrating this Proposition is thus.





When a Ray falls on a Spherick Glass, and afterward it being but once
refracted, crosses the Axis. It shall be, as the Sine of the Angle of
Refraction: to the Sine of the Angle of Inclination:: so the Radius of the
Glass's Sphere: to the refracted Ray.

Tab. 3. Fig. 1. Ta. 3. Fi. 1.
Let b e ^ be the Unequal Surface of the Glass A D E, k b a Ray of Light, f the
Center of the Convexity, b f c the Angle of Inclination, b o the Sine of the
Inclination, b r the refracted Ray meeting the Axis in r, h b r = b r c = to
the Angle of Refraction; draw f e parallel to b r, then e f c is equal to b r
c, and e c is the Sine of the Angle of Refraction. And by reason of the similar
Triangles b r o, e f c, it shall be e c: b o:: e f: b r. Which was to be
demonstrated.

Wherefore supposing that from Air to Glass, the Sine of the Angle of
Inclination: be to the Sine of the refracted Angle:: as 300: to 193: then the
Sine of the Inclination shall be: to the Sine of the Angle of Refraction:: as
300: to 300 - 193 = 107. Because the Angle of Refraction is equal to the
difference between the Angle of Inclination and the refracted Angle* And Sines
and Angles being (in these small Angles) proportional. It shall be, As 107:
300:: so Radius of the Convexity: to the Concourse of the refracted Ray with
the A^is.

It shall also be, As 107: 193:: so the Radius of the Convexity to the
Concourse of the refracted Ray beyond the Center of the Sphere.

For Tab. 3. Fig. 2. Ta. 3. Fi. 2.
1 e a c: f a c:: 300: 193 Dividing the First 2 e a c - f a c: f a c:: 300 -
193: 193 That is 3 e a f: f a c:: 107 193

Moreover, 4 e a f = f b c = Angle of Refraction. From 3 and 4 5 f b c: f a c::
107: 193 But in the a b c 6 f b c: f a c:: R a d. = a c: c b From 5 and 6 7
107: 193:: a c: c b = To the Concourse of the Ray beyond the Center of the
Sphere c. Which was to be demonstrated.

PROP. II. PROBL.
A Plano-Convex Glass a f b Tab. 4. Fig. 1. Ta. 4. Fi. 1.
being exposed to a distant Object with its Unequal side toward it, and
receiving the Ray cd parallel to the Axis ez, it is required to determine the
Point of Concourse z, from these Data, f h the Glasses thickness, q f the
Radius of the Convexity, and d g the distance of the Ray c d from the Axis e z.

The same Problem is proposed from the same Data, for the plane Side toward
the Object.

But first for the Convex-Side to the Object: The Mechanical Construction is
thus, Tab. 4. Fig. 1. Produce the Ray c d through the Glass at pleasure to m.
And from d the Point of Incidence draw the Line d q to the Center of the
Convexity; this is the Perpendicular, and the Angle q d m the Incidence or
Inclination. On d as a^ Center at any distance strike the Arch m o q, in which
make mn the Sine of the Angle of Incidence, to o p the Sine of the refracted
Angle, as 14 to 9 (or o p 9 such parts as m n is 14, which is easily done by
the Sector) the Line d k o shall be the Line in which the Ray would proceed; if
the Medium of Glass were continued so far.

But because in this Line at k the Ray emerges from the plain Surface of the
Glass a dense Medium into Air a rare Medium, from k raise k x perpendicular to
the plain Surface a h b, and on k, as a Center at any distance strike the Arch
x u s; then the Angle x k u is the Incidence of the Ray passing from Glass to
Air.

Making therefore t u the Sine of this Angle, to r s the Sine of the second
refracted Angle from the Perpendicular as 9 to 14, the Line drawn from k
through the Point s, and produced to the Axis at z, shows the Progress of the
Ray in the Air after its Emersion from Glass: Wherefore the Point z is
determined in the Axis.



Trigonometrical Calculation.
But this Point z, or the Measure of the Line f z may be found more accurately
by Calculation thus. In the Triangle qdg Right Angled at g are given q d and d
g, to find the Angle of Incidence d q g, and the Side q g. Then q f - h f = q
h, and q g - q h = h g = d i.

First then, because the Ray passes at d from a rare Medium into a dense, it
shall be refracted toward the Perpendicular d q. Wherefore the Analogy is, As
14: to 9:: so the Sine of the Angle of Incidence d q f (= m d q): to the Sine
of the refracted Angle o d q (that is k d l). But m d q (= i d l) - k d l = i d
k = x k u, d m and k x being parallel:) And this is the Angle of Incidence as
the Ray passes from Glass to Air.

Secondly, In the little Right Angled Triangle i d k, the Side d i, and the
Angle i d k are known; whence the Side i k may be found, then ih (= dg) - i k =
k h.

Thirdly, Because at k the Ray emerges from a Dense into a Rare Medium, it
shall be refracted from the Perpendicular kx; and the Analogy shall be, as 9:
to 14:: so the Sine of the Angle of Incidence x k u: to the Sine of the Second
refracted Angle x k s (= k z h, k x, and h z being Parallel)

Fourthly, In the Right Angled Triangle k h z, the Side k h, and all the Angles
are known, whence the Side h z, and consequently f z (= f h + h z) the Distance
of the Point of Concourse from the Pole of the Glass f is discovered.

When the plain Side is turned to the Object, the Method is the same, only
shorter; for Tab. 5. Fig. 1. Ta. 5. Fi. 1.
in the Right Angled Triangle q d g, we have q d and d g to find d q g = u d x,
the Incidence, and the Side q g: Then q f - q g = g f. Next, As 9: to 14:: (or
as 193: to 300::) so the Sine of u d x: to the Sine of s d x. Ta. 4 Fi. 1.
But s d x - u d x = s d u = d z g. Then in the Right Angled Triangle d z g we
have d g, and the Angles to find g z. And g z - g f = f z. Which was to be
found.

Scholium.
In the little Tables inserted in Tab. 4. and Tab. 5. I have given Examples at
large of the Calculation of the Progress of the Ray cd, which I presume is
pretty truly wrought: But if perhaps any Errors do intervene, they are easily
corrected.

By these Tables we may perceive, that the Point of Concourse z is distant from
the Pole of the Glass f about a Diameter of the Convexity, but not fully so
much.

It Is also to be noted in Tab. 4. Fig. 1 That the Point of Concourse z, shall
be less or more removed from the Pole f, according as we give the Glass less or
more thickness. For it is manifest, that the farther we let the Ray run in the
Medium of Glass, after it enters it at d, before it emerges into Air at k, the
farther the Point of Concourse z shall be protracted from f. Ta. 6. Fi. 1.
For we may imagine the Medium of Glass continued below the Diameter of the
Convexity, and then it is evident that the Point of Concourse z shall be much
more below it. But it can be no more below it than a Diameter and half. By the
First Proposition hereof.

This our Second Proposition is usually found in Dioptricks thus expressed and
demonstrated.

Parallel Rays falling on a Plano-Convex-Glass, are united with the Axis about
the distance of a Diameter of the Convexity from the Pole of the Glass, if the
Segment be but 30 Degrees.



Demonstration.
First for the plain Side toward the Object. Tab. 6. Fig. 1. Tab. 6. Fig. 1.
AB is a Ray of Light falling on the Glass GL parallel to the Axis C D. C is
the Center of the Convexity G P L. Join C B; the Angle of Incidence or
Inclination is BCD, the Angle of Refraction is E B D or B D C.

Wherefore in the Triangle B C D, the Angle B C D being double the Angle BDC
(For by Kepler's Experiments, which are followed by most Authors, from Glass to
Air, the Angle of Incidence: is to the Angle of Refraction:: as 2: to 1.) the
Side B D shall be double the Side B C; the Angles and Sides or Sines under 15
Degrees being proportional; but D P is almost equal to B D (for the Thickness
and Breadth of the Glass, in Optic Glasses especially in Glasses of Long Foci,
are inconsiderable), therefore D P is double C P. Which was to be Demonstrated.

Secondly, for the Convex-side toward the Object. Tab. 6. Ta. 6. Fi. 2.
Fig. 2. A B C D is a Plano-Convex Glass (I have here expressed it of this
thickness, to show the Angles and Progress of the Ray more plainly, tho really
this great Thickness hinders the Exactness of the Demonstration; for the Glass
is to be supposed of the most inconsiderable Thickness) F is the Center of the
Convexity. K H is a Ray falling thereon, parallel to the Axis E G. This Ray,
(after it has suffered a Double Refraction, one at its Ingress from Air into
Glass at H toward the Perpendicular H F, by which it becomes the Refracted Ray
H M, and another Refraction at its Egress from Glass to Air at M from the
Perpendicular P M, by which, instead of going forward toward R, it becomes the
Refracted Ray M G) at G crosses the Axis, so that G E is the Diameter of the
Convexity A E B.

For the Incidence or Inclination of the Ray K H is L H F, of which Angle there
is taken off L H M, for the Angle of Refraction from Air to Glass is of the
Incidence (by Exper. 4.) If therefore the Ray had proceeded onwards in Glass
toward R, it had crossed the Axis at a Diameter' and half (by the foregoing
Proposition), but at its egress into Air at M, it is again refracted from the
Perpendicular P M by the Angle R M G = P M R. The Angle of Refraction R M G
from Glass to Air, being the Incidence P M R (by Exper. 5.) But P M R is equal
to L H M. Wherefore the first Angle of Incidence LHF by this Double Refraction,
has lost first of it self LHM, and again of this Third RMG: But ^ and of ^ is
equal to, wherefore the Angle of Incidence is diminished by its Half.

Let us therefore consider the Glass A. B, Tab. 6. Fig. 3. Ta. ^ Fi. 3.
without respect to its Thickness, or to the Refraction the Ray suffers at its
egress on the lower side of the Glass into Air. But let us imagine, that by the
first Refraction, the Ray were brought nigher the Perpendicular H F by half the
Angle of Incidence L H F, and we shall find, that then the Ray shall cross the
Axis at G; so that GE shall be the Diameter of the Convexity. For LHG or G H F
is equal to LHF or HFE the Incidence, but H F E is equal to G H F + H G F (32.
1. Eucl.) therefore GHF and HGF are equal, each of them being HFE, and
consequently their opposite Side H F and G F are equal. Wherefore GE is the
Diameter of the Convexity A E B. Which was to be Demonstrated.

Corollary.
In Plano-Convex Glasses, As 300 - 193 = 107: To 193:: So Radius of the
Convexity: To the refracted Ray taken to its Concourse with the Axis; which in
Glasses of large Spheres and small Segments is almost equal to the Distance of
the Focus taken in the Axis. Tab. 6. Fig. 1. Ta. 6. Fi. 1.




Demonstration.
The Inclination = A B C = O B E = B C D = 193. Refracted Angle = O B D = 300
Angle of Refraction = E B D = B D P = O B D - O B E = 300 - 193 = 107.

In the B D C: sB D C: sB C D:: Rad. = B C: B D. That is, 107: 193:: BC: BD=PD
in Glasses of large Spheres. Which was to be Demonstrated.

PORP. III. PROBL.
In a Double Convex-Glass ab, Tab. 7. Fig. 1. Ta. 7. Fi. 1.
of equal or unequal Convexities; Let the Centres of the Spherical Surfaces be
k and q; cd a Ray falling parallel to the Axis kqz, and being Refracted at its
Ingress at d, and at its Egress at i; It Is required to determine the Point of
its Concourse with the Axis at z, from these Data, the Radii ky, qw, of the
Convexities, and gd the Distance of the Point of Incidence from the Axis.

This is so easily done by Scale and Compass from what foregoes, that I shall
not insist on a farther Explication thereof, but shall show the more certain
Method of tracing the Progress of this Ray by Calculation.

Produce c d directly to e, and d i to m. We have k y + q w - w y = k q.

First therefore in the Right-angled Triangle q d g, g d and q d being given,
we may find the g q d = q d e and the side q g. Then k q - q g = k g.

Secondly, In the Right angled Triangle k g d, there being given k g and g d,
we may have the g k d = k d c, and the side k d.

Thirdly, As 300: to 193:: so S. q d e: to S. q d i.

Fourthly, q d e - q d i = e d i. And 180 - k d c - e d i = k d i.

Fifthly, In the Triangle k d i, the Angle k d i and the Sides k i, k d, being
known, we have the Angle k i d = m i l. And the Angle i k d. Then g k d - i k d
= q k i.

Sixthly, As 193: to 300:: so S. kid: to S. zil, then zil-qki=kzi.

Lastly, In the Triangle z k i, k i and all the Angles being known, we find k
z, from which subtracting k y, there remains z y, which was required.

If by this Method we calculate the Progress of a Ray^through a Double
Convex-Glass of equal Convexities; and the Thickness of the Glass be little or
nothing in comparison of the Radius of the Convexity; and the Distance of the
Point of Incidence from the Axis be but small, we shall find the Point of
Concourse to be distant from the Glass about the Radius of the Convexity nearly.

This our Third Proposition in most Dioptrick Writers is usually thus expressed.

Parallel Rays falling on a Double Convex-Glass of equal Convexities on both
sides, are united with the Axis, about the Distance of the Radius of the
Convexity from the Pole of the Glass, if the Segment be but 30 Degrees.

But their Demonstrations of this Proposition are usually perplexed enough, by
reason of the smallness and multiplicity of Angles, which are expressed in
their Figures, as also by the Thickness of the Glass, which they are forced to
represent, and yet is to be neglected in their Demonstrations. I shall give as
short a Demonstration as I can, after their Method, as follows.

Tab. 7. Fig. 2. Ta. 7. Fi. 2.
Let a be the Center of the Convexity b k l, h the Center of the Convexity b i
l, d b a Ray of Light produced directly to f parallel to the Axis a h, a b e is
a Right Line, and h b c is a Right Line. The first Angle of Inclination is c b
d = h b f = e b f, and the perpendicular is h b. By the first Refraction the
Ray is deflected from its straight course b f and becomes b g, approaching the
perpendicular b h by the Angle f b g, which is of the Inclination e b f.
Produce g b directly to z. Now the Angle of Incidence on the lower Convexity
bkl from Glass to Air is a b z = e b g, and the Perpendicular is a b or b e:
Wherefore the Ray instead of going forwards in b g is now, by its Emersion into
Air, refracted from the Perpendicular b e, by the Angle g b h, which is
therefore to be equal to the second Angle of Incidence e b g. by Exper. 5. and
that g b h is equal to e b g, I thus demonstrate; By the Supposals in the Prop.
and Common Geometry. -- 1 e b f = f b h By the Fig. -- 2 g b h = f b h - f b g
From 1 and 2 -- 3 g b h = e b f - f b g Doct. Refract. Exper. 4. -- 4 f b g = e
f b e b f From 3 and 4 -- 5 g b h = e b f - e b f = e b f Moreover by the
Scheme -- 6 e b g = e b f + f b g 4 / 2 -- 7 f b g = 16 e b f From 6 and 7 -- 8
e b g = e b f + 16 e b f = e b f From 5 and 8. -- 9 g b h = e b g

Which was to be Demonst.

Therefore it follows that the Ray by this second Refraction proceeds in hh,
crossing the Axis in h the Center of the Convexity. Which was to be
demonstrated.

See the Demonstrations of this Proposition Kepleri Dioptri. Prop. 39. Herigon.
Prop. 15. Dechales Pr. 21. lib. 13. Hon. Faber Prop. 43. Sec. 8. Cherubin de
Orleans la Dioptr. Oculair, Prop. 2. Zahn Telescop. Fund 2. Syntag. 1. Cap. 4.
Prop. 8.

Of Glasses of unequal Convexities.
As for double Unequal Glasses of unequal Spheres on each Side, the foregoing
Method of Calculation determines the Point of Concourse exactly in them also:
But the shorter Rule laid down by most Optic Writers, is this.

As the Sum of the Radii of both Con^exities: to the Radius of either
Convexity:: So the double Radius of the other Convexity: to the Distance of the
Focus. Vid. Corol Pr. 16.

Demonstration.
T. 7. F. 3. T. 7. F. 3.
Let the Axis of the Glass ib be g k, d l a Ray of Light Parallel thereto, g
the Center of the Convexity i f b, b the Center of the Convexity i c b, g i l
and h in are right Lines. The first Angle of Inclination is d i^ = ^h c, and by
the first Refraction the Ray is deflected into i k, crossing the Axis in k, so
that k c is equal to 3 c h. The second Angle of Incidence from Glass to Air on
the Surface i f b is the Angle lik: I say kim being made of lik, the Ray
crosses the Axis in m, and it shall then be (according to the Rule) g h: 2 f
g:: c h: m c. Which I thus Demonstrate. In the kim 1 k i m: k:: k m: m i = m f
in large Spheres. Double the Antecedents 2 2 k i m = l i k: k:: 2 k m: m f::
km: mf = m c: Divide the second Step. 3 l i k -- k = g: k:: k m -- m c: m c.
Then in g i k it shall be 4 g: k:: i k = k c: i g = f g. From 3 and 4 5 k c: f
g:: k m- m c: m c Compound the 5th. 6 k c + f g: f g:: k m: m c Double the
Consequents 7 k c + f g: ^ f g:: k m: m c. Compound the 7th. 8 k c + 3 f g: 2 f
g:: k m + m c= k c = 3 c b: m c That is otherwise 9 3 c h + 3 f g: 2 f g:: 3 c
h: m c. Divide the Ant. by 3. 10 c h + f g = g h: 2 f g:: c h: m c.

Which was to be Demonstrated. Vid. Cherubin Dioptt^. Ocul. page 61, 62. Hon.
Faber Synop. Opt. Prop. 43. Sec. 8, 9. Dechales Prop. 23, 24. Zahn Telescop.
Fund. 2. Cap. 9. Prop. 38.



But this Rule will need but little farther Demonstration, if we consider, that
it holds even ^n double Convexes of equal Convexities; for in them, as the Sum
of the Radii of both Convexities: to the Radius of the Convexity:: so the
double Radius of the Convexity: to the Distance of the Focus. And it is the same
in Glasses of unequal Convexities, for these refract in the same Proportion to
their Curvities as the other.

Wherefore from these three foregoing Propositions we lay these down as General
Rules, That the Point of Convergency for Parallel Rays falling on a Plano
Convex^ Glass, is distant about the Diameter of the Convexity. On a double
Unequal of equal Convexities, it is about the (...) Diameter of the Convexity.
And on a Double Unequal of unequal Convexities, the Rule for finding it is what
we have laid down before.

Scholium.
Before I proceed, it will be requisite here to note, That the Rays which fall
nigher the Axis are not united thereto so near the Pole of the Glass, as those
that fall farther from it; and the difference of the Points of Concourse is not
so great, when the Unequal side of a Plano-Convex Glass is turned to the Object,
as when the Plain side is toward the Object.

For this observe Tab. 8. F. 1, 2, 3. Ta. 8. Fi. 1, 2, 3.
in each of which, the Radius of the Convexity cv is 2 Inches, or 20000 Parts
(an Inch being 10000 Parts) the Arch rvr in the first and second Figures is a
Quadrant, and consequently the Thickness of the Glass vz in each is 5858, being
the versed Sine of 45 to the Radius 20000. But in the double Unequal Fig. 3. the
thickness of the Glass vz is 110 of an Inch or 8000 such Parts a b in each is a
Ray falling on the Glass Parallel to the Axis c v, at the distance of 112 of an
Inch or 1000 such Parts as c ^ is 20000 de a like Ray falling (...)

Parts distant from the Axis, i is the Point wherein the Ray a b meets the
Axis, ^ the point in which d e crosses the Axis. Here I call hi the Depth of
the Focus, which we see is greater in the second Figure, wherein the plain side
is toward the Object, than in the first Fig. wherein the Unequal Surface is
toward the Object. For Proof of this, let the Angles of Incidence be to the
refracted Angle (according to Kepler) as 3 to 2, Expressed in the first Column
of the following Table; or let the Sines of the Incidence be to the Sines of
the refracted Angles, as 300 to 193 (according to Mr. Newton) as is expressed
in the second Column of the Table. Then by the foregoing Method of Calculation,
delivered in the second and third Propositions, we shall find as in the
following Table. 1st. Column. 2d. Column. 3:2:: Inclin: Ref. 300:193:: Inc.
Ref. For the Plano-Convex with the Unequal Side to the Object. Tab. 8. Fig. 1.
vi = 4*1930 vi = 3*4762 vh = 4*1230 vh = 3*4112 hi = 700 hi = 650 For the
Plano-Convex with the plain side to the Object.Tab. 8. Fig. 2. vi = 3*9910 vi =
3*5957 vh = 3*7140 vh = 3*3259 hi = 2770 hi = 2698 For the Double Unequal of
equal Convexities.Tab. 8. Fig. 3. vi = 1*841 vi = 1*762 vh = 1*685 vh = 1*653
hi = 156 hi = 109

From this Table it is manifest, first that the Ray ab, which falls nigher the
Axis v c, is not united thereto so near the Pole of the Glass v, as the Ray d
e, which falls farther from the Axis; for a b is united to the Axis at the
Distance v i, and d e is united to the Axis at the Distance v h, but v i is
greater than (...)



Secondly, It Is evident that the Focal Depth h i is not so great in a
Plano-Convex Glass, when the Unequal Side is toward the Object, as in Fig. 1.
Tab. 8. as when the plain Side is toward the Object, as in Fig. 2. Tab. 8. for
by the Table hi is in the former but 650, but in the latter posture it is 2691,
that is more than four times greater.

Whence I deduce this, that in viewing an Object by a PlanoConvex Glass, it is
best turning the Spherical Side to the Object; and so likewise for burning by
such a Glass, it is best turning the Unequal Side toward the Sun.

Of OBLIQUE RAYS.
Premises to the Fourth Proposition.
Hitherto I have considered only the Direct Rays. I come now to the
Consideration of Oblique Rays: And for this we must have Recourse to our
foregoing 13th. and 17th. Definitions; as also to the first and second
Experiments: By the 13th Definition, we know what Oblique Rays are: And by the
17th Definition, we learn that in every Parcel of Oblique Rays, flowing from
the same Point of an Object upon a Glass; there is one certain Ray, which may
be called the Axis, and that this Axis is as it were not at all refracted. But
for a farther Declaration hereof, Tab. 9. Fig. 1. Ta. 9. Fi. 1.
Let a b c be a Plano-Convex Glass, with the Unequal Side toward the Object, d
b the Axis of the Direct Cone of Rays, e b a Ray of the Oblique Cone, falling
on the Vertex of the Glass at b, I say, this is the Axis of an Oblique Cone,
and after its Double Refraction; first at its Ingress at b, and then at its
Egress at f, it becomes f g Parallel to e b. This is Evident, if we imagine the
Ray e b to fall on the Plane Glass amnc, for it is refracted the same way in one
Case as in t other. Wherefore the Ray e b f g, is as it were st^a^t, as e b h
or k f g; so likewise we may imagine the Plane Side of this same Glass a c
turned toward the Object, then p b d is the Axis of the Direct Cone, and g f
the Axis of an Oblique Cone. We see therefore that a Plano-Convex Glass, being
exposed with its Unequal Side to the Object, the Rays that fall from the several
Points of the Object, whose Ingress is at the Glasses vertex b, are the Axes of
the respective Cones. But the Plane Side being toward the Object, the Rays
from the several Points, which have their Egress at the Glasses vertex b, are
the Axes of the respective Cones. And that amongst the Infinite Rays that
proceed from a Collateral Point of an Object, and form an Oblique Cone, falling
on the Plano-Convex Glass; there is some one certain Ray, that falls on the
Vertex, and has its Ingress at b; Or (if the Plane Side be toward the Object)
has its Emersion at b, is manifest from this Reason only, that the Rays
compounding such a Cone, are spread over the Whole surface of the Glass, and
are as it were Infinite or Indefinite.

In like manner, Tab. 9. Fig. 2. a b c k Ta. 9. Fi. 2.
is a Double Unequal of Equal Convexities, d b k p the Axis of the Direct Cone
of Rays, e h a Ray of an Oblique Cone, which at its Ingress at h is refracted
into h f, in such manner that it makes the Arches b ^, k f, equal; then at its
egress it becomes f g, Parallel again to e h, as if it had not been at all
refracted, but had passed directly forward, or through a Plane Glass. This also
will be manifest, if at the Point of Incidence h, and at the Point of Emersion
f, we draw the Tangents mn, or; for these Tangents are Parallel when h b and f
k are equal Arches; and the Ray e h is no otherwise refracted by the Unequal
Glass, than if it had fallen on the Plane Glass mnor.

And that amongst the Infinite Rays that proceed from a Collateral Point of an
Object, and form an Oblique Cone, falling on the Double Unequal abck; there is
some one certain Ray, that has its Incidence so, that after its Refraction at
its Ingress, it may proceed so in the Glass, as to cut off equal Arches b h, k
f, may be easily conceived; because the whole surface of the Glass is occupy'd
by each Cone from each Point; so that the Point h (for instance) cannot miss of
having amongst the rest its Ray, which must necessarily be so refracted.

What has been said concerning a Double Unequal of Equal Convexities Tab. 9.
Fig. 2. may be accommodated to a Double Unequal of unequal Convexities Tab. 9.
Fig. 3. Ta. 9. Fi. 3.
For as in Fig. 2. the Arches b h, k f, are to be equal (the Convexities being
Equal) so in Fig. 3. the Arches b h, k f, are to be Similar; that is to say, bh
is to be as many degrees of its Circumference, as k f is of its Circumference.
Thus suppose in the same Fig. 3. The Arch a b c to be struck with a Radius of
two Inches, and the Arch a k c to be struck with the Radius 4 Inches; these
Radii being to each other as 2 to 1, k f must be to b h as 2 to 1, for then
they shall be of equal degrees, each in its own respective Circumference, for
here likewise in this third Fig. the Tangents at h and f, run Parallel to each
other.

The Axes of all the Radious Cones, falling on a PlanoConvex with its Unequal
Side to the Object, Cross each other in the Vertex of the Unequal surface, at
their Ingress into the Glass, as in Tab. 9. Fig. 1. Ta. 9. Fi. 1.
at b; but if the Plane Side be turned toward the Object, they Cross in the
Vertex of the Unequal surface at their Egress from the Glass, as in the same
Fig. 1. at b.

The Axes of all the Radious Cones, falling on a Double Unequal of Equal
Convexities, Cross each other in the Middle or Center of the Glasses Axis. Thus
in Tab. 9. Fig. 2. Ta. 9. Fi. 2.
d b p is the Line, which produced, would pass through the Centres of the two
Unequal surfaces; this Line I call the Axis of the Glass, ^et b q be equal to k
q, then q is the Point wherein the Axes of all the Radious Cones Cross each
other.

The Axes of all the Radious Cones, falling on a Double Unequal of unequal
Convexities, Cross each other in a Point within the Glass in its Axis, which
divides the said Axis in the Proportion, that the Radius of one Convexity has
to the Radius of the other. Tab. 9. Fig. 3. Ta. 9. Fi. 3.
Let the Radius of the Convexity a k c be to the Radius of the Convexity a b c,
as 2 to 1. Let b k the Axis of the Glass be divided in q, so that k q may be to
b q as 2 to 1, then q is the Point wherein the Axes of all the Radious Cones
Cross each other.

The same may be understood of Concave Glasses.

And this is sufficient for explaining what I mean by the Axis of an Oblique
Cone of Rays.

I come now to the Fourth Proposition.

PROP. IV.
The Parallel Rays that proceed from each Collateral Point of an Object, and
fall Obliquely on a Glass, are united with their Axis at the same Distance, as
the Direct Parallel Rays are united with their Axis, viz. By a Plano Unequal
about the Distance of the Diameter; by a Double Equal Unequal about the Distance
of the Radius; and by a Double Unequal Unequal, as is before determined.

I have hitherto proposed the Properties of Glasses Problematically, to be
Demonstrated or rather traced out by a Geometrical Calculation of the Rays
Progress. This Method, as it is the most Artificial, so it is the most Legitimate
and Exact, and wholly New and Distinct from that of other Optic Writers. I
shall first observe the same Method in this Proposition, proposing it
Problematically thus, Tab 1^. Fig. 1.
Tab. 10. Fig. 1. efc is a Plano Unequal Glass, with the Unequal Side toward the
Object. Let there be given qf the Radius of the Convexity (as in the Table
after the foregoing Scholium) 20000, and fg the Glasses thickness 5858, zfqa is
the Axis of the Glass it self, or of the Direct Cone of Rays, the Point of
whose Concourse is in a, so that fa (as we have found in the foregoing
Propositions) is 34112. Let rf be the Axis of an Oblique Cone of Rays, falling
on the Vertex f; and making the Angle of Incidence rfz (= xdl) of any given
Quantity (as in this Example suppose 14^. 28'. 40''.) Let us suppose an other
Ray mi Parallel to rf, and its Point of Incidence i at such a Distance from the
Axis zfa, that being produced directly forwards, it may pass through the Center
q of the Convexity; that is to say, let us suppose kqi to be equal to zfr. Thus
I propose it for ease of Illustration, for the Calculation may as truly be
performed by supposing the Ray mi at any other Distance, as I shall declare
presently.

From these things given, it is required to find the Point l in the Axis, where
the Ray mi crosses it. For the Discovery whereof we proceed thus.

Draw ik Perpendicular to zq, then in the Right-angled Triangle kqi, we have q
i, and the Angle k q i to find k q and k i; then q f-f g = q g. And k q: k i::
q g:g h.

Produce r f to p, then in the Right-angled Triangle f g p, we have f g, and
the Angle g f p = r f z to find the Side p g; or thus, the Triangles g f p, g q
h are Similar, then g q: g h:: g f: g p. Say then, as 300: to 193:: so S. ^ g f
p: to S. ^ g f d.

In the Right-angled Triangle f g d, we have f g, and the ^ g f d, to find the
Side d g, then dg + g h = d h.

Draw ho and dx Perpendiculars to ec, say then, as 193: to 300:: so S. ^ o h q
= g q h: to S. ^ o h l. But 90- ohl= d h l. And 90 + x d l or z f r = h d l.

Lastly, In the Triangle hdl, we have the two Angles d h l and h d l, and the
Side h d to find the Side d l; which was required.

I have said before, that the same Calculation may be performed for any other
Ray Parallel to r f, falling at any distance ki from the Direct Axis z f q a;
supposing with the former Data (instead of the Angle f q i) ( Tab. 10. Fig. 1.)
the Distance ki (Tab. 10. Fig. 2.) be given. For then in Tab. 10. Fig. 2. T.
10. Fi. 2.
draw n i b Parallel to z q, and produce q i to x, then nim = r f z. In the
Right-angled Triangle q k i, having k i and q i, we get the Angle kqi = n i x,
and the Side k q. And n i x-n i m = m i x = to the Angle of Incidence. And q
f-q k = f k, f g-f k = k g = i b, by which in the several small Triangles
within the Glass, we may find the Angle of the Rays Incidence from Glass to
Air, as in the immediate foregoing Example, and so onwards in like manner.

I shall propose one Case more in this Doctrine of Oblique Rays, and that is in
Tab. 11. Fig. 1. Tab. 11. Fig. 1.
where the Plane Side of the Glass is turned toward the Object. And that we
may trace a Ray in this Case by Calculation, and find out a proper Ray for our
purpose, we are to work a little backwards, thus, q f = q h the Radius of the
Convexity is given 20000, f g the thickness of the Glass is given 5858; And q
f-g f= q g = 14142. Let d f be a Ray within the Glass, whose Ingress is at d,
so that d g is given 1000; and its Egress is at the Glasses Vertex f: In the
Right-angled Triangle d g f, we have two Sides given to find the Angle d f g.
Let k d be Perpendicular to e c, and produce f d directly to x: Then say, as
193: to 300:: so Sine of the Angle k d x = d f g: to Sine ^ k d r. And k d r-k
d x = x d r. Wherefore r d is a Ray of Light falling on the Glass at d
obliquely by the Angle k d r, which after its Immersion into the Glass proceeds
onwards, and Emerges at the Vertex of the Glass f. This Ray at its Emersion at
f shall again run Parallel to r d, by what foregoes; wherefore the Angle l f a
is equal to the Angle k d r.

And thus much for the backward Operation, which we have Instituted to find a
proper Ray to work with, that is, to find the Axis of an Oblique Cone, and its
Angle of Inclination.

Let m i be another Ray Parallel to r d, and falling on the Glass at i, so that
g i, may be given 5000. It Is required to determine the Point l, where the Ray m
i, after a Double Refraction at its Ingress at i, and at its Egress at h, meets
the Axis r d f l.

Produce r d directly to p, and m i to b, and make s i Perpendicular to ec;
Seeing therefore that m i is Parallel to r d, the refracted part i h, shall be
Parallel to the refracted part d f, and the Angle x d r (=p d f) shall be equal
to b i h, and the Angle k d r is equal to s i m. Join f h.

Then in the Right-angled Triangle q g i, we have q g and g i to find the Angle
g q i = q i s, and the Side q i: But q i s + s i m = m i q, and 180- m i q = q
i b. And q i b + b i h is equal to q i h.

Therefore in the Triangle q i h we have the Sides q i and q h, and the Angle q
i h, to find the Angles i q h and q h i. But g q i-i q h is equal to g q h or f
q h.

Then in the Isosceles Triangle f q h, we have f q and q h equal to each other,
and the Angle f q h to find the Side f h, and the Angle f h q = q f h.

Produce q h directly to ^, then as 193: To 300:: So Sine Angle q h i: To Sine
of the Angle o h l. But 180- o h l-f h q = f h l. Also 180 - q f h = h f a. And
h f a + l f a = h f l.

Lastly, In the Triangle h f l, we have f h and all the Angles to find the Side
f l, which was required.

Common Demonstration.
I shall now Demonstrate this Proposition the usual Way. Tab. 12. Fig. 1. agb
Tab. 12. Fig. 1.
is a Plano-Convex, let the Plain surface ab be first turned to the Object: And
let the two Parallel Rays c d, e f, fall Obliquely on the Plane surface ab, I
say, that these Rays shall be united in l, so that hl shall be near equal to
the Diameter of the Convexity, which we'll suppose g k.

Seeing the Angles e f b, c d b, are equal, these two Rays have equal Angles of
Inclination, and consequently shall have equal Correspondent Angles of
Refraction within the Glass, and therefore the refracted Rays d h, f g, shall
also be Parallel within the Glass: And because from the same Point in the
Object, that transmits these two Rays c d, e f, there proceed Infinite Rays,
which falling on the Glass, and being refracted therein, do occupy the whole
Glass; some one of these Rays after its first Refraction, being produced
backwards, shall pass through the Center of the Convexity i. Let hd be this Ray
produced directly both ways to i and l: Seeing therefore h d is Perpendicular
to the surface a g b, at h it suffers no Refraction in its Egress from the
Glass. Wherefore let us consider the other refracted Ray f g, and what
Refraction it suffers at the Point g on its Egress from the Glass: Here the
Angle of Inclination is f g i equal to the Altern g i h; Let us suppose the
refracted Angle k g l, which (by Experiment V) ought to be more than the
Inclination f g i = g i h. Wherefore in the Triangle i g l, l i: l g:: S. ^ l g
i = S. ^ l g k: S. ^ l i g. But in these small Angles, as the Sines, so the
Angles, and therefore if the Angle l g k be more than the Angle l i g, the Side
l i is 1/^ more than the Side l g or l h (for l g and l h are insensibly equal
in Glasses of small Segments of large Spheres) wherefore h i being the
Semidiameter, h l shall be the Diameter. Which was to be Demonstrated.

Secondly in Tab. 12. Fig. 2. T. 12. Fi. 2.
Let the same Glass a b be turned with its Convex-Side to the Object, and
thereon let the Parallel Rays c d, e f, fall obliquely to the Axis. These Rays
shall be united together behind the Glass almost at the distance of the
Diameter of the Convexity.

For amongst the parallel Rays that fall on the Glass, let us conceive one e f,
that after its first Refraction at f, passing in the Glass in the Line f h, and
being produced directly, would pass through the Center of the Convexity i. If
we conceive the Medium of Glass continued, we know that these two Rays e f, c
d, would be united in k at the distance of a Diameter and half from the Glass
(by Prop. I.). From the point k draw k n perpendicular to the plane surface of
the Glass a b, and let the Ray n o be drawn parallel to e f, c d; this Ray n o
shall also, by its first Refraction, be directed toward the Point k; and
because within the Glass the Ray n m is perpendicular to the plain Surface a b,
it shall proceed unrefracted through m l k. I shall now show that f h by its
second Refraction at its egress at h is refracted to l. Draw h l, and through h
draw q h p perpendicular to a b. The Angle of Inclination within the Glass is f
h q = p h k = h k l. And now I shall prove that the Angle k h l is the Angle of
Inclination p h k or h k l. In the Triangle h k l, s. ^ h k l: s. ^ k h l:: h
l: k l (or k r, for they are nearly equal), but h l is almost double k l or k
r, therefore the Angle h k l is almost double k h l. Which was to be
Demonstrated. And therefore the parallel Oblique Rays have the Point of
Concourse at the distance of a Diameter almost from a Plano-Convex Glass. Which
was to be Demonstrated. Vid. L'Optique de Pierre Ango Livre 3. Sec. 69. etc.

Thirdly, In Tab. 13. Fig. 1. T. 13. F i. 1.
z x is a double Unequal, c is the Center of the Convexity z a x, y the Center
of the Convexity z b x, c y s the Axis of the Glass. It Is evident by what
foregoes, that whatever Rays fall on this Glass parallel to the Glass's Axis
are united thereto, at the distance of the Focus, ( viz. about the Semidiameter
in equal Convexities) as suppose at m. Wherefore let us consider two other
Rays, parallel between themselves, but oblique to the Glass's Axis c s, such as
f g, h i, I say these likewise, after a Double Refraction do concur about the
distance of the Principal Focus (for so I call the Focus of the Rays parallel
to the Glass's Axis.)

Seeing there are infinite parallel Rays, that fall thus obliquely on the
Surface z b x, most certainly there must be one amongst the rest, which so
falls thereon, that being produced directly, shall pass through the Center y of
the Convexity z b x: Let us conceive f g to be this Ray, so that f g y is a
Right Line; let it be produced to l, so that y l may be equal to double gy.

From the Point l to c the Center of the Convexity z a x draw the Right Line l
c, and where this Line cuts the Surface z b x, as in i, let the Ray h i fall
parallel to f g. It Is evident, that by the first Refraction the Ray h i suffers
on the Convexity z b x, it will concur with the Ray f g in l at the distance of
a Diameter and half, for now f g d y l may be considered as the principal Axis.

Let us suppose the principal Focus of this Glass to be at m. From the Center c
strike the Arch m k cutting c l in the Point k. The Ray h i shall be refracted
at i, but the refracted Ray i r (seeing it is perpendicular to the Surface z a
x by Construction) shall proceed unrefracted directly to k; but the Ray f g d
being refracted in the Point d shall proceed refracted, and shall be united
with the Ray i k in k. Which I thus prove,

From c draw the Line cdp, the Angle p d y is equal to the Angle of Inclination
g d c in the Glass; and therefore if d k be truly the refracted Ray, the Angle
p d y ought to be double the Angle y d k, and that it is so I thus prove.

Let us suppose the Ray o e Parallel to the principal Axis c s, this Ray by the
first Refraction it suffers at e is directed to the Point s, so that b s is a
Diameter and half, or triple by, and therefore equal to g l. The same Ray o e
being refracted at e to n, and at n suffering a second Refraction is brought to
concur with the Axis c s in m, the principal Focus by Supposition. In which
Case, the Angle of Inclination in the Glass shall necessarily be e n c, which
is equal to q n s, and the Angle of Refraction shall be s n m; and therefore
the former q n s shall be double the latter s n m. But I say, as qns is double
of snm:: so p d l is double of l d k. Which I thus prove, In the Triangle n c m
1 s. c n m = s q n m: s n m c:: c m = ck: nc = cd Also in the Triang. d c k 2
s. c d k = s p d k: s d k c:: k c: c d. From 1 and 2 3 s q n m: s n m c:: s p d
k: s d k c. Then Sines and Angles being proportional 4 q n m: n m c:: p d k: d
k c By the Scheme 5 q n m = q n s + s n m. Also p d k = p d l + l d k. From 4
and 5. 6 q n s + s n m: n m c:: p d l + l d k: d k c. Alternando 6. 7 q n s + s
n m:p d l + l d k:: n m c: d k c. Moreover in nms. 8 s. s m n = s. n m c: s. s
n m:: n s = d l: m s = k l Also in Triang. d k l 9 s. d k l = s. d k c: s. l d
k:: d l: k l From 8 and 9 10 s. n m c: s. s n m:: s. d k c: s. l d k Sines and
Angles prop. 11 n m c: s n m:: d k c: ld k Alternando 11 12 s n m: l d k: n m
c: d k c From 7 and 12 13 q n s + s n m: p d l + l d k:: s n m: l d k
Alternando 13 14 q n s + s n m: s n m:: p d l + ld k: l d k. Dividendo 14 15 q
n s: s n m:: p d l: l d k.

From which 15th Step if follows, that if q n s be double of s n m:: so p d l
is double of ldk. Which was to be Demonst.

Note, In this Demonstration we assume n s and d l to be equal, and m s and k l
to be likewise equal, whereas they are not so exactly, for the Thickness and
Breadth of the Glass causes some little difference, but in Glasses of small
Segments and large Spheres, and where the Rays do not fall very obliquely, this
Difference is so very inconsiderable, that in a Demonstration relating to a
Physico-Mathematical Matter, they may well be considered as equal.

Scholium.
But tho the Proposition expresses, that the Parallel Rays which proceed from
each collateral Point of an Object, and fall obliquely on a Glass are united
with their Axis at the same distance, as the direct Parallel Rays; yet this is
to be understood with some Limitation: For if the Rays fall very obliquely,
their Union with the Axis is not so exact, but they are scattered and the Focal
Depth is very great. As will appear by Calculation.

Of the Representation of outward Objects in a Dark Chamber; by a Convex-Glass.
From what has been hitherto laid down results that admirable Appearance, and
Effect of a Convex-Glass duly placed in a small Hole in a Dark Chamber; Which
therefore we shall here consider, Tab. 14. F. 1. Tab. 14. Fig. 1.
ABC is a distant Object, which we are now to consider as very remote, so that
tho the Figure, for want of Room in the Paper, expresses the Rays flowing from
every single Point, as very much diverging; yet we are to imagine, that the
Rays (for Instance) from the Point A run as it were Parallel to each other; the
distance of the Object B H being supposed vastly great, in Comparison to the
Glasses Breadth G K (But after the 5th. Proposition following, this
Advertisement of the great distance of the Object will be needless, as therein
shall appear) G H K is a Plano-Convex-Glass, receiving on its Surface a Cone of
Rays from each single Point of the Object, but here for avoiding Confusion in
the Scheme, we have only expressed the Cones flowing from the uppermost,
middle, and lower Point of the Object, that is, from A, C, and B; and in each
of these Cones neither have we expressed any more Rays than the Axis of the
Cone (as for instance) A H, and the two extreme Rays of the same Cone A G and A
K.

First therefore for the Rays that flow from the Point A. By what forgoes we
know that the Axis of this Cone A H, after it has passed the Glass proceeds
directly toward F, as if it were not at all refracted; and that the Rays A G,
A K, are united with this Axis in a Point (suppose at F) distant from the Glass
about the Diameter of its Convexity (the Glass being a Plano-Convex) and what
is said of the Rays A G. A K, being united with their Axis, must be conceived
of all the Rays that make up the whole Cone flowing from this single Point A:
and they are all united likewise with the Axis in the Point F, forming another
correspondent Cone G F K, having its Base on the Glass, and its Vertex in the
Point F, making the Pencil of Rays F G A K F.

And so likewise, what is declared of the Point A, and the Rays that flow from
it, and of their being united together in F, may be easily conceived of the
Rays flowing from the middly Point B, and their being united in E; and may be
also understood of the Rays flowing from C, and their union in D; and so of the
Rays proceeding from any other Point in the Object A B C, and their being
united in a correspondent Point in F E D. And this F E D we call the Distinct
Base, Focus, or Burning Point. It Is called the Distinct Base, because therein
is a Distinct Representation of the Object. And supposing the Glass G K in the
Hole of a dark Room, so that the Representation F E D may be disturbed by no
other luminous rays from outward Objects, and a Paper were placed at D E F,
there to receive the Image, we should thereon see the Object most livelily
painted in its exact Shape and Colors. It Is called the Focus, or Burning
Point, because the Glass being exposed to the Sun, it there collects the Rays
from each Point of the Sun's Body, and paints its Image there most vividly,
exciting a violent Heat, even to the inflaming of combustible Bodies.

But whereas in a Scholium after the Third Proposition, it is observed, that
the Rays falling nigh the Axis are not united thereto so near the Glass, as the
Rays that fall farther from the Axis. And consequently that all the Rays from
one Point in the Object, do not united a correspondent Point in the Distinct
Base, but that (as we have noted before) the Focus has some Depth, and consists
not in an Indivisible Point. Yet this hinders not the Representation in the
Distinct Base to be very lively and exact. For tho all the Rays from each Point
are not united in an answerable Point in the Image, yet there are a sufficient
quantity of them to render the Representation very perfect. And tho some Rays
from other adjacent Points may a little intermix with those from its
neighboring Parts, yet these are so few, that they make no great disturbance.

Moreover in a Scholium following the Fourth Proposition, N. B.
it is observed, that when the Incidence of the oblique Rays is very oblique,
that then their Concourse with their Axis is not so very regular. From, hence
it proceeds, that the Representation in the Distinct Base is not so clear and
exact toward the Extremes, as toward the Middle.

As for the reason of this surprising Appearance in a dark Chamber, wherein
there is a small Hole armed with a Unequal Glass; it will be manifest, if we
consider, that from every Point in the inverted Representation on the Paper,
the Rays proceed to the Eye that looks at it, exactly in the same manner, as
from the Object it self. For let us imagine the Point A to be Blue, B to be
Yellow, and C Red. Because all the Rays flowing from A are separated by
themselves, and fall in the Image on the Point F, where no other Rays intermix
with them no disturb them, they must needs there represent Blue. For passing
through the Glass, it being a Diaphanous Colorless Medium, does not at all
alter them (notwithstanding the Appearance of the Prisme,) and the Point F in
the Paper being e^lightened only with Rays of Blue Light, and of it self being
White, indifferent to all Colors, or rather indeed of no Color, must needs
represent Blue; and so E Yellow, and D Red. As to the Shape of the Object, it
must needs be expressed exact likewise; for every Physical Point in the Object
sending out a Cone of Rays falling on the Glass, and these being formed into
another Correspondent Cone on the other side the Glass, determining their
Vertices in Correspondent Points of the Image; the Eye must necessarily
perceive on the Paper the lively Image of the Object, being it is affected in
the same way by This, as by the Object it self. for from the Object it self the
Eye receives only a Cone of Rays from each of its Points, and so it receives a
Cone of Rays form each Point in the Image on the Paper; each Point in the Image
on the Paper being enlightened by the Rays it receives through the Glass; and
consequently the Paper, being an Impolite Surface, reflects these Rays into the
whole circumjacent Medium. Vid. Schol. Prop. 52. Gregorii Optic. Promot.

And now that I am on the Consideration of this Appearance, it may not be
improper to consider the Effect of a Plain small Hole without a Glass in a dark
Room. Tab. 14. Fig. 2. Tab. 14. Fig. 2.
represents a dark Chamber, in whose side there is a small Hole g k, an Inch
wide; a b c is a distant Object. Now because there is no Glass in the Hole g k,
the Rays from each Point of the Object pass through the Hole directly strait,
and represent on the Wall within, at dedfef, a faint and confused Image of the
Object: Because here by the narrowness of the Hole, the Rays from some Points
are hindered from intermixing with the Rays from some other Points; as here the
Rays from the Point a do not intermix on the Wall with the Rays from the Point
c; for we see d d do not intermix with f f. But then the Representation is
confused; for tho some Rays are hereby hindered from intermixing with some other
Rays, yet other Rays from nigh adjoining Points do intermix with their
neighboring Rays, as here the Rays from a, and those from b are blended
together in f e, and so those from c and b in d e. And if the Hole be made so
narrow as to hinder this communication of Rays in a great measure (for it is
absolutely impossible to hinder it altogether) then the opening ad mits so few
Rays from each Point, that the Image is obscure and imperceivable.

There is another Particular relating to this Appearance in a dark Chamber,
which seems not so clearly treated of in those Optic Writers which I have
consulted. Particularly Zahn in his Ocul. Artif. Fund. 1. Synt. 3. Cap. 2. Sec.
8. gives no satisfactory Account thereof. The Matter is thus; in Tab. 14. F. 1.
Tab. 14. Fig. 2.
if the Image D E F in the dark Chamber be received on a Speculum or Looking
Glass instead of a White Paper, the Eye perceives a most dilute and faint Image
on the Speculum: But if the Speculum be placed any where between G K and D E F,
and a Paper placed as far distant from the Speculum before it, as the distinct
Base D E F is behind the Speculum; then the Speculum shall reflect on the Paper
the distinct Image of the Object.

The dilute and very faint Image, which the Eye perceives on the Speculum in
the first Case, proceeds from the Imperfect Politure of the Speculum; For if it
were a most exquisitely smooth Surface, even that faint Image it self would not
appear. But as it is impossible by the Industrly of Man to procure such, and all
Miroirs partake in some measure of a little Roughness, therefore it is that we
have that dilute Image. And the reason we have no such vivid Representation
from a Speculum (considered as a perfectly polished Surface) as from a Paper,
as also the reason of the appearance in the second forementioned posture of the
Speculum, does so depend on the Doctrine of Reflection or Catoptricks, that I
shall pass it over in this place, it being manifest to any one meanly versed in
that Doctrine. Vid. Schol. Prop. 52. Gregorii Optic. Promot.

Of Nigh Objects, or Diverging Rays.
We have hitherto considered the Radiating Points of Distant Objects both
Direct and Oblique, the Rays from each single Point whereof do proceed as it
were Parallel. I come now to the Consideration of Nigh Objects or Diverging
Rays, and for these let us look back on the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th
Definitions.

When the Rays from each Point of an Object run as it were Parallel, we may
imagine that they may be sooner or easier brought together, than when they
Diverge considerably, by coming from a nigh Object. And that therefore a Unequal
Glass unites the Parallel Rays nigher to it self, than Diverging Rays. Tab. 14.
Fig. 3. a b, c d T. 14. Fi. 3.
are Parallel Rays flowing from one Point of a distant Object, these are united
in the Point k, farther from the Glass than the Point f.

For we may conceive (to omit the farther Proof of this by Geometrical
Calculation), that the Parallel Rays have not so great a Reluctance to be
brought together, as the Diverging Rays; and therefore the Refractive Power of
the Glass has not so much to do to bring those together, as to bring these. And
consequently it performs the First sooner than the Latter, or in a shorter
space, after the Ray's Emerge from behind the Glass. And this the more,
according as the Object g approaches nigher and nigher to the Glass, till at
last it be so nigh, that the Rays, after they have passed the Glass, become
Parallel or Diverging, as I shall show in the following Propositions.

Definitions.
The Focus wherein the Parallel Rays of a Distant Object are united, I call the
Focus, simply without any Addition, sometimes the Absolute Focus, or Solar
Focus.

The Focus wherein the Rays from a Nigh Object, or the Diverging Rays are
united, I call the Respective Focus.

The foregoing Precepts, which I have given for calculating teh Progress of a
Ray through a Spherical Glass, are abundantly sufficient to find the Point of
Union of Rays form Nigh Objects, or of Diverging Rays; The Distance of the
Object or point of Divergency from the Glass (together with the foregoing Data)
being given. I shall not therefore enlarge thereon, but Instead thereof I shall
give these following short Rules in this Matter.

PROP. V.
In Convex-Glasses, When a Nigh Object a Placed more Distant than the Focus,
The Rule for Determining the Distant Base, or Respective Focus is This,

As the Difference, between the Distance of the Object, and Focus:

Is To the Focus, or Focal Length::

So the Distance of the Object from the Glass:

To the Distance of the Respective Focus or Distinct Base from the Glass.

Demonstration.
In Tab. 11. Fig. 2. Let ed be a Plano-Convex Glass, whose absolute Focus we
know is about a Diameter of the Convexity, Let sd be this Diameter. a is a
Radiating Point, f the Center of the Convexity, fe the Radius of the Convexity
produced directly to q. ae a Ray falling on the Glass, produced directly to y.
Here we see the Angle of Inclination, or Incidence of the Ray a e is q e a. Let
it then be made -- I say k is the respective Focus of the Ray a e. 1 a s: s d::
a d: d k Let k l be made = k d. I shall first Demonstrate, that by virtue of
the first Refraction which the Ray suffers at its entrance on the Convex-Side
of the Glass at e, it is directed as if it proceeded strait toward l. For to
the Consequents of the Analogy in the first step add their Halfs, and it shall
be -- 2 a s: s f:: a d: d l And compounding the 2d -- 3 a f: s f:: a l: d l
Here we see s f is equal to three Semidiameters of the Convexity, that is, to
thrice f e. The Angle of Refraction is y e l, if therefore we prove that y e l
is of q e a the Angle of Incidence, it will be manifest, that by the first
Refraction the Ray is directed toward l. In order to the Proof hereof, we lay
down these Suppositions. 1. In the Triangle a e l we suppose le and l d equal,
because we suppose the Glass of the least Thickness imaginable, and the Segment
of a large Sphere. 2. We suppose likewise, that the Angles of Incidence are all
very small, that so Sines and Angles may be proportional. Tho we could not
express this truly in the Figure. Wherefore, for the Demonstration of the
forgoing Position, in the Triangle a e l it is -- 4 a l:l e = l d:: s a e l:s a
But the Angle a e l is the Complement of the Angle y e l to 180 Therefore the
Sine of the Angle a e l is equal to the Sine of the Angle y e l. Wherefore the
4th Step runs thus 5 a l:l d:: s. y e l: s. a But in these small Angles, as the
Sines are, so are the Angles. Therefore the 5th stands thus -- 6 a l: l d:: y e
l: a Then from 3 and 6 it follows -- 7 y e l: a:: a f:s f = 3 e f Then in the 7
Triple the Antecedent on this side, and subtriple the Consequent on the other
side, and it will be -- 8 3 y e l: a:: a f:e f Moreover, in the aef it is -- 9
a f:e f:: s a of:s a But the Sine of the Angle a e f is equal to the Sine of
the Angle qea, being Complements to 180. Wherefore the 9 may stand thus 10 a f:
e f:: s q e a: s a But Sines and Angles in these small Angles being
proportional, it follows from the 8th and 10th. Steps, That 11 3 y e l: a:: q e
a: a.

Wherefore from the Analogy in the 11th, it is evident, that the Angle of
Inclination or Incidence q e a is thrice the Angle of Refraction y e l; seeing
three times the Angle y e l, and the Angle q e a, bear the same Proportion to
the same Angle a. And this was the first thing to be proved; and consequently
the Ray a e by its first Refraction at its Point of Incidence is directed
toward the Point l

It remains to be Demonstrated secondly, that the Ray, at its Eruption on the
plain side of the Glass into Air, is refracted into e k.

For the Proof of this draw rem Parallel to the Axis. Now the Angle of
Incidence from Glass to Air shall be m e l, the Angle of Refraction l e k,
which we shall prove to be half the Angle of Inclination m e l; or we shall
prove that the Angle m e k is thrice the Angle of Refraction l e k. Which being
Demonstrated, it is certain the Ray is refracted into e k. For the Demonstration
hereof we retain the Series of our former Steps, and in the Triangle l e k we
have it 12 l e = l d:l k:: s. ^ e k l:s ^ l e k But s. ^ e k l is equal to s. ^
e k f being Complements to 180. Therefore the 12th. Analogy may stand thus 13 l
d: l k:: s ^ e k f:s ^ l e k And the Angle e k f is = ^ m e k Wherefore 14 l
xd:l k:: s ^ m e k:s ^ l e k

Now the Angles being as the Sines, and l k being by Construction the third
Part of l d, it follows from the 14th Step, that the Angle l e k is the third
Part of the Angle m e k. Wherefore the Angle l e k is the Angle of Refraction
agreeable to the Angle of Inclination m e l. Which was to be Demonstrated.

Example of this Rule.
Of this Rule I shall give this short Example. Let the Focus of a Glass be 48
Inches; the Distance of the Object 156, their Difference is 108. Then 108: 48::
156: 69 = to the respective Focus.

By this Rule we may view very nigh Objects with long Telescopes, converting
them as it were into Microscopes, only by lengthning them. But of this more
hereafter.

Also from hence I shall deduce a Method of measuring distances at one Station:
but hereof also more hereafter.

PROP. VI.
An Object being placed in the Focus of a Convex-Glass, the Rays from each
Point thereof, after passing the Glass become Parallel;

Tab. 14. F. 4. Tab. 14. Fig. 4.
ABC is an Object placed in the Focus of the Glass RS. The Rays form each Point
of this Object ^low upon the Glass, as here we have expressed those Points
after passing the Glass become Parallel, those from A being a a a, from B b b
b, from C c c c. For let us imagine a distant Object to send its Parallel Ray,
a a a from its upper Point, b b b from its middle Point, c c c from its lower
Point: These (by what foregoes) shall be formed by the Glass into the distinct
Base A B C. Let us now conceive this distinct Base, A B C, to be made the
Object; and the Case is most plain, that its Rays must needs ^e remitted back
again in the same manner as they were received from the distant Object on the
side a b c, that is, Parallel. For the Progress of a Ray is reciprocal. per
Exp. 8. Vid. Prop. XXVII.

PROP. VII.
If an Object be placed nigher a Convex-Glass than its Focus, the Rays from
each single Point thereof after they have passed the Glass, do proceed onwards
diverging; But do not diverge so much as before they entered the Glass.

For if it be as much as the Glass can do, by its refractive Power to reduce to
a Parallelism the diverging Rays from an Object placed in its Focus; it must
needs be more than it can do, to reduce to a Parallelism the Divergency of the
Rays, from an Object placed nigher to it than its Focus; The Divergence in this
latter Posture being much greater than in the former, and consequently not so
easily reduced by the refractive Power of the Glass. Tab. 15. Fig. 1.
In Tab. 15. Fig. 1. cd is a Convex-Glass in whose Focus at a there is a
radiating Point, from which proceed the Rays a c f, a d m, which meeting with
the Glass, instead of going onwards to f and m, are reduced thereby to c h, d
k, Parallel to each other. b is another radiating Point nigher the Glass than
its Focus a, we may plainly perceive the Rays b c, b d, diverge more than the
Rays a c, a d. Wherefore b c, b d, instead of proceeding directly onwards to e
and n, are reduced to c g, d l; But c g and d l do yet diverge, but not so much
as b c, b d.

Definition.
Imaginary Focus.
In the same Figure, draw g c, l d, directly to Cross in x, I call x the
Imaginary Focus; which is determined by the following Proposition.

PROP. VIII.
In Convex-Glasses when an Object is placed nigher the Glass than the Focus,
the Rule for finding the Imaginary Focus is this,

As the Difference between the Distance of the Object from Glass, and the
Glasses Focus:

Is to the Glasses Focus::

So the distance of the Object from the Glass:

To the Distance of the Imaginary Focus from the Glass.

Demonstration.
In Tab. 15. F. 2. Let e d be a Plano-Convex-Glass, whose absolute Focus is a
Diameter of the Convexity, let s d be this Diameter; a is a rediating Point, f
the Center of the Convexity f e (= f d) the Radius of the Convexity produced to
q, a e a Ray falling on the Glass produced directly to i.

We here suppose the Thickness of the Glass to be inconsiderable; and also,
that the Breadth of the Glass is so little, that the Angles of Incidence shall
be so small, that Sines and Angles may be proportional.

Let it then be made according to the Rule, a s:s d:: a d:d k. I say k d is the
Distance of the Imaginary Focus of this Ray a e, after it has passed the Glass:
That is, it shall be refracted, and proceed onwards in e h, as if it came
directly from the Point k, k e h being a strait Line.

Let k l be made = k d. I shall first Demonstrate, that by virtue of the first
Refraction the Ray suffers at its Entrance on the Convex-Side of the Glass at
e, it is refracted so as if it proceeded directly from l, that is to say, it is
refracted into e g, l e g being a Right Line.

It Is first manifest, that the Angle of Incidence is q e a; if therefore we
prove, that the Angle of Refraction i e g = l e a is ^ of q e a, we show
hereby, that by the first Refraction, the Ray is broken as if it proceeded
directly from l.

That we may prove this, add to the Consequents of the foresaid Analogy their
Halfs, -- 1 a s: s d:: a d: dk And it shall be -- 2 a s:s f:: a d:d l
Inverting, and Dividing this Second -- 3 s f-a s:s f:: d l-a d:d l That is by
the Scheme -- 4 a f:s f:: a l:d l Moreover in the Triangle a e f it is 5 af:e
f:: s ^ f e a:s ^ e a f But s ^ f e a is = s ^ q e a being Complements to 180
-- 6 a f:e f:: s ^ q e a:s ^ e a f And in these small Angles, Sines and Angles
being proportional, the 6th shall be -- 7 ^ q e a: ^ e a f:: a f:e f Subtriple
the Antecedent on this side, and triple the Consequent on the other -- 8 ^ q e
a:e a f:: a f:3 e f =s f Then from the 4th and 8th Steps it follows -- 9 ^ q e
a:e a f:: a l:d l Moreover in the Triang. e l a it is 10 a:l e = l d:: s ^ l e
a:s ^ l a e But s ^ l a e = s ^ e a f being Complements to 180 -- 11 l a:l d::
s ^ l e a:s ^ e a f And Signs and Angles being proportional 12 a l:d l:: ^ l e
a:^ e a f From the 12th and 9th Steps it is manifest that -- 13 ^ q e a:e a f::
l e a:e a f

Wherefore from the 13th Step it is evident that ^ q ea is equal to l e a, they
having the same Proportion to the same Angle e a f.

Which was the first thing to be proved: and consequently it is manifest that
the Ray a e, by its first Refraction at its Incidence on e, is refracted into e
g, as if it came directly from l, l e g being a Right Line.

It remains to be Demonstrated secondly, that the Ray upon its Eruption on the
plain side of the Glass into Air is refracted into eh, as if it proceeded
directly from k, k e h being a Right Line.

Draw mer Parallel to the Axis lf. Now the Angle of Incidence from Glass to Air
is g e r = m e l=e l a. The Angle of Refraction is g e h = l e k, which I shall
prove to be half the Angle of Inclination m e l; Or I shall prove that the
refracted Angle m e k = r e h is thrice the Angle of Refraction l e k.

Which being Demonstrated, it is certain the Ray is refracted into e h, as if it
came directly from k, and consequently k is the Imaginary Focus of the Ray a e.
But this we shall thus Demonstrate.

In the Triangle lek -- 14 l e = l d:lk:: s ^ l k e:s ^ l e k But s ^ l k e = s
^ e k f being Complements to 180. -- 15 l d:l k:: s ^ e k f:s ^ l e k But ^ e k
f = ^ m e k therefore, the 15th is -- 16 l d: l k:: ^ m e k: l e k

And by Construction l d was put equal to 3 l k, therefore from this 6th step
it is manifest, that the Angle m e k is equal to Thrice the Angle l e k. Which
was to be Demonstrated.

Corollary.
Concerning Convex-Glasses exposed to Converging Rays.
Hitherto we have spoken of Convex-Glasses exposed either to Parallel or to
Diverging Rays. Let us now consider their Property exposed to Converging Rays.
Tab. 15. Fig. 2. T. 15. F. 2.
Let h e be a Ray of Light falling on the Convex-Glass e d, and converging
directly toward the point k; d k the distance of this Point of Convergence
from the Glass, and s d the Focal length of the Glass being given, it is
required to find d a, the distance at which this Ray converges after passing
the Glass.

We know that the Progress of a Ray is reciprocal (by Exp. 8.) and therefore,
that if the Ray a e be refracted into ^ h, the Ray he shall be refracted into e
a.

Wherefore it being by Prop. VIII. -- d s -- d a = a s:s d:: a d:d k

Alternating we have it -- s d:d k:: d s -- d a:a d

And Compounding -- s d + d k:d k:: d s:a d

From which last Analogy this Rule arises, for solving the Problem in the
Corallary.

As the Sum of the Focal Length of the Glass and the distance at which the
strait Ray converges directly -- d s + d k:

To the said Distance at which the strait Ray converges d k::

So the Focal Length of the Glass -- d s:

To the Distance at which the refracted Ray converges -- a d:

Observation.
Dechales in his first Book of Dioptricks, Prop. 48. gives a Rule for solving
this 8th Proposition: But therein he is the most egregiously mistaken as ever
Man was, that pretended to Demonstration, and commits the most notorious Error
that can be imagined. And yet herein he wants not his Followers, for Zahn in
his Telescopium Fundam. 2. Syntag. 1. Cap. 4. Prop. 13 transcribes Dechales,
and copies out even his Errata Typographica, besides the chief and great Error
of the whole Solution. Which shows that Zahn was either very careless, or else
that he understood nothing of the Matter, as indeed he seems to do very little,
for he is a mere blind Transcriber from others.

Dechales Rule in his forecited Proposition is this. As the Sum of the
Distance of the Object from the Glass, and half the Glass's Focus: Is to the
Glass's Focus:: so the Distance of the Object from the Glass: to the Distance
of the Imaginary Focus beyond the Distance of the Object: That is, in Tab. 15.
F. 2. a f: s d:: a d: a k. Tab. 15. Fig. 2.
But how false this is, shall appear not only from his mistaking one Angle for
another in his Demonstration, but from the following Examples, which I have
taken the pains to calculate for a more full Confutation of Dechales, and
Illustration of my own Rule.

1. Example.
Given in T. 15. F. 2.
inch. Plan.-Conv. Gl. Foc. 144,00 = s d = 2 e f Rad. of the Convexit. 72,00 =
e f = f d Distance of the Object 48,00 = a d = a z ^ Breadth of the Glass 1,00
= e z
By my Rule
d k = 7200 k l = 3600 d l = 10800 = d k + k l a l = 6000 = d l-d a
By Dechal. Prop. 48.
dk = 10560 k l = 5280 d l = 15840 = d k + k l a l = 11040 = d l-d a
Let us now try by Calculation, which of these is the Truth. Tab. 15. Fig. 2.
Tab. 15. Fig. 1.


In the Right-angled Triangle e f z, we have the Sides e f and e z, to find the
Angle e f z = 0 47' 40'' and its Complement to 90 f e z = 89^ 12' 20''.

Then in the Right-angled Triangle e a z, we have a z, and e z to find the
Angles and Side a e.

Thus ^ e a z = 1 11' 40''

^ a e z = 88 48 20

a e =4801

Then a e z + f e z = a e f = -- 178 0 40

And Compl. a e f to 180 = q e a = Incl.=1 59 20

Then as 3: 1:: s ^ q e a:s ^ i e g = l e a = 039' 50'' Ang. of Ref.

Moreover, eal = 180- e a z = -- 178 48 20

And e l a = 180- e a l-l e a = m e l = g e r = 0 31 50

Then in the Triangle e a l, we have two Angles, l e a and e l a, and the Side
a e, to find the Side a l. Thus,

As s^ela = 0 31' 50'' Log. C. Ar. 2.0333979726

To ae = 4801 -- 3.6813317060

So s ^ l e a = 0 39' 50' -- 8.0639630497

To a l = 6007 -- 3.7786927283

which is sufficiently agreeable to my

a l = 6000, but differs vastly from Dechales al = 11040.

I now proceed to find the Side d k, which by my Rule is 7200, but by Dechales
is 10560.

q e z = q e a + a e z = 1 59' 20'' + 88' 48' 20'' = 90 47' 40''

q e m = q e z90 = -- 0 47 40

^mel = a l e = g e r = -- 0 31 50,

This is the Angle of Inclination or Incidence from Glass to Air, on the plane
side of the Glass.

Then, As 2: 3:^ s ^ g e r = 0^ 31' 50'': s ^ h e r = m e k = e k d = 0 47'
40''.

And k e z = 90- e k d = 89^ 12' 20''.

Then in the Triangle k e z, all the Angles, and the Side e z are given, to
find k d or k z (we supposing the Thickness of the Glass inconsiderable). Thus,

Rad --

To e z = 100 Log. 2.0000000000

So Tang. ^kez = 89 12' 20'' 11.8580312668

To k d = 7208 3.8580312668

Which k d answer sufficiently exact to what my Rule gives it 7200, the Eight
Parts coming in for the Thickness of the Glass, and the Angles not being
calculated more accurately than to 10" Seconds Numero rotundo. But this is much
different from what Dechales Rule gives it 10560.

2. Example.
Given in Tab. 15. F. 2.
Glass Focus = 14400 = s d = 2 e f Rad. of the Conv. = 7200 = e f = f d Did.
of the Object = 5763 = a d = a z Bread. of the Glass = 100 = e z
By my Rule
d k = 9608 k l = 4808 d l = 14412 = d k + k l a l = 8549 = d l - a d By
Dechales, 48 Prop. d k = 12165 k l = 6082 d l = 18247 = d k + k l a l = 12484 =
d l - a d
The Thickness of the Glass z d is but 17200 and therefore inconsiderable, it
being the Versed Sine of the Angle e f z. We suppose therefore k d and k z
equal.

Then by Calculation, ex Datis, we find as follows,

1 efz = 0 47' 40" 2 fez = 89 12 20 3 eaz = 0 59 40 4 aez = 89 00 20 5 ae =
5764 6 aef = 178 12 40 7 qea = 1 47' 20" = Inclination 8 lea = 0 35 40 =
Refraction 9 eal = 179 0 20 10 ela = 0 24 0 11 al = 8566
Which a l = 8566 is but 17 more than my Rule gives it, which (considering the
Inaccuracy of the Calculation of the Angles, being only Numero rotundo to about
10" Seconds) proves my Rule sufficiently true, and shows Dechales as false,
which makes a l = 12484.

Moreover, By my Rule d k is = 9608, and by Dechales 12165. The Angles
requisite to find d k we have thus,

Before found --
1 qez = 90 47' 40" 2 qem = 0 47 40 3 ale = 0 24 0 = ger = mel = Inclin. 4 mek
= 0 36 0 = her = ekd. 5 kez = 89 24 0 6 kd = kz = 9550
Which k d = 9550 is but 58 less than my Rule gives it; and this small
Discrepancy may easily arise from the Error of 10" Seconds in the Calculation
of the Angles. But Dechales gives it 12165.

I have chosen a Plano-Convex Glass to demonstrate this Rule, which holds as
true in double Convexes, but would in them be more difficult and intricate to
demonstrate.

PROP. IX.
In double Convex-Glasses of equal or unequal Convexities, the Rays proceeding
from the Distance of a Diameter of one Convexity, are united at the Distance of
a Diameter of the other Convexity.

In Tab. 15. Fig. 3. T. 15. F. 3.
Let us conceive the Glass a b divided by the Pointed Right Line a b into two
Plano-Convex Glasses a c b and a d b. Let the Point k be distant from the Glass
a c b the Diameter of the Convexity a c b. By what foregoes, Prop. II. The Rays
k a, k e, k c, k p, etc. shall be sent parallel through the Glass a c b, so
that they shall become e g, c d, p q. Then falling Parallel on the Plano-Convex
Glass a d b, they are united thereby in f, at the distance of its Diameter: By
the foregoing Doctrine. Prop. II.

Of Concave-Glasses.
Hitherto we have treated of Spherical Unequal Glasses only. We now proceed to
the Consideration of Concave-Glasses.

Definition.
Vertual Focus, or Point of Divergence.
In Tab. 15. Fig. 5. T. 15. F. 5.
a b c is a Plano Concave Glass, whose Axis is d e, f g is a Ray falling
thereon parallel to the Axis d e, d is the Center of the Arch a b c. This Ray
after it has passed the Glass at its Emersion at g, instead of proceeding
directly to h, is refracted from the Perpendicular d g, and becomes g k. Draw g
k directly to cross the Axis in e. I call the Point e the Virtual Focus, or
Point of Divergence.

Concerning Concaves, there is little to be said after our foregoing Method for
Calculating the Progress of a Ray falling on a Spherical Unequal; for this may
easily be accommodated to Concaves.

I shall therefore slightly pass these over, and shall only lay down their
Properties in brief, with their usual Demonstrations, referring to Calculation
for a more accurate Scrutiny.

PROP. X
A Ray falling parallel to the Axis from Air, on the Concave Surface of a Glass
Medium, has its Virtual Focus by its first Refraction at the Distance of a
Diameter and half of the Concavity.

Tab. 15. Fig. 4. T. 15. F. 4.
a b k h is a Glass Medium terminated by the Concave Surface a b, d e a Ray of
Light falling parallel to the Axis g e x. I say the Ray d e, by its Refraction
at the Point of Incidence e, is so refracted into e h, as if it proceeded
directly from g the distance of a Diameter and half of the Convexity.

Let c be the Center of the Concave-Arch a e b, draw c e directly to i, produce
d e directly to f, and h e directly to g. The Angle c ed = f e i is the Angle
of Inclination, the Perpendicular is e i. By what foregoes, the Ray passing
from Air a Rare Medium into Glass a Dense Medium, is refracted toward the
Perpendicular by the Angle f e h, which must be 1^ of the Inclination f e i.
Therefore f e h = d e g = e g c is half h e i = g e c. Wherefore in the
Triangle c e g, the Angle c e g being double the Angle e g c, the Side c g that
subtends c e g, shall be double the side c e that subtends e g c. For we
suppose these Angles to be so small, that Sines and Angles, or Sides and Angles
are proportional. Which was to be Demonstrated.

PROP. XI.
In Plano-Concave Glasses, when the Rays fall parallel to the Axis, the Point
of Divergence or Virtual Focus is distant from the Glass the Diameter of the
Concavity.

Tab. 15. Fig. 5. a b c is a Plano-Convex Glass, T. 15. F. 5.
whose Axis e d, f g is a Ray of Light falling on this Glass parallel to its
Axis. This Ray after it has passed the Glass at g, is so refracted into g k,
that g k being produced directly backwards, it shall intersect the Axis in e,
so that e b shall be the Diameter of the Cavity a b c.

First, Let the plain Side be turned toward the Object, as in Tab. 15. Fig. 5.
Because the Ray falls perpendicular on the plain Superficies, it is not at all
refracted at its Immersion into the Glass. But at g it emerges from the Concave
Side of the Glass into Air; and its Inclination is g d b (d being the Center of
the Cavity a b c) and it is now refracted from the Perpendicular d g, by the
Angle h g k, which is half the Inclination g d b. But h g k is equal to f g e =
g e d. Wherefore in the Triangle g d e, the Angle g e d is half the Angle g d
e, and therefore the Side g d is half the Side g e = e b in Glasses of large
Spheres.

Secondly, Tab. 16. Fig. 1. T. 16. F. 1.
Let the Concave Side e c be turned to the Ray d e. By the first Refraction the
Ray suffers at its Immersion into Glass at e, it is refracted from e to f, and
directed to the Point k, so that c k is thrice the Semidiameter n c (by the Xth
hereof). Through the Point f draw i h perpendicular to the plain Side of the
Glass, and continue e f directly to l. The Angle of Inclination of the Ray
within the Glass is h f e = i f l = d e k = e k c. Now the Ray emerging from
Glass to Air, the second refracted Ray ought to recede from the Perpendicular i
f, so that the Angle g f i must be thrice the Angle g f l. Produce g f directly
to m. Then g f i shall be equal to f m c. Wherefore in the Triangle k f m; As
the Sine of the Angle k m f, or the Sine of the Angle f m c: To the Sine of the
Angle f k m:: So f k: To f m, and (neglecting the Thickness of the Glass) So is
k c: To m c. And Angles and Sines being proportional, k c shall be to m c as 3
to 2; but k c is Thrice the Semidiameter, therefore m c is the Diameter. Which
was to be Demonstrated.

Corollary.
In Plano-Concave Glasses, as 300 - 193 = 107: 193:: So the Radius of the
Concavity: To the Distance of the Virtual Focus.

Demonstration.
Tab. 15. F. 5. The Inclination is h g d = g d b = f g z = 193. T. 15. F. 5.
Refracted Angle is z g e = k g d = 300. Ang. of Refr. k g h = k g d - h g d =
300 - 193 = 107 = f g e = g e d. In the Triang. g d e. As s g e d: To s g d e::
So Rad. = g d: To g e. That is -- 107: 193:: g d: g e = e b in Glasses of large
Spheres and small Segments.

PROP. XII.
In Double Concaves of equal Cavities, Parallel Rays have their Virtual Focus,
or Point of Divergence at the Distance of the Radius of the Concavity.

Tab. 16. F. 2. ab is a Concave of equal Cavities, that is, Tab. 16. Fig. 2.
m c the Radius of the Cavity e c, is equal to g n the Radius of the Cavity n
i. Let the Ray d e fall thereon parallel to the Axis k c. This Ray, after it
has suffered a double Refraction, shall proceed in i h, as if it came directly
from m, the Center of the Cavity.

Let c k be made three times c m, draw k e i l. By the first Refraction the Ray
is propagated into e i, as if it proceeded from k (by Prop. X.). From the
Center g draw the Perpendicular g i f. The Angle of Inclination of the Ray
within the Glass is e i f = l i g. The Ray must therefore at its Egress at i be
refracted, so that the Angle of Refraction h i l = k i m must be half the
Inclination l i g. Wherefore in the Triangle k i g, As the Sine of the Angle k
i g, or of the Complement to 180 viz. l i g: To the Sine of the Angle at g:: So
k g = 4: To i k or n k = 3. And as the Sines, so are the Angles, seeing they
are supposed very acute: Therefore, As 4: To 3:: So lig: To the g: Add h i l =
2 to l i g = 4, we have h i g = 6. Wherefore hig: Is to the Angle g:: As 6: To
3:: or 2: To 1. But the Sine of the Angle h i g is equal to the Sine of the
Angle g i m; and consequently in the Triangle g i m, As Sine of the Angle g i
m: To the Sine of the Angle g:: So g m: To i m. Therefore g m: Is to i m:: As
2: To 1. So that neglecting the Thickness of the Glass, m i may be taken for
the Radius of the Cavity, and g m is double thereto. Wherefore ^tis
Demonstrated, that m is the Virtual Focus. Which was to be Demonstrated.

PROP. XIII.
In double Concaves of equal or unequal Concavities, the Virtual Focus or Point
of Divergence of the Parallel Rays is determined by this Rule:

As the Sum of the Radii of both Concavities:

Is to the Radius of either Concavity::

So the Double Radius of the other Concavity:

To the Distance of the Virtual Focus.

Tab. 16. Fig. 3. f c is the Radius of the Concavity e c, T. 16. F. 3.
make k c thrice f c, l o is the Radius of the Cavity o i; let l m be put equal
to l o, and m n be put = l m, that is, o n shall then be equal to thrice o l.

I say the Ray d e, after a double Refraction, shall proceed in i h, as if it
came directly from g, and that it shall be, As s l the Aggregate of the
Semidiameters (neglecting the Thickness of the Glass): To f c the Radius of one
Concavity:: So o m the Diameter of the other Concavity: To g c the Distance of
the Point of Divergence.

By the first Refraction the Ray proceeds in e i, as if it came directly from
k, k e i p being a Right Line ( Prop. X.).

Then the Inclination within the Glass is q i e = p i l. And the second Angle
of Refraction is p i h = g i k, which is to be half the Angle of Inclination p
i l.

Wherefore Sines and Angles being proportional, and the Thickness of the Glass
neglected, we thus proceed in the Demonstration. In the Triang. g i k we have
it -- 1 g i k = h i p: g k i:: k g: g i = g c Double the Antecedent on this
side, and halve the Consequent on the other -- 2 2 g i k = p i l: i k l:: k g: g
c Dividing the Second -- 3 p i l - i k l (= i l k 32. 1 Eucl.): i k l:: g k - g
c: g c Then in the Trian. k l i^ 4 i l k: i k l:: k i = k c: i l = l o From the
Third and Fourth it follows -- 5 k c: o l:: k g - g c: g c Compounding the
Fifth 6 k c + o l = k l: o l:: k g: g c Double the Consequents 7 k l: 2 o l = o
m = l n:: k g: g c Compound. the Seventh 8 k l + l n = k n: o m:: k g + g c = k
c: g c Alternate the Eighth -- 9 k n: k c:: o m: g c But k n is equal to 3 f l,
that is, thrice the Aggregate of the Semidiameters f c and l o. Also k c is
equal to thrice the Semidiameter f c: and as the Triples are, so are their
Thirds. Wherefore from the 9th. Step it follows- 10 f l: f c:: o m: g c. Which
was to be Demonst.

Example.
Let f c be = 8 Feet or 96 Inches

l o = 10 Feet, or 120 Inches.

Then f l shall be = to 216 Inches.

Say then f l = 216: f c = 96:: 240 = 2 l o: 107 = g c.

Or thus, f l = 216: l o = 120:: 192 = 2 f c: 107 = g c.

Corollary.
It follows from the four last Propositions, that supposing a Ray falling on a
Concave Glass, and tending toward the virtual Focus, after it has passed the
Glass, it shall proceed Parallel to the Axis. Because the Progress of Light
through Glasses is reciprocal. Vid. Prop. VI.

Scholium.
It is before Demonstrated in Prop. IV. that the Focus or Point of Convergence
of a Convex-Glass, for the Parallel Rays that fall obliquely thereon is at the
same Distance, as the Focus of the direct Parallel Rays. The same may be
Demonstrated concerning the Virtual Focus or Point of Divergence in Concave
Glasses; but it is sufficient only to illustrate this Matter by Tab. 16. Fig. 4.
Tab. 16. Fig. 4.
Let us imagine the uppermost Point of a distant Object to send the Parallel
Rays g a, g b, g c, on the Concave-Glass a b c, and its middle Point to send
the Rays h a, h b, h c; and the lowermost Point to send the Rays i a, i b, i c.
Here are therefore three Radious Cones, having their Vertices in their
respective Points of the Object, and their Bases on the Surface of the
Concave-Glass: the Axes of these Cones, are g d b k, h e b l, i f b m: These,
by what foregoes preliminary to the Prop. IV. may be conceived to pass the
Glass as it were unrefracted. But the other Rays of each Cone are refracted,
that is, g a is so refracted at a into a k, as if it proceeded directly from d
the Virtual Focus or Point of Divergence for this oblique Cone. And so g c is
refracted at c into c k, as if it proceeded directly from d. And in like manner
h a, h b, h c, are refracted into a l, b l, c l, as if they came from e. And
the Rays i a, i b, i c, are propagated in a m, b m, c m, as if they proceeded
directly from f. So that d e f is the Virtual Focus of the Glass exposed to the
Object, that sends these direct and oblique Cones of Rays.

Converging Rays.
The Properties of Concaves exposed to Converging Rays are shown in these two
next following Propositions.

PROP. XIV.
In Concave Glasses, if the Point to which the incident Ray converges, be
distant from the Glass farther than the Virtual Focus of Parallel Rays, the
Rule for finding the Virtual Focus of this Ray, is this:

As the difference between the distance of this Point from the Glass, and the
distance of the Virtual Focus from the Glass:

Is to the distance of the Virtual Focus::

So the distance of this Point of Convergence from the Glass:

To the distance of the Virtual Focus of this Converging Ray.

Tab. 17. Fig. 1. a b is a Plano Concave Glass, T. 17. F. 1.
d the Center of the Concavity, d a o a right Line, c f the length of the
Virtual Focus, which (by what foregoes, Prop. XI.) is equal to 2 a d or 2 d c;
so that f d is equal to 3 d c or 3 a d. Let n a be a Ray of Light converging
directly toward the Point g. If it be made according to the Rule in the
Proposition, g f: f c:: g c: chapter Then h shall be the Virtual Focus of the Ray n
a, that is the Ray n a after the double Refraction it receives by the Glass
shall proceed onwards in a m, as if it came directly from h, mah being a Right
Line.

The Proof hereof is after the same manner with the Prop. V. beforegoing; and
we suppose (as in that) the Thickness of the Glass to be nothing in Comparison
to the Focal Length; and likewise that the Angles of Incidence are so small,
that they are as the Sines; also that the Breadth of the Glass is so little,
that it makes the Angles a g c, a d c, a h c, a p c, etc. very small and
Proportionable to their Sines.

Demonstration.
Let p h be made half h c, and consequently the third Part of p c. I say by
virtue of the first Refraction which the Ray suffers at its entrance into Glass
at a, it is refracted into a k, as if it proceeded directly from p, p a k being
a Right Line.

To prove this we must observe that the Angle of Inclination or Incidence is n
a d = o a g. If therefore it be proved, that the Angle of Refraction g a k = n
a p is of the Angle n a d, our first Position will be manifest, viz. That the
Ray by the first Refraction is bent into a k.

First therefore it is by Position 1 g f: f c:: c g: c h Add to the Consequents
their Halfs -- 2 g f: f d:: c g: c p = p a Compounding the second -- 3 g f + f
d = g d: f d:: c g + c p = g p: p a Also in the Triangle g a d -- 4 g d: d a =
d c:: s d a g = s n a d: s g And Sines and Angles being proportional, it
follows from the 4th. -- 5 n a d: g:: g d: 3 a d = f d It then follows from the
5th. and 3d. -- 6 n a d: g:: g p: p a Moreover in the Triangle g a p 7 g p: p
a:: s g a p = s n a p: s g And Sines and Angles being proportional -- 8 g p: p
a:: n a p: g. From the 6th and 8th it follows 9 1^ n a d: g:: n a p: g.

From which 9th Step it is manifest that the first Angle of Refraction, n a p,
is equal to of the first Angle of Incidence n a d. Which was first required to
be Demonstrated.

We are secondly to Demonstrate, that by virtue of the second Refraction the
Ray receives on the plane side of the Glass at its Egress into Air, it is
refracted into m a, as if it came directly from h. Draw i a l Parallel to the
Axis h g, and Perpendicular to the plane side of the Glass; The Angle of
Incidence is l a k = i a p; the Angle of Refraction is m a k = h a p; the
refracted Angle m a l = h a i.

We are therefore to prove, that the refracted Angle m a l is equal to triple
the Angle of Refraction m a k.

In the Triangle p a h we have this Analogy p a = p c: p h:: s a h p = s a h c
= s h a i = s m a l: s h a p = s m a k. But p c is thrice p h, therefore (Sines
and Angles being proportional) the Angle m a l is thrice the Angle m a k. Which
was to be Demonstrated.

PROP. XV.
In Concave Glasses a b (T. 17. F. 2.) if the Point d to which the Incident Ray
c a converges, Tab. 17. Fig. 2.
be nigher to the Glass than the Virtual Focus of Parallel Raysi; the Rule to
find where it crosses the Axis at h, is this,

As the Excess of the Virtual Focus more than this Point of Convergency i d:

To the Virtual Focus i e::

So the distance of this Point of Convergency from the Glass d e:

To the distance of the Point where this Ray crosses the Axis h e.

In the forementioned Figure a b is a Plano-Concave Glass, f the Center of the
Cavity i e the Length of the Virtual Focus of Parallel Rays, which we know is a
Diameter of the Cavity, that is, = 2 f e. On this Glass there falls the Ray c a
converging directly to the Point d. If it be made i d: i e:: d e: h e, I say h
is the Point in the Axis, where the Ray c a, after its double Refraction,
crosses it.

Demonstration.
For the Proof thereof we suppose all that we laid down as supposed in the last
Proposition. Draw f a directly to g, and make h k equal to h e. I shall first
show, that by virtue of the first Refraction, which the Ray suffers at a, it is
refracted directly toward k. Here the first Angle of Incidence is c a f, = g a
d. If therefore we prove that k a d is equal to c a f, our first Position shall
be manifest, that the Ray is refracted first toward k.

For by the Rule it is -- 1 i d: i e:: e d: e h Add to the Consequents their
Halfs -- 2 i d: i f:: e d: e k Inverting and dividing the Second 3 i f - i d =
d f: i f:: e k - e d = d k: e k Moreover in the Triang. d f a 4 d f: a f:: s f
a d = s c a f: s a d f From the 4th Step it follows 5 c a f: a d f:: d f: 3 a f
= i f By the 3d and 4th it is -- 6 c a f: a d f:: d k: e k Also in the Triangle
a k d -- 7 k d: k a = k e: s k a d: s k d a = s a d f Sines and Angles being
prop. 8 k d: k e:: k a d: a d f. From the 6th and 8th it follows 9 c a f: a d
f:: k a d: a d f

Wherefore from this 9th Step it is manifest that k a d is equal to c a f, which
was first to be Demonstrated.

I shall next demonstrate, that by virtue of the second Refraction the Ray
proceeds in a h.

Draw o a l Parallel to the Axis f k, and therefore (by Supposition 2d)
perpendicular to the plane side of the Glass. Here the Angle of Incidence from
Glass to Air shall be o a k. I am therefore to prove that the Angle of
Refraction k a h is equal to o a h the refracted Angle. Thus,

In the Triangle k a h it is k a = k e: k h:: s a h k = s a h e, = s o a h: s k
a h

And Sines and Angl. being prop. k e: k h:: o a h: k a h

But k h is of k e and therefore the Angle k a h, is of the Angle o a h. Which
was to be Demonstrated.

DIVERGING RAYS.
Corollary.
Concerning Concave-Glasses exposed to Diverging Rays.
The Virtual Focus of a Concave Glass exposed to Parallel Rays is found by
Prop. X, XI, XII, XIII. And the Properties of a Concave exposed to Converging
Rays are shown in Prop. XIV. and XV.

Let us now consider a Ray Diverging from the Axis, as suppose a nigh Object (
T. 17. F. 2.) in h, T. 17. F. 2.
in h, whose Ray h a diverges from the Axis h e, and so falls on the Concave
Glass a b. Let us conceive this nigh Object h either farther from, or nigher to
the Glass, than the Glasses Virtual Focus. This Ray after passing the Glass
diverges more, than before it entered it. And the Rule for determining the Point
d, from which this Ray after passing the Glass does as it were directly
Diverge, is this,

As the Sum of the distance of the Object from the Glass and the Glass's
Virtual Focus:

To the Distance of the Object from the Glass::

So the Glasses Virtual Focus:

To the distance of this Point of Divergency from the Glass:

Demonstration.
By the foregoing XVth Prop. -- i d: i e:: d e: e h

And Alternating -- i e: e h:: i d (= i e -- d e): d e

And Compounding -- i e + e h: e h:: i e: d e

Which last Analogy gives the forementioned Rule in Words as is manifest by
comparing it with the Scheme.

PROP. XVI. PROBL.
The Focal Lengths of two Convex-Glasses being given, the longer being placed
before the shorter at any given Distance less than the longer Focal Length;
It Is required to determine the Distance of the Distinct Base from the shorter
Glass.

This is solved from the VIII. Proposition hereof.

Tab. 18. Fig. 1. c x c is a Convex-Glass uniting the Parallel Rays, b c, b c,
T. 18, F. 1
in its Focus at k; f d f is a shorter Unequal uniting the Parallel Rays g f, g
f, in its Focus at s. In the Problem, k x the longer Focal Length, and s d the
shorter Focal Length, and d x the Distance of the Glasses, are given; To find d
a, the Point wherein the Rays c i, c i, are united with the Axis by the Glass f
f.

By the 8th. Proposition preceding, the Focal Length d s of the Convex-Glass f
f being given, and the Distance of an Object d a being given less than the
Focal Length d s, to find the Distance d k of the Imaginary Focus; the Rule is,
As the Difference between the Distance of the Object d a, and the Focal Length
d s, that is, d s - d a = a s: To the Focal Length d s:: So the Distance of the
Object from the Glass a d: To the Distance of the Imaginary Focus from the
Glass d k.

Now whereas in the 8th. Proposition d a is given, and d k sought; in this
Problem d a is sought, and d k is given; for d k is equal to the Difference
between the Focal Length of the longer Glass k x, and the Glass's Distance x d.

Wherefore by the foresaid 8th. Proposition, and its Corollary, it being d s -
d a = a s: d s:: a d: d k. It shall be also alternando d s: d k:: d s -d a: a
d. And Compounding d s + d k: d k:: d s: a d. But in this Problem the Three
first Terms of this last Analogy are given, and the last a d required.
Wherefore by this Analogy, the last Term a d is found. And according to the
Analogy we frame this Rule for solving this Problem.

As the Focal Length of the shorter Glass + the Difference between the Focal
Length of the longer, and the Glasses Distance:

To the Difference between the Focal Length of the longer and the Glasses
Distance::

So the Focal Length of the shorter Glass:

To the Distance of the Distinct Base from the Glass.

Example.
Let the longer Focal Length be x k = 20, the shorter Focal Length d s = 8. The
Distance of the Glasses d x = 15.

Then x k - d x (= d k) + d s: d k:: d s: a d

In Numb. 20 - 15 (= 5) + 8 = 13: 5:: 8: 3,07692.

Schol. 1. The same Solution holds, if the shorter Glass be placed before the
longer, and the longer Glass at any Distance from the shorter less than the
Focal Length of the shorter.

Let the shorter Focal Length be = 8, the longer = 20, and the Glasses Distance
= 6; then 8 - 6 = 2; and the Proportion is 8 - 6 + 20 = 22: 2:: 20: 1,8182 = to
the Distance of the Compound Distinct Bast (for so I Will call it) of these two
Glasses from the last and longer Glass.

Corollary.
From hence is manifest the Rule which is before laid down after our 3d
Proposition for Determining the Focus of a double Convex-Glass. The Rule is
this, As the Sum of the Radii of both Convexities: To the Radius of either
Convexity:: So the double Radius of the other Convexity: To the Distance of the
Focus. For Example, Let the Radius of one Convexity be 20, and of the other 8.
Then 28: 8:: 40: 11, 4286. Or, 28: 20:: 16: 11, 4286 = Focus. Let us then
conceive this double Convex-Glass to be divided into two Plano-Convex Glasses,
formed on the same Spheres as the two Sides of the double Unequal, Viz. One on a
Sphere whose Radius is 20; and the other on a Sphere whose Radius is 8; and these
two Glasses placed touching each other on their plain Sides, the larger Focal
Length would be 40, and the shorter Focal Length would be 16, and the Distance
of the Glasses would be Nothing. Then by the Rule of the XVI. Prop. 16 + 40 =
56: 40:: 16: 11,4286 = To the Compound Focus.

Scholium 2.
By this Proposition, and by the Corollaries of Prop. XXVI. hereafter, the
Eight first Propositions of Dechales Second Book of Dioptricks are manifestly
solved.

Another Solution of the same Problem.
My esteemed Friend, the Learned and Ingenious Mr. JOHN FLAMSTEED, Reg. Astron,
has very neatly solved this Problem, and communicated the Solution, thereof to
me, as follows.

Tab. 18. Fig. 2. Let b p b represent a Convex-Glass, T. 18. F. 2.
whose Focus is at f; let a b be two Rays falling upon it parallel to the Axis
c f, which shall therefore be collected in f; let n f k be another Convex-Glass
of any different Sphere, whose Focus is h, its Distinct Base i h i. It Is
required to find, at what distance from the Point f, the Distinct Base shall be
formed, the Glass n f k being placed any where nearer the Glass b b; as suppose
in X, Y, or p.

Through the Points X, Y, p, draw the Lines EX e, DIE d, T p, at Right Angles to
the Axis. And from the Points E, D, T, wherein they cut the refracted Ray b f,
draw the Lines E o, D m, T n, parallel to the Axis. And from the Points o, m,
n, where they fall on the Glass n f k, draw the Lines o q, m r, n s, parallel
to the refracted Ray b f; these represent this Ray f b falling upon the Glass n
f k placed at X, Y, p.

Produce b f through the Glass to the Distinct Base, which it cuts in i, we may
now consider q o, r m, s n, as three parallel Rays proceeding from the same
Point of an Object infinitely distant, which by the known Properties of
Glasses, shall be collected into the same Point i of the Distinct Base with the
Ray b f. Draw therefore the Lines o i, m i, n i, intersecting the Axis in the
Points x, y, g. Now, because the Focus is that Point, where the Ray falling
upon the outward Glass is by the second Glass collected or made to converge
with the Axis, the Points x, y, g, shall be the Foci sought; that is, f x shall
be the Compound Focal Length for the Glass n f k placed in X, f y when it is
placed in Y; and f g when it is placed in p, or when both the Glasses touch.

Now that we may find these Focal Lengths f x, f y, f g, draw m k parallel to
the Distinct Base i h i, and i k parallel to the Axis f h. We suppose the
Thickness of the Glasses to be as little as possible, and therefore the Lines
representing the Rays, passing through them, are strait, and not at all bent.

Wherefore the Triangles DIE f, hif are similar. Also the Triangles mki, mfy are
similar. It shall therefore be -- 1 f Y: f b:: YD (= m f): h i Converting and
Compound. 2 f Y + f h: f Y:: m f + h i: m f But by the Scheme -- 3 m f + h i =
m k Therefore the 2d is thus -- 4 f Y + f h: f Y:: m k: m f And by the sim, m k
i, m f y -- 5 m k: m f:: k i: f y From the 4th and 5th it foll. 6 f Y + f h: f
Y:: k i: fie

Now by Position b f = p f is the longer Focal Length, and f h = k i is the
shorter Focal Length, and Y p the Distance of the Glasses; and therefore f Y =
p f - p Y is the longer Focus, -- the Distance of the Glasses; and f y is the
Distance of the Distinct Base from the inward Glass. From all which, the
foregoing 6th Analogy, being resolved into Words, gives his Rule for solving
the Problem,

As the longer Focus - the Glasses Distance + the shorter Focus:

To the longer Focus - the Glasses Distance::

So the shorter Focus:

To the Distance of the Distinct Base from the inward Glass.

Or thus,

As the Aggregate of the shorter Focus and the Difference between the longer
and the Glasses Distance:

To the Difference between the longer Focus and Glasses Distance::

So the shorter Focal Length:

To the Distance of the Distinct Base from the inward Glass.

Which is the very same Canon with that I have given, deduced from the 8th
Proposition hereof.

This Problem is of considerable Use in Dioptricks, being the Foundation of an
excellent sort of Telescope much used in England for the Night. But it seems no
Optic Writer has solved it. Honoratus Faber has clearly omitted it. And
Dechales, though he offers at our foresaid VIII. Proposition, on which our
Solution of this Problem is founded; yet missing so enormously as he has done
in that, he could not pretend to the Solution of this. And had he rightly
solved our VIII. Propsition, I question whether he would have pushed it on so
far as to solve thereby this Problem; for in the two next succeeding Problems,
he has rightly the Propositions on which their Solutions depend, but leaves the
Problems themselves untouched.

PROP. XVII. PROBL.
A Convex-Glass being given, with a Concave of a larger Sphere, the Concave
being placed behind the Unequal, at any Distance less than the Focal Length of
the Unequal; It Is required to find the Place of the Compound Focus, or Distinct
Base of these two Glasses.

This Problem is solved by the XV. Proposition hereof. Tab. 18. F. 3. T. 18. F.
3.
The Convex-Glass x is placed so before the Concave-Glass e, that this Unequal
would unite the Parallel Rays b f, b f, in its Focus at d, and the Rays q d, q
d, would cross the Axis in d, unless the Concave e were interposed. Which
Concave is supposed to have its Virtual Focus at i more distant than d the
Distance of the Focus of the Unequal x.

Wherefore here is a Ray q incident on the Concave e, and converges toward a
Point d, nigher the Glass e than the Virtual Focus of parallel Rays i; and it is
required to determine the Point h, where it crosses the Axis. The Rule by the
XV. Proposition is this,

As the Excess of the Focus of the Concave more than this Point of Convergency
id:

To the Focus of the Concave ie::

So the Distance of the Point of Convergency from the Glass de:

To the Distance of the Point where this Ray crosses the Axis he:

Now in our present Problem, the three first Terms of this Analogy are given,
and the last required. For the Problem gives d x the Focal Distance of the
Unequal, and i e the Focus of the Concave, and e x the Distance of the Glasses.
Hence we have d e (= d x - e x) the Distance from the Concave of the Point d,
to which the Ray converges. And we have i d (= i e - d e) the Excels of the
Virtual Focus of the Concave beyond the Point of Convergency d.

Wherefore by the foresaid Analogy it being, As i d: i e:: d e: he. The Rule
for Solving this Problem is this,

From the Focal Length of the Unequal subtract the Glasses distance. Mark the
difference, then say,

As the Focal Length of the Concave -- this difference:

To the Focal Length of the Concave::

So this difference:

To the distance of the Distinct Base from the Concave.

1. Example. 2. Example. Focus Unequal = d x = 20 Focus Conv. = 12 Focus Concave
= i e = 60 Focus Conv. = 15 Glasses Distance = e x = 10 Glasses Did. = 2 Hence
-- = d e = 10 Diff. Hence d e = 10 Difference And -- = i d = 50 And i d = 5
Then i d = 50: i e = 60:: d e = 10: h e = 12. Then 5: 15:: 10: 30 = h e.

PROP. XVIII. PROBL.
The Focal Lengths of a Convex-Glass and a Concave-Glass being given, and the
Concave placed toward the Object, distant from the Unequal, so that the Sum of
the Concaves Focal Length and Glasses distance may be greater than the Focal
Length of the Unequal, and this distance of the Glasses being given also; It Is
required to determine the distance of the Distinct Base from the Unequal.

This is performed by the V. Proposition hereof. Tab. 18. Fig. 4. T. 18. F. 4.
Let b z c be a Concave, on which there fall the parallel Rays n b, m c, which are so refracted by this Glass, that after passing it, they proceed on in b e, c
f, as if they came directly from the Point a the Virtual Focus of the Concave,
(by Prop. X. XI. XII. hereof) but in e and f meeting with the Convex-Glass,
whose Focus is on each side it as s, s, the Rays diverge not to i and g, but
are refracted, so that they cross the Axis in k.

We may therefore conceive these Rays, not as passing through the Concave b c,
but as proceeding directly from the ^igh Point a; and then to determine the
Point k, where the cross the Axis, the Rule is in the Prop. V. thus,

As sa the difference between the Focus sd of the Convex-Glass of, and the
distance da of the Object from the Glass:

To the Focus sd of the Convex-Glass::

So the distance da of the Object from the Glass:

To the distance of the respective Focus dk.

Now in this Problem, the three first Terms of this Analogy are given, and the
fourth d k is required. For the Sum of the Concaves Focal Length and the
distance of the Glasses, that is, z a + d z is equal to d a; and d a -- the
Convex's Focal Length that is d a - s d is equal to s a.

Wherefore we solve the Problem by this Canon.

From the Sum of the Focus of the Concave and distance of the Glasses subtract
the Focus of the Unequal, that is, z a + d z - s d = sa. Keep this difference,
then say,

As this difference sa:

To the Focus of the Unequal sd::

So the Sum of the Concaves Focus and Glasses distance za + + dz = ad:

To the distance of the Focus from the Unequal d k.

Which is required by the Problem, and is the very Analogy of our Prop. V.

Another Solution of the Two last Problems in Prop. XVII. and XVIII.
These Two last Problems were likewise communicated to me, most ingeniously
solved by my forementioned Honored Friend Mr. J. FLAMSTEED. The Solutions I
shall give in his own Words at large, as I have them in a Letter to me Dated
from the Greenwich-Observatory, Ian. 17. 168^. as follows

The First Problem is this, A Unequal Glass being given, with a Concave of a
larger Sphere; the Concave being placed at any distance less than the Focal
Length of the Unequal from it, and remoter from the Object; To find the Place of
the Focus or Distinct Base.

The Second Problem is, From the same Data; the Concave being placed nigher the
Object; To find the Distinct Base.

For the First Problem, Tab. 19. Fig. 1. T. 19. F. 1.
B is a Convex-Glass, P its Focus, m k a Ray of Light falling upon it parallel
to its Axis, which will therefore converge into its Focus at P. G is a
Concave-Glass of a larger Sphere, placed upon the Focus of the Unequal; CP the
Radius of the Sphere whereon the Concave is formed. And we are always to
conceive the Thickness of both these Glasses where the Rays of Light pierce
them as small as possible.

Draw the Line k P, this shows the way of the Ray m k after its Emersion from
the Unequal B. Produce it both ways at pleasure to t and h. Then conceive the
Concave G placed any where betwixt P and B, as in q, q; From which Places draw
the Lines q o, q o, at Right Angles to the Axis. And from the Points o, o, k,
wherein they intersect the refracted Ray k P; draw the Lines o b, o b, k b,
falling on the Concave G in b, b, b. From these Points again draw the Lines b
r, b r, b r, parallel to the refracted Ray k P; these shall represent the Ray.
k P falling on the Concave G placed at q, q; and also when it touches the
Unequal B. Let these then be considered as so many parallel Rays, proceeding
from the same distant Point. Wherever they shall intersect the Axis after they
have passed the Concave, there shall be the true Focus for both Glasses, which
I shall call the Compound Focus* To find which we are to remember;

That, as the Parallel Rays of Light falling on a Convex-Glass, are all
collected very nearly in the same Point of the distinct Base; so also the Rays
of Light falling Parallel to each other on a Concave, after they emerge from
it, diverge and separate, as if they had all proceeded from the same Point,
which I therefore call the Point of Divergency (This, in my foregoing
Propositions, I term with most Optic Writers, the Virtual Focus) Which Point
in a Concave-Glass is just as far distant from it, as the Point of Convergency,
or Focus of a Unequal of the same Sphere or Spheres is distant from it. We know
the Focal Point is some little nigher the Glass in the Parallel Rays that fall
widest from the Axis, than in those that fall near it; so is the Point of
Divergency for Concaves. But the difference is so small in Glasses of a large
Sphere (such as in these Problems we suppose) that for all Rays falling on the
Glass Parallel to each other, it may be taken as a simple Point. Such therefore
we are to conceive it; and then to find this Point of Divergency, The Rule is (
Corol. Prop. XI.) 300 - 193 = 107: 193:: So CP the Radius of the
Plano-Concave-Glass: To P h: Which in Glasses of a large Sphere, and where the
Inclination of P h is small, will be insensibly different from P g; h g being
perpendicular to the Axis. Or we may determine this Point of Divergence
Geometrically thus, On the Center P with any Radius P t, on the void side of
the Figure, strike the Arch a t; then make it 300: 193:: ts: au. Draw P a, and
from C the Center of the Concave draw C h Parallel to a P. The Point h, wherein
it cuts the Line P k produced upwards, shall be the Point of Divergency sought.

Lay a Ruler over the Point h, and the Points b, b, b; this, where it cuts the
Axis g p produced, as in f, f, shall give all the possible Compound Foci

Then h g being perpendicular to the Axis, produce the Lines b o, till they cut
it in d, d.

Then the Triangles h P g, o P q are similar: likewise the Triangles h f g, b f
P are similar also. It will then hold o b similia Triangula h P g, o P q 1 h P
o P:: h g: d g Dividing the First -- 2 h P - o P: o P:: h g - d g: d g That is,
-- 3 h o: o P:: h d: d g = o q Moreover by Simil. Triang. h f g, b f P -- 4 h
d: d g:: h b: b f From the 3d and 4th it follows -- 5 h o: o P:: h b: bf. And
Compound the 5th -- 6 h o + o P: o P:: h b + b f: b f That is, -- 7 h P: o P::
h f: bf And Dividing the 7th -- 8 h P - o P: o P:: h f - b f: b f That is, -- 9
h P - o P: o P:: h b: b f: But h P = g P = h b, and so likewise o P = q P, (the
Inclination of k P, as is said before, being supposed very small; and the
Glasses of small Segments of large Spheres.) Wherefore the 9th is thus -- 10 g
P - q P: q P:: g P: bf. But by Position Focus of the Concave 11 = g P = h P.
Focus of the Unequal 12 = z P. Distance of the Glasses 13 = z q. Fo. Unequal -
Gl. did. = q P = z P - z q.

Wherefore the 10th. Analogy, by the 11th, 12th, and 13th Steps, resolved into
Words gives this Rule,

As the Focus of the Concave-Focus of the Unequal + distance of the Glasses:

To the Focus of the Convex-distance of the Glasses::

So the Focus of the Concave:

To b f = to the distance of the Distinct Base from the Concave.

And this Canon of Mr. Flamsteed is the very same with ours in the preceding 17
th Proposition deduced from the 15 th hereof.

But if the Concave be placed next the Object: Which is his Problem II, and our
XVIIIth Proposition, my forementioned Learned Friend solves it thus.

Tab. 19. F. 2. D is a Concave, T. 19. F. 2.
E a Unequal, h p the Focal Length of the Concave, gp = gq the Focal Length of
the Unequal. Let s k be a Ray of Light falling into the Concave at k. From the
Point of Divergency h, through k draw the Line k d; this shall show the
refracted Path of the Ray s k after it has passed the Glass D. From q the Focus
of the Unequal E erect q b perpendicular to the Axis h f; and through g draw the
Line r g b Parallel to k d, intersecting the distinct Base of the Unequal E in
b, through which draw d b, continuing it till it intersect the Axis in f: There
shall be the compound Focus or distinct Base for these Glasses thus posited.
Draw now the Line d g at Right Angles to the Axis; produce s k till it cut d g
in m; and draw b n Parallel to q g.

Then the Triangles h d g, h k p, b g q, are similar. Also the Triangles b d n,
f b q, are similar. And h p + p g = h g. It shall therefore be -- 1 h g: g q::
d g: n g = b q And converting the First -- 2 h g: h g - g q:: d g: d g - n g
Inverting the second -- 3 h g - g q: h g:: d g - n g: d g. That is, by the
Scheme -- 4 h g - g q: h g:: d n: d g. Then by the similar Triangles d n b, d g
f -- 5 d n: d g:: n b = g q: g f From 4 and 5 it follows -- 6 h g - g q: h g::
g q: g f Then h g being = to h p + p g, the 6th is thus 7 h p + pg - g q: hp +
p g:: g q: g f. But by Position Focus of the Concave -- 8 = h p Focus of the
Unequal -- 9 = g q Distance of the Glasses -- 10 = p g Focus of Concave +
Glasses did. -- 11 = h g = h p + p g Did. of the distinct Base from Unequal --
12 = g f

From all which the 7th Analogy may be thus expressed in words,

As the Focus of the Concave + the distance of the Glasses-the Focus of the
Unequal:

To the Focus of the Concave + the distance of the Glasses::

So the Focus of the Unequal:

To the Distance of the distinct Base from the Unequal:

Which is the same Rule with that which I have before given in Prop. XVIII,
deduced from the 5th hereof.

And these two last Propositions do naturally lead us to the Consideration of
Meniscus-Glasses.

MENISCUS-GLASSES.
That is called a Meniscus-Glass, which is Unequal on one side and Concave on
the other. It Is so named from its Resemblance to the New Moon or Lunula, in Greek
(...).

In Meniscus-Glasses either the Semidiameter of the Convexity and Concavity are
equal or unequal: If they are equal the Ray that falls thereon Parallel to the
Axis, after Refraction proceeds again Parallel: If they are unequal, then
either the Semidiameter of the Convexity is less than the Semidiameter of the
Cavity, and then the Convexity prevails, and the Glass has a Real Focus: Or
else the Semidiameter of the Cavity is less than the Semidiameter of the
Convexity, and then the Cavity prevails, and the Glass has only a Virtual
Focus. But of these more fully in the following Propositions; Observe.
This Observation being premised, That the Focus of a Meniscus, the
Semidiameter of whose Convexity is less than the Semidiameter of the Concavity,
and these two Semidiameters being given, is easily determined by Prop. XVII
preceding. For in that Proposition, two Glasses are given, one a Unequal, and
the other a Concave, and the Focal Length of the Unequal is shorter than that of
the Concave. And whereas in that Prop. there is given a distance between the
Glasses, let us conceive this Distance to be nothing, that is, let us imagine
these Glasses to touch; and their Results a Meniscus whose Focus is determined
by the same Rule in that Prop. Which is this,

As the Focal Length of the Concave-the Focal Length of the Unequal + the
Glasses Distance:

To the Focal Length of the Concave::

So the Focal Length of the Convex-the Glasses Distance:

To the Distance of the Distinct Base from the Concave.

But because we suppose, in the Case of a Meniscus, the two sides of the Glass
to touch, that is, the distance of the two Glasses to be nothing (for every
Meniscus may be conceived divided into two Glasses, a Plano-Convex, and a
Plano-Concave) or the Thickness of the Glass to be inconsiderable in Comparison
of the Focal Length. The foresaid Rule applied to a Meniscus shall be this,

As the Focal Length of the Concave-the Focal Length of the Unequal:

To the Focal Length of the Concave::

So the Focal Length of the Unequal:

To the Distance of the Focus of the Meniscus.

Now if we have given the Semidiameters of the Convexity and Concavity of a
Meniscus, we have given the Focal Lengths of the Plano-Convex and Plano-Concave
of which this Meniscus is compounded. For these Focal Lengths may be assumed
the Doubles of the Semidiameters, wherefore Halfs being as their Wholes, the
foresaid Rule for finding the Focus of a Meniscus may be thus expressed,

As the Difference of the Semidiameters of the Convexity and Concavity:

To the Semidiameter of the Concavity::

So the Diameter of the Convexity:

To the Focal Length.

Which is the Common Rule assigned by Optic Writers. But of this more fully
hereafter Prop. XXIII. And tho this Rule in General were sufficient for
determining the Foci of Meniscus-Glasses, yet I shall enlarge more fully
thereon in the following Propositions.

PROP. XIX.
In a Meniscus, if both spherical Superficies have the same Diameter, the Ray
that falls thereon Parallel to the Axis, after its second Refraction proceeds
again Parallel.

Tab. 20. F. 1. mn is a Meniscus, b c the Semidiameter of the Convexity e c, f
a the Semidiameter of the Concavity i a, d e a Ray of Light Parallel to the
Axis k g. I say this Ray after a double Refraction, one at e, and the other at i,
proceeds in i h Parallel to k g.

We here suppose the Thickness of the Glass inconsiderable in respect of the
Semidiameter of the Sphere on which it is formed; and therefore we wholly
neglect it.

We suppose also that Sines and Angles and Sides in these small Angles are
Proportional.

Let g c = g a be made Triple b c = f a, the Ray d e by its first Refraction at
its Entrance into the Glass at e is refracted toward g, eig being a Right
Ling; at i the Ray emerges from the Glass on the Concave Surface i a. Draw f i
l. Now the Angle of Inclination within the Glass is l i e = f i g, and if the
Ray be refracted into i h, the Angle of Refraction is hig = igf, which ought
therefore to be the Inclination f i g, and, that it is so, I thus prove.

In the Triangle g i f, As g f: To i f:: So the Angle g i f: To the Angle i g
f. But g f is double i f, therefore gif is double igf. Which was to be
Demonstrated.

PROP. XX.
In a Meniscus, if the Semidiameter of the Concavity be triple the Semidiameter
of the Convexity, the Focal Length is equal to the Semidiameter of the
Concavity.

This is most evident, if the Convex-side be turned to the Ray, T. 20, F. 2.
as Tab. 20. Fig. 2. hi is a Ray parallel to the Axis a b, d c the Semidiameter
of the Convexity f c i g, b e = 3 d c the Semidiameter of the Concavity fekg.
The Ray, by the first Refraction it suffers on the Unequal Surface at i, is
directed to concur with the Axis at a Diameter and an half of the Convexity,
that is, in b. But b is the Center of the Concavity; wherefore the Ray i k
within the Glass falls perpendicularly on the Concave Surface f k g; and
therefore is not at all refracted by its Emersion from the Glass, but proceeds
onwards directly in i k b. Which was to be Demonstrated.

But let the Concave-side be toward the Ray, as Tab. 20. Fig. 3. fc T. 20. F.
3.
is the Semidiameter of the Conexity i c, g k = 3 f c the Semidiameter of the
Convcavity e k, d e a Ray parallel to the Axis, produced directly to m. Let l c
be made equal to g k, I say the Focus shall be at l, l c being equal to the
Semidiameter of the Concavity. Draw g e o. The Angle of the Rays Inclination on
the Concave Surface is d e g = o e m (Ang. ad Verticem) and the Ray by the
first Refraction it receives on the Concave Surface at e is so refracted as if
it came from the Point h distant a Diameter and half of the Concavity then draw
hein directly. Here m e n = d e h = e h g is the Angle of Refraction, which is
therefore ^ of the Inclination d e g = e g k = oem. But we suppose, as the
Angles so are the Sines, and so are the Sides. Wherefore in the Triangle e g h,
s e g h = s e g k: s e h k:: e h = k h: e g, that is, e g k: e h k:: k h: e g.
But the Angle e g k is equal to 3 e h k, and therefore k h is equal to 3 e g,
and consequently g h is double e g or g k. From f the Center of the Convexity
draw f i p, this is perpendicular to the Unequal Surface i c. Wherefore seeing g
h is double g k, and g k is triple f c or f i, h f shall be octuple f i (by the
Scheme). And the Second Angle of Inclination h i f on the Unequal Surface shall
be octuple of the Angle at h, because their Correspondent subtending Sides are
as 8 to 1. But h i f is equal to p i n (Ang. ad Vert.) And because at the Rays
Egress from Glass to Air, the Angle of Refraction n i l ought to be half the
Inclination p i n, so let it be made; and then seeing the Angle p i n is
octuple the Angle at h, its half n i l shall be quadruple the Angle at h; from
the Angle n i l subtract the Angle n i m = d i h = h, there remains the Angle m
i l = i l f = 3 h; wherefore the Angle at l and e g k = 3 e h k are equal. And
then in the Triangle e l g (neglecting the Thickness of the Glass) e l and e g,
or c l and k g the Semidiameter of the Concavity are equal. Which was to be
Demonstrated.

Observation.
This is the 28th. Prop. of Dechales First Book of Dioptricks, which he there
huddles over in a most confused manner, omitting several Steps in the
Demonstration. Zahn has the same in Fund. 2. Syntag. 1. Cap. 7. Prop. 32. and
transcribes from Dechales not omitting his very Errors.

PROP. XXI.
In a Meniscus, the Semidiameter of whose Convexity is triple the Semidiameter
of the Concavity, The Virtual Focus is distant the Semidiameter of the
Convexity.

Tab. 20. F. 4. T. 20. F. 4.
a b is the Semidiameter of the Concavity b d, k c = 3 a b is the Semidiameter
of the Convexity c f, r d a Ray parallel ot the Axis k c. This Ray by the first
Refraction it receives on the Concave Surface at d, is refracted into d e, as
if it came directly from the Point k (by Prop. X.), wherefore d e falls
perpendicular on the Unequal Surface (by D e f. 10.) and consequently is not
refracted at its egress from the Glass (by Exp. 3.) wherefore the Virtual Focus
is at k. Which was to be Demonstrated.

PROP. XXII.
In whatever Meniscus wherein the Semidiameters of the Convexity and Concavity
are unequal; The General Rule that assigns the Focus either Real or Virtual is
this,

As the difference of the Semidiameters:

To either of the Semidiameters, whether of the Convexity or Concavity::

So is the Diameter, of the other Surface:

To the Focus Real or Virtual.

( Case 1.) I shall demonstrate this Proposition in Three several Cases, and
the First shall be, Where the Semidiameter of the Concave is greater than the
Semidiameter of the Unequal, but less than triple the Semidiameter of the Unequal.

( Case 2.) Wherein the Semidiameter of the Concave is greater than triple the
Semidiameter of the Unequal.

And in these Two Cases the Glass has a Real Focus.

( Case 3.) Wherein the Semidiameter of the Concave is less than the
Semidiameter of the Unequal, and then the Glass has only a Virtual Focus.

It Is here supposed, that the Breadth of the Glass is so little, and the Angles
so small, that Sines and Angles and Sides may be proportional. For an Angle, we
often assume its Complement to 180, as having the same Sine.

It Is supposed likewise that the Thickness of the Glass is inconsiderable, and
therefore it is wholly neglected.

First therefore for the First Case. Tab. 20. Fig. 5. T. 20. F. 5.
Let d e be a Ray parallel to the Axis c k, f c is the Semidiameter of the
Convexity e c; g l is the Semidiameter of the Concavity o l. Make h c triple f
c. Then by the first Refraction the Ray suffers at e, it is directed toward h
(by Prop. I.). Wherefore the Angle of Inclination upon its Emersion from the
Glass is g o h. Let the Angle of Refraction h o k be made half g o h. Then k is
the Focus, and it being so made, I say, the difference of the Semidiameters = f
g: Is to f c the one Semidiameter:: As 2 g l the other Diameter: To c k the
Focal Length.

Demonstration.
In the Triangle h o g -- 1 h o g: o h g:: h g: g o = g l And therefore -- 2 h
o g = h o k: o h g:: h g: 2 g l Moreover in the Triang. h o k 3 h o k: o h g::
h k: o k = k l From 2 and 3 it follows -- 4 h g: 2 g l:: h k: k l By permuting
the 4th. -- 5 2 g l: k l:: h g: h k Compounding the 5th. -- 6 2 g l + k l: k
l:: h g + h k = g k: h k But k l is equal to k g + + g l, therefore -- 7 2 g l
+ k l = 2 g l + k g + g l = 3 g l + g k Wherefore the 6th. runs thus 8 3 g l +
g k: k l:: g k: h k By permuting the 8th. -- 9 3 g l + g k: g k:: k l: h k
Dividing the 9th. -- 10 3 g l: g k:: k l - h k = h l: h k And permuting the
10th. -- 11 3 g l: h l = 3 f l:: g k: h k From 11 and 6 it follows -- 12 3 g l:
3 f l:: 2 g l + k l: k l And consequently from 12 13 g l: f l:: 2 g l + k l: k
l Dividing the 13th. -- 14 g l - f l = f g: f l = f c:: 2 g l: k l = k c For
the Thickness of the Glass is neglected, and therefore we assume k l = k c.

But this 14th. Analogy f g: f c:: 2 g l: k c. Is the Proposition which was to
be Demonstrated.

Note, Zahn does again in this Proposition transcribe from Dechales, and copies
the very Mistakes of the Press. But in our foregoing Demonstration all is
rectified.

Corollary.
Because -- f g: f c:: 2 g l: k c

It shall also be -- f g: g l:: 2 f c: k c

For if it be -- f g: f c:: 2 g l: k c

Then Permuting f g: 2 g l:: f c: k c

Then halve the first Consequent and double the last Antecedent, and it shall
be f g: g l:: 2 f c: k c. Which was to be Demonstrated.

In the 2. Case, Let fc, Tab. 20. Fig. 6. T 20. F. 6.
be the Semidiamiter of the Convexity e c. Make c h equal to 3 f c. Let g l be
the Semidiameter of the Concave l o, d e a Ray parallel to the Axis, which by
the first Refraction tends toward h (by Prop. I.) Now the Angle of Inclination
on the Concave Surface is h o g; for g o is the Perpendicular. Wherefore the
Ray by the second Refraction from Glass to Air is bent from the Perpendicular
by half the Angle of Inclination; Let k o h be this Angle of Refraction = h o
g. I say then, that As g f: To l f or f c (neglecting the Thickness of the
Glass):: So 2 g l: To c k or l k.

Demonstration.
In the Triangle g o h -- 1 o h g or o h l: g o h:: o g = g l: g h. And
therefore -- 2 o h l: g o h = h o k:: 2 g l: g h Moreover in the Triang. h o k
3 o h l: h o k:: o k = l k: k h. From 2 and 3 it follows -- 4 2 g l: g h:: l k:
k h. Permuting 4 -- 5 2 g l: l k:: g h: k h. Compound the 4th. -- 6 2 g l + g
h: g h:: l k + k h: k h. Permute the 6th. -- 7 2 g l + g h: l k + k h:: g h: k
h. From 5 and 7 it follows -- 8 2 g l + g h: l k + k h = l h:: 2 g l: l k.
Compound the 8th. 9 2 g l + (g h + l h =) g l = 3 g l: l h = 3 l f:: 2 g l + l
k: l k. And from the 9th. it follows 10 g l: l f:: 2 g l + l k: l k. And
dividing the 10 11 g l - l f = g f: l f:: 2 g l: l k. Which was to be
Demonstrated.

Corollary.
Because -- g f: l f:: 2 g l: l k.

It shall be also -- g f: g l:: 2 l f: l k, by the foregoing Corollary.

Lastly in the third Case, Tab. 21. f. 1. f l T. 21. F. 1.
is the Semidiameter of the Concavity i l, n c the Semidiameter of the
Convexity e c. Let c m be made Triple n c. d e is a Ray Parallel to the Axis k
m. this Ray by its First Refraction proceeds in e i m; at i it emerges into Air
on the Concave Surface. Draw the Perpendicular fig. The Angle of Inclination on
this Concave Surface is e i g = f i m, ad Vert. Let the Angle of Refraction h i
m be made equal to f i m. as it ought to be. Then, I say, the Ray Proceeds
after its Second Refraction in i h, as if it came directly from the Virtual
Focus k, and that then it shall be, as n f: n c:: 2 f l: k c.

Demonstration.
In the Trian. m i f -- 1 m i f: m:: f m: f i = f l. Therefore -- 2 m i f = h i
m: m:: f m: 2 f l. Also in Trian. m i k -- 3 m i k or its Compl. h i m: m:: m
k: i k = k l. From 2 and 3 -- 4 f m: 2 f l:: m k: k l = k c neglecting the
Thickness. Dividing 4 -- 5 f m - 2 f l: 2 f l:: m k - k l = m l = m c: k c. But
by Position in the Scheme 6 f m - 2 f l = m l - 3 f l. Wherefore the 5th Runs
thus 7 m l (= m c) - 3 f l: 2 f l:: m l = m c: k c. And Permuting 7 -- 8 m c (=
3 n c) - 3 f l: m c:: 2 f l: k c. And therefore -- 9 n c - f l = n f: m c = n
c:: 2 f l: k c. Which was to be Demonstrated.

Corollary.
Seeing it is -- n f: n c:: 2 f l: k c.

It shall be also -- n f: f l:: 2 n c: k c.

Vid. Preceding Corollaries.

PROP. XXIII. PROBL.
The Semidiameter of the Convexity being given, it is required to find the
Semidiameter of the Concavity, that a Meniscus formed with this Convexity and
Concavity may unite the Parallel Rays at a given distance. Vid. Barrow Lect.
Opt. 14. page 102. etc. Edit. Land. 1672. 4 to.

Tab. 21. F. 2. T. 21. F. 2.
a e = a d is the given Semidiameter of the Convexity, d f is the given
Distance, at which the Parallel Rays are to be united, z e produced to k is a
Ray Parallel to the Axis d f. Draw a e h on the Point of Incidence e as a
Center at any Interval, strike the Arch k o a, and make the sine of the Angle
of Incidence k m, to the Sine of the first refracted Angle o n, as 300 to 193,
or as 14 to 9. Draw e o l produced the other way to c. The Ray by the first
Refraction is directed to l; in the Line l e take any Point at Pleasure i, so
that e i may be the Thickness of the Glass which is to be formed; which
Thickness is here represented considerable, for Illustration sake, but it being
really of no Moment in Glasses of small Segments of large Spheres, it is
neglected altogether in Demonstration. Draw f i which we suppose equal to f d.
And make the Angle l i q: To the Angle l i f:: As 193: To 107. Draw q i which
cuts the Azis in b. On b as a Center strike the Arch of the Concavity ix. I say
by = bx is the Semidiameter of the Concavity, which added on the other side the
Glass to the former given Convexity, shall unite the Parallel Rays at the given
distance d f.

Demonstration.
By the first Refraction the Course of the Ray is through e i l, but at i it
meets the Concave Surface, and emerges from thence into Air. Now the second
Angle of Inclination is b i l, for b i is perpendicular to the Concave Surface.
But the Angle l i f is (by Construction) To the Angle l i q:: As 107: To 193.
Wherefore l i f is the second Angle of Refraction agreeable to the second Angle
of Inclination b i l (by Exp. 6.) Wherefore i p f is the refracted Ray. Which
was to be Demonstrated.

Calculation of an Example.
Let the Semidiameter of the Convexity a e = a d be given 10000. and the Focal
Distance d f = f i 63000.

Let us suppose the first Angle of Inclination k e a to be 5. 0'. 01".

Then as 300: to 107:: s. ^ k e a: s. ^ i l a, which is the first Angle of
Refraction = 1. 46'. 50". Wherefore i l f = 178. 13'. 10".

Also (by Prop. 1.) As 107: 300:: a e = 10000: To el = il = ld = 28037.

Then in the Triangle i f l, we have the three sides and the Angle i l f, to
find the Angle, i f l = 0. 47'. 30" and f i l = 0. 59'. 20".

Say then, As 107: To 193:: s. f i l: s. l i q which we shall find to be 1.
47'. 0".

And f i l + l i q = f i b = 2. 46'. 20". Also 180 - f i b - i f l = i b f =
176. 26'. 10".

Lastly in the Triangle f i b

As s. i b f = 176. 26'. 20" Log. comp. ar. 1. 2064785633

To -- s. i f b = 0 47 30 -- 8. 1404059077

So i f = 63000 -- 4. 7993405495

To b i = b i = 14000 -- 4. 1462250205

Wherefore I say that a Meniscus, whose Convexity has the Semidiameter 10000,
and the Concavity the Semidiameter 14000, has its Focal Length 63000.

Further Proof.
To Prove this by some of the foregoing Rules for finding the Focus of a
Meniscus. Let us conceive such a Meniscus to consist of a Plano-Convex Glass,
and a Plano-Concave Glass. And the Semidiameter of the Plano-Convex to be
10000, and the Semidiameter of the Plano-Concave 14000. Then to find the Focal
Lengths of these Glasses separately, say,

By Corol. Prop. II. 107: 193:: 10000: 18037 = Fo. Conv.

And by Corol. Pr. XI. 107: 193:: 14000:25252 = Fo. Conc. Diff. 7215

Then by the Observation Preliminary to Prop. XIX. 7215: 25252:: 18037: 63128 =
to the Focal length of such a Meniscus. Which comes sufficiently nigh 63000,
considering the foregoing Angles are Calculated only in Round Numbers to every
10" seconds.

What is here performed by supposing the First Angle of Inclination k e a = 5.
0'.0", may be likewise done supposing it of an other Inclination, and as the
Angle is smaller it will be the more exact.

PROP. XXIV.
An entire Glass-Sphere Unites the Parallel Rays at the Distance almost of half
its Semidiameter behind it.

It Is here supposed that the Incident Rays do not fall distant from the Axis
more than 20 or 30 Degrees.

Tab. 21. f. 3. T. 21. F. 3.
a k is a Glass-Sphere. On the Point d there falls the Ray b d Parallel to the
Axis a k. I say this Ray after a Double Refraction concurs with the Axis in the
Point f, so that f k is almost half the Semidiameter of the Sphere.

c is the Center of the Sphere, make k h equal to the Semidiameter c k, then a
h is a Diameter and Half. And the Ray b d by the First Refraction proceeds in d
e directly toward the Point h. But at e it emerges from Glass to Air. Draw the
Perpendicular c e g, the Angle of this second Inclination is c e d = g e h. Now
the Ray instead of proceeding directly to h is refracted from the Perpendicular
e g by the Angle f e h, which is therefore to be half c e d. And that it is so,
I thus prove. c e d is equal to e c h + e h c (32. 1. Eucl.) but e c h and e h
c are to sense equal, their Subtenses e h and e c being very near equal:
wherefore e h c is half c e d. But e h c is equal to f e h (their Subtenses f e
and f h being as to sense equal; for f k by supposition is equal to f h, and f
e is very near equal to f k, therefore f e is almost equal to f h) and
consequently the Angle f e h is half c e d or g e h. Which was to be
Demonstrated.

PROP. XXV.
A Glass Hemisphere Unites the Parallel Rays at the Distance of a Diameter and
one third of a Semidiameter from the Pole of the Glass.

Tab. 21. f. 4. T. 21. F. 4.
a d c is a Glass Hemisphere, b d a Ray of Light Parallel to the Axis a h. This
Ray after a Double Refraction Crosses the Axis in the Point f, so that f c is a
Semidiameter and one third of a Semidiameter. Make c k and k h each equal to c
a. By the first Refraction at d, the Ray is directed toward h in d e h. At e
the Point where it emerges from the Glass, draw p e r Perpendicular to the
Surface c e. Now the second Angle of Inclination is d e p = h e r (15. 1.) = k
h e (29. 1.) = k e h. (For k e being nighly equal to k c, it is also nighly
equal to k h; Then in the Equilateral Triangle k e h, the Angle k e h shall be
nighly equal to the Angle k h e) And the Angle of Refraction is f e h. And this
we are to prove equal to ^ the Inclination h e r or e h f. Seeing k h is equal
to c k, and k f is of k h by Construction, it follows that c f is double f h
(for c k + k f = c f = 33 + = 43, and f h =, but 43 is = to double) But e f is
nighly equal to c f; therefore e f is nighly double f h. Then in the Triangle f
e h, as the Sides, so the Angles (by supposition) therefore the Angle e h f is
nighly double the Angle f e h. Which was to be Demonstrated.

Definition.
The Projection of an Object in the Distinct Base of a Unequal Glass, I call the
Image.

PROP. XXVI.
As the Distance of the Object from the Glass:

To the Distance of the Image from the Glass::

So the Diameter of the Objects Magnitude:

To the Diameter of the Image.

Tab. 22. f. 1. a b c T. 22. F. 1.
is an Object, k d m a Unequal Glass in the Hole of a Dark Chamber, e f g the
Image formed by this Glass on a White Paper in the Distinct Base. I say, As c d
the Distance of the Object from the Glass: To e d the Distance of the Image
from the Glass:: So a c the Objects Magnitude: To g e the Magnitude of the
Image.

To show this, we are to remember the Premises to the IV Proposition. For by
them we shall find, that the Axes a d, and c d of the Luminous Cones k a m, k c
m, may be considered as passing the Glass unrefracted. Because that after they
have passed the Glass and become d g, d e, they proceed Parallel to their
Course before they entered the Glass. So that in Glasses of large Spheres, and
small Segments, the thickness of the Glass being inconsiderable in respect of
the Focal Distance, we may neglect it. And then we have here two Similar
Triangles a d c, g d e; For ^ a d c is equal to ^ e d g (15. 1. Eucl.) and the
Side e g is Parallel to the Side a c (by supposition) and consequently the
Angle c a d is equal to the Angle e g d. (29. 1.) and a c d is equal to the
Angle g e d. Wherefore it shall be c d: e d:: a c: g e. Which was to be
Demonstrated.

Note. From hence appears the Mistake committed by Monsieur Comiers in De
Blegny's Zodiacus Medico-Gallicus. An. 3tio. page 117. Who says, Diameter
Imaginis Solis in Distincta Basi obtinebit ad minimum in sua Diametro Funem seu
Chordam Dimidii Gradus magni Circuli Sphaerae, cujus Vitrum est segmentum.
Whereas it should be, Magni Circuli Sphaerae, cujus Radius est Distantia
Focalis Vitri.

What is here Demonstrated concerning the Real Image of a Unequal Glass may be
accommodated to the Virtual Image of a Concave.

Scholium.
But if we are yet more scrupulous, and will consider also the thickness of the
Glass; Then the Point within the Glass from whence the Distance of the Distinct
Base is to be counted, may be thus determined in a Plano-Convex Glass. Tab. 22.
f. 2, T. 22. F. 2.
k d m is a Plano-Convex Glass with its Unequal Side toward the Object a b c; a
d, c d, the Axes of Radious Cones falling Obliquely on the Glass in its Pole d;
Which (if the Glass were not interposed) would proceed directly on to p, p, but
by the Glass are now refracted into d i, d i; But at i i meeting with the
Second surface of the Glass, instead of going strait onwards, they are again
Refracted into i e, i g, Parallel to a d, c d. Let e i, g i be produced
backwards till they Intersect the Axis b f in x, I say x is the Point in the
Glasses Axis, from whence the Distance of the Distinct Base is to be reckoned.
And as the Thickness of the Glass d z: To the Distance of this Point x from the
Inner surface z x:: So is the Co-tangent of the Angle of Incidence from Glass
to Air: To the Co-tangent of the Refracted Angle.

For to the Point of Incidence i draw l i r Perpendicular to k m. Here the
Angle of Incidence from Glass to Air is l i d = i d z and the Complement of i d
z is d i z, whose Tangent is d z (making i z Radius) and the Refracted Angle is
r i e = i x z whose Complement is x i z, and the Tangent hereof is x z.

In Double Convexes the Case is something different, but it is needless to
enlarge any farther thereon.

Wherefore we see, that if we use a Plano-Convex Glass with its Convex-side
toward the Object, and if we allow for its Thickness, we are to compute the
Distance of the Object from the Pole of the Glass d, and the Distance of the
Distinct Base from the Point x. But supposing the Plane Side toward the Object
e f g, then we are to reckon the Distance of the Object e f g from the the
Point x, and the Distance of the Distinct Base a b c from d the Pole of the
Glass. Vid. Prop. XXVII.

Corollary 1.
It follows from this Prop. XXVI. That the Diameter of the Sun subtending an
Arch of 32 Minutes in a Great Circle of the Heavens, the Diameter of the Sun's
Image, Represented in the Distinct Base of a Convex-glass, subtends an Arch of
32 Minutes in a Circle, whose Radius is the Distance of the Distinct Base from
the Glass.

But Tab. 23. Fig. 1. T. 23. F. 1.
b is a Convex-Glass, a b a Ray of Light proceeding from the Sun's Eastern
Limb, d b a Ray from its Center, c b a Ray from its Western Limb. Let the
single Glass b Represent the Image of the Sun in the Distinct Base h q i, and
let us suppose the Sun's Diameter to be 32' Minutes. Draw b h, b q, b i. Let e
x z f be an other Plano-Convex-Glass, so placed behind the Glass b that both
these Glasses together (according to Prop. XVI.) may Represent the Sun's Image
in the Distinct Base k p o: It Is required to find the Breadth or Diameter k o
of this Image, from these Data, h b q the Angle of the Sun's Semidiameter 16'
Minutes, b q the Focal Length of the Glass b, b f the Distance of the Glasses,
p f the Distance of the Distinct Base from the Glass f x, e g the Radius of the
Convexity e x z, or instead thereof, the Focal Length of the Plano-Convex Glass
e x z f, for having one we may easily obtain the other.

We suppose that the Central Ray d b x q is Co-incident with the Axis of the
Glasses.

First therefore in the Right Angled Triangle h b q; we have the Angle h b q
(and consequently b h q = b e f) and b q to find h q.

(2) Then b f + f p = b p. And b q: h q:: b p: p n:: b f: of.

(3) In the Right-Angled Triangle e f g, e f and e g are known to find the
Angle f e g.

(4) 180 - b e f - f e g = y e b = g e h, Which is the Angle of the Inclination
of the Ray b e on the Unequal surface e x.

(5) 300: 193:: s. h e g: s. h e l, Wherefore the Ray by its first Refraction
would proceed in e l.

(6) Draw m e Perpendicular to the Plane Surface e f, then e f = m p. And m e =
p f. And n p - m p = n m; And the Angle n e m is = to q b h, And h e l - n e m
is = to m e l, Which is the Inclination of the Ray on the Plane Surface e f.

(7) Then 193: 300:: s. m e l: s. m e k.

(8) In the Right-angled Triangle m e k, m e and the Angles are known to find m
k.

(9) Lastly n m + m k = n k, and p n - n k = p k = k o; Which was required to
be found.

Corollary 2.
The foregoing Trigonometrical Calculation in the first Corollary I had from my
Esteemed Friend Mr. John Flamsteed Astr. Reg. But Instead thereof, or as an
Additament thereto, I shall substitute this Problem.

To Determine the Breadth of the Distinct Base Resulting from the Combinations
of Glasses expressed in Prop. XVI, XVII, XVIII. There being given (together
with the Data in those Propositions) the Breadth of the Object, or the Angle it
subtends before the outermost Glass, And if it be a nigh Object, its Distance
from the outermost Glass.

We here suppose our Glasses of the least Thickness Imaginable, or that all the
Refractions are performed in the Right Line, that passes through the Glasses
Breadth at Right Angles to the Glasses Axis, for avoiding Confusion in the
Schemes.

Wherefore in Tab. 24. Fig. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. T. 24. F. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
b is the Glass next the Object, whether Unequal (as in Prop. 16, 17.) or
Concave (as in Prop. 18.) We shall take the Sun for our Object, and suppose a b
a Ray proceeding from its Eastern Limb, d b a Ray from its Center, c b a Ray
from its Western Limb. Let the single Glass b, in the first and second Figures,
Represent the Image of the Sun in the Distinct Base h q i. The Breadth of the
Base h q i is easily obtained from the Data. Let e f z be another Glass, so
placed behind the Glass b, that both these Glasses together may Represent the
Suns Image in the Distinct Base k p o, It Is required to find the Breadth or
Diameter k o of this Image from these Data; b q the Focal Length of the Glass
b; The Breadth of the Image h i, or the Angle a b c = e b z; The Focal Length
of the Glass e z; The Distance of the Glasses f b and p f the Distance of the
Distinct Base from the Glass e z.

Through p at Right-angles to the Axis d s b f p of the Glasses draw k p o
infinitely. First from these Data, let us obtain the Breadth of the Glass e z,
where the Rays b e, b z, meet it, or its half breadth e f, which is easily had
in the Right-angled Triangle e f b, the Angle e b f, and the Side f b being
given.

Let us then consider b as a radiating Point, either farther from or nigher to
the Glass e z than its Focus; And by Prop. V. and VIII. for Convexes, and by
Corol. XV. for Concaves, let us determine the Respective, Imaginary, or Virtual
Focus s, whereby we obtain f s. From s draw s e, s z, directly; Where these
Lines s e, s z, meet the Distinct Base in k and o, there the Breadth of the
Distinct Base is determined; To obtain the Measure whereof, say as s f: f e:: s
p: p k = p o = k o.

And note that in Fig. 1 and 3. s p = s f- p f. But in Fig. 2, 4, 5. s p = s f
+ f p.

Corollary 3.
If the Glass be a Complete Sphere; Then, as the Distance of the Object from
the Center of the Glass: To the Breadth of the Object:: So the Distance of the
Image from the same Center of the Sphere: To the Breadth of the Image.

This is Manifest from Tab. 23. Fig. 2. T. 23. F. 2.
Whereby it appears, that a Glass Sphere s p c exposed to an Object a b; From
each point a, b, of the Object there proceeds one certain Ray a c n, b c m,
which passes Unrefracted; And these Rays Cross in the Center c of the Sphere,
by which means they are Perpendicular to both Sides of the Sphere, at their
Ingress and Egress, and so pass Unrefracted.

Corollary 4. PROBL.
The Distance of an Object, and its Diameter being given, it is required to
Represent its Image in the Distinct Base under a given Measure; The Thickness
of the Glass being given also.

This is the 52 Problematical Proposition of Gregorii Opt. Promot. And is thus
solved by our Doctrine.

Tab. 24. Fig. 6. T. 24. F. 6:
a v b is an Object, whose Diameter a b is given, and its Distance from the
Glass v d is given also: It Is required to Project this Object under a Given
Measure m n; The Thickness of the Glass d d being also given. Let it be made,
As a b: v d:: m n: d i. Then strike the Arch x d x with such a Radius, that the
Rays flowing from the Point v may thereby be transmitted Parallel within the
Body of the Glass (which shall be by the foregoing Doctrine, by making v d the
Radius) Afterward strike the Arch z d z with such a Radius, that it may Unite
the Parallel Rays at i, which shall be by making d i the Radius: I say the
Glass z x shall project the Image of a b under the given Measure m n. This is
so manifest from Prop. IX. together with the foregoing Doctrine, that it wants
no farther Explication.

Note. I have here considered the whole Thickness d d of the Glass in
Conformity to Gregory's Proposition. But what foregoes concerning the
Consideration of the Glasses Thickness may be applied here.

PROP. XXVII.
The Object and its Image in the Distinct Base are Reciprocal. vid. Prop. VI.

Tab. 22. Fig. 1. T. 22. F. 1.
a b c being an Object, and the Unequal Glass k m Representing the Image thereof
in the Distinct Base e f g. Let us now conceive e f g an Object, I say the same
Glass k m the same way posited shall project the Image thereof in the Distinct
Base at a b c.

This does necessarily follow from the precedent Proposition, and from Exp. 8.
And therefore needs no farther Demonstration.

Corollary.
Hence it follows that the Image in the Distinct Base may be sometimes larger
than the Object. On which depends the Doctrine of the double Microscope, as
hereafter shall appear more fully.

Let us imagine the Image of the Sun projected in the Focus of a Convex-glass,
And let us now conceive the Converse, viz. That this Image were now the Real
Sun, the Distinct Base of this would be as Large and as Remote as is now the
Real Sun. So that every Convex-glass may be conceived to have two Foci, or
Distinct Bases; one at the Object, the other at the Image.

PROP. XXVIII.
The manner of Plain Vision with the naked Eye is expounded.

Tab. 25. F. 1. T. 25. F. 1*
a b c is an Object, i k l e m is the Globe of the Eye, furnished with all its
Coats and Humors; But in this Figure we have only expressed the Crystalline
Humor g o h, as being Principally concerned in Forming the Image on the Fund
of the Eye.

(1) From each Point in the Object we may Conceive Rays flowing on the Pupil of
the Eye i k; as here from the middle Point b, there proceed the Rays b g, b o,
b h; These by means of the Coats and Humors of the Eye, and especially by the
Chrystalline Humor g h, are refracted and brought together on the Ratina or
Fund of the Eye in the Point e, and there the Point b is represented. For we
may conceive the Crystalline Humor g h as it were a Convex-glass, in the Hole
a Dark Chamber i l m k, and that d e f is the Distinct Base of this Glass. What
is here said of the Point b, and its Representation at e, may be understood of
all the other Points in the Object, as of a and c and their Representations at
f and d.

(2) And as in a dark Chamber, that has a Hole furnished with a Convex-glass,
if the Paper, that is to receive the Image in the Distinct Base, be either
nigher to, or farther from the Glass, than its due distance, the Representation
thereon is confused; For then the Radious Pencils do not exactly determine with
their Apices on the Paper; But those from one Point are mixed and confused with
those from the Adjacent Points: so in the Case of Plain Vision, it is requisite
that the Pencils should exactly determine their Apices at d, e, f, on the
Retina, or else Vision is not Distinct.

It Is therefore contrived by the Most Wise and Omnipotent Framer of the Eye,
That it should have a Power of adapting it self in some Measure to Nigh and
Distant Objects. For they require different Conformations of the Eye; Because
the Rays proceeding from the Luminous Points of Nigh Objects do more Diverge,
than those from more Remote Objects.

But whether this variety of Conformation consist in the Crystallines
approaching nigher to, or removing farther from the Retina; Or in the
Crystallines assuming a different Convexity, sometimes greater, sometimes less,
according as is requi^ite, I leave to the scrutiny of others, and particularly
of the curious Anatomist. This only I can say, that either of these Methods
will serve to explain the various Phenomenon of the Eye; And I am apt to
believe, that both these may attend each other, viz. a Less Unequal Crystalline
requires an Elongation of the Eye, and a more Unequal Crystalline requires a
shortning thereof; As a more^Flat^Convex-Object-glass or of a Larger Sphere
requires a Longer Tube, and one more Protuberant, bulging or of a smaller
Sphere requires a shorter Tube.

(3) By the forementioned Scheme we perceive, the Rays from each Point of the
Object are all confused together on the Pupil in g h, so that the Eye is placed
in the Point of the Greatest Confusion: But by means of the Humors and Coats
thereof each Cone of Rays is separated, and brought by it self to determine in
its proper Point on the Retina, there Painting distinctly the Vivid
Representation of the Object; Which Representation is there perceived by the
sensitive Soul (whatever it be) the manner of whose Actions and Passions, He
only knows who Created and Preserves it, Whose Ways are Past finding out, and
by us unsearchable. But of this Moral truth we may be assured, That He that
made the Eye shall see.

(4) We are likewise to observe, that the Representation of the Object a b c on
the Fund of the Eye f e d is Inverted. For so likewise it is on the Paper in a
dark Room; there being no other way for the Radious Cones to enter the Eye or
the dark Chamber, but by their Axes a o, b o, c o, crossing in the Pole o of
the Crystalline or Glass. And here it may be enquired; How then comes it to
pass that the Eye sees the Object Erect? But this Quaery seems to encroach too
nigh the enquiry into the manner of the Visive Faculties Perception; For it is
not properly the Eye that sees, it is only the Organ or Instrument, it is the
Soul that sees by means of the Eye. To enquire then, how it comes to pass, that
the Soul perceives the Object Erect by means of an Inverted Image, is to
enquire into the Souls Faculties; which is not the proper subject of this
Discourse. But yet that in this Matter we may offer at something, I say, Erect
and Inverted are only Terms of Relation to Up and Down, or Farther from and
Nigher to the Center of the Earth, in parts of the same thing: And that that is
an Erect Object, makes an Inverted Image in the Eye, and an Inverted Object
makes an Erect Image; That is, that part of the Object which is farthest from
the Center of the Earth is Painted on a Part of the Eye Nigher the Center of
the Earth, than the other parts of the Image. But the Eye or Visive Faculty
takes no Notice of the Internal Posture of its own Parts, but uses them as an
Instrument only, contrived by Nature for the Exercise of such a Faculty.

But to come yet a little nigher this difficulty; This enquiry results briefly
to no more than this, How comes it to pass, that the Eye receiving the
Representation of a Part of an Object on that part of its Fund which is
Lowermost or nighest the Center of the Earth, perceives that part of the Object
as Uppermost or farthest from the Center of the Earth? And in answer to this,
let us imagine, that the Eye in the Point f receives an Impulse or Stroke by
the Protrusion forwards of the Luminous Axis a o f, from the Point of the
Object a; Must not the Visive Faculty be necessarily directed hereby to
consider this stroke, as coming from the Top a, rather than from the bottom c,
and consequently should be directed to conclude f the Representation of the Top?

Hereof we may be satisfied by supposing a Man standing on his Head: For here,
tho the Upper Parts of Objects are painted on the Upper Parts of the Eye, yet
the Objects are judged to be Erect. And from this Posture of a Man, the Reason
appears, why we have used the Words Farthest from, and Nighest to the Center of
the Earth, rather than Upper and Lower. For in this Posture, because the Upper
Parts of the Object are painted on that part of the Eye nighest the Earth,
(though really the upper Part of the Eye) they are judged to be farthest
removed from the Earth.

What is said of Erect and Reverse may be understood of Sinister and Dexter:
But of these Physical Conjectures enough.

(5) The Image of an Erect Object being Represented on the Fund of the Eye
Inverted, and yet the sensitive Faculty judging the Object Erect; it follows
that when the Image of an Erect Object is Painted on the Fund of the Eye Erect,
the sense Judges that Object to be Inverted.

This is a necessary Conclusion, and is of consequence for explaining some
Particulars that follow.

(6) The Magnitude of an Object is Estimated by the Angle the Object subtends
before the Eye: Thus in the same foremention^d Tab. 25. Fig. 1. T. 25. F. 1
the Length of the Object a c is estimated by the Angle a o c = f o d, this we
call The Optic Angle.

From hence, and from Prop. XXVI, XXVII. it follows, that if the Eye were
placed instead of the Glass at d (T. 22. F. 1.) T. 22. F. 1
and a b c or e f g were Objects, the Eye would perceive them of Equal Bigness.

I know very well the Point o, which is the Vertex of the Optic Angle, is
variously assigned by various Authors; some placing it in the Center of the
Eye; Others in the Vertex of the Crystalline; Others in the Vertex of the
outward Coat or Cornea of the Eye: But it is a Matter of no great consequence,
wherever we place it; for according to the Bigness of this Angle a o c, the
Image on the Fund of the Eye is Bigger or Less. Vid. Tacquet Optica. Lib. 1.
Def. 4. and Prop. 3.

I know likewise, that by a curious Experiment in Optics discovered by an
Ingenious Frenchman Monsieur Mariotte, it is controverted, whether the Retina
or Choroide be the Seat of Vision, or the Place on which the Pictures of
outward Objects are expressed ( vid. Philosoph. Transact. Number. 35. and 59.) But
to our business it matters not which of them we pitch on; and therefore I choose
to speak as commonly it is presumed; and mention the Retina, or rather the Fund
of the Eye, as the Place that receives this Picture.

(7) In the same ( Tab. 25. Fig. 1.) T. 25. F. 1.
We perceive the Rays that flow from the Point b do proceed to the Eye
Diverging, as b g, b o, b h; And if the Object a c were infinitely diitant from
the Eye, or so distant from the Eye, that the Breadth of the Pupil i k were
insensible in Comparison to this Distance, then the Rays b g, b o, b h, would
proceed as it were Parallel, and so fall on the Eye: In both which Cases, by
means of the Refractions in the Eye, they are brought together, and paint the
Image of the Point b on the Fund of the Eye at e. Vid. Gregorii Opt. Prom. Pr.
30.

But in Tab. 25. Fig. 2. T. 25. F. ^.
If the Diverging Rays b v, b x, that flow from the Point b, meet the Unequal
Glass v x, and are thereby made to converge as v i, x k, and so fall on the
Eye, and there passing through the Crystalline g h, are made to Converge yet
more as i e, k e; Here they cross in the Point e, before they reach the Retina
r t, and consequently do paint thereon the Image of the Point b confusedly, for
it is Painted on the space r t; whereas to cause distinct Vision, it should only
be painted on a correspondent Point on the Retina.

And this is the Fault of their Eyes, who are called Myopes, Purblind, or
Short-sighted. For in them the Crystalline is too Unequal (as in this Tab. 25.
Fig. 2. both the Unequal Glass and Crystalline joined together make too great a
Convexity) uniting the Rays before they arrive at the Retina. And therefore
they are helped by Concave-glasses, which take off from the too great Convexity
of their Crystalline some part of its Refractive Power: Or rather these
Concaves make the Rays Diverge so, that their Crystalline shall be sufficient
only to bring them again together, so that they be not united, till they arrive
at the Fund of the Eye.

Myopes are also helped by holding the Object very near; for then the Rays that
fall on their Eye from any single Point do more Diverge, than when the Eye is
farther from the Point, and consequently their too Unequal Crystalline does but
suffice to bring them together on the Retina.

(8) On the contrary, the Eyes of Old Men have their Crystalline too Flat (as
Tab. 25. Fig. 3.) T. 25. F. 3.
and cannot correct the Divergence of the Rays b i, b k, to make them meet on
the Retina rt, but beyond the Eye at e. Wherefore for their Help it is requisite
they add the Adventitious Convexity of a Glass; that both it and the
Crystalline together, may be sufficient to unite the Rays just at the Retina:
And from hence it appears, that Spectacles help Old Men, not by magnifying an
Object, but by making its Appearance Distinct; for Old Men cannot read the
largest Print without Spectacles, and yet with Spectacles, they read the
smallest, though these with Spectacles do not appear so large, as those without
Spectacles.

(9) What is said of the Confused or Distinct Representation of a Point in the
Object, may be understood of the Confused or Distinct Representation of the
w^ole Object; at least for those Parts that lie pretty nigh adjacent to that
Point that is looked at. For here we do not take a Point in the strict sense of
the Mathematicians, but in a Physical Sense, for the smallest Part imaginable;
or as we have assumed it in the first supposition. And the whole Object
consisting of such Points, what is shown of one Point may be understood of
every Point in the Object, that is, of the whole Object.

(10) It Is Requisite also (before I proceed farther) to explain, what I mean by
Clear Vision, and Faint Vision; Distinct Vision, and Confused Vision.

By what foregoes, I suppose these two latter Terms are pretty well understood,
viz. Distinct Vision is then caused, when the Pencils of Rays from each Point
of an Object do accurately determine in Correspondent Points of the Image on
the Retina: Confused Vision on the contrary, when these Pencils do intermix one
with another.

But Clear Vision is only caused by a Great Quantity of Rays in the same
Pencil, illuminating the Correspondent Points of the Image strongly and
vigorously.

Faint Vision is then when a Few Rays make up one Pencil; And tho this may be
Distinct, yet it is Dark and Obscure, at least not so Bright and Strong, as if
more Rays concurred.

Of Single Glasses applied to the Eye.
Hitherto I have spoken of Glasses by themselves; And of the Eye by it self: I
come now to consider them both together.

But first it is to be Noted, that when we speak of the Distinct or Confused
Appearance of an Object, it is needful only to explain my self concerning some
one single Point in the Object; and for this we choose the middle Point; for if
we show that single Point in the Object to be Distinctly or Confusedly
Represented on the Retina (according to the XXVIII. Prop.) the same may be
understood of the Adjacent Points in the Object.

But when we discourse of the Erect or Inverted Appearance of an Object: Or of
the Magnified or Diminished Appearance of an Object; it is requisite we consider
the whole Object. For a single Point, though Physical, cannot properly be
consider^d as Erect or Inverted, or Magnified or Diminishd.

So that we perceive Distinct or Confused Vision to depend on the Formation of
Rays proceeding from each single Point. But Erect and Inverted, or Magnified
and Diminished Appearances depend on the Consideration of Rays proceeding from
different Points of the Object. I shall always consider those, that proceed
from the extremities of the Object.

PROP. XXIX.
An Object seen through a Plain Glass whose Surfaces are Parallel is Magnified
thereby.

This Proposition being directly contradictory to what HONORATUS FABER asserts
in the XLIII. Prop. Sec. 2. of his Synopsis Optica, I shall mark my Tab. 26.
Fig. 1. T. 26. F. 1.
with the same Letters wherewith he marks his 89th Fig. He acknowledges that
the Apparent Place of an Object is changed by a Plain Glass; but not that the
Visual Angle is altered thereby. But I shall show that the Optic^ Angle is
Magnified thus; Let m l be a Plain Glass, a b an Object, a f a Ray produced
directly to g, but Refracted into f i; And at its Emersion from the Glass at i,
Refracted again into i h, parallel to a f g. (by Experim. 1, 2.) Produce i h
directly toward k; let the Eye be at h, draw h a. The Angle, under which the
Object a b appears through the Glass m l to the Eye at h, is i h b, or k h b,
which is certainly greater than a h b, which is the natural Optic Angle.
Wherefore the Eye at h through the Glass sees the Object a b, under a greater
Angle than it would do without the Glass, and consequently the Object is
magnify^d by the Glass. Which was to be Demonstrated.

But that which deceived FABER is, that because the Angle a g b is equal to the
Angle k h b, therefore (says he) the Optic Angle with and without the Glass
are the same; or (as he has it) the Eye at g without the Glass would see the
Object a b under the Angle a g b, and through the Glass the Object is seen
under the Angle k h b equal to a g b: Which is granted him. But this does only
prove, that the naked Eye at g, and the Eye through the Glass at h, sees the
Object under the same Angle. Whereas he should have proved (if it were
possible) that the naked Eye at h, and the Eye through the Glass at h, sees the
Objects under the same Angle; And then indeed he had rightly proved what he
proposed, viz. that the Optic Angle is not magnified by the Interposition of
the Glass: For it is not Mathematical, first to place the Eye at g without the
Glass, and then at h with the Glass, and proving the Optic Angles the same, to
conclude that therefore the Plain Glass does not magnify. For at that rate one
may show that even a Unequal Glass does not magnify; For at one Station an
Object shall appear under as great an Angle without it, as at another Station
through the Glass.

The Reason, why the Common Window Glass, etc. through which we look, causes no
sensible Alteration of O^jects, is because it is too Thin. Vid. Barrow Lect.
Opt. 15.

Concerning the Apparent Place of an Object through a Plain Glass, more
hereafter.

PROP. XXX.
All Objects seen Erect through Unequal Glasses are Magnified thereby.

Tab. 26. Fig. 2. T. 26. F. 2.
Let a x b be an Object, o the Eye, draw a e o, b d o, directly strait from the
extremities of the Object to the Eye. The Angle comprised by the Direct Rays
aeo, bdo, that is the Angle a o b, is the Natural Optic Angle. Let now the
Glass c f be interposed; here because the Rays a e, b d, would naturally and by
their Direct course concur at o, now the Glass is interposed, their Concourse
shall be accelerated before they arrive at o. Wherefore the Eye at o shall not
perceive the extremities of the Object through the Glass by the Rays a e, b d,
but by some other Rays. And these other Rays must fall either without (that is,
farther from the Axis o x, than) a e, b d, or they must fall within a e, b d:
But they cannot fall within a e, b d; for if a e, b d themselves be made by the
Glass to concur before they arrive at o, much more shall any other Rays that
fall within a e, b d, be made to concur before they arrive there: And
consequently they cannot convey the Appearance of the Extreme Points a, b, to
the Eye at o. Wherefore it remains, that the Rays that do this must fall
without a e, b d: Let these Rays be a c, b f, which by the Refractive Power of
the Glass are bent from their Direct Course and are made to proceed in c o, f
o, crossing at the Eye in o; Here the Optic Angle through the Glass is c o f,
which is greater than the Natural Optic Angle a o b, and consequently the
Object is Magnifyd. Which was to be Demonstrated.

PROP. XXXI.
Concerning the Apparent Place of Objects seen through Convex-glasses.

(1) In Plain Vision the Estimate we make of the Distance. of Objects
(especially when so far removed, that the Interval between our two Eyes, bears
no sensible Proportion thereto; or when looked upon with one Eye only) is
rather the Act of our Judgment, than of Sense; and acquired by Exercise and a
Faculty of comparing, rather than Natural. For Distance of it self, is not to
be perceived; for it is a Line (or a Length) presented to our Eye with its End
toward us, which must therefore be only a Point, and that is Invisible.
Wherefore Distance is chiefly perceived by means of Interjacent Bodies, as by
the Earth, Mountains, Hills, Fields, Trees, Houses, etc. Or by the Estimate we
make of the Comparative Magnitude of Bodies, or of their Faint Colors, etc.
These I say are the Chief Means of apprehending the Distance of Objects, that
are considerably Remote. But as to nigh Objects, to whose Distance the Interval
of the Eyes bears a sensible Proportion, their Distance is perceived by the
turn of the Eyes, or by the Angle of the Optic Axes. ( Gregorii Opt. Promot.
Prop. XXVIII.) This was the Opinion of the Ancients, Alhazen, Vitellio, etc.
And tho the Ingenious Jesuit Tacquet (Opt. Lib. I. Prop. II.) disapprove
thereof, and Objects against it a New Notion of Gassendus (of a Man's seeing
only with one Eye at a Time one and the same Object) yet this Notion of
Gassendus being absolutely False (as I could Demonstrate, were it not beside my
Present Purpose, but I refer to the 7th Chap. of the 2d Part.) it makes nothing
against this Opinion.

(2) Wherefore Distance being only a Line, and not of it self perceivable; if
an Object were conveyed to the Eye by one single Ray only, there were no other
means of judging of its Distance, but by some of those hinted before. Therefore
when we estimate the Distance of nigh Objects, either we take the help of both
Eyes, or else we consider the Pupil of one Eye as having Breadth, and receiving
a Parcel of Rays from each Radiating Point. And according to the various
Inclination of the Rays from one Point, on the various Parts of the Pupil, we
make our Estimate of the Distance of the Object: And therefore (as is said
before) by one single Eye we can only Judge of the Distance of such Objects, to
whose Distance the Breadth of the Pupil has a sensible Proportion. To
illustrate all this by Tab. 26. Fig. 3. T. 26. F. 3.
Let a be a Radiating Point, sending forth the Rays a d, a e, a f, a g, a h,
with all the intermediate Rays. Let p u be the Breadth of the Pupil, and first
placed at c, there receiving only a e, a f, a g: Let p u be translated to b,
where it receives all the Rays; and it is manifest that the Rays from a are
differently inclined on the Pupil in one and the other Posture, for the Rays,
which fall on the Pupil when placed at b, diverge very much more than those
that fall upon it, when placed at c: And therefore the Eye, or Visual Faculty
will apprehend the Distance of a from b and c to be Different. For it is
observed before ( Prop. 29. Sect. 2. see also, Gregorii Opt. Promot. Prop.
XXIX.) that for viewing Objects Remote and Nigh, there are Requisite Various
Conformations of the Eye: The Rays from Nigh Objects, that fall on the Eye,
Diverging more than those from more Remote Objects.

(4) If therefore by Refraction through Glasses, that parcel of Rays which
falls on the Pupil from each Point in Nigh Objects be made to flow as close
together as those from Distant Objects; or the Rays from Distant Objects be
made to Diverge, as much as if they flowed from Nigh Objects, the Eye through
such Glasses shall perceive the Place of the Object changed.

(5) But first for a sensible and common Experiment, to show the Change of an
Objects Place by Refraction. Tab. 26. F. 4. T. 26. F. 4.
represents a Vessel, on whose Bottom at a there is laid a piece of Money, or
any other remarkable Object, so that the Eye at o may just perceive the Money
over the Edge c of the Vessel. The Money now appears to the Eye o by the direct
Line a c o. Let now the Vessel be fill^d with Water up to g f h; let the Ray a
f proceed from the Money, and draw p f perpendicular to g h; the Ray a f,
instead of going onwards directly to d, emerging from Water, a dense Medium to
Air, deflects from the perpendicular p f; and becomes (suppose) f o. Wherefore
the Eye o, now the Vessel has Water in it, sees the Silver, not by the direct
Ray a c o (for that is bent from it, and escapes it) but by the refracted Ray a
f o. Produce o f directly to b, the Money shall appear as if it were at b. For
the Eye is not sensible of the bending of the Ray, but is affected by it, as if
it were directly strait.

(6) In like manner Tab. 26. F. 5. T. 26. F. 5.
if the Point c send its Ray c e obliquely on the plain Glass a b; and after a
double Refraction it arrive at the Eye o; This Point c is not now seen in its
own proper Place, but somewhere in the Ray o g produced, as at f. For the Eye
is not sensible of the outward accidental Refraction, that attends the Ray at
its passage through the Glass; but is directed by the next immediate Ray o g
that falls upon it, and considers it as strait, and coming directly from the
Point f.

I say moreover, that by a plain Glass, the place of an Object is changed, and
brought nigher the Eye. Tab. 26. F. 6. T. 26. F. 6.
c is an Object sending its Rays c d, c e, upon the plain Glass a b; these
after a double Refraction proceed (by supposition) in g i, h k. Produce these
directly toward f; and suppose the Pupil of the Eye large enough to receive
the Rays g i, h k; the Point c shall appear to the Eye as at f.

(7) To determine the Locus Apparens of an Object placed nigher a Convex-glass
than its Focus.

To perform this, we are to have, the Power of the Glass, the Distance of the
Object from the Glass, and the Length of the Object given. Tab. 27. Fig. 1. T.
27. F. 1.
a b c is an Object, whose Distance from the Glass b z is given. Let us suppose
the Glass of the least thickness imaginable, that we may not be at the trouble
of considering the Optic Angle, both at the Immersion and Emersion. Let the
middle Point b Radiate upon the Glass, and after the Rays have passed the
Glass, let them be so Refracted, as if they came directly from the Point e.
From the forementioned Data, this Point e, being the Imaginary Focus, is easily
determined by Prop. VIII. hereof: Through e draw the Infinite Right Line d e f
Parallel to a b c. Wherefore as the Locus Apparens of the Point b is at e, so
the Loci of the Collateral Points a, c, shall be somewhere in the Line d e f
(unless perhaps Convexes on very small Spheres, will Represent the Object
Crooked or Bowed, but of this we shall take no notice) to determine which, from
the Vertex of the Glass z draw the Lines z a d, z c f (or if the Glass have any
Thickness, as in Tab. 27. Fig. 2. T. 27. F. 2.
from the Vertex of Immersion, or outward Vertex, draw z a, z c; And from the
Vertex of Emersion or Inward Vertex, draw z d, z f, Parallel to z a, z c, and
then the Thickness of the Glass must be one of the Data. Vid. Prop. 47.
Gregorii Opt. Promot.) the Points d and f are the Loci Apparentes of the Points
a and c. For certainly were the Eye behind the Glass just at z, and Object a b
c would appear under the Angle a z c, and the Point b would appear as at e, and
therefore the Points a and c would appear somewhere, so as to make the Object
keep the same Angle; But that can only be by the Points a and c appearing at d
and f (supposing the Object to appear in its own Natural strait shape)
Wherefore d and f are the Loci of the Points a and c, and d e f is the Locus of
the Object a b c.

Hence it appears, that a Convex-Glass Represents Objects as farther off than
really they are: And this is the Reason, why Pieces of Perspective (as of
Churches and Long Porticoes) appear very Natural and strong through
Convex-Glasses duly applied. For these Glasses making Objects appear further
off than really they are, must consequently make the Parts of the Perspective
seem really Hollowed or sunk in, the French term it Renfonce.

Hence also it is Manifest, why Convex-Glasses help the Eyes of those, that see
only Distant Objects, as Old Men, for these make Nigh Objects appear as
Distant. Vid. Prop. XXVIII. Sec. 8.

We may perceive also that the Distance between the Object and Glass continuing
the same, the Locus Apparens is never altered, though the Eye be removed to and
from the Glass. Gregorii Opt. Promot. Corol. Prop. XLVII. For the Distance
between the Object and Glass continuing the same, the Imaginary Focus e shall
always be the same.

(8) The Locus of an Object exposed to a Convex-Glass in its Focus is not to be
determined.

When the Radiating Point a. Tab. 27. Fig. 3. T. 27. F. 3.
is placed in the Focus of the Convex-Glass c d, the Rays c e, d g, after
passing the Glass, run Parallel, and being produced to c x, d z, they never
Intersect. Wherefore in this Case there is no Rule whereby to determine the
Locus of the Object. And Barrow tells us only, Quod Remotissime Positum
Aestimatur. Lect. 18. ad Finem.

(9) The Locus of an Object, beyond the Focus of a Convex-Glass, to the Eye
between the Glass and Distinct Base, cannot be determined.

Tab. 27. Fig. 4. T. 27. F. 4.
Let a be a Radiating Point placed more distant from the Glass c d than its
Focus; the Rays c e, d g, after passing the Glass, do Converge toward the
Distinct Base; let the Eye e f g be placed between the Glass and Distinct Base,
it shall then receive the Rays c e, d g, Converging; and they being produced
toward x and z separate the further.

In this and the last Section lies the great Difficulty, which the Incomparable
and most profoundly Learned BARROW ( Lect. Opt. 18. Sect. 13.) confessedly
passes over as insuperable, and not to be explained by whatever Theories we
have yet of Vision. For seeing that the Object which applies to the Eye by
Less-diverging Rays, is judged the more remote; And that which applies to the
Eye by Parallel Rays, is reputed most remote; it should seem reasonably to
follow, that what is seen by Converging Rays, should appear yet most remote of
all: And yet Experience contradicts this, and testifies, that the Point a, Tab,
27. Fig. 4. appears variously distant, according to the various Situations of
the Eye between the Glass and Distinct Base; and that it does almost never (if
ever) appear more distant than the Point a it self to the naked Sight, and
sometimes it appears much nigher: Or rather, by how much the Rays, which fall
through the Glass on the Eye, do more Converge, by so much the nigher does the
Object appear to approach, insomuch, that if the Eye approach the Glass very
nigh, the Object a appears in its natural Place: The Eye being a little farther
removed from the Glass toward the Distinct Base, the Point a seems yet to
approach. The Eye being yet farther, the Point seems yet nigher; and so by
degrees, till at last the Eye being placed at a certain station, as at the
Distinct Base, the Point a appears very nigh, so that it begins to vanish away
in mere Confusion. All which (continues the candid BARROW) seems repugnant, or
at least not so well to agree to what we have laid down. And so he leaves this
Difficulty to the solution of others, which I (after so great an Example) shall
do likewise; but with the resolution of the same admirable Author, of not
quitting the evident Doctrine, which we have before laid down, for determining
the Locus Objecti, on the account of being pressed by one Difficulty, which
seems inexplicable, till a more intimate Knowledge of the Visive Faculty be
obtained by Mortals. In the mean time, I propose it to the consideration of the
ingenious, whether the Locus Apparens of an Object placed as in this oath.
Section, be not as much before the Eye, as the Distinct Base is behind the Eye.
Vid. Corol. 1. Prop. LVII.

(10) If an Object be more distant from a Convex-Glass than its Focus, and the
Eye beyond the Distinct Base, the Locus Apparens of the Object is in the
Distinct Base. Vid. Prop. XXXIX. Sect. 5. item Schol. Prop. L.

Tab. 27. Fig. 5. T. 27. F. 5.
The Object a b c is projected by the Glass g z l in the Distinct Base d e f.
The Locus of each Point in the Object is in the correspondent Point of the
Image in the Distinct Base: Thus a appears at d, b at e, c at f. Gregorii Opt.
Prom. Prop. XLVI.

Dechales (Dioptr. Lib. II. Prop. XI.) remarks a Matter of some moment in this
Business of the Locus Objecti. The reason (says he) that the Appearances
through Glasses of the Change of the Objects Place, do not so strongly strike
the Sense, as the Doctrine here laid down seems to intimate, proceeds from
hence; that Optick-Glasses are seldom or never made so large, as to be looked
through by both Eyes at once; for if they were, he asserts, That the Locus
apparens Objecti would be much more plainly and sensibly determined to the
sight: In this particular certainly he is much in the right; for we see at all
times, that two Eyes make a more exact estimate of the Position of an Object,
than one single Eye. And we have a sensible Experiment hereof in Catoptricks,
by the large concave Miroirs, where an Hand and Dagger presented beyond the
Focus, seem to strike far without the Speculum, at him that presents it: But
not so strongly if the Speculum be but small, so that the Image can be seen but
by one Eye at once.

Scholium.
To this Property of the Change of the Apparent Place of an Object, may we
attribute that common Effect of Objects seeming to Dance and Move, being seen
through Spherick-Glasses, whether Unequal or Concave, nimbly shaken between the
Eye and the Object. It Is a noted Experiment, that to know, whether a Glass be
Plain or Spherical (which is not to be found by Inspection of the Glass it
self, or by Touch, if the Glasses he formed on large Spheres, and be but small
portions thereof), the common Trial is, to shake them something nimbly between
the Eye and an Object; and if the Object seem to move by the motion of the
Glass, the Glass is not Plain: The reason hereof is this; That toward the
Extremities of a Glass, the Glass refracts more than toward the middle (for
the very middle Ray, that is perpendicular, is not refracted at all) and
consequently the Apparent Place of an Object is more changed by the Refraction
in the Extreme parts of the Glass, than in the middle of the Glass: So that the
Object, by the Motion of the Glass, appearing sometimes through the middle of
the Glass, sometimes through the extremities of the Glass; the Apparent Place
thereof is varied likewise, and the Object seems therefore to change its Place,
or to move. But in a plain Glass the Case is otherwise, for the Refraction
thereof is equally prevalent throughout the whole Glass, and neither stronger
nor weaker in the middle, than in the extremities; so that the shaking of it
between the Eye and Object, makes no other difference in the Apparent Place,
than if the Glass were looked through fixed and immovable; and therefore the
Object seems not through it to shake and move. And tho the Locus be changed by
a Spherick Glas's being removed to and from the Eye, yet in Glasses of large
Spheres, the Locus is not so sensibly changed, as by being shaken before the
Eye. The same Reason holds for the apparent Dancing of Objects seen through
rising Smoaks or Vapors.

PROP. XXXII.
An Object being placed in the Focus of a Convex-Glass, and the Eye on the other
side the Glass, sees this Object distinctly and erect.

That an Object so posited, is seen distinctly, is evident, because the Rays
from each particular Point, after passing the Glass, become parallel (by Prop.
VI.) and so fall on the Eye. And therefore (by Prop. XXVIII. Sec. 7.) they are
fit to cause Distinct Vision. Tab. 27. Fig. 3. T. 27. F. 3.
The Point a sends forth its Diverging Rays a c, a d, on the Convex-Glass c
d; these are transmitted by the Glass parallel in c e, d g, and so fall on the
Eye; by whose Coars and Humors, especially by the Crystalline h i, they are
refracted and brought together in the Point k on the Retina, there representing
distinctly the Point a of the Object.

Or thus, Tab. 28. Fig. 1. T. 28. F. 1.
The Eye o p, being in the place where some of the Rays from every Point in the
Object are mixed together, is in the place of the greatest Confusion; and
therefore by Prop. XXVIII. Sec. 3. the Vision is distinct.

I say also the Object is seen erect. In the same Figure g k is a Convex-Glass,
a b c an Object; we may imagine that each Point of this Object sends from it a
Cone of Rays, falling on the whole Surface of the Glass; but for avoiding
Confusion in the Scheme, I only express and consider the Rays c g, c h, from
the Point c; and a k, a i from the Point a^ o p is the Crystalline of the Eye.
The Rays c g, c h, after passing the Glass become parallel as g o, h p, and
fall so on the Crystalline, by whose Refractions they are again brought
together in the Point d on the Retina, there painting the lively Representation
of the Point c; and the same may be shown of the Representation of the Point a
at f on the Retina. Wherefore the smister point c is represented on the dexter
part of the Fund of the Eye d; and the dexter part of the Object a is painted
on the smister part of the Eye f. And consequently the Image on the Retina
being inverted, the Object is seen erect (by Prop. XXVIII. Sec. 4, 5.). Which
was to be Demonstrated.

PROP. XXXIII.
An Object being placed in the Focus of a Unequal Glass, and the Eye being
placed in the Focus, on the other side the Glass, sees this Object under the same
Angle, as were the naked Eye placed at the station of the Glass.

Tab. 28. Fig. 2. T. 28. F. 2.
a x b is an Object placed in the Focus of the Glass e f (which we suppose of
the least thickness imaginable): Let the Rays a e, b f, run parallel to the
Axis x c o, these Rays are united in the Focus at o, at which Point we suppose
the Eye. Produce o e and o f directly to g and k, and draw e c f (which by
supposition is parallel to a x b, and then draw a c, b c. The Optick-Angle
through the Glass is e o f, which we are to prove equal to a c b. Thus, a x and
e c being parallel, and a e, x c, being so likewise; a x is equal to e c, and a
e to x c, being the opposite Sides of a Parallelogram. But x c is equal to c o
(the Focal Length on one side and the other). Wherefore the Right-angled Triangle
e c o is equal and similar to the Right-angled Triangle a x c. Wherefore the
Angle e o c is equal to the Angle a c x, or e o f is equal to a c b. And
consequently the Eye at o sees the Object through the Glass under the same
Angle, as the naked Eye being place at c, would see it. Which was to be proved.
Vid. Gregorii Opt. Prom. Prop. XLIV.

Scholium.
This is the Posture of both Eye and Object for causing the most perfect Vision
possible through a single Unequal Glass; unless perhaps we say, That seeing all
Objects, which we perceive most distinctly are pretty nigh our Eyes; therefore
we may conceive the Rays flowing from each Point of them, as falling on the
Pupil Diverging. And consequently, that to see an Object most perfectly through
a Unequal Glass, it is best that the Object be placed a very little nigher the
Glass than its Focus: For then the Rays, after passing the Glass, do something
Diverge, and fall so on the Pupil; and this being the most natural and usual
occurrence of Objects, it suits best, and is best adapted and most agreeable to
the Eye; which by its refractive Coats and Humors easily collects each Cone of
these Diverging Rays, and brings them together in a Point on the Fund of the
Eye.

Corollary 1.
The Eye and Object being so placed as above; the Eye sees this Object
magnified under an Angle almost double to that under which the Object would
appear to the Eye, were the Glass removed; that is, the Angle e o c or a c x is
almost double the Angle a o c (a o and b o being drawn directly) for the Angle
a c x is equal to a o c + c a o (32. 1.) but c a o is almost equal to a o c.
Therefore the Angle a c x is almost double a o c. Which was to be Demonstrated.
That c a o is almost equal to a o c, is manifest; for the Triangle o c a is
almost Isosceles, o c (= c x) being almost equal to c a.

If now we suppose the Eye to continue in the Focus at o, and the Object a x b
to be brought nigher the Glass e f; still the Optic Angle through the Glass
shall be e o f. By which (tho it continue the same, yet) the Object would not
be magnified by the Glass in this second Posture, as much as in the former. For
the Angle e o f in this latter Posture would not so much exceed the natural
Optic Angle a o b. For at last a x b being brought so near e c f, as to be
coincident therewith, the Angles e o f and a o b would be coincident also.

The same may be shown, if we suppose the Object to continue in the Focus, and
the Eye o to approach the Point c. For at last the Eye arriving at c, perceives
the Object through the Glass under its own natural Angle a c b.

Corollary 2.
Hence it appears, that the Eye being in the Focus of a Unequal Glass, and the
Object in the Focus also, the Eye can perceive no greater an Area or Space of
the Object, than the Breadth of the Glass, or the Breadth of that Portion
thereof, which the Eye makes use of; for a b is equal to e f. And the reason
is, because those Rays a e, b f, that come from the Extremities of the Object a
and b, and concur at the Eye in the Focus o, must necessarily fall on the
Glass parallel to the Axis x c.

PROP. XXXIV. PROBL.
To determine the Optic Angle, or apparent Magnitude of an Object in the Focus
of a Convex-Glass, to the Eye at any other station; from these Data, the
Glasses Focal Length, or the Distance of the Object from the Glass x c, Tab.
29. F. 1. T. 29. F. 1.
The Distance of the Eye from the Glass c d, and the Breadth of the Object a b.

The Thickness of the Glass I take no notice of, because I would not perplex
the Scheme. And therefore the Glass is supposed of the least Thickness
imaginable; or all the Refractions are supposed performed at the Line in the
middle of the Glass g e c f g.

Wherefore let a x b be an Object, and let the Rays a e, b f, fall parallel to
the Axis x c o; these are united in the other Focus at o, where if the Eye be
placed, it sees the Object under the Angle e o f = a c b, by the preceding
Prop. Wherefore having b x the half Object, and x c; in the Right-angled
Triangle b x c, we may find the Semi-optick Angle b c x. Draw the pricked Line b
o directly; the Angle b o x is the natural Optic Angle of the Object b x,
which is easily. obtained, in the Right-angled Triangle b o x, having b x and x
o.

Let now the Eye be out of the Focus at d; the Rays a g, after passing the
Glass, become parallel to e o (Prop. VI.) And therefore the Angle g d x is
equal to e o x or a c x, which we have found before. Draw the pricked Line b d
directly; the Angle b d x is the natural Optic Angle of the Object b x, were
the Glass removed; and is easily had in the Right-angled Triangle b x d, having
b x and x d (= x c + c d). So the Problem is satisfied.

PROP. XXXV. PROBL.
To determine the Visible Area of an Object in the Focus of a Unequal Glass;
from these Data, the distance of the Object from the Glass or the Glasses Focal
Length, the distance of the Eye from the Glass, and the Breadth of the Glass.

It is shown before in the 2d. Corollary to Prop. XXXIII. That the Visible Area
of an Object in the Focus of a Unequal Glass, to the Eye placed in the other
Focus, is equal to the Breadth of the Glass. Wherefore I shall only here
consider the two other Cases.

And first, Let the Eye at o, Tab. 29. Fig. 2. T. 29. F. 2.
be placed further from the Glass g l than its Focus, the Object a x b is in
the Focus, g l the Glasses Breadth, x c the Glasses Focus or distance of the
Object, and c o the distance of the Eye from the Glass are given. Draw g o, l
o, and produce the Axis o c f infinitely. Let us now imagine the Point o a nigh
Radiating Point or Object, sending its Rays o g, o c, o l, on the Glass. By
Prop. V. Let us determine the Distinct Base or Respective Focus of this Point
projected by this Glass, which by the foregoing Data is easily performed.
Suppose this respective Focus to be c f. Draw g f, l f; where these Lines
intersect the Object in e and d, the Visible Area of the Object is determined
by e d.

Demonstration. For by Exper. 8. the Progress of a Ray through different
Mediums is Reciprocal. Wherefore if the Rays o g, o l, be refracted into g e, l
d; it will necessarily follow, that e g, d l, being considered as two Rays
flowing from the Points e and d, they shall be refracted into g o, l o;
wherefore this Analogy will hold, f c: c l:: fx (= f c - xc): x d. Which x d is
half the Visible Area to the Eye at o.

Secondly, Tab. 29. F. 3. T. 29. F. 3.
Let the Eye at o be placed nigher the Glass than its Focus. Draw g o, l o. And
produce the Axis o c infinitely backwards toward f. Then (as before) supposing
the Point o a Radiating Point or Object; by the Data, and by Prop. VIII. we may
easily determine the Imaginary Focus thereof, which let be c f. From f draw f g
directly to e, and f l to d. e d, by the foregoing Demonstration, is the
Visible Area of the Object a b. And c f: c l:: f x (= f c + c x): x d. Which is
half the Visible Area to the Eye at o.

Scholium.
The same Rules may be used, when the Object is nigher to or further from the
Glass than its Focus. So that this Proposition is universal to all Cases in
Erect Vision through Unequal Glasses. But whether this Area be distinctly
visible or not, depends on other Considerations, and will be obvious enough to
those that consider what has been before, and what shall be hereafter laid down
concerning the distinct and confused appearance of Objects.

PROP. XXXVI.
An Object being placed more distant from a Unequal Glass than its Focus, and
the Eye placed on the other side this Glass nigher to the Glass than the Distinct
Base to the Glass, sees this Object erect and confused

I have shown before ( Prop. V. XXVI, XXVII.) that if an Object be placed more
distant from a Glass than its Focus, this Object is projected in a distinct
Base somewhere on the other side the Glass. And that this Distinct Base, may be
sometimes Less, sometimes equal to, and sometimes Greater than the Object it
self.

Tab. 30. Fig. 1. T. 30. F. 1.
a b c is an Object exposed to the Glass g l, and projected in the Distinct
Base f e d. Each Cone of Rays from the Object is made to converge, as b l g is
formed into g e l. Let the Eye be placed at k. I say, first the Object appears
erect. For the Rays from a the upper part of the Object tend to, and determine
in the lower part of the Fund of the Eye. And the Rays from c the lower part of
the Object tend toward the upper part of the Retina; and therefore the
Appearance is erect, (by Prop. XXVIII. Sec. 4, 5.)

Moreover, the Eye being placed any where between the Glass g l, and the
Distinct Base f e d, does not receive the Species of the Object inverted; for
that only happens just in the Distinct Base it self. And on this account, it is
manifest, that the Appearance to the Eye in this posture shall be Erect.

I say likewise, that the Apearance of the Object is confused. Let us conceive
the Pupil of the Eye at m n; here it receives the Rays from the Point b
converging; and therefore by Prop. XXVIII. the Representation of the Point b on
the Fund of the Eye shall be confused. And so of the other Points in the
Object, that is, of the whole Object. And if the Eye recede from the Glass, as
to h i, the Vision is more confused, because the Rays are nigher converged.

PROP. XXXVII. PROBL.
To determine the Optic Angle, or Apparent Magnitude, and the Visible Area of
an Object placed as in the last; from these Data, The Breadth of the Object a b
c (Tab. 30. Fig. 2.), T. 30. F. 2.
Its Distance from the Glass z b, The Glasses Power, The Glasses Breadth g l,
And the Distance of the Eye from the Glass k z.

(1.) From these Data by the foregoing Doctrine of Unequal Glasses, it is easy
to determine the Breadth of the Distinct Base. For by Prop. XXVI, XXVII. As the
Distance of the Object from a Unequal Glass: To the Breadth of the Object:: So
the Distance of the Image in the Distinct Base: (which is easily obtained from
the foregoing Data) To the Breadth of the said Image. That is (in the foresaid
Figure) b z: a c:: e z: d f. And As a b: b z:: d e: e z. And consequently the
Angle e z d is equal to the Angle a z b; the Triangles e z d and a z b being
similar. And in the Right-angled Triangle a b z, we have a b and b z, to find
the Angle a z b = e z d; which is the Angle, under which the Object would
appear to the Eye placed just touching the Glass at z; supposing the Glass to
be there of the least Thickness imaginable.

(2.) Let us now suppose the Eye at k. I say if the Rays from the single Points
a, c, in an Object be converged by the Unequal Glass g l to any other Points d,
f; the Object shall appear under the Optic Angle x k m, as do the Apices of
the Pencils from the Extreme Points of the Object, which is d k f = x k m. Vid.
Gregorii Opt. Promot. Prop. X+LV.

(3.) Wherefore in the Right-angled Triangle e k d, we have e k and e d, To
find the Angle e k d = z k x, which is the Semi-Optick Angle to the Eye at k.
In like man^e^ may we find the Optic Angle at any other given Station of the
Eye, as at n, e n d = g n z being equal to half f n d.

(4.) As to the Visible Area of the Object, it is determined as before, Prop.
XXXV. and Schol. I shall only add, That if the Eye be at q. and the Line d q
being drawn, and produced toward h, it does not fall upon the Glass g l* then
the Eye at q shall not see through the Glass the Point a, the Apex of whose
Pencil is in the Point d. And from hence we may perceive, that at k, we may see
through the Glass a greater space than the Area of the Object a b c. At ^ we
can but ju^^ see the whole Object a b c; and at q we cannot see extreme Point a
c. By which the 81 and 82 Prop. of Kepler's Dioptrick^ are manifest.

(5.) If the Glass have any Thickness considerable, see Prop. XXXI. concerning
the Locus Objecti, Sec. 7.

Scholium.
If we first determine the Visible Area by Prop. XXXV. the Breadth of the
Object need not be one of the Data for determining the Optick-Angle. For the
Breadth of the Object is found by obtaining the Visible Area.

PROP. XXXVIII.
An Object being more distant from a Glass than its Focus, and the Eye placed
in the Distinct Base, the Object appears most confused.

By Prop. XXXVI. it is manifest, that the nigher the Eye approaches the Distinct
Base, the more confused the Object appears; because the Rays from each
particular Point, do fall on the Eye closer Converged, and more orderly
separated by the Glass from the Rays of adjacent Points. But in the Distinct
Base, the Rays are most of all Converged, and most orderly united in their
proper Points, each with the Rays flowing from the same Point in the Object.
Wherefore the Eye is there in the greatest Confusion.

Moreover (by Prop. XXVIII. Sec. 3.) it is requisite to Distinct Vision, that
the Rays from the several Points in the Object, fall on the Eye altogether
confused thereon (as they do on the Glass in the Hole of a dark Room), that the
Coats and Humors of the Eye may refract them, and bring them together,
distinctly painting the Image on the Retina. But when the Eye is in the
Distinct Base, all this is frustrated.

PROP. XXXIX.
The Object being more Distant from the Glass than the Focus; and the Eye
further from the Glass than the Distinct Base, begins to perceive the Object
inverted; and, at a proper distance, Distinct.

(1.) This is manifest by Tab. 30. Fig. 3. T. 30. F. 3.
wherein a b c is an Object, g s l the Glass projecting the Distinct Base f e
d, o is the Eye. And because half the Pencils of Rays that flow from each of
the extreme Points of the Object a and c, proceeding forwards from the Points d
and f in the Distinct Base, after they cross in the aforesaid Points d and f,
by reason of their too great Divergence, do escape the Eye. Therefore, for
avoiding Perplexity in the Scheme, I have only expressed the Half Cones s a l,
s d l, and s c g, s f g, which incurr the Eye.

(2.) Wherefore we may observe, that the Diverging Rays p f o and o d q,
falling diverging and confused on the Crystalline p q, are thereby collected,
and made to concur on the Retina in the Points n and r; and there paint the
upper Point a of the Object on the upper part r of the Eyes Fund; and the lower
Point c of the Object on the lower part n of the Retina. Therefore by Prop.
XXVIII. Sect. 4, and 5. the Object appears inverted, because the Image
represented on the Retina is Erect.

(3.) Or more plainly thus, We may now conceive the Distinct Base it self f d
to be as it were an inverted Object (as here the Cross turned with its head
downwards). Therefore the appearance thereof to the Eye, shall seem inverted.
For if the Eye perceive an erect Object, erect, it must needs perceive the
Distinct Base, being an inverted Object, inverted.

And this may be laid down as a General Rule, That where an Object, or the
Image, or Representation of an Object, which is next the Eye, is inverted,
there the Object shall appear inverted. And where the Object, or Image next
before the Eye, is erect, the Object appears erect.

(4.) I say also, At a proper distance the Inverted Appearance is Distinct. For
when the Eye is so far removed from the Distinct Base, as to be able to correct
the Divergence of the Rays, that come to it from each Point in the Distinct
Base, and to form them into correspondent Cones determining their Apices on the
Retina, the Vision is Distinct, otherwise not.

Moreover there are two other Phenomenon of this Posture of Object, Glass, and
Eye; which I shall here explain as follows.

(5.) If the Eye be moved upwards toward z, the Object shall appear to move
downwards. If the Eye be moved downwards toward x, the Object seems to move
upwards. To explain this, let us consider the Point c; and how the appearance
thereof is brought to and formed in the Eye. And we shall find, that in the
Posture of the Scheme, the Point c is expressed in the Eye, only by that parcel
of its Rays that fall on the half Glass s g, for these are brought together in
s f g, and flowing forward, become p f o: But the other parcel of Rays, s c l,
that fall on the half Glass s l, and are brought together in s f l, proceeding
forwards, escape the Eye; for they go on in p f z. Wherefore the Point c is now
represented through the half Glass s g, or seen somewhere between g and s. But
the Eye moving upwards toward z, so that it miss the Rays p f o, and receive
only the Rays p f z; the Point c shall then be represented through the half
Glass s l, or seen somewhere between s and l, and consequently shall seen to
move downwards. What is shown of the Point c, may be conceived of the other
Points in the Object, that is, of the whole Object.

And this Phenomenon is the strongest Confirmation imaginable, that the Locus
Apparens Objecti, in this Case, is in the Distinct Base (as is said before,
Prop. XXXI. Sec. 10.). For by raising the Eye, we depress the Point f; and by
depressing the Eye, we raise the Point f. Wherefore. the appearance of the
Point c is at f. For the Point c in the Object seems to move contrary to the
motion of the Eye.

From the foregoing Explication it follows, that if the Glass be moved upwards,
the Object appears to move upwards. And if the Glass be moved downwards, the
Object appears to move downwards; for the moving of the Glass upwards is the
same as moving the Eye downwards; but moving the Eye downwards, makes the
Object appear to move upwards; therefore the moving of the Glass upwards makes
the Objects appear to move upwards.

Or thus, Because moving the Glass upwards, the Distinct Base is moved upwards
(for it follows the Glass), and the Distinct Base is in this case as it were
the Object. ( Prop. XXXI. Sec. 10.) Therefore by the Glasses motion upwards,
the Eye shall perceive the Object moved upwards.

(6.) If with both Eye we look at the inverted Appearance of an Object through
a Convex-Glass, we shall perceive the Object double. Supposing the Eyes not
very far removed from the Distinct Base. Tab. 30. Fig. 4. T. 30. F. 4.
a b c is an Object projected by the Glass g l in the Distinct Base f e d; the
Point e being correspondent to the Point b. Let the Cone of Rays g e l flow
forwards from e, and become z e y. Let the two Eyes n, m meet the Cone of Rays
z e y. I say the Eye n perceives the Point e (the Representation of the Point
b) by the Rays z e q, which flow forward from i e l; and consequently the Eye n
perceives the Point ^ or e, as it were, somewhere between (...) and l. In like
manner, the Eye ^ perceives the Point b or e somewhere between s and g:
Wherefore the two Eyes seeing the Point ^. or e, as it were, in two places, see
it Double. What is said of the Point b, may be understood of any other Point in
the Object, and consequently of the whole Object. And if we shut the Right Eye
m, the Left Appearance of b vanishes; if the Left Eye n, then the Right
Appearance of the Object vanishs.

But if the Eyes be removed very far from the Distinct Base f e d, their
Interval continues the same; and the Rays e k, e p, Diverging continually, they
shall at last fall on the Eyes; that is, e k on the Eye n, and e p on the Eye
m. By which the Eye n shall perceive e as it were at u (k e u being one Right
Line), and the Eye m shall perceive the same e as it were at r (p e r being one
Right Line), whereby the Difference of the Places r and u becomes less than
before, till at last the Eye be got at such a Distance from the Distinct Base,
that this Difference of the Apparent Places becomes so small, that it is
insensible to the sight.

Quaere. How Dr. Briggs would explain this Phenomenon of Double Vision by his
Theory of sight. Philosoph. Collect. Numb. 6.

PROP. XL.
To determine the Optick-Angle or Apparent Magnitude, and the Visible Area of
an Object, placed as in the last, from these Data; The Breadth of the Object a
b c, (Tab. 30. F. 5.) T. 30. F. 5.
Its Distance from the Glass s b, The Glasses Power or Focal Length, The
Glasses Breadth g l, And the Distance of the Eye from the Glass o s.

(1.) It is shown before ( Prop. XXXVII.) how we may from these Data obtain the
Breadth of the Distinct Base f e d, and its Distance from the Glass e s.
Wherefore o s - e s = o e. Then in the Right-angled Triangle o e f, we have o e
and e f to find the Angle f o e, which is the Semi-Optick Angle, under which
the Eye perceives the Inverted Appearance of the Object. In like manner may we
find the Optic Angle to any other station as at n.

(2.) The Learned GREGORY in his Opt. Promot. Prop. 46. has a curious Theorem
to this purpose, it is this, The Rays from each single Point in an Object a b c,
being formed by the Glass g s l into the Distinct Base f e d; and the Eye o
being placed behind the Points of Concourse f e d; the Image of each Point in
the Object shall appear in the Apex of its Pencil ( That is, The Image of the
Point a shall appear in the Apex of its Pencil at d, etc.), And the Object
shall appear Inverted; And under that Optick-Angle, as the Apices of the
Pencils of the Extreme Points of the Object; That is, under the Angle f o d.

(3.) The Visible Area is thus determined, Tab. 30. Fig. 6. T 30. F. 6.
The Object a b c is projected by the Glass g s l in the Distinct Base f e d.
Let the Eye be at o; draw o g, o l; the Eye at o shall see no more of the
Object, than what is represented between z and r, where the Lines o g, o l,
intersect the Distinct Base. To determine the Points in the Object, that answer
the Points z, r, in the Distinct Base. From the Center of the Glass s (for I
suppose it of no Thickness), draw z s x, r s k; the Point k answers r, and x
answers z. Lastly, from the foregoing Data to determine the Measure of z r say,
As s o: s g:: e o: e z = z r; but the three first are known, therefore the
fourth is known also. Which was to be found.

(4.) If the Line o y produced do not fall on the Glass, then that Point in the
Object, whose Apex of its Pencil is at y, or which is projected in the Distinct
Base at y, shall not be seen through the Glass by the Eye at o. Vid. Schol
Prop. XLVI. Gregorii Opt. Promot.

Corollary.
Hence it follows, That the further the Eye is removed from the Distinct Base,
it perceives the greater Area of the Object; but can never see more than what
is projected in the Breadth of the Glass; that is, z r can never be greater
than g l, nor ever equal thereto, unless the Eye o be at an infinite Distance.

PROP. XLI.
An Object being placed nigher a Unequal Glass than its Focus, and the Eye on
the other side the Glass, at any Distance within the Eyes power, sees this Object
Distinct and Erect.

I say, Within the Eye's Power; for it is shown before in Prop. VII. and VIII.
That when an Object is placed nigher a Unequal Glass than its Focus, the Rays
from each Point thereof, after passing the Glass, do Diverge, but not so much
as if the Glass were away. Wherefore, tho the Eye looking at an Object within
the Focus of this Glass, may be nigher the Object, than if the Glass were away,
and yet see it distinctly; yet there is a mean to be observed; for even with
the Glass it self the Eye may be too nigh the Object, and not able to correct
the Divergence of the Rays it receives.

But that an Object thus posited appears Distinct to the Eye at a convenient
Distance, is manifest; for the Rays from each Point proceed moderately
Diverging, and so fall on the Eye. Prop. XXVIII. Sec. 7.

That an Object thus posited is seen Erect, is evident from Prop. XXXII. and
XXXIX.

PROP. XLII.
To determine the Visible Area, and the Optick-Angle or Apparent Magnitude of
an Object placed as in the last, from these Data, The Power or Focal Length of
the Glass, The Distance of the Object from the Glass, The Distance of the Eye
from the Glass, and the Breadth of the Glass.

Tab. 31. Fig. 1. and 2. Tab. 32. Fig. 1, 2.
a b is an Object exposed to the Glass g l, nigher to it than its Focus. o is
the Eye, which in F i g. 1. is supposed nigher the Glass than its Focus; and
this is the First Case. But in Fig. 2. the Eye o is supposed further from the
Glass than its Focus; and this is the Second Case. It Is shown before ( Prop. V.
VIII.), how the Respective and Imaginary Foci f are determined in one and
the other Case.

First let the given Breadth of the Glass be g l. By Prop. XXXV. we determine
the Visible Area z y. Let us then suppose the given Breadth of the Glass to be
p q. By the same Prop. XXXV. we determine the Visible Area e d.

As to the Optick-Angles g o l (supposing the Object z y) or p o q (supposing
the Object e d) they are determined from the Data, by Plain Trigonometry of
Right-angled Triangles, as before in Prop. XXXIV.

And we shall find by Calculation (as indeed it is evident by the very
Inspection and Consideration of the Schemes), that the Collateral Parts z e, d
y, of the Object z y, are much more magnifid (in respect of their Natural
Appearance) by Broad Glasses formed on small Spheres, than the Middle Parts e
x, d x; for the Angle g o p is the Optick-Angle, through the Glass, of the Part
z e; and the Angle p o s is the Optick-Angle, through the Glass, of the Part e
x; but the former exceeds the Natural Optick-Angle much more than the latter.
As to the Natural Optick-Angle of the Object z x, were the Glass away; draw z o
directly ( Fig. 1.), then in the Right-angled Triangle z x o, we have z x and x
o to find the Angle z o x, which is the Natural Optick-Angle of the Object z x.

From hence it is, that by Broad Glasses formed on small Spheres, the Extreme
Parts of strait Objects, seem to be incurved and bent; as is manifest in the
Case of the Micrometer, or Lattic^e of fine Hairs, strained before the Eye
Glass in a Telescope, for Measuring the Diameters of Objects. As Pere Cherubin
complains in his Dioptrique Oculair. Part. III. Sec. 7. Chap. 1. page 239. but
understood not the reason. Of this we may make Experiment, by looking with a
very Unequal Glass at two Parallel Lines drawn pretty close on a Paper.

Schol. 1.
If instead of the Glasses Breadth, we have the Breadth of the Object e d
given, we may easily determine the Breadth of the Glass, through which this
Portion of the Object is seen: For from the Point f, draw f e, f d, these
intersect the Glass in p, q. I say this is the Portion of the Glass, through
which e d is visible. And if the Line f m, being produced, do not fall on the
Glass, the Point m in the Object is not visible through the Glass g l to the
Eye at o.

Schol. 2.
This XLII. Proposition, as it relates to the Optick-Angle, may be solved an
other way by Determining the Locus Objecti. But then, to the former Data in
that Proposition, instead of the Glasses Breadth, we must add the Breadth of
the Object.

Wherefore, Tab. 31. Fig. 3. T. 32. F. 1.
Let the Locus of the Object a b c be determined d e f, by Prop. XXXI. Sec. 7.
Let the Eye be at o, draw d o, f o directly; if the Right Line do do not fall
on the Glass, the Eye at o cannot perceive through the Glass the Point of the
Object a (Vid. Prop. XXXVII. Sec. 4. Prop. XL. Sec. 4. and Schol. Prop. XLVI.
Gregorii Opt. Promot.). But if d o, f o, fall on the Glass; I say the Angle d o
f is the Angle under which the Object a b c appears to the Eye at o through the
Glass. For the Object a b c is seen through the Glass under the same Angle, as
the Image d e f would be seen without the Glass (by Prop. XXXI. Sec. 7.). Now
because we have a b and b z given, and e z found, we may find also e d; for b
z: b a:: e z: e d. Then in the Right-angled Triangle d o e, we have d e and e o
(= e z + z o) to find the Angle d o e = d o f. Draw then a o directly; the
Angle a o b is the Natural Optick-Angle, under which the Object a b would
appear to the Eye without the Glass. Now having a b and b o (= b z + z o) we
may find the Angle a o b; the Difference between which and the Angle d o e
(that is d o a) shows how much the Objects is magnified by the Glass.

I. Example of the First Case computed by the Method in Prop. XLII. Tab. 31.
Fig. 1. T. 31. F. 1

Data.
Glasses Focus = -- 4637 Did. of the Eye from the Glass = s o = 2500 Did. of
the Obj. from the Glass = s x = 2721 Breadth of the Glass = g l = s g = 145
Quaesita.
Visible Area = z x =? Optick-Angle = g o s =?
First supposing the Point o Radiating Point,

By Prop. VIII. As Focus Glass -- s o: to Foc. Glass:: s o: f s

That is in Numbers 2137: 4637:: 2500: 5425

Then -- f s: s g:: f x (= f s + s x): z x

That is 5425: 145:: 8146: 217 = x z the Visible Area in this Case according to
the Data.

Secondly, To find the Optick-Angle g o s, under which this z x = 217, appears;
say,

s o: Rad.:: s g: Tang. g o s = 3 19' 10".

The foregoing Example calculated according to Schol. 2. Prop. XLII. But the
Letters refer to Tab. 31. Fig. 3. T. 31. F. 3.


Data.
Glasses Focus = -- 4637 Did. of the Eye from the Gl. = z o = 2500 Did. of
the Obj. from the Gl. = z b = 2721 Breadth of the Object = -- a b = 217
Quaesita.
Distance of the Imaginary Focus z e =? Breadth of the Imaginary Focus = d e =?
Optick-Angle -- d o e =?
First, Supposing the Point b a Radiating Point, to determine the Imaginary
focus at e, by Prop. VIII. we must say,

As Focus Glass -- z b: Focus Glass:: z b: z e

That is in Numbers 1916: 4637:: 2721: 6585

Then by Pr. 2. 6. Eucl. z b: b a:: z e: e d

That is in Numb. 2721: 217:: 6585: 525

Lastly, As e o (= z e + z o): Rad.:: c e: Tang. d o e = 3 18' 30", which wants
only 40^ Seconds of the former Calculation, by reason of the neglect of the
Fractions.

II Example of the Second Case calculated according to Prop. XLII. Tab. 31.
Fig. 2. T. 31. F 2

Data.
Glasses Focus = -- 4637 Did. of the Eye from the Glass = s o = 5000 Did. of
the Obj. from the Glass = s x = 2721 Breadth of the Glass = g l = s g = 145
Quaesita.
Visible Area = -- z x =? Optick-Angle = -- g o s =?
First, Supposing the point o a Radiating Point, Then by Prop. V.

As s o -- Foc. of the Gl.: Foc. of the Gl.:: s o: f s

That is in Numbers 363: 4637: 5000: 63870

Then -- f s: s g:: f x (= f s - s x): z x

That is in Numbers 63870: 145:: 61149: 138, being the Visible Area in this
Case, according to the Data.

Secondly, To find the Optick-Angle g o s, under which this z x = 138 appears;
say,

As so: Rad.:: s g: Tang. g o s = 1 39' 40"

The foregoing II. Example calculated according to the Solution in Schol. 2.
Pr. XLII. The Letters relate to Tab. 31. F. 3. T 31. F. 3.


Data.
Glasses Focus = 4637 Did. of the Eye from the Glass = z o = 5000 Did. of the
Obj. from the Glass = z b = 2721 Breadth of the Object = -- a b = 138
Quaesita.
Distance of the Imaginary Focus = z e Breadth of the Imaginary Focus = d e
Optick-Angle through the Glass = d o e
Let us suppose the Point b a Radiating Point. To determine the Imaginary Focus
at e, by Prop. VIII. say,

As Foc. of the Glass -- z b: Foc. of the Gl.:: z b: z e

That is in Numbers 1916: 4637:: 2721: 6585

Then z b: b a:: z e: e d

That is in Numbers 2721: 138:: 6585: 334

Lastly, As e o (= z e + z o): Rad.:: d e: Tang. d o e = = 1 39' 0", which by
reason of the neglect of Fractions wants 40" Seconds of the foregoing
Calculation.

Of CONCAVES.
I Now proceed to the Confideration of Vision through Concave Glasses.

PROP. XLIII.
All Objects seen through Concave Glasses appear Erect and Diminished.

That the Object shall appear Erect is manifest; for it is before ( Prop. XXXIX.
Sec. 3.) laid down as a General Rule, That where the Object, or Image that is
next before the Eye, is Erect, the Eye shall perceive the Object Erect; and
where Inverted, the Eye sees it Inverted: But Concaves have no Distinct Base
(as Convexes have) wherein they represent the Image of the Object Inverted, and
consequently, wherever the Eye is placed behind a Concave Glass, it shall
perceive the Object through it, in its Natural Posture. That Concaves have no
Real Distinct Base, is most plain from the Doctrine that foregoes relating to
them: For a Distinct Base is caused by the Collection of the Rays proceeding
from a single Point in the Object, into a single Point in the Representation;
but Concave-Glasses do not unite, but scatter and dissipate the Rays. It Is true
indeed, a Convex-Glass may cause a Distinct Base, notwithstanding a Concave
placed behind it or before it (as we see in Prop. XV. XVII, XVIII.); but then
this Distinct Base proceeds not from the Concave, but from the Unequal: For the
Concave exerts its scattering power even in this Case; and it protracts the
Uniting of the Rays to a greater Distance from the Unequal, as in manifest from
the forecited Propositions.

I say also, The Appearance of Objects through Concaves is diminish^d. Tab. 32.
Fig. 1. T 32 F. 1.
a x b is an Object, o the Eye. Draw a e o, b d o, directly strait from the
Extremities of the Object to the Eye. The Angle comprised by the direct Rays a
e o, b d o, that is, the Angle a o b is the Natural Optick-Angle. Let now the
Concave-Glass c f be interposed; here, because the Rays a e, b d, would
naturally concur at o, now the Concave-Glass is interposed, their Concourse
shall be protracted beyond o; wherefore the Eye at o shall not perceive the
Extremities a, b, of the Object through the Glass by the Rays a e, b d, but by
some other Rays, and these other Rays must either fall without (that is farther
from the Axis o x, than) a e, b d, or they must fall within a e, b d: But they
cannot fall without a e, b d; for if a e, b d, themselves be made by the Glass
to concur beyond the Eye at o, much more shall the Concourse of any other Rays
that fall without a e, b d, be protracted beyond o; and consequently they
cannot convey the Appearance of the Extreme Points a, b, to the Eye at o.
Wherefore it remains, that the Rays that do this, must fall within ae, bd. Let
us suppose these Rays to be a c, b f, which in their Natural direct Course,
would concur at q, but by the Refractive Power of the Concave, are bent and
made to proceed in c o, f o, their Concourse being protracted till they arrive
at the Eye in o. Here the Optick-Angle through the Glass is c o f, which is
less than the Natural Optick-Angle a o b, and consequently the Appearance of
the Object is diminished. Which was to be proved.

PROP. XLIV.
Concerning the Distinct and Confused Appearance of Objects through Concaves;
as also of their Faint or Obscure Appearance.

We are here to remember what before is laid down, concerning the Virtual Focus
of a Concave exposed to Parallel or to Diverging Rays (in Prop. XI, XII, XIII.
and Corol. Prop. XV.). We are likewise to take notice, that in Plain Vision,
when the Rays from any single Point in an Object do not Diverge more that what
the Refractive Power of the Coats and Humors of the Eye can correct; so that
these Rays may be brought together in a Correspondent Point on the Retina; then
the Appearance of that Point is Distinct. For instance, Tab. 32, F. 2. T. 32.
F. 2.
Let the Point a diffuse the Rays a b, a s, a r, a c. Suppose the Breadth of
the Pupil were p q, and the Eye there placed; perhaps the Refractive Power of
the eye is not sufficient to correct the Divergence of the Rays a p b, a q c.
But if the Pupil (continuing of the same Breadth) recede to r s, then only the
Rays a s, a r, fall into it; and these perhaps may be reduced by the Eye to
determine in a Point on the Retina; because they do not Diverge so much as the
former. If therefore we suppose the Pupil in its former station at p q, but now
only to be of the Breadth i d, so as to admit only the Rays a d s, a i r, then
the Point a may be seen as distinctly as at r s. This manifest even by
Experiment; for apply a Minute Object so near the Eye, that it appears very
confused; then place before the Eye a very small Hole made with a Pins end in a
Paper; The Object shall now appear Distinct. For the Hole in the Paper serves
to make the Pupil more Narrow. Which evidently proves what we have laid down.

The same may be shown concerning Vision through a Concave Glass Tab. 32. f.
3. T. 32. F. 3.
a is a Radiating Point, whose Rays a b, a c, fall on the Concave b c. These
after passing the Glass Diverge more than before. Let p q be the Breadth of the
Pupil, receiving the refracted Rays a p, a q, These Diverge so much, that it is
not in the power of the Eye to reduce them, and form them into an inward Cone,
determining its Apex on the Fund of the Eye. But let the Pupil continue of the
same Breadth, and recede to r s, where it may only receive the Rays a d s, a i
r; and then perhaps the Eye may prevail to reduce these; because they do not
Diverge so much as the other Rays that fell on the Pupil at p q. Or otherwise,
let the Pupil continue at p q, But let its Breadth be contracted to d i; so
that it may receive no more Rays in this Posture, than (continuing of its
natural Breadth) at r s. Here likewise the Appearance of the Point a may be
Distinct. Of this likewise we may make a most convincing Experiment: For take a
Concave of a small Sphere, and place it very near the Eye, and the Appearance
of distant Objects through it is Confus^d. Remove it farther from the Eye, and
the Appearance shall be more Distinct. But even in a Posture where the
Appearance is Confused, contract the Pupil by placing before it a small Hole
Prick^d in a Paper, And the Object shall appear more Distinct, though Obscure,
which upon the removal of Hole, shall be again Confused, though more Lightsome.
Vid. Kepleri Dioptr. Prop. C.

Wherefore if we have the Distance of a Radiating Point from a Concave, and the
virtual Focus of the Concave, and the Distance of the Eye behind the Glass; we
may easily by the foregoing Rules ( viz. Corol. Prop. XV.) find the virtual
Focus of these Rays. As suppose in the same Fig^ the Rays flowing from a, after
passing the Glass, Diverge as if they came directly from z. And consequently,
if in Plain Vision the Eye at r s be able to see distinctly the Point a, if it
were removed nigher, as at z, then it shall be able to see the Point a
distinctly through the Glass. But whether any Particular Eye be able to do
this, is impossible to be known by Rule; The Strength and Weakness of Men's Eyes
being infinitely various. And therefore one Man may see a Point at a certain
Distance distinctly through a Glass, which Glass to another Man would render it
Confused; As it is Plain in the Case of Myopes, or Short-sighted Persons.

As to the Strong or Faint Appearance of Objects through Concaves; Because the
Concave ( Tab. 32. f. 3.) T. 32. F. 3.
scatters the Rays flowing from the Point a, insomuch that now the Rays a b, a
c, escape the Pupil p q, the Point a shall appear more Faint through the Glass
than naturally. For Strong or very Luminous Virsion proceeds from a greater
Quantity of Rays or Light entering the Pupil; And Faint or Obsure Vision from a
less Quantity of Rays.

Scholium.
We may here consider the different Effects of Unequal and Concave Glasses. For
when a Point appears Confused through a Unequal, it is by Reason of the Too great
Convergence of the Rays that fall on the Eye. And therefore, Because the
farther from the Glass toward the Point of Concourse the Rays that fall on the
Eye Converge the more; the Appearance is through Them still the more Confused.

But in Concaves; Because the Confused Appearance of a Point proceeds from the
Too great Divergence of those Rays that fall on the Eye; and because the
farther the Eye is from the Glass, the Rays that fall on the Eye Diverge less
than those that fell upon it when it was nigher the Glass; Therefore through
Concaves, the farther the Eye is from the Glass, the more Distinct is the
Appearance, but still more Faint:

PROB. XLV.
Concerning the Apparent Place of Objects seen through Concave Glasses.

Tab. 32. f. 4. T. 32. F. 4.
If the Point a Radiate on the Concave Glass c d, and the Rays after passing
the Glass Diverge as if they came directly from the Point b. And the Eye e g
receive all or part of the Rays, and there by perceive the Radiating Point a,
the Point b is the Locus Apparens of the Point a. That is, the Point a is seen
by the Eye, as if it were at b.

By which we may Observe, that the Apparent Place of Objects seen through
Concaves is brought nigher the Eye. And hence it is manifest, why they help
their Eyes, who are short-sighted, or can only see nigh Objects. For these
Glasses make distant Objects seem nigh. Vid. Dechales Dioptr. Lib. 2. Prop.
XXXIX.

Here also by the way we shall Note, That suppose a Purblind Person, that can
Read distinctly or see Objects at the distance of a foot from his naked Eye: A
Concave Glass, whose virtual Focus is a Foot distant from it, makes such a
Person see distant Objects distinctly. Wherefore knowing the Distance at which
a Purblind Person Reads distinctly, it is easy to assign him a proper Glass for
his Eye, to see distant Objects. Vid. second Part. C. 3.

Tab. 32. f. 5. T. 32. F. 5.
Is in all things Correspondent to the Doctrine laid down in Prop. XXXI. Sec.
7. and marked with the same Letters; so that the very Words of that Section may
be applied to the Concave, as well as to the Unequal. Only the Imaginary Focus e
for the Concave is to be determined by Prop. XI, XII, XIII. XV. and Corol.
Prop. XV. etc. I shall not therefore, Repeat, but refer to that Section.

PROP. XLVI. PROBL.
To determine the visible Area, and the Optic Angle or Apparent Magnitude of
an Object seen through a Concave from these Data; The Power or Focal Length of
the Glass; The Distance of the Object from the Glass; The Distance of the Eye
from the Glass, and the Breadth of the Glass.

Tab. 33. f. 1. T. 33. F. 1.
g z l is a Concave Glass, whole virtual Focus is given. Likewise g z the half
Breadth of the Glass is given also. a b c is an Object, whose Distance from the
Glass b z is given. And the Distance of the Eye o from the Glass, o z, is also
given.

Let us now conceive the Point o an Object or nigh Radiating Point, sending its
Rays o g, o z, o l, on the Concave Glass; These (by the foregoing Doctrine of
Concaves) after passing the Glass Diverge more than before their Entrance, and
proceed in g a, l c, as if they came directly from a certain Point f. This
Point f or the Line f z, is easily determind by Prop. XI, XII, XIII. XV. and
Corol. thereof. Wherefore having f z, we may say, As f z: z g:: f b (= f z + z
b) b a. Which is half the Visible Area.

As to the Optic Angle through the Glass, g o z, it is easily obtain^d in the
right-angled Triangle g o z, having g z and z o.

Draw a o directly, The Angle a o b is the natural Optic Angle, under which
the Object would appear to the Eye, were the Glass removed; This we obtain in
the right-angled Triangle a b o by having a b and b o = b z + z o.

Scholium 1.
If instead of the Glasses Breadth, we have given the Breadth of the Object a b
c (Tab. 33. f. 2.) T. 33. F. 2.
We may easily determine the Portion of the Glass through which this Object is
seen. For from the Point f, draw f a, f c, These Intersect the Glass in g l; I
say g l is the Portion of the Glass, through which the Object a c is visible.

And if the Line f m being drawn do not fall on the Glass, the Point m in the
Object is not visible through the Glass to the Eye at o.

Scholium 2.
The foregoing Problem, as it relates to the Optic Angle, may be solved
another way by determining the Locus Objecti. But then to the former Da^a,
instead of the Breadth of the Glass, we cannot add the Breadth of the Object.

This is Evident from Tab. 32. f. 5. T. 32. F. 5.
To which we may apply the Words of the Second Scholium, Prop. XLII. without
further Repetition.

Example of a Calculation according to Prop. XLVI. applied to Tab. 33. f. 1. T.
33. F. 1.
Data.
Focus of the Glass = -- 4573. Breadth of the Glass = g z = 500 Distance of the
Object = b z = 10000 Distance of the Eye = z o = 20000
Quaesit.
Half the Visible Area = a b =? Half Optic Angle = g o z =?


First by Corol. Prop. XV. z o+ F o. Glass: z o:: F o. G l: z f

That is in Numbers -- 24573: 20000:: 4573: 3722.

Then -- z f: g z:: b f (= b z + z f): a b

That is in Numbers 3722: 500:: 13722: 1843.

Lastly in the right-angled Triangle g o z, as z o: Rad:: g z: Tang. goz = 1
25' 50".

Example Calculated according to the Method Proposed in this Second Schol.
Prop. XLVI. but the Letters refer to Tab. 32. f 5. T. 32. F. 5.


Data.
Focus of the Glass = -- 4573. Distance of the Object = b z = -- 10000 Distance
of the Eye = z o = -- 20000 Half Breadth of the Object as Found in the forgoing
Example = a b = 1843
First by Corol. Prop. XV. b z + Gl. Focus: b z:: Gl. Fo: z e

That is in Numbers 14573: 10000:: 4573: 3138

Then -- z b: b a:: z e: e d

That is in Numbers -- 10000: 1843:: 3138: 578.

Lastly in the right-angled Triangle d e o, as o e (= o z + z e = 23138): Rad::
e d: Tang. d o e = 1 25' 50". agreeable to what was found by the immediately
preceding Calculation.

I shall now show, how by this Method of Demonstrating the Properties, Effects,
and Appearances of Glasses; Some of the noted Propositions in Dioptrick Writers
may be easily proved. In which the Authors have been very Operose, and in some
very Obscure. And because I will not interrupt the Series of my Propositions, I
shall give them in the following Order.

PROP. XLVII.
The further the Eye is removed from the Concave Glass, the Object appears the
less. Zahn Telescop: Fund. 2. Synt. 2. Cap. 5. Prop. XXIII. Dechales Dioptr.
Lib. 2. Prop. LII.

This is manifest from Tab. 32. f. 5. T. 32. F. 5.
For we are to Consider the Image d e f, in the virtual Focus, as the Object,
and as looked at without the Glass. For the Lines d o, f o, which determine the
Optic Angle, are drawn directly to the Eye at o. Wherefore if we conceive the
Eye o removed farther from the Glass; the Angle d o f must needs decrease, and
consequently the Object appear less. What is here said of the Concave may be
applied to the Unequal in Tab. 31. f. 3. ^. 31. F. 3.


PROP. XLVIII.
If a Concave Glass be removed from the Eye, so large an Area or space of the
Object cannot be seen through it.

This is the 97 th Prop. of Kepler's Dioptricks. Wherein he seems to make no
Distinction between removing the Glass from the Eye, and removing the Eye from
the Glass. Whereas there is a very great Difference between both Motions to be
considered in Dioptricks. For in moving the Glass from the Eye, the Glass
Approaches the Object, and the Locus Apparens Objecti is changed. But in moving
the Eye to or from the Glass, the Locus Apparens Objecti never alters. Prop.
XXXI. Sec. 7. And from his Proof of this Proposition it is manifest, that he
should have expressed it thus,

If the Eye be removed from a Concave, so large a space of the Object cannot be
seen through it.

Wherefore instead of the foregoing 48 th. Proposition, I substitute this;
Which is Evident by our foregoing Method from Tab. 33. f. 3. T. 33. F. 3.
Wherein a b c is an Object, g l a Concave Glass, o the Eye nigh the Glass, e
Eye more Distant from the Glass. Let the Point of Divergence, answering to the
Station at o, be f (determined by the foregoing Doctrine): draw f g a, f l c,
directly; the space visible at o is a c. Now, when the Eye is removed from the
Glass to e, the Point of Divergence shall also be removed from the Glass, and
determined by what foregoes, as suppose at q (till the Eye be at an infinite
Distance, and then the Point of Divergence is as far from the Glass as it is
possible, viz. in the virtual Focus): draw q g n, q l m, directly; The space
visible at e is n m less than a c. Which was to be Demonstrated.

Or otherwise. Tab. 34. f. 1. T 43. F. 1.
d e f is the Locus Apparens Objecti abc through the Glass g l; the Eye is at
o; o g, o l produced directly meet the Image in the Points d, f. Wherefore
exactly the whole Object a b c, and no more, is seen through the Glass g l by
the Eye at o. Let the Eye be removed to q; If we draw q d, q f, these fall not
on the Glass, and consequently the Extremities of the Object a and c shall not
be perceived by the Eye at q through the Glass. ( Schol. 1. Prop. XLVI.) Draw
therefore q g, q l, and produce them directly to n and m; the Points in the
Object y x, answerable to the Points n, m, are the utmost Extremities visible
through the Glass g l to the Eye at q. Which Point y, x, are e^sily
determinable by what is laid down Prop. XL. Sec. 3. For from the Center of the
Glass z, draw z n y, z m x, directly; y, x, are hereby determined.

As to this 48 th. Prop. VIZ. That if a Concave Glass be removed from the Eye,
so large an Area or space of the Object cannot be seen through it. It Is
needless to enlarge thereon, after our 46 th. Prop..

PROP. XLIX.
The farther a Concave Glass is removed from the Eye, The Obj^^^s are thereby
the more diminish^d, as long as the Glass continu^s nigher to the Eye than to
the Object,

This is the 98 th. Prop. of Kepler's Dioptricks. We may find it also, In
Cherubin's La Dioptrique Oculaire page 77. Dechales Dioptrica Lib. 2. Prop.
XXXVIII. Herigonii Dioptr. Prop. XXXI. But in all of them obscurely and loosely
proved.

The Proposition is universally True, as well in Unequal as Concave Glasses,
only with this Restriction in the Unequal, That the Object is to be nigher the
Glass, than the Glasses Focal Length. And then we may express the Proposition
universally thus,

A Convex-Glass being equally Distant from the Eye and from the Object, renders
the Appearance the most Magnified; and a Concave the most Diminished, that That
Distance of Eye and Object will allow.

For the Proof hereof I need offer no more than the following Calculations
(instituted according to the Doctrine Precedent) wherein we shall find ( Tab.
31. f. 3. and Tab. 32. f. 5.) T. 31. F. 5. T. 32. F. 5.
the Angle d o e, (which is the Angle under which the Object appears through
the Glass) in the second Case (wherein the Glass is equally Distant from the
Eye and Object) to be greater for the Unequal, and less for the Concave, than
the same Angle in either of the other Cases.

And by the same Calculations we may likewise observe in the first and third
Cases, That when the Glass is equally removed from the middle toward the Eye,
or toward the Object, the Appearance is equally magnified by the Unequal, and
diminished by the Concave; for we find in the first and third Cases, the Angles
d o e equal.

I say, this may be sufficient for the Proof of the foregoing Position. But to
this I shall add also this farther Consideration. That by the preceding
Doctrine, the magnified Appearances of Objects through Convexes, and their
diminished Appearances through Concaves, being deduced from the Loci Apparentes
of Objects through those Glasses. We may easily conceive, That supposing the
Convex-Glass g l (Tab. 34. f. 2. T. 34. F. 2.
) or Concave g l (Tab. 34. f. 3. T. 34 F. 3.
) to touch the Eye o, and that the Apparent Place of the Object a b c is d e f.
The Eye perceives the Object under its own Natural Optick-Angle, neither
magnified or diminished by one or t other Glass.

Likewise if, in the same Figures, we conceive the Glasses (which are still
supposed of the least thickness imaginable) to touch the Objects, the Object
and Locus Apparens thereof are the same; and consequently, the Optick-Angle in
this Posture can neither be increased or diminished by either of the Glasses.

Wherefore it remains, that seeing the Glasses do not at all Exert their
Effects in either of the Extremes, that is, either touching the Eye, or
touching the Object: And seeing they Exert their Effects equally being equally
removed from the middle z between the Eye and the Object; It will follow, that
they Exert their Effects most powerfully being placed just in the middle z
between the Eye and Object, that is, the Unequal by Magnifying, and the Concave
by Diminishing the Appearance.

And thus much shall suffice concerning single Glasses applied to the Eye. Here
follow the Calculations.
Calculation for the UNEQUAL Tab. 31. F. 3. T. 31. F. 3.
Focus of the Glass = 10, 000 Breadth of the Object = a b = 1*000 Given the
same in all the Cases. First Case. Second Case. Third Case. Wherein the
Distance between the Eye and the Glass o z is given greater than the Distance
between the Object and Glass b z Wherein the Glass is equally distant from the
Eye and Object, that is b z = o z* Wherein the Distance between the Eye and the
Glass o z is given less than the Distance between the Object and the Glass b z
Data
b z = 3,000 o z = 9,000
Data
b z = 6,000 o z = 6,000
Data
b z = 9,000 o z = 3,000
-- -- -- z e = 4, 286 z e = 15,000 z e = 90,000 e d = 1, 429 e d = 2, 500 e d
= 10,000 o e = o z + z e = 13, 286 o e = o z + z e = 21,000 o e = o z + z e =
9^,000 d o e = 6 8' 15".. d o e = 6 47' 202.. d o e = 6 8' 15".

Calculation for the CONCAVET Tab. 32. F. 5. T. 32. F. 5.
Focus of the Glass = 10,000 Breadth of the Object = a b = 1,000 Given the same
in all the Cases. First Case. Second Case. Third Case. Wherein the Distance
between the Eye and the Glass o z is given greater than the Distance between
the Object and the Glass b z. Wherein the Glass is equally Distant from the Eye
and Object, that is, b z = z o Wherein the Distance between the Eye and the
Glass o z is given less than the Distance between the Object and Glass b z. Data
b z = 3,000 o z = 9,000
Data
b z = 6,000 o z = 6,000
Data
b z = 9,000 o z = 3,000
-- -- -- z e = 2,308 z e = 3,750 z e = 4,737 e d = 0,769 e d = 0,625 e d =
0,526 o e = o z + z e = 11,308 o e = o z + z e = 9,750 o e = o z + z e = 7,737.
d o e = 3 53' 20".. d o e = 3 40' 0".. d o e = 3 53' 20".

Hitherto we have Treated of single Convexes and Concaves, applied to the Eye.
I proceed now to the Combination of Convexes with Convexes, and Convexes with
Concaves; Wherein the Properties, Effects, and Appearances of Telescopes, and
Microscopes, of all kinds shall be declared.

Definitions.
The Object-Glass is the Glass next the Object.

The Eye-Glass, simply so called, is the Glass immediately next the Eye. But if
there be more than one, the first Eye-Glass is that next the Object-Glass; the
second is that next the first, etc.

PROP. L.
The Telescope, consisting of a Unequal Object-Glass and a Unequal Eye-Glass of a
less Sphere or greater Convexity, is explained.

Tab. 35. f. 1. T. 35. F. 1.
Let there be a Distant Object such as A B C; From whose highest Point A let
the Rays a a a, marked by the long Pricks, proceed. And from the middle Point
B, let the Rays expressed by the continued Lines b b b, proceed. And from its
lower Point C, the Rays marked by the round Pricks c c c. And so Rays from all
the other Points in the Object. These falling on the Object-Glass x y z, are
formed thereby into the Distinct Base f e d. Let now the Eye-Glass g h l be
placed as far distant from this Distinct Base f e d, as is the Focus of this
Eye-Glass, that is; Let e h be the Focal length of the Eye-Glass g h l (And
consequently the Distance of the Glasses y h is the Aggregate of both their
Focal lengths) And let the Eye o be placed as far distant (or rather a little
more distant) from the Eye-Glass g h l as is the Focal length of the same
Eye-Glass. I say the Eye shall perceive the Object ABC, Distinct, Magnified,
and Inverted.

First, I say the Object is seen distinctly. For the Rays from each Point,
being made by the Object-Glass to Converge toward the Distinct Base, proceed
forward from the Distinct Base Diverging, and so fall on the Eye-Glass. Thus
the Rays b x, b y, b z, from the middle Point of the Object B* are made to
Converge into x e, y e, z e; And crossing at e, they flow forward, and fall on
the Eye-Glass about h Diverging. Wherefore the Point e being now in the Focus
of the Eye-Glass, the Rays that flow from it upon the Eye-Glass, after passing
the Eye-Glass become parallel ( Prop. VI.) and fall so on the Eye at o; By
whose Coats and Humors they are refracted and brought together on the Point s
on the Retina (Prop. XXVIII. Sec. 7.) there painting the lively Image of the
Point B in the Object.

Secondly, In like manner may we conceive the Representation of the Collateral
Points: thus the Rays a x, a y, a z, proceeding from the upper Point A of the
Object, are by the Object-Glass x y z made to Converge toward the Distinct
Base in d; From whence flowing forward they fall Diverging on the Eye- Glass at
l; by which they are made to run parallel amongst themselves, and are bent
toward the Focus at o; where falling on the Pupil parallel, they are by the
Eye refracted and brought together in the Point r on the Retina. There
paintting the Representing of the Point A in the Object.

Thirdly, That the Rays flowing Diverging from each particular Point in the
Distinct Base f e d are brought by the Eye-Glass to a Parallelism amongst
themselves, is manifest from Prop. VI. And that the Rays from f, from e, and
from d, are mixed and confused by the Eye-Glass in its Focus at o (or
thereabouts) is manifest from hence, that we may conceive one Ray in the Cone
of Rays g f, or in the Cone of Rays z f x, that runs parallel to the Axis y e h
o s, or at least that would run so parallel, if the Breadth of the Object-Glass
in respect of the Breadth of the Eye-Glass will permit. This Ray, I say, by the
known Properties of the Unequal Eye-Glass, shall be refracted into its Focus at
o; and all the other Rays of the same Cone f g, after passing the Eye-Glass,
shall be refracted and made to proceed parallel to that single Ray, that is
bent into the Focus o, because the Point f is supposed in the other Focus of the
Eye-Glass. Wherefore the Rays from all the Points in the Distinct Base are
confounded together about the Focus of the Eye-Glass.

Fourthly, Or otherwise I shall explain this matter thus; If we conceive y, a
Radiating Point, sending forth the Rays y g, y b, y l: And the difference
between the Focal length of the Object-Glass and Focal length of the Eye-Glass
to be very great (as suppose the Object-Glass to be twelve Foot, and the Eye-
Glass three Inches) we shall find by Prop. V. the Point o, where the Rays g o,
l o, cross the Axis or Perpendicular Ray h o, to be very nigh the Focus of the
Eye-Glass ( viz. in our Supposition h o shall be 3,063 Inches) and let the
Focal lengths of the Object-Glass and Eye-Glass bear whatever Proportion, the
Point o, where g o, l o, shall cross h o, may be determined by Prop. V. But
then indeed the Rays that fall on the Eye without g o, or within it, do cross
the Perpendicular Ray h o, farther from the Eye-Glass, or nigher to the
Eye-Glass than g o it self; For they do not proceed from the same Point y; And
g o is only the Refraction of the Ray y g. And therefore, unless the difference
between the Focal lengths of the Object-Glass and Eye- Glass be Considerable,
the Eye may move considerably nigher to the Eye-Glass, or farther from the
Eye-Glass than the Point o, and not perceive any Alteration in the Appearance
of the Object. But if the said Difference be Considerable, (as it always is in
Telescopes) the Eye can move but very little either farther from or nigher to
the Eye-Glass than o, but it shall perceive a great Alteration in the
Appearance (that is, in the Visible Area) of the Object. As shall be manifested
more plainly hereafter.

From all which it appears, That the Pupil of the Eye at o, being in the place
of the greatest Confusion, where the Rays from all Points in the Object are
mixed together, and the Rays from each single Point fall parallel amongst
themselves; The Appearance of the Object must needs be Distinct. By Prop.
XXVIII. Sec. 3.

Fifthly, I say likewise the Object is magnified. If the naked Eye were in the
place of the Object-Glass at y (Tab. 35. f. 2.) T. 35. F. 2.
the Object would appear to it under the Angle a y c = f y d. That is, the
Object would appear to the Eye at y, under the same Angle as the Distinct Base
f e d, were it an Object, would appear to the same Eye at y. Wherefore let us
now consider the Distinct Base f e d as the Object. This appears to the Eye at
o through the Eye-Glass under the same Angle g o l, as were the naked Eye
viewing it at h, by Prop. XXXIII. Make ^ q equal to e h, and draw h f, h d, and
q f, q d. The Angle f h d by Prop. XXXIV. is equal to g o l, the Optick-Angle
through the Telescope, and the same Angle f h d is equal to f q d. But f q d is
much greater than f y d = a y c the Natural Optick-Angle to the Eye supposed at
y. and yet much greater than the Natural Optick-Angle would be to the Eye at o.
Because o is yet further from the outward real Object than y by the whole
length of the Telescope. Wherefore the Object is Magnified.

Lastly, I say the Object appears Inverted. This is manifest from the very
Scheme ( Tab. 35. f. 1. T. 35. F. 1.
) without farther Explication. For the Object is Inverted in the Distinct Base,
and the Eye-Glass does not return it again before it arrive at the Eye, but
it is painted on the Retina r s t Erect; wherefore by Prop. XXXVIII. Sec. 4, 5.
the Object appears Inverted. See also Prop. XXXIX. Sec. 4, 5.

Scholium.
The Locus Apparens of an Object through this Glass is the Distinct Base f e d
(Prop. XXXI.) as is manifest from this Experiment. Stretch an Hair exactly in
this Distinct Base, it shall appear as it were fixed to the very Object. Vid.
Chap. 5. Sec. 3. of the Second Part.

PROP. LI. LEMMA.
If the Eye directly appraoch to or recede from an Object; it shall be, as the
Tangent of the Semioptick-Angle of one Station: to the Tangent of the
Semioptick-Angle of the other Station:: So (reciprocally) the Distance of the Eye
from the Object in this latter Station: to the Distance of the Eye from the
Object in the Former Station.

Tab. 35. f. 3. T. 32. F. 3.
Let a b c be an Object, from whose middle Point c erect c e Perpendicular to a
b. Let the first Station of the Eye be at e, and its second Station at d; and
draw a d, a e; I say therefore, As c e: to c d:: so Tangent of the Angle a d c:
to the Tangent of the Angle a e c.

Demonstration.
Produce c a infinitely toward z, draw e z parallel to a d. The Angle z e c is
equal to the Angle a d c (29. 1. Eucl.) then e c being put Radius, z c is the
Tangent of the Angle z e c = a d c; And a c is the Tangent of the Angle a e c.
And it shall be, As c e: to c d:: so z c: to a c: (2. 6. Eucl.) which was to be
Demonstrated.

This is the 31 Prop. of Gregorii Opt. Promot. but there otherwise Demonstrated.

PROP. LII. LEMMA 2.
If the Eye directly approach to, or recede from an Object, its apparent
Bigness increases or diminishes, at the Tangents of the Semioptick-Angles at
one and the other Station.

This is manifest, for the Eye at d (Tab 35. f. 3. T. 35. F. 3.
) sees a c as big as the Eye at e would see z c, by Prop. XXVIII. Sec. 6.
Because the Angles a d c, z e c are equal; and Quae sub aequali Apparent
Angulo, Aequalia videntur. So that the Eye advancing from e, to d, sees a c as
much bigger, as if, continuing at e, the Object a c had increased to c z.

Corollary.
From this and the last Proposition it follows, that if the Eye directly
approach to or recede from an Object, its apparent Magnitude increases or
diminishes, as the Distances of one and t other Station reciprocally, that is,
the apparent Magnitude of a c to the Eye at d: is to the apparent Magnitude of
a c to the Eye at e:: as c e: to c d.

PROP. LIII.
The apparent Diametral Magnitude of an Object viewed through the Telescope of
Prop. L. Is to the apparent Diametral Magnitude of the Object viewed by the
naked Eye at the Station of the Object-Glass:: As the Focal length of the
Object-Glass: to the Focal length of the Eye-Glass.

This is the great Proposition asserted by most Dioptrick Writers, but hitherto
proved by none (for as much as I know) they offer indeed Experiments and
Methods of Trial to confirm the Truth thereof, but proceed no farther.

Vid. Cherubin Diop. Oculaire Part. II. Prop. XXI. LIX. LX. LXII. Kepleri
Dioptr. Prop. CXXIV. Galilei Nuncius Sidereus page 12. Edit. Land. 1653. 8vo.

Honoratus Faber in his Synopsis Optica Prop. XLIV. for the Telescope
consisting of a Unequal Object Glass and Concave Eye-Glass; and in Prop. XLV.
for the Telescope consisting of a Unequal Object-Glass and Unequal Eye-Glass,
endeavors at something, which he calls a Demonstration of this Property. But
whether that which he there offers will amount to clear Satisfaction, I leave
to their Judgments, who shall Read him.

Dechales in Prop. LIVE. Lib. II. Dioptr. thinks this Proposition so far from
Demonstrable, that he takes it to be False; and says, He never met with any
Demonstration thereof, that did not include manifest Paralogisms. Perhaps he
may be right in this latter part of his Assertion; but the Reason he gives for
his concluding it a False Proposition is manifestly Weak and Erroneous: And
that on the account of an inartificial kind of Notion and Method, that he takes
for Explicating the Magnifying of Telescopes; especially of the Telescope
furnished with a Concave Eye-Glass, which he explains after his manner in Prop.
LIII.

It were needless to enlarge in this matter, I shall therefore pass it over,
and hasten to the Demonstration of this Proposition.

Tab. 35. f. 2. T. 35 F. 2.
Let the Object-Glass x y z Project the Image of the Object A B C in the
Distinct Base f e d, g h l is the Eye-Glass, h e the Focal length of the
Eye-Glass, to which let e q be made equal. Draw h f, h d, and q f, q d. And let
the Eye at o be placed in the Exterior Focus of the Eye-Glass. The Rays y f g,
y d l, are refracted by the Eye-Glass, and cross at o. Wherefore g o l is the
Angle under which the Object appears through the Telescope. But the Angle g o l
is equal to the Angle f h d (as well by what foregoes in Prop. L. Sec. 3. and
5. as by Prop. XXXIV.) And the Angle f h d is equal to the Angle f q d.

Wherefore were the naked Eye at y the Station of the Object-Glass, it would
perceive the Object under the Angle f y d = a y c. But now being armed with the
Telescope, it sees the Object under the Angle f q d. Let us take their halfs f
y e, f q e; and consider the Angle fe, half the Distinct Base, as the Object
viewed by the naked Eye at the Stations y and q. I say (by Lemma 2.) The
apparent bigness of the Object f e at the Station q: Is to its apparent bigness
at the Station y:: As the Tangent of the Angle f q e: To the Tangent of the
Angle f y e. But (by Lemma 1.) the Tangent of the Angle f q e: Is to the
Tangent of the Angle f y e:: As e y: To e q. Therefore the apparent bigness of
the Object f e at the Station q: Is to its apparent bigness at the Station y::
As e y: To e q: that is, As the Focal length of the Object-Glass: To the Focal
length of the Eye-Glass. But the Angle g o h, under which the Eye sees half the
Object through the Telescope, is equal to the Angle f h e or f q e. Therefore
the apparent Diametral bigness of an Object viewed through a Telescope: Is to
the apparent Diametral Magnitude of the Object viewed by the naked Eye at the
Station of the Object-Glass:: As the Focal length of the Object-Glass: To the
Focal length of the Eye-Glass. Which was to be Demonstrated.

The same may be declared otherwise. Thus; Tab. 35. f. 2. T. 35. F. 2.
Let us suppose the naked Eye at h to view the Object Inverted by means of the
Distinct Base f e d; The Inverted Object shall appear under the Angle f h d (by
Prop. XL.) But the Eye at o through the Glass perceives the Inverted Image of
the Object under the Angle g o l equal to f h d, (by Prop. XXXIII.) and f h d
is equal to f q d, and consequently (as in the foregoing Demonstration) the
Proposition is manifest.

I shall now mention the common Method for trying the Truth of this Proposition
by Experiment. Having the Focal length of an Object-Glass (for Instance) 144
Inches, and the Focal length of an Eye-Glass three Inches. A Telescope composed
of these, shall make the apparent Diamet^al Magnitude of an Object: To the
apparent Magnitude of the same Object viewed by the naked Eye:: As 144: To 3::
or 48: To 1. Wherefore, such a Glass is said to Magnify 48 times in the
Diameter of the Object, and 2304 (= square of 48) in the Surface of the Object.
The Superficies of like Figures being to each other, as the Squares of their
Diameters, or Homologous Sides.

Wherefore from a convenient Scale take one part, and therewith describe a
Circle; And from the same Scale take 48 parts, and describe another Circle. Let
these two Circles be cut out in Paper, or other Conspicuous Material, and
placed at three or four Foot from each other, on a Wall at such a Distance as
will require the length between the Glasses in the Telescope but just 147 (=
144 + 3) Inches, to show these Objects distinctly; Then with one Eye through
the Telescope observe the smaller Circle, and at the same time with the other Eye
naked look upon the greater Circle; these two Circles shall appear equal to
both Eyes.

Perhaps it may be objected, That the Comparison is not fair between both
Appearances. For the Proposition supposes the naked Eye at the Station of the
Object-Glass; But this Experiment sets the naked Eye Distant from the
Object-Glass the whole length of the Telescope. This would be a material
Objection against this Method of Trial, were not the Distance of the two
Circles from the Eyes vastly greater than the length of the Telescope; so that
the Telescopes length may not bear any sensible Proportion thereto. And such we
suppose it in this Experiment, by advertising that this Distance is to be so
great, that the Distance between the Glasses may be no longer than for viewing
a Distant Object, viz. the just Aggregate of the Focal lengths of the Glasses,
that is, 144 + 3 = 147 Inches, that is, ye + eh = yh.

I shall now give an Example of a Calculation according to this Proposition.
Wherefore in Tab. 35. f. 4. T. 35. F. 4.
let us take the Moon ABC for our Distant Object; and let us suppose its
Diameter to subtend an Arch of a great Circle of Heaven of 30' Minutes. Let the
Ray a y d proceed from its upper Limb, b y e from its Center, c y f from its
lower Limb. These cross in the Vertex y, or middle Point of the Object-Glass x
y z; making the Angle f y d = a y e, equal to 30 Minutes. Let the Focal length
of the Object-Glass e y be given twelve Feet = 144 Inches, or 144,00 Parts: And
the Focus of the Eye-Glass h e be given three Inches, or 3,00 such Parts. Let
the Distinct Base, wherein the Image of the Moon is Projected by the
Object-Glass be f e d, and draw f h, d h. It is shown before that the Angle g o
h is equal to the Angle f h e.

Wherefore in the Right-angled Triangle f e y, we have e y = 144,00, and the
Angle f y e = 15', to find f e = 0,63.

Then in the Right-angled Triangle f e h, we have h e = 3,00, and f e = 0, 63,
to find the Angle f h e = 11 51' 40".

Wherefore the Semidiameter of the Moon, which by the naked Eye would be seen
under the Angle of 15' Minutes, is seen through this Telescope under an Angle
of 11 51' 40".

Let us now enquire, whether the Object appearing under an Angle of 15 Minutes,
and being afterward made to appear under an Angle of 11 51' 40", does not
thereby appear 48 times bigger than naturally. (for so much, by what foregoes,
does this Glass Magnify).

And for showing this, let us imagine f e increased 48 times its length 0, 63;
And then inquire what Angle f y e would be. Wherefore f e is now supposed = 30,
24 = 48 times 0. 63; Then in the Right-angled Triangle f e y, we have f e = 30,
24, and e y = 144,00, to find the Angle f y e = 11 51' 40". Which shows that
the Semidiameter of the Moon, being made by the Glass to appear under an Angle
of 11 51' 40", is seen by the Eye as big, as if the Semidiameter of the Moon it
self were really increased 48 times, and viewed by the naked Eye. Which is the
proposed Design of this Calculation.

Corollary 1.
From hence it follows, That the same Object-Glass being at one time combined
with an Eye-Glass whose Focus is 1. And at another time with an Eye-Glass whose
Focus is 2. The first Telescope Magnifies twice as much as the latter.

Corollary 2.
Supposing two Telescopes of different lengths; If the Focus of the Eye-Glass
of the shorter bears the same Proportion to the Focus of its Object-Glass, as
the Focus of the Eye-Glass of the longer bears to its Object-Glass: These two
Telescopes Magnify equally.

And hereupon perhaps it may be enquired, To what end then is all the Pains and
Trouble in forming and managing Telescopes of 30. 40. 50. 100. 200. 300, etc.
Feet; When Objects may be Magnified as much by smaller Object-Glasses, or
Object-Glasses of shorter Focal lengths, combined with Proportional Eye-Glases?

I answer First, That Object-Glasses of a shorter Focus will not bear
proportionably Eye-Glasses of such short Foci, without coloring the Object and
rendering it dark, as Object-Glasses of longer Foci. For instance, let us
suppose that an excellent Object-Glass of twelve Foot Focus will receive an
Eye-Glass of no shorter a Focus than three Inches with Clearness and
Distinctness. I say an Object Glass of 24 Foot Focus of the same Perfection
shall receive an Eye-Glass of less than six Inches Focus with equal Clearness
and Distinctness. And perhaps it may take an Eye-Glass of five or four Inches
Focus. And then an Object-Glass of twelve Foot with an Eye-Glass of three
Inches Magnifies but 48 times. But an Object-Glass of 24 Foot with an Eye-Glass
of four Inches Magnifies 72 times, viz. more than the former, which is a great
Difference, and of vast Advantage, when it may be obtained with the same
Clearness and Distinctness. I confess the longest Telescopes do generally
render the Objects more Dark and Obscure, yet when shorter Glasses have
proportionably as short Eye-Glasses, and as close Apertures, they are more
Obscure, than the longer Telescopes.

I answer Secondly, That the Image of the Moon or other Object in the Distinct
Base of an Object-Glass of 24 Foot is twice as long as the Image in the
Distinct Base of an Object-Glass of twelve Foot. And consequently we shall not
wonder, that the Picture in the former, should be much more Distinct and
Perfect, than in the latter; As it is much more easy to represent every Feature
and Line of a Face in a large Piece, than in a small Piece of Miniature.

Corollary 3.
And if the Object-Glass be formed on a less Sphere than the Eye-Glass (as
suppose the Object-Glass formed on a Sphere of six Inches Radius, and the
Eye-Glass on a Sphere of twelve Inches Radius) hereby the Appearance of the
Object shall be Diminished. And the Appearance through the Glass shall be to
the naked Appearance as six to twelve, or the Natural Appearance.

Scholium.
From hence it is manifest, how requisite it is in relating any Phenomenon
observed by the Telescope (or even by the Microscope) to mention not only the
length of the Tube in general; But to specify the particular Focus of the
Eye-Glass, as well as of the Object-Glass; as also the Aperture of the
Object-Glass. For by this means, they that intend to observe the same
Phenomenon, may understand how to adapt their Telescopes proper for the
Observation. This the Learned and Ingenious Monsieur Hugens in his Systema
Saturnium puts down exactly, page 4. Where also we find this Passage. Illud in
Dioptricis Nostris Demonstratum invenietur, Speciei per Tubum visae ad eam quae
Nudo Oculo percipitur, hane secundum Diametrum esse Rationem, quae Distantiae
Foci in Exteriori vitro (Objectivo Scilicet) ad illam quae in Interiori sive
Oculari vitro est Foci Distantiam. But hitherto we are so unhappy as to want
that excellent Persons Dioptricks. In the mean time, let that which I have
given in the foregoing Prop. LIII. serve till a better be offered.

PROP. LIVE. PROBL.
To Determine the Angle received by a Telescope of the foregoing Combination.
The Rule is, as the Distance between the Object-Glass and Eye-Glass: To half
the Breadth of the Eye-Glass:: So Radius: To the Tangent of half the Angle
received.

Tab. 25. f. 2. T. 35. F. 2.
The Distance of the Glasses is h y. Let half the Breadth of the Eye-Glass be g
h. Then, as h y: To g h:: So Radius: To the Tangent of the Angle g y h, which
is half the Angle g y l, the Angle received. That is, the Eye at o shall
perceive no more of the Object, than subtends this Angle before the
Object-Glass.

Scholium 1.
But if the Eye Approach nigher to, or recede further from the Eye-Glass g h l
(Tab. 35. f. 1. T. 35. F. 1.
) than its Focus at o, it shall perceive a lesser Area of the Object, though
what it sees shall be as Distinct as at o. For let us suppose the Pupil of the
Eye at m; The Rays g o, l o, do not enter the Eye, and consequently the Points
in the Object answerable to f, d, in the Distinct Base, shall not be visible.
The same may be conceived if the Eye recede farther from the Eye-Glass than o;
because all the Rays from the several Points in the Object are mixed together,
and intersect at o, in the Focus of the Eye-Glass, and thence flowing forward
they separate and Diverge. But then the Eye at m receives the Rays, that do
enter it, Parallel or at least a very little Diverging; and consequently the
Vision is Distinct.

Scholium. 2.
From hence also it is manifest, that the Angle received, or Visible Area of the
Object, is not increased or diminished, by the greater or lesser Aperture of
the Object-Glass. For the Angle g y l continues the same, though the
Object-Glass were all covered to the very middle Point y. All that is effected
by this greater or lesser Aperture is the more Bright or Obscure Appea^ance of
the Object. But of this more fully in the next Proposition.

PROP. LV.
Concerning the Apertures of Object Glasses.

By the Aperture of a Glass I mean, that part of the Glass which is left open
and uncovered. And this ought to be various according as we would have more or
less Light admitted. It also varies according to the various Focal lengths of
the Object-Glasses. For a ten Foot Object-Glass shall bear a greater Aperture
than an Object-Glass of one Foot; and a twenty Foot Glass yet greater than a
ten Foot Glass.

But at what Rate or Proportion the Apertures of Glasses alter in respect of
their lengths, is not yet well settled.

Monsieur Auzout, (Phil. Transact. N. 4. P. 55.) Tells us, that he finds, That
the Apertures, which Glasses can bear with Distinctness, are in (about) a
Subduplicate Ratio to their lengths: Or as the Square Roots of their lengths.
Whereof he intends to give the Reason and Demonstration in his Dioptrica (which
we yet want.) But this Ingenious Person should have told us, when he speaks of
the Apertures of Glasses, whether he designs them for Objects on the Earth or
in the Heavens. And if in this latter, whether for the Moon, Mars, Jupiter, or
Venus. For each of these Objects will require a different Aperture of the same
Glass. Because the Strength of their Light is different. For to view Venus
there is requisite a much smaller Aperture, than to view the Moon, Saturn or
Jupiter.

However till some better Rule can be found for settling the Apertures of
Object-Glasses (which at present I shall not pretend to) I shall here Present
you with Mr. Auzout's Table, as it is to be found in the forecited
Philosophical Transaction, Numb. 4. Noting only, that his Feet are Parisian
Feet (which is to the London Foot as 1068: to 1000) and each Inch (which is the
112 part of his Foot) is subdivided into twelve Lines. For it had not been
worth our Pains to have reduced the whole Table to our English Measure. Vid.
Tab. 36.

I have said before ( Schol. 2. Prop. LIVE.) That the Angle received, or Visible
Area of an Object, is not Increased or Diminished by the greater or lesser
Aperture of the Object-Glass; all that is effected thereby is the Admittance of
more or less A TABLE of the Apertures of Obiect-Glasses* The Points put to some
of these Numbers denote Fractions.
Length of Glasses. For Excellent ones. For good ones. For ordinary ones. Feet.
Inchs Inch. Lines Inch. Lines. Inch. Lines. 4 4 4 3 6 5 5 4 9 7 6 5 0 8 7 6 1 6
9 8 7 2 0 11 10 8 2 6 1 0 11 9 3 0 1 1 1 0 10 3 0 1 2 1 1 11 4 0 1 4 1 2 1 0 4
6 1 5 1 3 1 5 0 1 6 1 4 1 1. 6 1 7 1 5 1 2 7 1 9 1 6 1 3 8 1 10 1 8 1 4 9 1 11.
1 9 1 5 10 2 1 1 10 1 6 12 2 4 2 0 1 8 14 2 6 2 2 1 9. 16 2 8 2 4 1 11. 18 2 10
2 6 2 1 20 3 0 2 7 2 2. 25 3 4 2 10 2 4. 30 3 8 3 2 2 7 35 4 0 3 4 2 10 40 4 3
3 7 3* 45 4 6 3 10 3 2. 50 4 9 4 0 3 4. 55 5 0 4 3 3 6. 60 5 2 4 6 3 8. 65 5 4
4 8 3 10 70 5 7 4 10 3* 75 5 9 5 0 4 2. 80 5 11 5 2 4 5 90 6 4 5 6 4 7. 100 6 8
5 9 4 10 120 7 5 6 5 5 3 150 8 0 7 0 5 11 200 9 6 8 0 6 9 250 10 6 9 2 7 8. 300
11 6 10 0 8 5 350 12 61 10 9 0 0 400 13 4 11 6 9 8

The feet here expres'd are Paris-feet, and a Line is the 112 part thereof. The
Paris-Foot is to the London-foot as 1068 to 1000

Tab. 36. page 170

Rays; and consequently the more Bright or Obscure Appearance of the Object.
Tab. 35. f. 5. T. 35. F. 5
Let the greater Aperture of the Object-Glass x y z be x z; And the lesser
Aperture m n. a b is a Remote Object Projected in the Distinct Base d e f. The
Cone of Rays x a z is Projected in the Cone of Rays x d z; And consequently the
Cone of Rays m a n (as being a part of the former x a z) shall be Collected at
d in the Cone m d n. But then by this latter Aperture m n, all the Rays that
fall on the outward Ring of the Glass, here expressed by x a m, z a n, are
excluded, and consequently the Point d shall not be illustrated with so much
light as were the Aperture as wide as z x. And therefore (supposing an
Eye-Glass behind this Object-Glass, so as to constitute a Telescope) such a
vigorous Light from each Radiating Point in the Object will not be brought into
the Eye.

We have the exact Natural Resemblance hereof in the Eye it self: whose Pupil
is contracted and dilated, according as the Light of an Object is more or less
Intense.

Another Particular, wherein this Contraction or Dilatation of a Glasses
Aperture is requisite, is this: An Object may be so nigh a Glass that the Rays
from each single Point, falling upon the whole Breadth of the Glass, may
Diverge so much that the Glass is not able to Correct the Divergence of those
Rays that fall toward its outward Borders, so as to reduce them to Determine
or Unite in the Distinct Base with those Rays, that fall nigher the middle of
the Glass (as before is noted after Prop. III.) And then it is requisite to
contract the Aperture of the Glass, so as to exclude these Exorbitant Rays. A
notable Experiment of this we may make by holding a Minute Object very nigh the
Pupil of the Eye, the Object shall appear very Confused. But by applying a
Paper with a small Pin-hole before the Pupil, it shall reduce the Appearance to
much more Distinctness than before.

PROP. LVI.
The Telescope Consisting of a Unequal Object-Glass, and Three Unequal
Eye-Glasses is Explained.

I have shown in Prop. L. etc. the Nature and Properties of the Telescope
consisting of a Unequal Object-Glass, and Unequal Eye-Glass. I have shown how the
Image of the Object being formed in the Distinct Base of the Object-Glass x y z
( Tab. 35. f. 1. T. 35 F. 1*
) by the Rays from each single Point of the Object there uniting, and flowing
forward on the Eye-Glass, are thereby all collected together and confounded in
its outward Focus at o

Now (in Tab. 37. Fig. 1. T. 37. F. 1.
) Let us Combine two other Eye-Glasses k, l, with the said Telescope of Prop.
L. And place them so, that the Distance between the first Eye-Glass ^, and the
second Eye-Glass k, may be the sum of their Foci. Also that the Distance
between the second Eye-Glass k, and the third Eye-Glass l, may be likewise the
sum of their Foci. So that all the Glasses are Distant from the next adjacent
Glasses, the sum of their Foci. Only here it may be noted, that to cause
Distinct Vision through this Telescope, it is not absolutely necessary that the
second Eye-Glass k be exactly Distant from the Focus ^o of the first Eye-Glass
h, the just length of its own Focus; For it may be more or less; but then the
Visible Area, and Magnified Appearance of the Object shall be altered. As will
be manifest after we have explained this Glass to those that consider it.

It is then evident that the first Eye-Glass h mixes all the Rays from
different Points in the Focus at o; from whence they flow forward, and fall
upon the second Eye-Glass k, each parcel of Rays parallel amongst themselves:
And by the Glass k are formed into the second Distinct Base g m n. For we may
imagine the middle Ray o q to proceed directly from o, the Focus of the Glass
k; wherefore o q shall be refracted by the Glass k, and be made to run in q g
parallel to its Axis k m. And then all the other Rays that are parallel to o q
before they enter the Glass k, after they have passed the Glass k, do unite
with q g in the Focus of the Glass k, and so the second Distinct Base g m n is
formed.

Or otherwise. We may conceive the Glass k to be the Crystalline of the Eye,
looking through the Telescope of Prop. L. h y. And as the Crystalline in that
Case does by means of the Glass h form in its Focus on the Retina the Image of
the Distinct Base f e d; So may we imagine the Glass k to form in its Focus g m
n, by means of the Glass h, the Image of the Distinct Base f e d.

Then from the second Distinct Base g m n the Rays proceed as is expressed in
the Scheme, and fall on the third Eye Glass l; By whose means we may imagine
the Distinct Base g m n projected distinctly on the Retina of the Eye r s t, in
the same manner as is shown before in the Telescope of Prop. L.

And here we may observe that the Image on the Retina r s t is Inverted,
therefore the Object shall appear Erect. Prop. XXVIII. Sec. 4, 5.

And we may conceive this sort of Telescope as a double Telescope of Prop. L.
For the Glasses h, y, make one Telescope; And the Glasses k, l, an other. And
as the former by it self Inverts the Object; so the latter with the former
Reverts the Inverted Image; and consequently makes the Object appear Erect. Yet
it has been lately Published in the Iournal des Scavans 17. Sept. 1685. as a
very difficult Problem in Dioptricks, why four Glasses in this kind of
Telescope represent Objects Erect? I think I have solved this Problem to
satisfaction, and my Answer is Published Number 187. of the London Philosophical
Transactions. As also in the Bibliotheque Universelle and Historique de l'Annee
1688. Tome 3. page 329. But the Learned Author of this latter in his
Translation has mistaken my Sense in one Particular. I shall therefore give it
here again in the Second Part of this Work Chap. 2.

Dioptrick Problem solved in the Second Part of this Treatise Chap. 2.
Concerning the Magnifying Power of this Telescope; our Prop. L. will direct us
how to Calculate it. For by that Proposition it is manifest, that if the several
Eye-Glasses h, k, l, be of equal Foci, and the Distance between h and k be the
sum of both their Foci, that then the apparent Diametral Magnitude of an Object
through the Glass, is to the Diametral Magnitude viewed by the naked Eye, as
the Focus of the Object-Glass, to the Focus of any one of the Eye-Glasses. But
if the Foci of the Eye-Glass h, k, l, be different, or the Distance between h
and k different from the sum of their Foci, then to obtain the magnified
Appearance, we must have Recourse to Calculation. Wherein the Cases are so very
various, that to insist on them all would be very tedious, and infinitely
laborious. For the Focus of h may be greater, equal, or less than of k or of l;
and so of k than of l or h; and so of l than of k or h; As likewise the
Distance between k and h may be infinitely varied. I shall therefore pass this
over; A little Consideration of the several Varieties will make any of them
plain, and show how they may be easily Calculated by those versed in the
foregoing Doctrine. For it is but considering, how the Distinct Base g m n is
Projected, whether equal to, greater or less than the Distinct Base f e d; And
how the Eye-Glass ^ conveys this Distinct Base g m n to the Eye.

In like manner, by Prop. LIVE. may the Angle received, or Visible Area of an
Object through this kind of double Telescope, be Determined, as in the single
Telescope; Respect being had to the several Apertures, Foci, and Distances of
the several Eye-Glasses h, k, l.

Scholium.
From the Explication of this kind of Telescope, and of that in Prop. L. may we
easily apprehend the Theories of the various Combinations of Convex-Glasses in
the Compositions of diverse Telescopes of 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, etc. Glasses.

Wherefore in explaining any kind of Telescope, we are first to obtain (by some
Practical Rules to be delivered hereafter Part II. Chap. 4. Sec. 3. the Focal
length of each particular Glass by it self. Then we are to consider the
Distances of each of these Glasses (as they lie in the Tube) from the Glasses
before and behind it. Afterward we are to consider, where the Distinct Base,
or Distinct Bases are formed by these several Glasses, and how they are
Projected as to Amplification or Diminution, which is easily found by the
Doctrine before delivered. And then how the Eye-Glasses affect these Distinct
Bases; As how they Confound them, Rectify them, Invert or Magnify them.

For the Result of all is this, that the Rays from the several Images in the
several Distinct Bases, shall be Confounded on the Pupil of the Eye, in order
to be rectified by the Crystalline, which (as has often been intimated) we may
consider as a Convex-Glass, whose Focus is on the Retina. And from a due
Consideration of the Premises, it will appear why some Telescopes consisting
of Convex-Glasses represent the Object Erect, others Inverted; in some one
Glass is to be taken as one, in others two Glasses perform the Effect but of
one.

And thus all the Combinations of Glasses expressed in the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Iconismes of Zahn Telescop. Fund. 2. Syntag. 3. Cap. 6, 7, 8, 9. are easily
explained, with a thousand other Varieties.

PROP. LVII.
The Telescope Compased of a Concave Eye-Glass, and Unequal Object-Glass of a
larger Sphere is Explained.

The Posture of the Glasses in this Telescope is this; The Distance of the
Glasses is to be the Difference of their Foci, that is, the Concave Eye-Glass
is to be placed so much nigher the Object-Glass than the Focal length of this
Object-Glass, as is the virtual Focus of this Eye-Glass. And the Eye is to be
placed as nigh the Eye-Glass as possible.

Note. I shall call the virtual Focus of the Concave, simply its Focus, it
being well known that a Concave has no other Focus, but a virtual Focus.

I shall now show, that through this Glass the Object appears Distinct, Erect,
and Magnified. And shall show the Angle received or visible Area, according to
the several Postures of the Eye.

Only premising in this Proposition (as I have done in several former) that we
suppose the Glasses of the least thickness imaginable; and especially the
Concave-Glass in its middle Point is supposed of no thickness at all, but the
two Surfaces to touch.

To explain this Glass the better, I shall express the Figure very large, Tab.
37. f. 2. T 37. F 2
Wherein we shall first consider the Telescope it self separate from the Eye.
Wherefore, let some Distant Object (as suppose a Cross) send the Rays a a a
from its upper Point, b b b from its middle Point, and c c c from its lower
Point. These falling on the Object-Glass x y z are formed thereby into the
Distinct Base f e d. Let now the Concave-Glass g h l, be placed between the
Distinct Base f e d, and the Object-Glass x y z, so far distant from the
Distinct Base, as is the Focus of this Concave; that is, let e h be the virtual
Focus of the Concave Eye-Glass. Then the Rays (for Instance) from the middle
Point, x i, y h, z k, falling on the Concave and Converging toward its Focus
e, after passing the Glass become Parallel ( Corol. Prop. XIII.) and run
onwards in i m, h e, k n. The same may be conceived of the Rays from the
Collateral Points; which Converge toward the Focus in f and d; viz that these
also after passing the Concave Eye-Glass, do proceed onwards Parallel amongst
themselves.

But concerning these Rays from the Collateral Points, we must not also; That,
as it is shown before in Prop. L. Sec. 3, 4. Concerning the Unequal Eye-Glass g
h l (Tab. 35. f. 1. T 35. F. 1.
) that it brings the Rays of the Collateral Points f g, d l, Parallel amongst
themselves into its Focus at o. So the Concave Eye-Glass g h l (Tab. 37. f. 2.
T. 37. F. 2.
) for the same Reasons expressed before in Prop. L. Sec. 3, 4. Mutatis
Mutandis, makes the several parcels of Rays from the Collateral Points, after
passing it, to Diverge, as if they proceeded directly, from the Point p; p h
and h e being equal, and each equal to the Focal length of the Concave
Eye-Glass. These things being fully considered; we proceed in the Explication
of this Telescope. And therefore now let us apply the Eye thereto; And this
also in a large Figure, Tab. 37. f. 3.

T. 37. F. 3.
I say first, the Object appears through this Glass Distinct; For by what
foregoes the Rays from each single Point, do fall on the Eye Parallel amongst
themselves; And therefore each Point (by Pr. XXVIII.) is distinctly represen^ed
on the Fund of the Eye.

I say secondly, the Object appears Erect. For it is manifest by the Inspection
only of the Scheme, that the Rays flowing from the lower Point of the Object,
are Terminated at t the upper Part of the Retina. And the Rays from the upper
Point of the Object are Terminated at r the lower Part of the Retina. So that
the Image is painted inverted on the Retina. And therefore by Prop. XXVIII. the
Object appears Erect.

I say lastly, the Object is Magnified by this Glass. For the Proof of this we
are to remember, what foregoes in Prop. XXXVII. It Is there declared, that if an
Object be Projected by a Convex-Glass x y z (Tab. 37. f. 2. T. 37. F. 2.
) in the Distinct Base f e d; And the Eye be placed any where between the Glass
and the Distinct Base, as suppose at h, draw f h, d h, and the Object appears
under the Angle f h d, which is much greater than f y d, the natural
Optick-Angle. The same will hold, though we interpose the Concave-Glass g l;
for the Ray x g from the Objects lower Point, that runs Parallel to the Axis b
y h e, is Refracted into g t, as if it came directly from the Point p. And so
the Ray z l from the Objects upper Point, that runs Parallel to the Axis b y h
e is Refracted into l r, as if it came directly from the same Point p. If
therefore we suppose the Rays x g f, z l d, Parallel to the Axis; then g l
shall be equal to f d; And p h being by Supposition equal to h e, p g t shall
be Parallel to h f; And p l r shall be Parallel to h d. And consequently the
Angle g p l shall be equal to the Angle f h d. Wherefore the Object through
this Glass appears under the same Angle, as we may imagine the Apices of the
Pencils f, d, would appear to the naked Eye at h (the Concave Eye-Glass being
removed) And consequently the Object appears Magnified.

The Visible Area, or Angle Received by this Glass, is Determined by the
Aperture or Breadth of the Eyes Pupil. For it is manifest, from Tab. 37. f. 3.
T* 37. F. 3
That if the Pupil d e of the Eye were not large enough to receive the Rays
from the extreme Points of the Object, it would not perceive the whole Object
through this Glass. Wherefore by the Breadth of the Pupil given, as also by the
Focal Distances of the Object-Glass and Eye-Glass being given, we may easily
obtain the Visible Area, or Angle Received. For let us suppose that we find
from these Data, that the whole Object Projecting the Distinct Base f e d (
Tab. 37. f. 2. T 37 F 2
) would be Projected in the breadth of the Pupil, at the Distance h y from the
Object-Glass. Then find the Angle f y d (as is easy from these Data, and the
preceding Doctrine) and we have the Angle Received.

Corollary 1.
In the XXXI. Prop. Sec. 9. We have considered the Locus Apparens of an Object,
Projected in the Distinct Base by a Convex-Glass, to the Eye placed between the
Glass and Distinct Base. And if the Affirmative of the Quere, which I there
propose, hold true; The Locus Apparens of the middle Point of the Object seen
through the Glass of Tab. 37. f. 2. T. 3^. F. 2.
is at p.

Corollary 2.
If we suppose a Unequal Eye-Glass, whose Focal length is equal to the Focal
length p h or e h of this Concave Eye-Glass, applied (as directed in Prop. L.)
to this same Object-Glass x y z in Tab. 37. f. 2. It would magnify the Object
equally with this Concave: And from hence it follows, that the preceding
Proposition LIII. concerning the Magnifying of a Telescope, may be applied to
this sort of Telescope furnished with a Concave Eye-Glass. But then the
Advantage of the Telescope in Prop. L. beyond that of this Proposition, is most
signal in this particular, That it receives a very much greater Angle, or shows
to the Eye a much greater Area of the Object. The Area in this being Determined
by the breadth of the Unequal Eye-Glass; But in that of a Concave Eye-Glass, the
Area is proportioned to the breadth of the Pupil.

Corollary 3.
If the Eye recede from the Concave Eye-Glass of this Proposition, it perceives
not so great a space of the Object. This is manifest only by Inspection of the
two Schemes ( Fig. 2, and 3. Tab. 37. T. 37. F. 2, 3.
) For if the Breadth of the Pupil d e, be but just sufficient to receive the
Rays from the extreme Points of the Object, after they have passed the
Eye-Glass, and are thereby so much Divaricated; if the Eye recede, the Pupil
shall not be broad enough; and consequently shall see less of the Object. Just
as in the Telescope of Prop. L.

Corollary 4.
If the Eye move upwards or downwards, or to one side, or the other of the
Eye-Glass (supposing the Eye-Glass much broader than the Pupil) it perceives
consecutively different parts of the Object. Thus suppose in Fig. 2. Tab. 37.
T. 37. F. 2.
The Pupil placed before the middle of the Eye-Glass at h, and not broad enough
to receive the Rays from the upper and lower parts of the Object: If the Eye
move upwards, it will meet with the Rays g t from the lower Point of the
Object, which before escaped it; and so moving downwards it meets the Rays l r
from the upper parts of the Object.

Of MICROSCOPES.
Hitherto of single Glasses, and of Glasses combined for viewing Distant
Objects. We come now to treat of Glasses for viewing minute and nigh Objects,
commonly called Microscopes. The Theory of these does so depend on what
foregoes, that we shall have no occasion of insisting long upon them.

And first for Microscopes consisting of a single Convex-Glass. In these the
Object is usually placed either in the Focus of the Glass, or a little nigher
the Glass than the Focus; And the Eye is placed in or about the Focus on
the other side the Glass. In which Cases the Appearances were already solved.
Prop. XXXI, XXXII, XXXIII, XXXIV, XXXV.

As to double Microscopes, or Microscopes consisting of more than one
Convex-Glass, wherein the Object is Projected in a Distinct Base, before it be
conveyed to the Eye; I explain them as follows, observing the Series of the
Propositions.

PROP. LVIII.
The double Microscope composed of a Unequal Object Glass, and Unequal Eye-Glass
is Explained.

Tab. 38. Fig. 1. T. 38. F* 1.
Let a b be a minute nigh Object exposed before the Object-Glass x y z, the
Segment of a very small Sphere. Let the Focus of this Object-Glass be at p.
Then the Object being something more distant from the Glass, than its Focal
length y p, shall be Projec^ed in the Distinct Base f d, somewhere on the other
side the Glass, according to the Doctrine before delivered Prop. V. And of what
bigness the Image shall be Projected in the Distinct Base is determined by
Prop. XXVI. Let the Eye-Glass l g be placed so far distant from the Distinct
Base f d, as is the Focal length of this Eye-Glass; And the Eye o r t placed
where this Eye-Glass confounds all the Rays g o, l o, which shall be about the
Focus of the Eye Glass.

All things being thus combined, The Effects of this Microscope are explained
in all things, as in the Telescope of Prop. L. As to the Magnified, Inverted,
and Distinct Appearance of the Object. And therefore it is needless to enlarge
farther thereon: To those versed in what is already delivered, the very
Inspection of the Scheme is sufficient.

Only as to the extraordinary Magnifying of these Microscopes, we may farther
Remark; that whereas for viewing a Minute Object, a well-constituted Eye does
usually Approach thereto about the distance of eight Inches: could we approach
the Eye thereto, and view it distinctly at the distance of half an Inch, the
Optick-Angle would be wonderfully magnified by Prop. LI, LII. that is to say,
the apparent Magnitude of the Object would be increased at the rate of sixteen
to one. Let us then suppose the Eye at y, viewing the Object a b, which would
then appear under the Angle a y b equal to d y f; which is the same as were the
Object increased to the bigness d f, and viewed by the Eye at the same distance
from it as y in the figure is now removed from d f. Wherefore if by help of the
Eye-Glass g l, the Eye can yet approach to the Distinct Base d f (which we may
now repute the real Object) suppose ten times nigher than y is to d f; the
apparent Magnitude of d f shall again be increased ten times more than before,
by the nigh approach of the Eye (suppose at y): that is, the Object by all
these helps shall be magnified 160 times in length, or Diametral Magnitude.

As to the Calculation of all these Angles, and apparent Magnitudes, it cannot
be difficult to those versed in what is before delivered.

There are various Combinations of Glasses in this kind of double Microscopes;
for in some there are two Object-Glasses, that is to say, one Object-Glass of a
very deep Convexity, and an other of a lesser Convexity, placed nigher the
former than the Projection of the Distinct Base (according to Schol. 1. Prop.
XVI.) which sometimes is called a Middle-Glass. In others there are two
Eye-Glasses, etc. But the Theory of all these depends on, and is so manifest
from what has been delivered, that it is needless to enlarge.

I shall conclude the First Part of this Treatise with a Piece of Dioptricks,
which though Ludicrous affords an Appearance surprising and pleasant enough.
The Explication thereof is much labourd at by several, though it be very
Obvious from what foregoes. It Is this,

PROP. LIX.
The Explication of the Magic Lantern, sometimes called Lanterna
Megalographica.

The Contrivance is briefly this, Tab. 38. f. 2. T. 38. F. 2.
A B C D is a Tin Lantern, from whose side there proceeds a square or round Arm
or Tube b n k c m l, consisting of two Parts, the outermost whereof n k m l
slides over the other, so as that the whole Tube may be lengthened or shortened
thereby. In the end of the Arm n k m l is fixed a Convex-Glass k l: about d e
there is a Contrivance for admitting and placing an Object d e painted in
dilute and transparent Colors on a pain thin Glass; which Object is there to
be placed Inverted. This is usually some Ludicrous or frightful Representation,
the more to divert the Spectators: b h c is a deep Convex-Glass, so placed in
the other end of the Prominent Tube, that it may strongly cast the light of the
Flame a on the Picture d e painted on the plain thin Glass. And here it is to be
noted, that the Glass b h c is only designed for the strong Illumination of the
Picture d e, and has nothing to do in the Representation, and therefore in some
of these Lanterns, instead of the Glass b h c, we shall find a Concave-Speculum
so placed, that it may strongly cast the light of the Flame a on the Picture at
d e.

Wherefore, Let us now consider the Picture d e as a very lightsome Object of
distinct Colors and Parts. And let us conceive d e more remote from the Glass
k l than its Focus. It Is then manifest, that the Distinct Image of the Object d
e shall be projec^ed by the Glass k l on the opposite white Wall F H at f g;
And here it shall be represented Erect. For now the whole Chamber E F G H is
dark, the Lantern A B C D enclosing all the Light; So that in Effect this
Appearance of the Magic Lantern is no more than what is already declared
concerning the Representation of outward Objects in a dark Room by a Unequal
Glass, after Prop. IV. ( vid. Tab. 14. f. 1.) And here we may observe, that if
the Tube be Contracted, and thereby the Glass k l brought nigher the Object d
e; the Representation f g shall be Projected so much the larger; and so much
the more Distant from the Glass k l; according to the Rules before laid down.
So that the smallest Picture at d e may be Projected at f g in any greater
Proportion required, within due limits. From whence the Name of Lanterna
Megalographica. And consequently, protracting the Tube and drawing the Glass k
l more distant from the Object d e, will diminish the Representation f g, and
Project it nigher the Glass k l.

As to the M^chanick Contrivance of this Lantern, the most convenient
Proportion of the Glasses, etc. This is so ordinary amongst the common
Glass-Grinders, that it is needless to insist farther thereon in this place.
It Is sufficient to me that I have explained the Theory thereof.

Scholium.
On this depends the Theory of the Optic Experiment proposed by Mr. Hook Number.
38. Page 741. Philosoph. Transact. For representing strange Visions and
Appearances.

The End of the First Part.
DIOPTRICKS. THE SECOND PART Containing Various Dioptrick Miscellanies.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. Of Refraction and Light. Page 191 Chap. 2. A Dioptrick Problem. Page
203 Chap. 3. Of Glasses for defective Eyes. Page 207 Chap. 4. Of Mechanic
Dioptricks. Page 214 Chap. 5. Of Telescopick Instruments. Page 228 Chap. 6. Of
the Invention of Optick-Glasses, Discoveries made by them, and other
Applications of them. Page 251 Chap. 7. An Optic Problem of Double Vision.
Page 287 Chap. 8. An Appendix. Page 295
To My esteemed Friend Henry Osborn OF Dardys-Town in the County of Mead
ESQUIRE.
THE Respect which I have ever had for you since our first Acquaintance, and
which on all Occasions I have expressed in private, I have now an Opportunity
of declaring to the Public: And that too so very apposite, that it would be
unpardonable in me to omit it at this time; by presenting the following Sheets
to you, Dedicating them to your Name, and Devoting them and their Author to
your Use and Service.

You may well remember the frequent Discourses we have had on several Subjects
treated of in the following Chapters, and on account whereof I first set on
this Dioptrical Work: And particularly, I think, our Disquisitions concerning
the Iustness of Telescopick Sights adapted to Astronomical Instruments, and our
Considerations of the Micrometer, were the first Occasion of my Thoughts
turning this Way; And therefore the ensuing Discourses belong to you of Right.
But if to this I add, the Advantage I have received by your Acquaintance, and
the repeated Satisfaction I have had in your agreeable Conversation; I am bound
by indispensible Ties to make this Acknowledgment.

I cannot but admire your prudent Choice of a private, retired Life;
notwithstanding your great Advantages both of Nature and Fortune, that render
you capable of the most public and weighty Employ. By this Course, you have an
Opportunity of enjoying your self, and improving your Philosophical Thoughts
beyond the common pitch: You can look on unconcerned, and securely observe the
froathy Sea of Business, wherein Men fluctuate; and some are shipwreckt, sink,
and perish.

And because you seem careless of propagating your Name the common ways; suffer
me to erect this slight Monument to it: Though I am certain at the same time,
that, if you pleased, you may raise a lasting Mausolaeum to your Memory; but
you seem above these Desires; yet you will permit your Friend to Honor it as far
as he can; and if the Materials or Workmanship do not seem to promise a long
Duration to Posterity, this only reflects on my Abilities, (which I shall never
vindicate) but cannot lessen the sincere Intention of

Your most affectionate Humble Servant, WILL. MOLYNEUX.
April 17. 1690.
DIOPTRICKS PART II.
CHAP* I.
Of Refraction and Light.
(1.) This Discourse promised. (2.) Leibnutz's Universal Principle in Optics,
etc. (3.) On Occasion whereof; Of Final Causes. (4.) Farther Explication of
Refraction. (5.) Light a Body, from several Arguments. (6.) From its being
resisted in its passage through Diaphanous Mediums. (7.) Its Requiring time to
move from place to place. (8.) Impossible to be increased, but by robbing some
other Place of its Light. (9.) Therefore impossible to be augmented uniformly.

This Discourse promised.
IN the second Experiment of Part I. I had occasion to mention the Natural
Cause of Refraction; or why the Rays of Light passing through different Mediums
are refracted at their Immersion or Emersion. I then avoided any farther
enquiry into the reason thereof, as being more of a Physical than Mathematical
Consideration. But at the same time, I promised a farther Disquisition thereon,
to be borrowed from a most Learned Author; whose reason we shall find briefly
comprehended in this, That the Different Resistance that a Ray of Light finds
in passing (for instance) through Air and Glass, is the cause, why it is bent
from its direct Course. But how this Refraction comes to be from the
Perpendicular, in proceeding from a Dense to a more Rare Medium; or toward the
Perpendicular, when from a Rare to a more Dense Medium; we shall more fully
apprehend by the Discourse it self, which I here subjoyn from the Acta Erud.
Lipsiae, Ann. 1682. page 185.

Leibnutz universal Principle in Optics.
One Universal Principle of Optics, Catoptricks, and Dioptricks. By the
Learned and Ingenious G. G. Leibnutzius.

The chief Hypothesis common to all these Sciences, and by which the Progress
of all Rays of Light is geometrically determined, may be thus laid down. Light
proceeds from the Radiating Point, to the Point to be enlightened, that way,
which is of all the most easy; and this is first to be Determined in respect
to plain Surfaces, and then is accommodated to Concave or Unequal Surfaces, by
considering the Planes, that are Tangents to these Surfaces. But here I take no
notice of some Irregularities, which perhaps may conduce to the Generation of
Colors, and to some other extraordinary Phoenomena, which in practical Optics
are not at all considered.

Hence, In plain or simple Optics, Tab. 38. Fig. 3. The direct Ray proceeds
from the Radiating Point C, to the Point to be illustrated E, by the shortest
direct way, the same Medium continuing all along, that is, in the Right Line C
E.

In Catoptricks the Angle of Incidence C E A, and of Reflection D E B are
equal. Let C be a Radiating Point; D the Point to be illustrated, and A B a
Plain Speculum: It Is required to find in the Speculum the Point E, that
reflects the Ray to D. I say, that it shall be such a Point, that the whole
Progress, Way or Journey of the Ray C E + E D, may be the least or shortest,
that is possible; or less than C F + F D, supposing that we take any other
Point F in the Speculum. And this shall be obtained, if E be taken such, that
the Angles C E A, D E B, may be equal; as is manifest from Geometry. Tab. 38.
Fig. 4. T. 38. F. 4.
Produce D E to Z, and join F Z.

Then A Z = (D B =) A C. And F Z = F C.

Therefore C E + E D (= D Z) is less than C F or F Z + F D.

Ptolomy and other Ancients insist on this Demonstration; and it is extant both
elsewhere, T. 38 F. 3.
and also in Heliodorus Larissaeus.

In Dioptricks, Here I translate according to the 2, 4. Definit. of Part I and
not according to the Author.
The Sines E H, E L, of the Angles of Incidence C E I, and Refracted Angle G E
K are to each other reciprocally as the Resistances of the Mediums. Let I E be
Air, and E K Water, Glass, or any other Diaphanous Medium more Dense than Air,
C a Radiating Point in the Air, G the Point to be illustrated under the Glass:
It Is inquired, by what Way or Path shall C radiate to G; or it is required to
determine, in the Surface of the Glass A B, the Point E, which refracting the
Ray that comes from C, sends it to G. Here this Point E must be taken such,
that the Way, which the Ray takes, may be of all ways the easiest. But now in
different Mediums, the Difficulties of the Way or Progress are in a Ratioo
compounded of the Length of the Way, and of the Resistance of the Mediums. Let
the Right Line m represent the Resistance that Light finds in its passage
through Air, and n the Resistance of its Passage through Glass: The Difficulty
of the Way from C to E shall be as the Rectangle under C E and m; and from E TO
G as the Rectangle under E G and n. Therefore that the Difficulty of the whole
Way C E G may be the least possible, the Sum of the Rectangles C E * m + E G *
n ought to be the least of all possible; or less than C F * m + F G * n,
supposing any other Point F taken besides E. The Point E is now required.
Wherefore, seeing the Points C and G, and also the Right Line A B are given by
Position, therefore the Lines C H, G L, Perpendiculars to the Plain A B, and
the Line H L, are given also. Let us call C H, c, and G L, g, and H L, b; but
the sought Line E H, let us call y; then E L shall be h - y, and C E shall be
^: c c + y y, which we shall call p; and E G shall be ^: g g + y y - 2 h y + h
h, which we shall call q.

Wherefore m * ^ c c + y y: + n * ^: g g + y y - 2 h y + h h (or m p + + n q)
ought to be the least of all those Quantities that can possibly be so
expressed; and it is required to determine y, that so it may be. By my Method De
Maximis and Minimis (Vid. Act. Lips. Ann. 1684. page 467. 472.) which, beyond
all that are hitherto known, does wonderfully shorten the Calculation, it is
manifest at the first sight, almost without any Calculation, That m q y shall
be equal to n p * ^ h - y, or that n p. m q:: y. h - y, that is, the Rectangle
of C E - n shall be the to Rectangle of E G * m:: As E H to E L. Therefore C E
and E G being put equal, n the Resistance of Glass to Light shall be to m the
Resistance of Air to Light:: As E H the Sine of the Angle of Incidence in Air C
E I: To E L the Sine of the Refracted Angle in Glass G E K. Or these Sines
shall be to each other reciprocally as the Resistances of the Mediums. Which
was the Assertion to be proved.

Wherefore, if in one Example or Experiment E L be found of E H, the same
Proportion shall hold in all other Experiments, wherever C and G be taken, that
in Air, this in Glass. If C be in Air, and G in Water, Experiment shows, that E
L shall be about of E H.

Thus far this ingenious Author. The rest of his Discourse is chiefly employed
in rectifying Descartes Notion of Refraction, Des. Cart. Notion of Refraction
rectified.
which tho founded on the same Principle here expressed, yet has this peculiar,
that he makes Water, or Glass, or any other more Dense Medium, resist the
Progress of Light less than Air. But in this particular he is abundantly
rectified by Leibnutzius, who shows the Incongruity of that Supposition.

(3.) One thing more there is remarkable in the Learned Leibnutzius Discourse,
which I cannot here pass over, and that is, A pious Reflection which he makes
on this occasion, concerning Final Causes. R^mar on Fina^ Causes.
For it is manifest, that the Ray proceeding from C, does not consult with it
self, how it may with the greatest ease arrive at the Point E, or D, or G;
neither is it carried by it self to those Points. But the Great Creator of all
things, has so made Light, that this most beautiful, orderly, and admirable
Event should result from its very Nature. Wherefore they are in a great Error,
who reject Final Causes in Natural Philosophy, which, besides affording us
occasion of admiring and adoring the Divine Wisdom, do often discover to us a
curious Principle of finding out the Properties of those things whose inward
Nature is not so clearly known by us, as that we can explain the immediate
efficient Causes and Instruments, which the Almighty Mover imploys in producing
those Effects, and obtaining those Ends.

Indeed I should think it an Attempt worth the Thought of some profound
Philosopher, to give an Account of those admirable, orderly, and beautiful
Appearances in Nature, whereof we can most plainly apprehend the Designs and
Final Causes, Final C^uses highly deserve our notice.
but can hardly proceed to any farther Knowledge of them. (Thus for instance,
suppose it were asked, What is the cause of Refraction? Were it not much
satisfactory to answer, That thereby the Ray may proceed the easiest way
possible) This surely might be able to convince the most obstinate Opposers of
Divinity: For certainly, if we can rely upon any Deduction or Consequence drawn
out by the Mind of Man, we may assuredly rest satisfied in this; that so many
Phenomenon, stupendous and surprising for their designed Contrivance, could not
proceed but from an Omnipotent and Designing Being. But if after all, they will
arrive to such an height of Extravagance, as to say, We cannot rely on these
Conclusions, as being all in the dark, and knowing nothing; let them look to
the hazard of their own Principles, who endanger their eternal Happiness on
confidence of their own Arguments. But to resume our Subject.

The Famous Mons. Fermat has written a long Demonstration of this same
Principle in Dioptricks. Fermat demonstrates the same.
It Is published amongst the French Letters, at the end of his Opera
Mathematica. Tolosae 1679. Page 158. To which I refer the Reader.

(4.) But after all, perhaps it may not be amiss, Farther Explication
Refraction from D. Barrow.
to illustrate this Business of Refraction, by some more familiar and sensible
Instance. Wherefore Tab. 38. Fig. 5. T. 38. F. 5.
Let the Parallelogram A B C D represent a Ray of Light of this breadth, and
let it fall on the plain Surface of the Glass E F; this in some measure does
stop its Course; and the Point B entering the Glass, shall endeavor (but
slower) to proceed onwards directly to G in the Line A B produced. But all this
while the Point D, continuing yet in the Air, shall continue its former motion
in the Right Line C D H, but now it is impossible for both the Points to obtain
what both endeavor; for each cannot perform his direct Motion, one slower, and
the other quicker. And therefore that they may both come nighest to what each
endeavors, they shall both be turned about some certain Point Z in the Right
Line D B produced. So that whilst the Point D in the thinner Medium proceeding
quicker describes the greater Arch D d; the Point B, proceeding more slowly in
the more Dense Medium, describes the lesser Arch B b; and when they have thus
run through both these Arches, the Right Line B D shall obtain the Posture b d.
And now that the Point D also is emerged into the more Dense Medium at d; and
it also is now as much retarded as b; these circular Motions shall now cease;
for D is not now carried quicker than B, and therefore describes not, as
before, a greater Arch. Wherefore forsaking, as soon as they can, their former
Progress, they shall both proceed in d c, b a, the Tangents to their Arches.
And the whole Ray A B C D thus bent, and brought into the Posture a b c d
proceeds onwards directly in that Course. And here it is to be noted, That
whatever Inclination A B has on E F, the Arches D d, B b, or their
Semidiameters Z D, Z B, have always the same Proportion* to wit, such a
Proportion, as the peculiar Difference in the Resistance or Density of one and
the other Medium does require (which is to be determined by Experiment): For Tab.
38. Fig. 6. T* 38. F. 6*
Let us suppose the Point B thrust forwards toward Q or N, and that the Medium
below E F is perfectly Homogeneous, that is, equally resisting in all Parts
thereof; there is then no reason, why this Point should not be carried with an
equal Celerity toward whatever Part, that is, it shall tend equally quick
toward Q in the Right Line O B Q (supposing its direction lie that way) as
toward N in the Right Line A B N* And therefore the Rays of Light A B, O B,
however differently inclined, shall find an equal Resistance; and the Point B,
whether it tend toward Q or N, shall be equally retarded. And also seeing the
Point D ( Tab. 38. Fig. 5.) T. 38. F. 5.
continues in the first Medium, it shall be thrust forwards with the same
Celerity, whatever is its Inclination. Whence it is manifest, that these
Motions, or Paths passed over in the same time, to wit, the circular Arches D
d, B b, shall always observe the same Proportion, that is, the Proportion of
their Semidiameters Z D, Z B, or Z d, Z b; which Proportion therefore
principally and chiefly measures and determines the Refractions of Rays in the
same two Mediums. And this is the same Proportion, as is between the Sines of
the Angles opposite to Z d* Z B, in the Triangle Z d B, that is, of the Angles
Z B d, (or Z B E) and Z d B. But Z B E is the Complement of the Angle A B E,
and therefore (by Def. 2. Part. I.) Z B E is the Angle of Incidence or
Inclination of A B to E F; and the Angle Z d B is the Complement of the Angle F
d c; and therefore Z d B is the Refracted Angle (by Def. 3. Part. I.). From
hence is manifest what we assert in the 7 Experiment, Part I. And here we shall
note, that according to Exper. 6. Part I. Z D shall be to Z B:: As 300 To 193;
or as 14 to 9.

(5.) And thus much concerning Refraction. The Consideration whereof does
naturally suggest unto us, That Light is a Body. Light a Body.
For however the Ancient Aristotelians defined it, Actus perspicui quatenus
perspicuum, which is perfectly unintelligible; yet so much we may perceive
hereby, that they designed to exclude it from all Corporeal Notion. But the
various Properties of Light, that do necessarily belong to a Body, are so many
and evident, that they leave no room for any farther doubt in this matter. I
shall mention but a few.

(6.) And first, by this Affection of being refracted, it is manifest that
Light, From its being resisted in its passage through Diaphanous Mediums.
in its passage through this and the other Diaphanous Body does find a different
Resistance. Now it is unconceivable, how any thing, but Body, should suffer
Resistance; but we may conceive the Resistance, that Light suffers in its
passage through different Diaphanous Bodies, to proceed from the Medium
Hindering of the Diffusion or Distribution of Light through more of the Parts
of this Medium, and consequently it may be said to be less illuminable. For the
Nature of Light endeavors to diffuse it self. And on the contrary, by how much
Light does more equably or uniformly affect the Parts of the Medium, which it
enlightens; or by how much it communicates its Energy to more of the Particles
of the enlightened Space; that Medium may be said to be by so much the more
illuminable, or less to resist the Progress of Light. Whence it is, that by how
much the affected Parts of the Medium are more solid and small, and admit
between them the less Space for any other Heterogeneous Matter, that suffers
not by Light; by so much the Medium is said to be more enlightened. But leaving
these Philosophical Refinements; it is manifest that Resistance must proceed
from Contact of two Bodies. And Contact, either Active or Passive, belongs only
to Body; according to that of the Philosophic Poet, (...)
Tangere enim and tangi nisi Corpus nulla potest Res. And our Savior himself,
the Fountain of all Wisdom and Philosophy, Divine and Natural, seems to confirm
this Notion; when to prove himself a True Body after his Resurrection, He
commands his Diffident Disciple To Touch Him.

(7.) The Second Property, that confirms Light to be a Body, and a Body moved
or thrust forward, is, That it requires time to pass from one place to another,
Requiring time to move from place to place.
and does it not in an instant, but is only of all Motions the quickest. For
the Experiment proving this, we are obliged to the Ingenious Mons. Romer, who
has demonstrated beyond all Contradiction, from the Observations of the
Immersions and Emersions of the Satellits of Jupiter; That Light requires the
Time of one Second to move the space of 3000 Leagues, or 9000 Miles, which is
near the Earths Diameter. He that requires a farther Account hereof, may
consult the Iournal des Scavans 1676. December. 7. Philosoph. Transact. Number. 136.
Or Mr. Newton's Incomparable Piece, Philosophiae Nature. Princ. Mathem. Lib. I.
Schol. Prop. 96. Where it is asserted, That Light requires about ten Minutes
time to come from the Sun to the Earth. And it is most evident, without this
Allowance for the Time spent in Lights Motion, the Appearances of the Satellits
Eclipses and Emersions are not to be explicated by any Excentricity or other
Hypothesis. But by this Allowance, they answer to the greatest exactness. And
this is a Part of Astronomy the most correct and accurately determined, as well
as the most useful, of all others: For hereby Geography may be rectified, the
Longitude determined, and Navigation made more easy and secure. For a
Confirmation of all which, I appeal to the Labors of the Ingenious Mr.
Flamsteed and Mr. Halley, to whom the Learned World is for ever obliged by
their Advancements of Astronomy.

(8.) A third proof that Light is a Body, Light not to be increased* but by
robbing some other place of its Light.
is, That it cannot by any Art or Contrivance whatsoever be increased or
deminished; that is to say, we cannot magnify (for instance) the Light of the
Sun or a Candle, no more than we can magnify a Cubick Inch of Gold, or make it
more than a Cubick Inch. But in this particular I desire to be rightly
understood, lest I seem herein to advance a Paradox. I say therefore, Whenever
we see Light increased, it is by Robbing of some other part of the Medium of its
Light; or, by bringing the Light, that naturally should have been diffused
through some other part, to the more enlightened place. Thus for Example, In a
Burning-Glass, by which the Light of the Sun is highly increased in its Focus,
or Burning-Spot: We are first to consider, that in this Focus the Image of the
Sun is projected, as being the Distinct Base of the Glass. And secondly we may
observe all round about this bright Spot of the Suns Image, there is cast the
strong Shadow of the whole breadth of the Burning-Glass. For all the Rays from
the Sun, that would have fallen on this broad shaded space, are now brought
together and crowded close in this bright Spot, there raising a vigorous Light
and violent Heat. This is abundantly confirmed by an easy Experiment: For
cover all the Burning-Glass, except one small round space in its middle, just
the bigness of the bright burning Spot in its Focus; and tho there be a shaded
space round the bright Speck, as before, yet we shall not be sensible of any
Increase either of Light of Heat; which plainly shows, that this Increase of
Light (when the Glass is all bare) proceeds from the crowding together of those
Rays that would have fallen on the rest of the Glass, and which (were not the
Glass interposed) would have fallen on the shaded space round about the bright
Speck.

There seems but one Objection against what is here laid down; and that is,
that Light is increased by Reflection, without depriving any place of the Light
it would otherwise receive; or, without bringing to the enlightened part any
Light that would otherwise escape it, or never come at it. But if we consider
the matter more attentively, we shall find it otherwise. For let us suppose an
Hole of a Foot square in the side of a Chamber, and that a Candle were placed
close to, and just before the middle of this Hole; there is but half this
Candle that now enlightens this Room, the other half of the Rays proceeding
directly out at the Hole: Let now a Looking-Glass be placed, so as just to fill
up this Hole; the Rays which before would have gone out at the Hole, are now
reflected into the Room; so that the Hemisphere without the Chamber, which was
enlightened whilst the Hole continued open, is now robbed of its Light; and all
this Light is now reflected into the Room; whereby the averse side of the Flame
is made to enlighten, as well as the side directly exposed to the Chamber. What
is said of this Case, may be accommodated to all: For so a Looking-Glass lying
Horizontal, and reflecting the Sunbeams to the Ceiling of the Room, does
plainly hinder the direct progress of the Rays to some other part, and
consequently robs that part of its Light. This is evident, by supposing an Hole
behind the Glass; as in the former Case.

(9.) From all which ^tis manifest, how vainly they attempt, who offer at
increasing Light Uniformly, Light not to be increased uniformly.
that is, equally throughout the whole Sphere of a Luminous Body, or Radiating
Point. Such are the Pretenses of those that would persuade the World of
Contrivances for making the small Flame of a Lamp enlighten strongly a whole
Chapel, Hall, or Court, by being hung up in the midst thereof. For these
things are impossible to be effected in Nature, and they had as well pretend to
create Light; for there is no other way of increasing it; unless by robbing
another part of its Light; and then it is not uniformly increased. We have a
very sensible Instance of this in the New-invented Lanthorns, now much used in
London; which by the Convex-Glasses in their sides, do strongly throw those
Rays along the Walks of the Passengers, which would otherwise (were the Glasses
away, and the round Holes left open) be spent on parts of the Streets not
frequented; whereby the untrodden parts of the Streets are robbed of their
Light, more strongly to supply and enlighten the Paths where Light is requisite.

I have insisted the longer on this particular, because there is nothing more
commonly pretended, than this Invention of increasing Light uniformly, by those
that do not consider how vain the Attempt is. I must confess, could the thing
be effected, it would be a piece of Oeconomick Philosophy, the most pleasant
and useful imaginable, and equivalent to the perpetual Lamp (if ever there was
any such thing, as I very much doubt). The Student in his Closet, the Merchant
in his Shop, the Housewife in her Offices, would find a great and pleasant
Advantage therein. But above all, the dark Northern Climates* who are many
Days, Weeks, and Months deprived of the Sun, would be infinitely obliged to the
Inventor, who could make the Flame of a Lamp, no bigger than a Barly-Corn,
supply the Presence of that glorious Body.

CHAP. II.
Dioptrick Problem.
Why Four Convex-Glasses in a Telescope show Objects Erect.
I was unwilling to burden the First Part with Digressions; and therefore in
Prop. LVI. thereof, I promised this Discourse in this place.

In the Iournal der Scavans. For Monday 17. September. 1685. Page 466. Amst.
Edition We find this Passage.

As Perspectives of One Convex-Glass make Objects appear upright, which those
of Two Convex-Glasses invert; and again those of Three rectify: So it should
seem, that those of Four ought to invert. And yet Experience shows us that
Objects appear upright through these Glasses. The singularity of this
Phenomenon obliges all skilled in Dioptricks, to enquire the reason thereof;
but hitherto they have found none. Mons. Regis, who applies himself
particularly to this Part of Natural Philosophy, believes that he has hit upon
the Reason, and makes us hope that he will suddenly publish it.

Thus far the Iournal: But does not tell us whose Remark this is: I am apt to
believe, 'twas written by Mons. Regis himself, to the Publisher of the Iournal.

To me this Phenomenon appears very easily explicable from the consideration
of placing the Glasses in a Telescope. And I wonder that any one, who pretends
to Skill in Dioptricks, should make a Difficulty of it. The posture of the
Glasses in the Tube is thus; After the Object-Glass, the first Eye-Glass is
placed so much distant (toward the Eye) from the Focus of the Object-Glass, as
is this Focus of the Eye-Glass; then the second or middle Eye-Glass is placed
so much distant from the Focus of the first Eye-Glass, as is the Focus of this
middle Eye-Glass. Lastly, the nearest or third Eye-Glass is placed so much
distant from the Focus of the middle Eye-Glass, as is the Focus of this nearest
Eye-Glass; and the Eye, looking through them all, is placed in the Focus of
this nearest Eye-Glass.

I say therefore first, that one single Convex-Glass, cannot properly be said
by it self, to show Objects erect or reverse; but only in respect of placing
the Eye that looks through it; and in respect of the Objects Distance from it.
For if the Eye that looks through such a single Convex-Glass, be placed nigher
thereto than the Glasses Focus or Distinct Base, distant Objects appear erect:
If the Eye be placed just in the Focus or Distinct Base, distant Objects are
neither erect or reversed, but all in Confusion between both. And if the Eye be
placed farther from the Glass than the Focus or Distinct Base, distant Objects
are reversed.

This being laid down, I assert, secondly, That the Object-Glass of a
Telescope, consisting of a Unequal Object-Glass, and Unequal Eye-Glass, reverses
the Object, both to the Eye-Glass, and to the Eye that looks through it. For
the Eye-Glass is placed farther from the Object-Glass, than is the Focus of the
Object-Glass. And the Eye-Glass does nothing toward the rectifying or
reversing. Thus we see the reversing of Objects in a Telescope of two
Convex-Glasses, proceeds wholly from the Object-Glass, and its Position; and
the Eye-Glass has nothing to do in the Affair: For were the Eye it self in the
place of the Eye-Glass, it would see the Object inverted through the single
Object-Glass.

I come now to consider the second Eye-Glass placed after the first Eye-Glass.
And here it is manifest, that placing this as it ought in a Telescope; if we
place our Eye nearer to this middle Eye-Glass than its Focus the Eye sees the
Object inverted and confused: Place the Eye in the Focus, it sees the Object
all in confusion, neither erect nor reversed. For here again, there is a
distinct Representation of the Object to be received on a piece of Paper, as in
the Focus of the Object-Glass; and the Eye being placed at any time in this
place, being in the Distinct Base, sees all in confusion, (all which is
manifest from the First Part, and therefore but lightly touched here). But then
let the Eye be placed farther from this middle Eye-Glass than its Focus (for so
is the third or immediate Eye-Glass, it being always distant from the middle
Eye-Glass, the Aggregate of both their Foci), it perceives the Object erect and
confused.

Lastly, the third or immediate Eye-Glass does nothing toward the erecting or
reversing the Species, which it receives erect from the middle Eye-Glass; no
more than, in a Telescope of two Convex-Glasses, the Eye-Glass does to the
Species it receives from the Object-Glass; as is shown before. All which will
be manifest from inspection only of Tab. 37. Fig. 1.

Wherefore we are to consider the Telescope consisting of a Unequal Object-Glass
and three Unequal Eye-Glasses, as two Telescopes, each consisting of two
Convex-Glasses. The first consists of the Object-Glass and first Eye-Glass, and
this inverts the Species; that is, the Species is inverted in the Distinct Base
of the Object Glass, and is so brought to the Eye. The second Telescope
consists of the two immediate Eye-Glasses, and this erects what the former
inverted; that is, the Species in the Distinct Base of the middle Eye-Glass is
erect, and is so brought to the Eye, by the Eye-Glass. The Eye-Glasses
themselves, in either Case, having nothing to do with the erecting or
inverting, but merely in representing in the same posture the Image immediately
before them.

The French Problem* should not therefore have broken a Telescope of four
Convex-Glasses into four Pieces, but into two; and the Case would then have
been plain; whereas, by breaking it into four Perspective-Glasses, that is
attributed to two of them, which neither of them does, viz. Inverting and
Erecting.

Therefore I say lastly, That one Convex-Glass (that is the Object-Glass) as
posited in this Telescope, inverts: The second (that is the first Eye-Glass)
does nothing toward erecting or reversing; but represents the Image as it is
in the Distinct Base of the Object-Glass before it, that is, inverted. The
third Glass erects, or rather restores what was before inverted. The fourth
represents the Image, as it receives it from the Distinct Base of the third,
that is, erect.

And this I think a sufficient and easy Answer to what the French Man makes a
great Difficulty.

As a Corollary to what has been laid down in this Chapter, we may deduce this
Practical Rule for combining or putting together a Telescope of Prop. LVI.

Take the two first Eye-Glasses, and combine them by Trials, so as to make a
Distinct Inverting Telescope of Prop. L.

Then take the Object-Glass and first Eye-Glass, and by Trials combine them
likewise.

Lastly, take both these Telescopes, and without altering the Distances of
their Glasses in either of them singly, by Trials combine both these
Telescopes, till the Appearance be clear and distinct.

What is here done by Trials, may be effected by actual Mensuration, or
designing out the Distances of the Glasses from each other by knowing their
Focal Lengths.

CHAP. III.
Of Glasses for defective Eyes.
(1.) Spectacles for old and pur-blind Men an Invention in Dioptricks of great
use. (2.) Some Rules for choosing Spectacles both for old and pur-blind. (3.)
Observations on Mr. Hook's Invention for helping Myopes by Unequal Glasses. (4.)
Telescopes and Microscopes adapted to defective Eyes.

(1.) WEre there no farther Use of Dioptricks than the Invention of Spectacles
for the Help of defective Eyes; Spectacles for old and pur-blind* Men, an
Invention of great use.
whether they be those of old Men, or those of pur-blind Men; I should think
the Advantage that Mankind receives thereby, inferior to no other Benefit
whatsoever, not absolutely requisite to the support of Life. For as the Sight
is the most noble and extensive of all our Senses; as we make the most frequent
and constant use of our Eyes in all the actions and concerns of human Life;
surely that Instrument that relieves the Eyes when decayed, and supplies their
Defects, rendering them useful, when otherwise almost useless, must needs, of
all others, be esteemed of the greatest Advantage. In what a miserable
condition do we count those, Condition of old Men deplorable without Spectacles.
in whom it has pleased the great Contriver of the Eyes and Sight, to shut
those two little Windows of the Soul? And we may imagine, that they, in whom
these Lights are but partly obscured, do in some measure partake of the Misery
of the blind. How melancholy is the condition of him, who only enjoys the Sight
of what is immediately about him? With what Disadvantage is he engaged in most
of the Concerns of human Life? Reading is to him troublesome, War more than
ordinary dangerous, Trade and Commerce toilsome and unpleasant. And so
likewise, on the other hand; How forlorn would the latter part of most Men's
Lives prove, unless Spectacles were at hand to help our Eyes, and a little
formed piece of Glass supplied the Decays of Nature? The curious Mechanic,
engaged in any minute Works, could no longer follow his Trade than till the
50th. or 60th. Year of his Age: The Scholar no longer converse with his Books,
or with an absent Friend in a Letter. All after would be melancholy Idleness,
or he must content himself to use an other Man's Eyes for every Line. Thus
forlorn was the state of most old Men, and many young, before this admirable
Invention; which, on this very account, can never be prized too highly.

(2.) And because in the First Part hereof, Prop. XXVIII. and XLV. I have but
slightly touched on the proper Method for helping defective Eyes; Rules for
Choosing Spectacles both for old and pur-blind.
I think it convenient to prosecute that matter more fully in this place.
Always supposing what foregoes in the First Part as understood.

First therefore for helping the Eyes of old Men, as being more frequently and
universally requisite than the Relief of pur-blind Eyes.

In the First Part ( Prop. XXVIII. Sec. 8. and Prop. XXXI.) we learn, that a
Convex-Glass is here to be used: For these seeing distant Objects distinctly,
and nigh Objects confusedly, must use such Glasses for reading, etc. as make
nigh Objects appear as distant; or, which bring the Rays from each single Point
in a nigh Object, as if they came from a more distant Point. Or thus, seeing
the Crystallines of old Men are too flat for nigh Objects, that is, want
Convexity; we are to help them by adding to them an artificial or adventitious
Convexity of a Glass. But then our enquiry must be, What is a Proper Convexity
to this or that particular Eye? And because reading, or working curious small
Works, as being engaged upon nigh Objects, are the chief Employments wherein
Spectacles are requisite. I shall suppose our Enquiry chiefly designed for this
purpose. And indeed, tho there can hardly be any Rules laid down, strictly to
determine this matter; for distinct Sight may consist within a great Latitude:
Yet if we observe the following Directions, we shall be apt to err less, and to
fit our Eyes better with Spectacles, than if we observed no Rule at all, but
chose at a venture.

First, When we first find our selves begin to require Spectacles, let us make
choice of the flattest Convexities, that will possibly help our Eyes. These are
usually called Young Spectacles. There are many ways of finding our and trying
such; but none more ready, obvious, and easy, than trying with which one can
read a small Print distinctly, with the Book farthest from the Eyes; or try
which Spectacles burn at the greatest distance; for these Spectacles are the
most proper for those Eyes to use, and shall prejudice the Sight less, and
preserve it longest of any.

We may note likewise, that the distance of the Print, or Object from the Eye
continuing the same, a Convex-Glass may be said to be older or younger,
according at it is removed farther from or nigher to the Eye or Object. This is
manifest from the Doctrine in the First Part, concerning the Locus Apparens of
an Object through such a Glass. To which therefore I refer.

Secondly. If your naked Eyes can read a moderate Print at the full extent of
your Arms, or at the distance of about two Feet or two and an half; and you
desire a Pair of Spectacles to read with, at the usual Distance of reading,
viz. about a Foot or little more: Procure a Pair of Glasses of such a
Convexity, that an Object being exposed before them at the Distance of about a
Foot, they may have their Imaginary Focus, or the apparent Place of the Object,
distant from them about two, or two Feet and an half. Barrow, Lect. Opt* 14. p.
103.
All which may be easily obtained and effected by the Doctrine in the First
Part.

In the next place, for relieving the Eyes of the short-sighted, pur-blind, or
Myopes. We must consider, that these, laboring under the contrary Defect with
old Men (for they see nigh Objects distinctly, but distant Objects confusedly),
must be relieved with a Remedy of a contrary effect; and therefore they are
helped by Concave-Glasses, which bring the Rays of distant Objects into the
Eye, as if they were nigh. And because we may conceive the Crystallines of
these Eyes as too protuberant or unequal, therefore we are to take off from this
too great Convexity, by adding an adventitious Concavity. But then, there is
nothing so universally complained of by those who are thus affected, as the
Difficulty they find in fitting proper Glasses to their Eyes. For the removal
whereof, the following Rules may be observed.

First, That for viewing distant Objects, according to what is noted in the
First Part, Prop. XLV. If a short-sighted Person can read distinctly, or see
Objects at the distance of a Foot from his naked Eye; a Concave-Glass, whose
Virtual-Focal-Length is a Foot, makes such a Person see distant Objects
distinctly. And so of any otherwise disposed Eye. So that knowing the Distance
at which a pur-blind Person reads distinctly with unarmed Eyes, it is easy, by
the Doctrine in the First Part, to assign him a proper Glass for his Eye to see
distant Objects.

Secondly, For Glasses proper for Myopes to read by, or to see Objects at the
distance of about a Foot and half. Let us suppose Eyes so affected, as not to
be able to read, but at the distance of Four Inches; and that we desire Glasses
for these Eyes to read by, at the ordinary distance of about a Foot and half:
Let us form such Concave-Glasses, which, being exposed to an Object at the
distance of a Foot and half, may have their Virtual respective Focus at the
distance of four Inches. And so likewise for any other Distance. Barrow, Lect.
Opt. 14. p. 102.
All which is easily performed by those versed in the First Part of this Work.

Thirdly, We are to note, that Myops shall require different Glasses for
viewing Objects at different Distances. But the visive Faculty not being
contained within such strict and determined Limitations; that Glass which is
useful at an Object an hundred Foot distant, shall serve likewise at an Object
distant fifty Foot; but then it is not so helpful at one distant five Foot. But
another may be had proper even for this Distance, and not so useful at an
Object distant an hundred or fifty Foot. All which is manifest from the
Doctrine in the First Part.

Fourthly, There are some Eyes so ill conformed, that no Glasses whatever will
relieve them. Of this I have often heard a very ingenious Man and great
Philosopher Sir William Petty often complain in his own particula^. But then
this proceeds not from a too little, or too great a Convexity in the
Crystalline; but from some other Indisposition or ill Configuration, not to be
relieved by Glasses.

Lastly, Persons pur-blind labor under this great Inconvenience, that the
Glasses which relieve them in one particular, do hinder their strong Vision of
distant Objects in another particular. For as Concave-Glasses do order the Rays
from any one single Point, properly to be received by the Eye of a Myops: So at
the same time, they diminish the Appearance of the whole Object. And from hence
it is, that tho these sort of Eyes may be well enough relieved for Reading and
Writing at a convenient distance, and for seeing pretty large Objects at the
distance of 100, 200, or 500 Foot; yet for Objects much farther, unless they be
very large indeed, they are not so easily supplied.

(3.) And here I cannot but take notice of an ingenious intimation of Mr. Hooks
M. Hook's Contrivance for helping Myopes considered.
(to whom the World is certainly much obliged for his curious Contrivances in
Mechanics, and his other Philosophic Endeavors) published in Number. 3. of the
Philosophical Collections. Land. 1681. which he calls Myopibus Iuvamen. It Is
briefly this, That some sort of short-sighted Persons, who cannot be relieved
by Concave Glasses, may perhaps find some help in Convex-Glasses; their Eyes
being removed at a convenient distance farther from these Glasses than their
Distinct Bases. As for reading by these Glasses; the Book must be inverted, and
then the Image in the Distinct Base shall be erect, and the Eye shall perceive
it erect. As for Writing, the Difficulty is greater than mentioned by the
Learned Author: For the Myops must not only learn to write inverted, but also
retrograde, viz. from the Right to the Left Hand; and, what is yet more
inconvenient, from the bottom toward the top of the Page; which is hardly
practicable on account of blotting the wet Writing. As for viewing distant
Objects with these Glasses; I acknowledge with the ingenious Author, that much
of the Disagreableness of the inverted Prospect is taken off by use and custom,
as I my self have experienced by my frequent use of inverting Telescopes. But
yet I cannot go so far with the Author, as to assent to his Deduction from
hence; which is, that it is only use and custom that makes us judge Objects
erect that are perceived by an inverted Image on the Fund of the Eye. For then
a Man standing on his Head, should judge the Trees and other Objects he sees
inverted; which no one in his Senses will do, but rather judge what is right,
viz. that he himself is inverted, whilst the circumjacent Objects continue
erect. This will be more evident to us, by considering the case of an adult
Person, who has been blind from his Birth, and now suddenly restored to his
Sight: He is not prejudiced by custom, and yet (doubtless) would judge as is
usual. But lastly, an other great Difficulty that will attend the use of these
Spectacles for Myopes, is, that they must be carried at such a distance from
the Eyes, that it will be very troublesome to manage them commodiously. And if*
to this again we add the distance requisite for the Object, I question whether
some Men's Arms will be long enough to manage a Pen for Writing, or turning the
Leaves of a Book.

I have been the longer on this Proposal, because the Worthy Author does
heartily invite all, to communicate to the Public, what real Benefit by it, or
Objections against it, they shall find.

(4.) I shall conclude this Chapter with the way of Adapting Telescopes and
Microscopes to defective Eyes. Adapting Telescopes and Microscopes to defective
Eyes.
Which is briesly thus;

A Telescope composed of a Unequal Object-Glass and Concave Eye-Glass, being
applied to an old Eye, the Eye-Glass may be a little farther removed from the
Object-Glass than ordinarily: On the contrary, in such a Telescope for the Eye
of a Myops, the Eye-Glass may be removed a little nigher to the Object-Glass;
the reason hereof is manifest from what has been delivered in the First Part.
But then, how much farther, or nigher they are to be removed, is only to be
determined by Experiment, and by every ones fitting the Glass to his own Eye.

And so likewise in Telescopes composed of a Unequal Object-Glass, and Unequal
Eye-Glass: For the Eye of an old Man, the Eye-Glass may be removed a little
farther from the Object-Glass, or from the Distinct Base. And for the Eye of a
Myops a little nigher to the Object-Glass, than for Eyes naturally and orderly
affected.

In like manner for Microscopes; First the simple or single Unequal for an old
Eye, is to be removed a little farther from the Object; and for a Myops, a
little nigher the Object, than the usual posture.

And so in Double Microscopes. For an old Eye, the Eye-Glass is to be a little
farther from the Object-Glass or Distinct Base; And for a Myops, a little
nigher the Object-Glass or Distinct Base. And because in these, the Distinct
Base is brought nigher to, or farther from the Eye-Glass (without altering the
Distance of the Eye-Glass and Object-Glass), only by removing the whole
Microscope nigher to or farther from the very Object: This latter Motion
effects the same as the former; and therefore may be used for old or short
Sights instead of the former.

CHAP. IV.
Of Mechanick-Dioptricks,
(1.) Chief Authors that have treated of Grinding or Forming Optick-Glasses.
(2.) For trying whether a Glass be not plain. (3.) For finding the Focal
Lengths of Glasses. (4.) Concerning the Center of a Glass. (5.) For trying the
Regularity and Goodness of an Object-Glass. (6.) Managing great Glasses, and
the Author's Treating thereof. (7.) Proportioning Glasses in Telescopes (8.)
Mr. Hooks's Contrivance for making an Object-Glass of a small Sphere serve a
long Tube.

(1.) I Design not in this Chapter to deliver at large the several ways of
Grinding and Forming Optick-Glasses, Authors treating of Glass-grinding.
the manner of making the Forms, Tools, or Dishes wherein they are shaped; or
the various Machines contrived by several ingenious Heads for this p^rpose: For
this may justly require a particular Treatise by it self. And because nothing
of this kind has ever yet appeared in English, according as I find the present
Work accepted, I may perhaps hereafter attempt something in this way, for the
satisfaction of some ingenious English Spirits, who may be inclinable to offer
at these Exercises. In the mean time, they that are Masters of the Languages
wherein they are written, may apply themselves to Pere Cherubin's Dioptrique
Oculaire, Cherubin.
and Zahn's Oculus Artificialis; Zahn.
wherein they will find an abundance on this Subject. But after all that can be
writ concerning it, Practice and Experience will find out many Conveniences
and Inconveniences, which can hardly be committed to Words, or described; and
therefore this is at last the best Instructour. But here I shall mention the
chief Modern Authors that have contrived Engines for Grinding Glasses, that
those who please may consult them. Mr. Hook Hook.
in his Micrographia describes an Engine for this purpose. Hevelius Hevelius.
in his Selenographia, Chap. I, II. describes another for Modelling the Forms
or Dishes for Grinding Spherick Glasses. And in the First Part of his Machina
Coelestis, Chap. XXIII. describes one for Grinding Conick-Glasses* Ant. Mar.
Schyrleus de Rheita De Rheita
in his Oculus Enoch and Eliae, Lib. IV. has a Machine for Conick-Glasses.
Maignan Maignan.
at the end of his Perspectiva Horaria describes Machines both for Spherick and
Conick-Glasses. Descartes Des Carts
in his Dioptricks has another for Conick Glasses. Mons. Borelly Bo^e li.
has given the World the Secret of his manner of Grinding great Glasses in
Cyphe^, Iournal des Scavans, Ann. 1676. July 6. but has not yet obliged us with
the Discovery: Tho he be a Person of the greatest Candor and Freedom, and the
most communicative; as I am obliged to express with much Gratitude for his
Civilities showed me in Paris 1685. at which time he gave me an Object-Glass
formed by this way for a Telescope 24 Foot long. The celebrated Mons. Fatio de
Duillier De Duillier
(of whom Dr. Burnet gives deservedly so excellent a Character in his Letters
of Travails) in the Iournal des Scavan, Ann. 1684. November. 20. describes an
Invention of his own, for exactly forming the Dishes for Grinding Spherick
Glasses; which indeed is very ingenious, and perfectly new: But I cannot tell
how easily it may be practiced, without some farther Improvement; for his
Contrivances of the Block c, and of the Screws d, g, (I refer to his Figure)
seem not to have all the Motions requisite, to keep the Point e exactly true to
the Axis of the little Telescope h k.

The Incomparable Sir Christopher Wren, Wren.
our English Archimedes, Apollonius, Diophantus, proposes his Contrivance for
Forming Hyperbolick-Glasses, Number. 48. and 53. of the Philosophic. Transact.

But all farther Endeavors for Forming Conick-Glasses, Conick-Glasses not
better than Spherick From Mr. Newton.
which have hitherto been wholly frustrated and unsuccessful, may now be put to
a full stop; when we hear in this matter the Opinion of as great a Philosopher
and Mathematician, as this or any Age could ever boast of, The Celebrated Mr.
Newton of Cambridge, who in his profound Treatise, Philosophiae Naturalis
Principia Mathematica, has fathomed the greatest Depths of Nature, and laid a
Foundation for Posterity to raise an infinite Superstructure. Thus he, in the
First Book, Schol. ad Prop. XCVIII. Ad usus autem Opticos, etc. In English as
follows, But for all Optic Uses, Spherick Figures are the most commodious. If
the Object-Glasses of Telescopes were composed of two Spherick-Glasses
containing Water between them, perhaps the Irregularity of the Refractions that
are made on the Surfaces of the Glasses toward their edges, may be accurately
enough corrected by the Refractions of the Water. And such Object-Glasses are
preferable to Elleptick or Hyperbolick-Glasses; not only because they are
easier and more accurately to be formed; but also because they refract more
accurately those Pencils of Rays that are (collateral or) out of the Glasses
Axis. But the different Refrangibility of different Rays, will for ever hinder
us from perfecting Optics by Glasses either of Spherick, or any other Figures
whatsoever. And unless we can correct the Errors that arise from hence, all our
Labor is lost in other Corrections.

And indeed if we consider it right, we shall find it impossible, by whatever
Figures to render the Appearance of the Collateral Parts of an Object of so
distinct as the direct; for the very natural Eye does it not; and therefore we
are forced to apply it successively directly before the Parts of any Object we
design to view: And we may well despair to perform by Art, more than what the
Almighty Framer of the Eye has given us a Pattern for.

What this Great Man means by the Different Refrangibility of Different Rays,
Different Refrangibility of Rays.
We may find, Number. 80. p. 3075. N. 83. p. 4059. N. 84. p. 4087. N. 85. p. 5004.
N. 88. p. 5084. N. 110. p. 217. N. 121. p. 499. N. 123. p. 556. N. 128. p. 692*
of the Philosoph. Transactions; wherein he lays down a perfectly new and most
ingenious Theory of Light.

In the same Tracts, Number. 81, 82, 83. we may find an Account of a new
Cata-Dioptrical Telescope, Cata-Dioptrick Telescope.
invented by this same excellent Person.

(2.) All that I shall offer at more in this Chapter, is, Trying whether a
Glass be not plain.
to lay down some practical Rules for finding the Foci and Centres of Glasses;
with some other Accidental Remarks, that may be requisite to the clearer
understanding and performance of some Precepts delivered in this Treatise.

The Object-Glasses of Telescopes are generally of so little Curvity on their
Superficies, that by looking on them or by feeling them, it cannot be
discovered, whether they are plain or of a Spherick Figure; or which is formed
on a Sphere of a greater, which of a lesser Radius. To find this (as I have
said before, in Schol. Prop. XXXI. Part I.) we are to shake the Glass nimbly at
our Arms length before the Eye; and if the Objects seen through it seem to
dance or move, the Glass is not plain. And that Glass which makes the Objects
seem the most to move is formed on the less Sphere, whether Unequal or Concave.

(3.) When we have thus found our Glasses to be Spherick. Then supposing them
Unequal, For finding the Foci of Glasses.
there are several Methods for finding their Foci. I shall lay down some of the
plainest and most certain.

First, for Glasses of pretty deep Convexities (that is, of small Spheres),
apply them to the end of a Scale of Inches and Decimal Parts, and expose them
before the Sun; and upon the Scale, we shall find the bright Intersection of
the Rays exactly measured out. Or expose them in the Hole of a dark Chamber;
and where a white Paper receives the distinct Representation of distant
Objects, there is the Focus of this Glass. This is an universal and certain way
for all Convexes. For a Glass of a pretty long Focus, observe some distant
Objects through it, and recede from the Glass, till the Eye perceive all in
confusion, or till the Objects begin just to appear inverted; here the Eye is
in the Focus. If it be a Plano-Convex Glass, make it reflect the Sun against a
Wall; we shall on the Wall perceive two sorts of Light, one more bright within
an other more obscure; withdraw the Glass from the Wall, till the bright Image
is at its smallest; the Glass is then distant from the Wall about the fourth
part of its Focal Length. If it be a double Unequal, expose each side to the Sun
in like manner, and observe both the Distances of the Glass from the Wall: The
first Distance is about half the Radius of the Convexity turned from the Sun,
and the second Distance is about half the Radius of the other Convexity likewise:
Thus we have the Radii of the two Convexities; whence the Focus is determined
by Prop. III. Part I. The reason hereof depends on the Doctrine of Catoptricks.

But the most exact way of determining the just Focal Length of the
Object-Glass of a Telescope, is what I shall lay down in Chap. V. Sec. 4. of
this Part, which, because I must necessarily deliver in that place, I will not
here anticipate.

The Foci of Concaves are obtained by Reflection; Foci of Concaves.
for as a Concave Miroir or Speculum burns at the distance of about half the
Radius of the Concavity; so a Concave-Glass being supposed a Reflecting
Speculum, shall unite the Rays of the Sun, at the distance of about half the
Radius of the Cavity.

(4) Before we proceed to the Centration of Glasses, Concerning the Centres of
Glasses.
we are to recollect the 18th. Definition of the First Part, wherein we define
the Axis of a Glass. I say therefore, when the Axis of a Glass passes directly
through the Center of the Glasses Breadth, or roundness of its Aperture, that
Glass is said to be truly centred. And this will always be so when the Glass is
equally thick round the edges of its Aperture. But this will be more
intelligible by a Scheme Tab. 40. Fig. 1. T. 40. F. 1.
Let a g d e a be a Plano-Convex* Glass, much thicker toward the Edge d e,
than toward a; let a g be equal to g d, g is the Center of this Glass, for
it is the middle Point of its Aperture or Breadth. But then this Glass is not
truly centered: For, to l the Center of the Convexity a g d draw g l, I say g l
is not the Axis of this Glass; but if there may an other Line l k be drawn,
whose Portion within the Glass i k is greater than h g (as in this Case it may
easily be demonstrated. For l k = l g and l h more than l i. For l i h = Rect.
therefore h g less than k i) and which being perpendicular to the plain Surface
a e, as well as to the Unequal Surface a k d; l k must consequently be the Axis
of this Glass. Wherefore k is the true Center of this Glass. And because, to
complete this Glass, there is wanting the Portion d f e; therefore to make the
true Center of the Glass k, coincident with the middle Point of its Breadth or
Aperture; we are to make k b equal to k d; and then we are to cut off, or to
cover the Portion of the Glass b a c equal to d f e; and so we obtain the
complete and truly Centered Glass c b k d e c. The same may be understood of
double Convexes, without farther Explication.

But because in Object-Glasses of even moderate Lengths, it is impossible by the
Eye, or any Admeasurement of their Thickness, to know whether they be truly
Centered: Therefore we must have recourse to some other Methods, that may show
this. And these are various.

First, Holding the Glasses at a due distance from the Eye, let us observe the
two reflected Images of a Candle; and where these two Images unite or coalesce,
there is the true Center of the Glass; if this be in the middle of the Glasses
Breadth, the Glass is truly Centred; if not, we are to rectify it, shall be
declared hereafter.

A second way is, By presenting the Glass before the Sun, and making it reflect
the Light on a Plain nighly parallel to its Surface, at a proper distance; and
we shall perceive two sorts of Light reflected; one smaller, but much more
strong and vigorous, within another more faint and large. Then by a due posture
of the Glass (found by Trials) both these Lights are to be projected as round
as possible; and at a proper distance from the Wall on which they are
reflected; the round brightest Spot is to be brought into the smallest compass
that it can (Trial will make all this plain). When the Glass is in this
posture, if the bright Spot be projected just in the middle of the fainter
Light, the Glass is well centred. If it be projected to the Left Hand of this
middle, the Glass is thickest toward the Left Hand Edge. And so to whatever
side of the faint Light, this bright Spot is projected, on that side is the
Glass thickest; and on that side lies the true Center. The reason hereof I
shall explain in a Plano-Convex-Glass, and is the same in a double Unequal;
mutatis mutandis. For the bright Spot is the Image of the Sun projected by the
curve Surface of the Glass considered as a reflecting Speculum (whereof more
hereafter), and the faint Light is the Reflection of the Sun from the other
plain Surface. Tab. 40. Fig. 2. T. 40. F. 2.
a d e is a Plano-Convex-Glass, thicker toward the side d e than toward a.
Let the Curvity a d (whose Center is c) be exposed directly to the Sun: By the
known Laws of Catoptricks, the Parallel Rays (from the middle Point of the Sun,
for instance) falling on the Curvity (which parallel Rays in the Figure are
expressed by continued Lines), are united in the Focus at f, distant from the
Curvity about half its Radius, there causing a brisk Light and Heat. In the
mean time these parallel Rays do fall on the plain Surface ae obliquely, and
are reflected thereby along the pricked Lines; and these are they which cause
the faint Light. Now it is manifest, that if a Plain at f, parallel to the plain
Surface a e, received these two Reflections, the bright Light at f would not be
found in the middle of the faint Light: For here we see the faint Light is
thrown much to one side. And the bright Light f is projected upwards from the
middle of the faint Light; for the Glass is thickest upwards toward its Edge d
e.

The third Way of Examining the Centres of Glasses is yet more complete than
the former; for it does not only discover the Fault (if there be any, as in
long Object-Glasses it is very rare but there is; especially if they be wrought
in the Form by the unguided Hand, and not by Engine), but withal, it rectifies
the Fault. It Is thus; Cover the Surface of the Glass with a thin piece of
Paper, in which there is cut a round Hole of about an Inch diameter, and round
about this Hole there are to be struck two or three Concentrick Circles; move
this Paper upon the Glass, till you see, on the plain that receives the
reflected Light, that the bright Spot is exactly in the middle of the other
fainter Light round it. This also one may measure by a Pair of Compasses,
having, to that end, slightly fixed the Paper to the Glass, that we may more
nicely determine, whether this bright Spot be exactly in the middle. This
therefore being carefully adjusted by gently sliding the Paper on the Glass (if
it be requisite), we are, without the least altering this true Position of the
Paper, to fix it more firmly to the Glass. And laying it thus on a Table, let
us mark on the Glass (by the Point of a Diamond) three Points in one of the
Circumferences Concentrick to the round Hole in the Paper. And sticking a small
piece of Cement on the Glass about the middle of the round Hole; by means of
the three marked Points, let us find the exact Center of this round Hole. Then
uncovering the whole Glass (except only the Cement in which the Center is
marked), with a Diamond-pointed Compass, let us strike as large a Circle on the
Glass, as its Breadth will bear. Then round the Glass according to this Circle,
and it is as exactly centred as the Sense can judge.

But note, That whereas I have said that the brighter Spot is smaller than the
fainter; and that the brighter Light is to be reflected into the middle of the
fainter. This is to be understood, supposing the Breadth of the Glass will
allow it. For the Glass may be so narrow, that the Projection of the bright
Image of the Sun may be broader than the Breadth of the Glass. But this happens
so seldom in Practice, that I pass it over.

Pere Cherubin, who is often very nice in matters of little moment, and loose
enough in those of greater weight and absolute necessity, describes an
implicated Contrivance for true Centring of Glasses. Vision Parfait. Tom. II.
p. 109.

(5.) The same Friar lays down a Way of Examining the Regularity and Goodness
of an Object-Glass, For trying the Regularity and Goodness of an Object-Glass.
page 25. which it may not be amiss here to insert. After we have centred the
Object-Glass as well as we can, by the foregoing Method: To try the Regularity
of its Form to the greatest exactness, says he, We must do thus, On a Paper
strike two Concentrick Circles; one whose Diameter is the same with the Breadth
of the Object-Glass; the other of half that Diameter. This inward Circumference
divide into six equal Parts, by the known way of applying the Radius six times
in the Circumference, and making six fine small Holes therein with a Needle.
Let us cover one side of the Glass with this Paper; and then exposing it to the
Sun, we are to receive the Rays that pass through these six Holes on a Plain at
a just distance from the Glass. And by withdrawing or approaching this Plain
from or to the Glass, we shall find, whether the Rays that pass through these
six Holes unite exactly together at any distance from the Glass; if they do, we
may be assured of the Regularity of this Glass, that is, of its just Form. And
at the same time we obtain exactly the Glasses Focal Length.

But after all, there is no better way for trying the Excellency of an
Object-Glass, than by placing it in a Tube; and trying it with small
Eye-Glasses at several distant Objects. For that Object-Glass that represents
the Objects the brightest and most distinct, and bears the greatest Ap^rture,
and most Unequal or Concave Eye-Glass, without coloring or Haziness, is surely
the best. The most convenient Object to try them at, is the Title Page of a
large Book; wherein there are generally Letters printed of diverse Magnitudes,
and therefore affords variety of small Objects; whereby the comparative
Excellency of Object-Glasses may be nicely estimated. This the Celebrated Mons.
Cassini, the French King's Astronomer, showed me when I visited him at the
Observatory in Paris, Ann. 1685. who tried all his Glasses by the large
Title Page of a Book, fixed inverted on the Jaume of a Steeple Window more than
^ of a Mile distant from the Observatoire.

(6) The next Piece of Mechanick-Dioptricks, which I shall mention, is, The
Managing Great Glasses. Manageing great Glasses.
And herein I shall not swell this Volume with describing those sumptuous
Contrivances and costly Machines invented for this purpose: It shall suffice me
to refer the Reader to the Original Authors, where he may find them described
at large.

Hevelius Hevelius.
in his Machina Coelestis, Part. I. Cap. 19, 20, 21, 22. describes the Engines
he used for his Telescopes. And amongst others, a Contrivance for managing his
Tube of 60 Foot, and another of 150 Foot long.

The deservedly Celebrated Mons. Hugens, Huge^s.
one of the chief Mathematick Luminaries of the present Age, has published a
small Tract, Astroscopia Compendiaria, designed only for Describing his way of
Managing great Glasses with very little trouble, and without a Tube. This I am
sure is no barren Speculation of the Ingenious Author's, but successfully
practiced by him; as I can gratefully testify, having had the favor of being
shown the whole Contrivance by the Excellent Author himself in his Garden at
the Hague, Ann. 1685. at which time I had the happiness also of seeing his
Planetary Clock, Planetary Clock.
or Moving Ephemeris, a Machine that cannot be sufficiently admired.

Mons. Cusset, Cusset.
an ingenious French Man of Lions, has published his Contrivance for managing
great Glasses, in the Iournal des Scavans, Ann. 1685. May 18.

Mons. Cassini, when I was with him at the Observatoir in Paris (amongst other
Curiosities, which according to his usual Candor and Civility he communicated
to me) showed me two very pretty Contrivances for managing great Glasses; which,
because not yet public, I shall describe as well as I can by Memory at this
distance of time. The first was a plain Piece of Clock-work, moved by a Spring
and regulated by a Pendulum Vibrating half Seconds. This carried an Arm that
stood something prominent from the Body of the Work; which Arm at its extremity
carried the Object-Glass fixed in a Ring. This Arm and the Object-Glass, by
means of graduated Arches in the Clock-work could be turned ad Libitum directly
to any Star. Thus suppose Saturn were to be observed; by a common Ephemeris,
knowing his Longitude and Latitude, together with the Time of Day or Night, the
Arches of the Clock being put to such and such Divisions, and the Machine it
self placed with such or such a part horizontal or perpendicular; the
Object-Glass was of course directly exposed to the Star. Then the Pendulum
being put in motion, the Machine kept the Glass constantly exposed directly to
the Star in its diurnal Motion. This whole Machine then, being placed upon an
Height, carried the Object-Glass in its due position; and the Observer below
managed the Eye-Glass by his free Hand, assisted with a Rest. Tho I cannot
retain so exact a Remembrance of this Engine, as to venture at a Scheme of the
particular Parts; yet this Description perhaps will be sufficient to give the
ingenious Astronomer an Idea thereof, so as to apprehend the Contrivance in
general. Something much of the same kind may we find described in Mr. Hooks
Animadversions on Hevelius Match. Coelestis. p. 66, 67, 68, etc.

The other Contrivance he mentioned to me, if I forget not, he or Mons. Borelly
told me, was due to Mons. Azout. It is thus; From the Tube of a small Telescope
there stands out an Arm perpendicular to the side of this smaller Tube: This
Arm carries the great Object-Glass; then an Observer upon an Height manages
this small Telescope, following therewith the Motion of a Star; by which means
the great Object-Glass (being parallel to the Object-Glass of this lesser
Telescope) is kept constantly in prosecution of this same Star: Then the other
Observer below manages the Eye-Glass as before.

These two Contrivances are indeed pretty Thoughts; but I cannot promise that
they can be so easily practiced; unless the Machines that carry the great
Object-Glass be made to rise and fall at pleasure, as the Star rises or sets.
For otherwise, the Observer that manages the Eye-Glass, shall soon lose the
sight of his Object; unless he have the opportunity of rising and falling, by
some such Contrivance as the forementioned Mons. Cusset proposes in the
forecited place. But this is vastly chargeable.

It Is now above seven Years since Mons. Boffat Boffa^.
of Toulouse has promised the World his Contrivance for managing great Glasses;
of which he has given a small Specimen in the Iournal des Scavans 1682. Dec.
28. but we hear nothing farther of it; perhaps because the Contrivance requires
reflecting Speculums, which much weaken the light of the Object, and are
therefore found useless.

(7.) I may reckon another Piece of Mechanic Dioptricks, The proportioning of
the Glasses in Telescopes and Microscopes. Proportioning of Glasses in
Telescopes and Microscopes.
We have said before, that, of two or more Object-Glasses of the same Focal
Lengths; that is the best, which will bear an Eye-Glass of the greatest
Convexity (this is usually called the Deepest Charge): But yet there are some
Proportions to be observed, which Experience has found out, as the most
convenient and best adapted for most Men's Eyes, that are well disposed. For so
a good Object-Glass of 12 or 13 Feet, will bear a Charge of 3 Inches, better
than a Charge much deeper or shallower.

But moreover, In adapting an Eye-Glass to an Object-Glass, respect is likewise
to be had to the Object we contemplate; for Objects of a sedate Light, as
Saturn, Jupiter, etc. will allow deeper Charges, than those of a more brisk and
strong Light, as Venus, etc.

Wherefore this whole Affair being only the Subject of Experiment, to that I
shall refer, and only hint by the bye; That for Telescopes of three Unequal
Eye-Glasses, Cherubin advises ( Dioptrique Oculaire, III. Par. Sec. 2. Cap.
VII. page 188.) that, of the three Eye-Glasses, that next the Object-Glass
should be of the deepest Charge; the middle Eye-Glass ought to be something
shallower; and the immediate Eye-Glass the shallowest of all.

For Proportioning Glasses in double Microscopes, we may consult the same
Author. But it is tedious to transcribe.

The LV. Prop. of the First Part, relates to the Apertures of Object-Glasses.
After which, we have nothing to add in this place; which otherwise might have
been challenged by a Discourse thereon, as being of a Mechanic Consideration.

(8.) The last Piece of Mechanic Dioptricks I shall mention, is an ingenious
Thought of Mr. Hooks, M. Hooks Contrivance to make a Glass of a small Sphere
serve a long Tube.
for making a short Object-Glass perform the part of one formed on a much
larger Sphere.

Prepare (says he) two Glasses, the one exactly flat on both sides, the other
flat on the one side, and Unequal on the other, of what Sphere you please. Let
the flat Glass be a little broader than the other. Then let there be made a Cell
or Ring of Brass very exactly turned, into which these two Glasses may be so
fastened with Cement, that the plain Surfaces of them may lie exactly parallel,
and that the Convex-side of the Plano Convex-Glass may lie inward, but so as
not to touch the flat of the other Glass. These being cemented into the Ring
very closely about the edges: By a small Hole in the side of the Brass Ring or
Cell, fill the interposed space between these two with Water, Oil of
Turpentine, Spirit of Wine, Saline Liquors, etc. then stop the Hole with a
Screw: And according to the differing Refraction of the interposed Liquors, so
shall the Focus of this compoud Glass be longer or shorter. Vid. Philosoph.
Trans. Number. 12. page 202.

This, I must confess is an ingenious Hint: But I doubt the desired Effect will
not be so successfully attained thereby, so as to constitute an Object-Glass
for a Telescope. For certainly, were it effectual; it is so easy and withal so
useful, that before this time it would have obtained, and been practiced
universally. And this makes me question, whether it would be of any better
effect, than a Meniscus-Glass, or a Combined Glass of Prop. XVII. Part. I.

CHAP. V.
Of Telescopick-Instruments.
(1) Controversy between Hevelius and Hook concerning Telescopick Sights. (2.)
Hevelius's Objections against them. His Mistake concerning them. (3.) Their
Fabric or Contrivance. (4.) Adjusting them to plain Rulers or Tubes. (5.) To
Quadrants, Sextants, etc. (6.) Dioptrick Reason of their Performance. (7.)
Adapting the Micrometer to a Telescope.

(1) THE Fame of Johannes Hevelius, Controversy between Hevelius and Hook
concerning Telescopick-Sights.
Consul of Dantzick, is deservedly celebrated by all that delight in Astronomy.
His Performances herein are highly extoll^d by all; and the sumptuous Volumes
of his Labors and Studies, which he has published, have procured him an
immortal Name of Honor amongst the Literate. But notwithstanding all his
commendable Endeavors, he has not yet arrived at the height of perfection; but
something is yet wanting and deficient even in his most costly Machines.
Whoever peruses the large and elegant Volume of his First Machina Coelestis,
will admire at the vast Treasure he has expended on Astronomical Instruments of
all sorts; when he sees even the very Description of them so very sumptuous.
And yet, at the same time, whoever peruses a small Book of Animadversions on
this Machina Coelestis, ^by the ingenious Mr. Hook, will find one grand Defect
does attend the noble Hevelius Instruments, which renders them (I will not say,
useless, faulty, or no better than Ticho's, yet) not so complete and perfect,
as otherwise they had been by the Addition of Telescopick Sights. For Hevelius
wholly used Plain Sights, which certainly are not so accurate as Telescopick.
And tho I must confess ingeniously, that this renouned Astronomer, by his
extraordinary Diligence, great Care, and perpetual long-continued Practice, but
chiefly by his peculiar sharpness of Sight, had arrived to a great exactness of
Observation by plain Sights (as I find by comparing the Observations made by
the most curious Astronomers of our Age, Flamsteed, Halley, Cassin, etc. by
Telescopick Sights, with those Observations made by Hevelius;) yet this we are
to attribute more to the peculiar acuteness of his Eye, and to his
extraordinary Diligence and Care in Observation, than to the exactness of plain
Sights. For to me it seems manifest, from what the Learned Mr. Hook lays down
in the forementioned Book, that the naked Eye cannot ordinarily perceive an
Angle (or Object that subtends an Angle) less than a Minute, or half a Minute
at the smallest. For tho we perceive Stars of that magnitude that their
Diameters are not half a Minute; yet this is by a sort of adventitious or
glaring Light, that is caused by the Refraction of their Rays in the Air; which
makes them appear to us much bigger than really they are; as is manifest, when
we come to look at them with a Telescope that takes off this glaring Light.

(2.) The want therefore of Telescopick Sights is what Mr. Hook chiefly insists
upon, as defective in Hevelius Hevelius Objections against them.
costly Astronomical Apparatus: But yet, in his whole Book of Animadversions,
he takes no notice of the chief Objections, which Hevelius uses against them.
And I am persuaded the Candor of that Noble Astronomer (whose Memory must now
be sacred) was so great, that upon the removal of these Difficulties, he would
have given up the Cause; for it seems the Controversy was long agitated
between them.

These Objections we shall find in the First Part of the Machina Coelestis,
(ap. XIV. page 296. Accedit, si quando Observator non aeque direct and precise
semper, ut saepius, creed, contingeret, per Centra lentium collineat, facile
diversitas aliqua aspectus observationibus possit induci, quae suo tempore
Coeli scrutatores jugiter seduceret. Caeterum, cum Acus vel Fila adeo prope
lentem Ocularem ad observatoris oculum vix in remotione aliquot digitorum
subsistunt; dubito an Dioptra haec oculo tam propinqua, multo accuratius
Stellas quasvis minimas, quam Pinnacidia nostra, ad ^ex novemve pedes ab
invicem remota, possit detegere. Nam etiamsi objectum distinctius videas; in eo
tamen, quod Dioptra tua oculo propius adheret, plus a vero deflectere poteris,
quam nos circa nostra Pinnacidia, quae tanto spatio ab invicem removentar. Ut
taceam, quod intersectio filorum minimas Stellas tibi tegat, etc.

For English Readers thus,

Add to this, That if at any time the Observator chances not to look directly
and precisely through the midst of the Glasses (as believe me it may often
happen) some Varieties may easily intermingle with the Observations, which in
time may egregiously deceive the Astronomer. Moreover, seeing the Needle or
cross Threads, do stand so close to the Eye-Glass, and near the Eye of the
Observator; I question whether these Sights, so near the Eye, can discover the
smallest Stars much more accurately, than our plain Sights, which are distant
from each other Six or Nine Feet. For, tho by these Telescopick Sights, one may
see the Object more distinctly; yet because they are so nigh to the Eye, one
may err, more than ^tis possible by our plain Sights, that are so far asunder;
so that I shall take no farther notice of another Inconvenience, which is, that
the Intersection of the Threads shall cover the smallest Stars from your Sight.

Thus far the Learned Hevelius. His Mistake concerning them.
Which shows plainly, that he had no right apprehension of the Nature of these
Sights. And therefore the best way of reconciling him to them, had been, fairly
to have laid down the Dioptrical Reasons of their Performance and Exactness.
Upon a right understanding whereof, all those Objections would be answered, and
would naturally vanish. This had been the right Method of proceeding amongst
Candid Philosophers: Whilst vilifying his Instruments, and slighting his
Performances with them as no better than those in the Age before him, did but
exasperate the Noble old Man, and made him adhere more obstinately to his
former Practice.

That Hevelius did not rightly apprehend the Nature of Telescopick Sights, is
manifest by this Objection which he makes against them, from the shortness of
the Line of Collimation, which he imagins no longer, than between the Eye or
Eye-Glass, and cross Hairs; but is really as long as between the Object-Glass
and cross Hairs: As shall be evident from what I shall now lay down.

Wherein I shall briefly explain their usual Fabric or Contrivance; their
adjusting to a plain Ruler, Cylindrick, or square Tube; their adjusting to
Quadrants, Sextants, and other Instruments; and the Dioptrick Reason of their
Performance and Exactness.

(3.) And first, the Fabric or contrivance of these Telescopick Sights is
briefly thus, Tab. 39. Fig. 1. Their Fabric or Contrivance. T. 39. F. 1.
Choosing an Object-glass g c l and convex-Eye-glass o p proper for the length
of the Ruler or Tube^ g o p l which we are to use. Let us take care that the
Object-glass be pretty well centred (by Chap. True Centration of Glasses not
absolutely requisite.
4. Sect. 4* of this part) but in this particular the greatest exactness is not
requisite (whatever Pere Cherubin d^Orleans may say to the contrary, in the
second Tome of his Vision Parfait. Paris 1681. fol. in his description of
Levels. page 23, 81, 106, 108, 109, etc. but chiefly page 107. wherein the
Friar is most grossly mistaken) it is sufficient, if the Glass be pretty nigh the
matter, as usually most Glasses are, immediately out of the Workmans hands.
This Object-glass and Eye-glass are each to be fixed strongly on a brass Ring
in the Ruler at their proper distance. And exactly in the Focus of the
Object-glass f m d i in an other brass Ring are strained the finest cross-Hairs
f d, i m; This Ring is contrived to be moveable to the Right and Left hand,
toward f, or toward d, and also (if the nature of the Instrument, to which we
affix these Sights, require it) upwards and downwards; and to be steadily fixed
in any posture by screws or otherwise. The Mechanic contrivance where of is
obvious enough, and needs not here be described, every one pleasing himself in
his own way.

By the Doctrine in the first part it is manifest, that this Tube being thus
disposed and presented before a Distant Object ABC, the Picture or Image of the
Object is projected in the Focus of the Object-glass f e d; and this Image in
the distinct Base is at the plain of the Cross-hairs. Wherefore all the Rays
that compose this Image, which escape, or do not fall on, the Cross-hairs,
shall arrive at the Eye freely, and distinctly. But the Points in the Image,
which are projected, and fall just on the Cross-hairs, are hid by the
Cross-hairs from the Eye: and the Hairs themselves appear as if they were
really stretched upon the very Object. For they are extended in the distinct
Base, which, in this kind of Telescope, is the Locus apparens of the Object, by
prop. 50. schol. At the same time the Hairs themselves appear very distinctly
to the Eye q in the outward Focus of the Eye^glass by prop. 32, 33. schol.

We may then conceive, that there is some one Point in the Object, as suppose
B, which sending a Cone of Rays on the Object-glass, the Principal Ray of this
Cone, or the Axis thereof, after passing the Object-glass, runs parallel in ce
to the side of the Ruler or Tube l p. Wherefore, if the intersection of the
Cross-hairs, e, without removing or stirring the Object-glass in the Tube, be
brought to meet with this Line, or to cover this Point B in the Object, and be
there strongly fixed: Whatever Point, in any Object, shall hereafter be found
covered by this crossing of the Hairs; we may be assured that this line of
Collimation, viz. the line from the Eye to this point in the Object or the line
from this Intersection e to the point in the Object, runs parallel to the side
of the Ruler or Tube, and therefore the side of the Ruler is directly pointed
toward that mark in the Object. Respect being had to the Breadth of the Ruler.

In like manner, supposing the sides of the Tube were in the lines D E, F G;
and the Object-glass fixed upon it in the posture expressed in the Figure. We
may conceive some point A in the Object, the Axis of whose Cone of Rays A c d
after passing the Object-glass, runs parallel to the sides D E, F G. If then
the Intersection of the Cross-hairs e, without stirring the Object-glass in the
Tube, be brought downwards to d, so that it may meet with the line c d, and
cover the point A in the Object, and the Ring of the Cross-hairs be there
fixed. Whatever point in an Object shall hereafter be found covered by this
crossing of the Hairs, the line from the Intersection of the Hairs to this
point in the Object runs parallel to the sides of the Tube or Ruler D E, F G.
And therefore we may be sure, the sides of the Ruler are directly pointed
toward the mark A in the distant Object. Respect being had to the Rulers
Breadth.

For from whatever point on the inner surface of the Object-glass (how thick
soever it be, or how ill soever centred) the Ray c d emerges; no other Ray can
emerge from that same point, and fall on the point d, but it must necessarily
be a principal Ray or Axis of some Cone, and must run parallel to the side of
the Ruler D E. For whatever Optic Angle the length A B in any Object subtends;
that length shall be projected by this Object-glass in d e subtending the same
Angle d c e.

(4) Wherefore we now come to show how to find out the Ray c d, Adjusting them
to plain R^lers or Tub^s.
that runs parallel to the side of the Ruler D E; or how to rectify the
Cross-hairs on the Ruler.

And first for, Exact^y determining the Focus of the Object-Glass
adjusting the Cross-hairs at their exact distance from the Object-glass, that
is, in its exact Focus. This is easily performed thus, Let us look at some
Object distant 3 or 4 miles; and moving or shaking our Eye before the Eye-glass
upwards and downwards, or to one and the other hand, let us observe whether the
Cross-hairs seem to move, or dance, upon the said Object: for if it do, then
the Cross-hairs are not at their exact distance from the Object-glass; but they
must be moved farther from or nigher to the Object-glass; till the Eye, looking
at such a distant Object, and moving before the Eye-glass, perceives the
Cross-hairs, as it were, fixed and immovable on the Object.

( Note. This is the way for exactly determining the Focal length of an
Object-glass, to which I have referred in Chap. 4. Sec. 3.)

If in raising the Eye, the Object seems to rise on the Croshairs; or in
depressing the Eye, the Object seems to fall down on the Cross-hairs, or if in
depressing the Eye, the Object seems to rise on the Cross-hairs, then are the
Cross-hairs too nigh the Object-glass: but if in raising the Eye, the Object
seems to sink or fall on the Cross-hairs; then are the Cross-hairs too far from
the Object-glass. All which will be evident from Tab. 39. f. 2. wherein let AB
be a distant Object, whose middle point C is projected by the Object-glass, D
at k. Let m n 1 be the Cross-hairs too nigh the Object-glass and m n 2 the same
too far from the Object-glass e, f, g, the Eye placed at three different
stations. In the case of the first Cross-hairs, if the Eye rise from e to f, it
perceives the point k depressed from 1 to ^, or if the Eye fall from e to g it
perceives the point k raised from 1 to l: and here the Cross-hairs are too nigh
the Object-glass. But in case of the second Cross-hairs; if the Eye rise from e
to f, the point k seems to rise on the Cross-hairs from 2 to r; or if the Eye
fall from e to g, it perceives the point k fallen from 2 to s: and in this case
the Cross-hairs are too far distant from the Object-glass. But if the
Cross-hairs are exactly in the Focus at k, let the Eye rise or fall, the
Cross-hairs seem fixed and steady on the Object. And this is the first thing
requisite for adjusting these Sights.

This I have borrowed from my own Sciathericum Telescopicum, Published at
Dublin 1686. quarto. And I hope, one may be allowed to transcribe from himself
without being called a Plagiary.

When this Affair is well adjusted; we may proceed to the second Rectification,
which consists in making the line of sight, mire, or collimation, exactly
parallel to the Sides of the Tube or Ruler, to which the Telescopick Sights are
to be adapted. And for the easier obtaining of this, we are first to be
ascertained, that even the two sides of the Ruler or Tube are exactly parallel.
And hereof we may be informed after this manner. T. 39. P. 3.
Tab. 39. Fig. 3. On an even board draw the right line D H I B, let A B C D be
a Ruler, to which the Telescopick Sghts are to be fitted, E the Ring carrying
the Object-glass, F the Ring carrying the Cross-hairs, G the Snout carrying the
Eye-glass. To the line B D apply the side B D of the Ruler, and looking through
the Glasses observe the point in an Object distant a mile or two whereon the
Cross-hairs fall. Then remove the Ruler, and apply its other side AC to the
line BD, and observe whether the Cross-hairs fall on the same point of the
Object, as before. If they do so, then are the sides of the Ruler A C, B D,
parallel; if no^, then the sides are not parallel. The reason that so remote an
Object m^st be chosen, is, that the Breadth of the Ruler may subtend an
imperceptible Angle in a circle whose Radius is the distance of the Object from
the Object-glass.

Or otherwise, In the plain Board strike two round brass-wire Pinns. Suppose H,
I, which having their roundness from their being drawn, must needs have their
sides parallel. To these Pins apply one and to other side of the Ruler, and
observe as before.

Having thus found, or made the two sides of the Ruler (or four sides of the
Tube, if need be) parallel; the next thing is to make the line of Collimation L
K parallel to these sides; or to bring the Intersection of the Cross-hairs e to
meet with the Axis LK of some of the Radious Pencils, which Axis, after passing
the Object-glass, runs parallel to these Sides

To effect this ( Tab. 39. f. 4, 5*) Tab. 39 Fig. 4, 5;
we are to raise the plain Board A B edgwife on the Board of a window or table
CD, so that we may rest or sustain the Ruler or parallelipiped Tube a b c d e f
g h, on the round Pins i, k: then looking through the hole in the end g h d c
designed for the Eye, let us observe the point in a far distant Object, which
falls exactly on the Intersection of the Cross-hairs. Afterward, let us invert
the Ruler or Tube (as we have it in fig. 5.) making the side a b c d, which in
fig. 4. was uppermost, now undermost in this fig. 5. by which means, the side
of the Tube a d h e, which in fig. 4. was farthest from the Board, in fig. 5.
is next the Board. Then looking through the Tube, let us observe, whether the
Cross-hairs fall now on the same point in the Object, as in the first posture:
If they do agree exactly, then is the line of collimation parallel to the
sides a h, b g; if they do not, but fall to the right hand apparently of the
said point in the Object, then are the Cross-hairs to be removed (by whatever
Contrivance they are made moveable) to the Left hand (the contrary requiring
the contrary), so that the Tube continuing in this latter posture, the
cross-Hairs may cover a Point in the Object, middle between the Point covered
in the posture of Fig. 4. and in the posture of Fig. 5. at the first sight. And
thus by frequent Repetitions and Trials, we at last bring all to rights. After
the same manner that we have rectified the Line of Collimation to run parallel
to any two parallel Sides of the Tube, we may rectify it to a Parallelism with
the other two parallel Sides of the Tube (supposing the Ring that carriers the
cross-Hairs to have all the Motions requisite to such Rectification). And so we
fix all strongly, chiefly the Object-Glass and cross-Hairs; and the Operation
is complete.

By this Method the Line of Sight of any Cylindrick or square Tube may be made
to run parallel to its Sides, for many Operations and Observations Mathematical
and Natural: Amongst others, for finding the Declination of the Magnet,
according to the Methods lately proposed by Mons. Hautefeville, and M. Sturmius
Sturmi^s Mistake.
in the Iournal des Scavans, 23. Aug. 1683. And in the Acta Eruditorum, Lipsie,
Ann. 1684. December. And for want of this Method; what Mons. Sturmius says in the
foresaid Act. Lips. page 579. is very defective. For thus he, Sola Tubi
locatio, ut Axis Visionis per medias Lentes excurrens Meridianae Lineae exact
respondeat, difficulties quippiam habere videbatur; verum and huic infirmitati
praesens, uti credo, inventum est Remedium, etc. And the Remedy he tells us is,
That the Tube be made a Parallelipped of Wood or Brass; for then, says he,
Applying the Side of your Tube to the Meridian Line, the Axis of Vision will be
parallel to the said Meridian Line. But with the Leave of so Great a Man, I
deny this; unless first it be rectified; so that this Axis runs parallel to the
Side of the Tube. And let us take what care soever possible for truly centring
the Object-Glass, and placing it, and the cross-Hairs exactly in the Tube; we
must after all rectify these Sights by some such Method as I have laid down,
or else we may be egregiously deceived. And on this account, Cherubins Gross
Error.
all the Levels and Instruments, to which Pere Cherubin D'Orleans has adapted
Telescopick-Sights, and which he has so neatly and sumptuously described by
curious Schemes, and a large Volume, La Vision Parfait. Tome II. A Paris 1681.
Fol. are deficient and useless. For he places the whole Rectification of this
Line of Collimation in the true Centration of the Glasses, page 107. And
rejects the Right Rectification by moving of the cross-Hairs as erroneous, page
170. But in this the Friar betrays his Ignorance; for tho the true Centration
of the Object-Glass be of good Convenience and Advantage; yet it does not
perfect the Instrument without farther Rectification; as being impossible to be
obtained to sufficient accuracy; and therefore we must have recourse to some
such Method as foregoes.

I have hitherto mentioned only two of the finest cross-Hairs to be extended as
a Mensurator in the Focus of the Object-Glass: But for some Uses, perhaps the
finest Silver, or Gold Wire, is better; as not being disordered by Heat and
Cold: Or else, See the end of this Chapter.
the Point of the smallest and most curious Needle, on whose Ex^remity, the
smallest Telescopick-Star may be visible.

When these Telescopick Sights Constancy and Security of these
Telescopick-Sights.
are rightly adjusted in the Tube, and strongly fixed in their due Posture by
Screws, and all covered over from outward Injuries and Accidents, they are of
all Sights the most constant and lasting, and the least subject to be
disordered: So that, when one finds the Great Hevelius objecting against them,
their Aptness to be out of order, one would think the most commodious Fabric
of them was never explained to him; tho I am sure, his Instructor Mr. Hook was
as able, as any in the World, to inform him rightly in this Matter.

(5.) I come now to the Rectification of these Sights on Quadrants and
Sextants, To Quadrants, Sextants, etc
for taking Angles. This is done either before or after the Divisions into
Degrees, etc. are made on the Limb of the Quadrant. If it be done before, then
we suppose the Telescope T L ( Tab. 39. Fig. 6, 7. Tab. 39. Fig 6, 7.
) fixed to the Quadrant, which we suppose continued a little farther than the
Fourth part of a Circle. Choosing then an Object pretty near the Horizon; let
us look through the Telescope, in the usual Posture of Observation, as Fig. 6.
and observe the Point in the Object marked by the cross-Hairs; and at the same
time we are to note most nicely the Point c, which the Plumb-Line f c g, hung
from the Center f of the Quadrant, cuts on the Limb. Then we are to invert the
Quadrant into the Posture of Fig. 7. (which is easily done by the usual
Contrivances for managing great Quadrants, by toothed Semicircles and endless
Screws) keeping still the Telescope T L nighly upon the same height from the
Ground, as before) unless the Object we look at, be so far distant, that the
Breadth of the Quadrant subtends but an insensible Angle. But yet for
certainty, it is better to keep the Telescope, as it is said, upon the same
height from the Floor); then direct the Telescope T L, that the cross Hairs may
cover exactly the same Point in the Object, as before in the Posture of Fig. 6.
And hanging now the Plumb-Line a f g on the Limb of the Quadrant; let us remove
it to and fro, till we find out the exact Point a, from which the Plumb-Line
being hung, shall most nicely hang over the Center of the Quadrant. f. Then
carefully marking the Point a, let us divide the Arch c a into two equal Parts
in b; and drawing b f, the Point b is the Point from which we are to begin the
Divisions of the Quadrant: And the Line of Collimation through the
Telescopick-Sight, stands exactly at Right Angles to the Line b f. So that the
Quadrant b f d being completed and divided, the said Line of Sight through the
Telescope runs exquisitely parallel to the Line f d.

In the next place, supposing the Quadrant b f d truly completed and divided;
and that we designed to fix thereto the Telescopick-Sight T L; so that the Line
of Sight may run exactly at Right Angles to the Line b f, or parallel to the
Line d f. We are to do as in the foregoing Praxis. And if in dividing the Arch
ac, we find its half exactly coincident with the Point b, we have our desire.
But if it differ from the Point b, and fall between b and d, then the Line of
Collimation through the Telescope stands at an obtuse Angle with the Line b f;
and the Instrument errs in excess: If this half Arch fall without b and d, then
the Line of Collimation makes an acute Angle with the Line b f; and the
Instrument errs in defect. And by often Trials, we are to remove the
cross-Hairs within the Tube, so much, as is requisite to correct this Error.
And when we have thus rectified them to their due place, there they are to be
strongly fixed. Or else, in Observations taken by this Instrument, we are to
make allowance for this Error; by subtracting from (if it be in excess) or by
adding to (if it be in defect) each Observation so much, as we find the Error
to be.

Then reason of this Rectification is most plain; for it is manifest, that c f d
(Fig. 6.) wants of a full Quadrant, as much as a f d (Fig. 7.) exceeds a
Quadrant. So the difference of the two Arches in the two Postures being a c;
half this difference b c added in Fig. 6. or a b subtracted in Fig. 7. makes b
d a complete Quadrant.

If we find our Instrument err in taking Angles, and we desire to know the
Error more nicely, than perhaps the Divisions of the Instrument it self will
show it: We are to do thus; Let us observe diligently the Object pointed at, in
the Posture the Instrument discovers its Error; and the Object pointed at when
the Instrument lies truly. Then, with a large Telescope and Micrometer (as is
used in taking the Planets Diameters, as shall be declared hereafter, Sec. 7.):
Let us take the Angle subtended at the Object-Glass of the Quadrants Telescope
by the length between these two Objects, and we obtain the Error of our
Instrument most nicely. Thus for Example; Supposing the Quadrant b f d already
accurately divided, and that the Plumb-Line, Fig. 6. plays over the Point c:
And upon the Inversion of the Instrument, Fig. 7. we find that before we can
get it to play exactly over the Center f, we must hang it over the Point e; so
that the Arch e b exceeds b c by the Arch e a; it is plain that the Angle e f a
is the Error of the Instrument: For had the Plumb-Line hung over a, and over
the Center f in this latter Posture, the Instrument had been exact; because a
is as much on one side b, as c is on the other side b. Wherefore e f a being the
Angle, by which our Instrument errs in observation: Let us turn the Instrument
into the usual Posture of Observation, as in Fig. 6. and hanging the Plumb-Line
on the Center f; let us bring it to play nicely on the Point e, and observe
what distant Object is covered by the cross-Hairs: Then let us bring it to play
exactly on the Point a, and observe likewise what distant Object is pointed at
by the Telescope-Hairs. Lastly, by a large Telescope and Micrometer, let us
measure the Angle between these two Objects, and we shall have the Angle of
Error much more nicely, than it is possible the Angle e f a should be given by
the Divisions on the Limb of the Quadrant e a. And thus much for adjusting a
Quadrant.

A Sextant is rectified in like manner; If we consider ( Tab. 39. Fig. 8.) T.
39 F ^. Rectification of a Sextant.
that if from the Center f to the beginning of the Divisions d there be drawn
the Radius f d; and it be divided equally in c; and from c there be suspended
the Plumb-Line c b: When the Plumb-Line hangs over the 60th Degree at b; then
the Line f d lies horizontal: And consequently, if the Line of Collimation
through the Tube be parallel to f d, this Line also lies horizontal. To try
which, Whilst the Sextant stands in this Posture, observe the Object marked by
the cross-Hairs; then invert the Sextant; and over the Point b hang the
Plumb-Line; and when from the Point b the Plumb-Line hangs over the middle
Point c, then again is the Line f d horizontal in this Posture. Mark then,
whether the cross-Hairs cover the same Object as before: If they do, then the
Line of Collimation is parallel to f d: If they do not; but the Point in the
Object marked in this latter Posture be higher than the Point marked in the
first Posture, the Instrument errs in excess; if it be lower, the Instrument
errs in defect. And either we are to remove the cross-Hairs, till we bring all
to rights, and there fix them: Or by the Methods before laid down in the
Rectification of the Quadrant, we are to find the Quantity of this erroneous
Angle, and to allow for it in Observation.

In Instruments furnished with two pair of Telescopick-Sights, Rectification of
a movable Sight.
one on a fixed Arm, and the other on a moveable Arm (by the Ancients termed an
Alidade); it is easy rectifying the Sights on the moveable Arm thus: After the
Sights on the fixed Arm are rectified by what foregoes; bring the Index of the
moveable Arm to the beginning of the Divisions on the Limb of the Instrument,
be it Quadrant or Sextant, etc. it is then manifest, that the Line of
Collimation through the movable Telescope (if it be right) should lie parallel
to the Line of Collimation through the fixed Telescope. Observe therefore,
whether the cross-Hairs in both Telescopes do at the same time cut the same
Star, or fall on the same Point in an Object distant three or four Miles. If
they do, then the movable Telescope agreeing with the fixed, and the fixed being
supposed rectifi^d to the Divisions on the Instrument, the movable is right
likewise. But if the Hairs in the movable Telescope do not agree in making the
same Point with the cross-Hairs in the fixed Telescope; then the Hairs in this
movable Telescope are to be removed (by whatever Contrivance there is for that
purpose) and brought to rights, and there fixed.

There are other Methods propounded for rectifying Telescopick-Sights on other
sorts of Instruments, by means of Observations toward the Zenith, as our
former Methods have been employed toward the Horizon. But it is sufficient here
to lay down only what foregoes, as being of the greatest and most frequent use:
Referring for the others to M. Picard^ s Treatise of the Measure of a Degree of
a great Circle of the Earth; published at the end of Memoirs for a Natural
History of Animals, etc. By the Academy Royal at Paris; lately translated into
English, and printed at London, 1688. Fol.

Before I quit this Point, Further Use of a Telescopick-Ruler
it may not be amiss to intimate one Use, to which a plain Ruler furnished with
Telescopick-Sights (such as is expressed Tab. 39. Fig. 3.) may be applied; and
that is, not only for trying the exquisite straitness of either of its own
Edges, and* parallelism of its own two Sides; but also, for the ready Trial of
the same in any other Ruler: For it is but affixing (by a little Cement, or
otherwise) this Telescopick-Ruler over the Ruler to be tried, and resting the
Edge of this latter against the Pins H, I, and gently sliding the Edge along
these Pins, and always touching them; looking all the while through the
Telescope, observe whether the cross-Hairs do steadily adhere to the same Point
in an Object: For if the Edge of the Ruler have the least irregular
Crookedness, the cross-Hairs will move from the Point first observed. And this
shall detect the least Curvity in the Edge of a Ruler (especially if the Ruler
be long, and the Distance of the Pins be considerable) that shall escape the
most exquisite Eye of a Workman. The way of trying the Parallelism of the two
Sides of this latter Ruler, is the same with what foregoes for the
Telescopick-Ruler it self: For when the Telescopick-Ruler is adjoined over the
other, they may both be taken but as one Ruler with Telescope-Sights affixed.

(6.) I come now to the last thing proposed concerning Telescopick-Sights;
Dioptrick-Reason of their Performance*
and that is, To show the Dioptrick-Reason of their Performance and Exactness.
But herein there will be little requisite to be added to what foregoes, both in
the First Part concerning Telescopes in general, and to what is laid down in
this Chapter concerning Telescopick-Sights. It Is manifest by Experiments, that
the ordinary Power of Man's Eye extends no farther than perceiving what
subtends an Angle of about a Minute, or something less. But when an Eye is
armed with a Telescope, it may discern an Angle less than a Second. The
Telescope that magnifies distinctly the Appearance of Body, magnifies also
distinctly the Appearance of Extension, Space, and Motion through this Space;
so if the Minute-Hand of a Watch, which can but just be perceived to move, be
looked upon with a Magnifying-Glass, we shall see it give a considerable Leap
at every Stroke of the Balance. And thus likewise the slow diurnal Motion of
the Sun or Stars, which is hardly perceivable by the bare Eye, unless assisted
by an Instrument of a vast Radius, is most easily perceived through an ordinary
Telescope of 18 Inches long: Insomuch that we may determine to the greatest
Niceity and Exactness, when a Star passes just over the cross-Hairs, even to
the single Beat of a Second-Pendulum. And let an Object in the Heavens rise
never so little, the Image in the Distinct-Base falls correspondently at the
cross-Hairs; and the Eye, by means of the Eye-Glass, perceives this Motion, be
it never so small. Thus suppose ( Tab. 39. Fig. 1^) that a Star rise from B to
A, the Image falls at the cross-Hairs in the Distinct Base from e to d; then by
means of the Eye-Glass o p, the Space e d is mightly magnified, and
consequently the Angle B c A, equal to e c d by which the Star is risen, is
made most sensible to the Eye q. By whatforegoes in the First Part concerning
the magnifying of this sort of Telescope.

By this we may perceive, how the Noble Hevelius Hevelius Mistake farther
manifest.
was mistaken in his Estimate of these Sights; when he imagined the Line of
Collimation therein was no longer than between the cross-Hairs and Eye-Glass:
Whereas this Distance is not at all to be considered in their Performance; the
Line of Collimation being full as long as the Distance between the Object-Glass
and cross-Hairs. I am persuaded, had he been rectified in this particular, he
would never have adhered so obstinately to the Use of plain Sights upon his
most costly Instruments. Tho I must confess, it is difficult to wean a Man from
the Use of what he has been accustomed to for so many Years; and upon the
Exactness of which, the Accuracy of all his former Labors did depend.

As to all other Objections which he makes against them, His other Objections
answe^ed.
as that they are easily disordered, that the Glasses are easily vitiated by
the Breath of the Observer, etc. They are not of any the least moment. For it is
manifest, they may be contrived so, as to be more secure, and less subject to
Injuries, than any other plain Sights whatsoever: And in this particular,
Telescope-Sights are so far from being obnoxious, that certainly they are
preferable to the best contrived plain Sights; for what can be more simple and
easier preserved, than the forementioned small (but strong) Brass Rings
defended by a Tin or Brass^ Tube covering all? When once these are adjusted and
fixed, nothing can possibly injure them. It Is true, the Breath of the Observer,
if puffed into the Telescope, will fully the Eye-Glass; but how easily is this
avoided? Who is it goes purposely to make a speaking-Trumpet of a Telescope?
The other most considerable Objection against their Use is, That in dark
Nights, at the smaller Stars, the cross-Hairs in the Telescope require a little
enlightening, or else they are invisible, and cannot be seen when the Star just
applies to them. This is so easily remedi'd, by admitting to them, through a
small opening purposely left in the side of the Tube, the least glimmering
Light of a Lanthorn; or by placing a Lanthorn a little aside before the
Object-Glass; that it is not worth mentioning as a Difficulty, much less is it
to be made an Argument for their utter rejection. As to what he says of the
Hairs being so gross as to cover the smaller Stars, this only relates to the
Material we employ; and the finest Silkworms Clue will be found small enough
almost to bisect the smallest Stars: If not, let us use the finest Needle, on
whose slender Point we may distinctly receive the most minute Star.

And thus much concerning Telescopick-Sights; Farther Uses of
Telesscopick-Sights.
from whose application to Mathematick-Instruments, Astronomy, and Geography
may expect their utmost Advancements. And even Natural Philosophy it self may
hereby receive the greatest Help, when we consider how Telescopes may be
applied to many Experiments therein; amongst others, to make the most nice
Hygroscope; and has already been used for accurately determining the capricious
Variations of the Magnet. Telescopick-Sights have been already successfully
applied to most exquisite Levels; wherein Mons. Picard in his Curious Treatise
Du Nivellement has prevented any farther Explication: And I doubt not, but
every Day will find new Uses for these Sights. Amongst others, I Will presume to
mention my own Telescopick-Dial already published, Ann. 1686: A Contrivance,
which, without Vanity I may ^ay, has not displeased at Home, and has been well
received Abroad.

(7.) The next Telescopick Instrument which I shall explain, Adapting the
Micrometer to a Telescope.
is the Micrometer. Concerning the Invention of this Ingenious Instrument, I
have only this to say, That for the Honor thereof, there are several
Competitors: Mons. Petit, Surveyor of the Fortifications in France, was the
first that published to the World the rough Draught hereof, 12. Mar. 1667* Vid.
Iournal des Scavans, 16. May 1667. After him Mons. Azout, another Ingenious
Frenchman, published a Tract concerning the exact Mensuration of the Planets
Diameters, wherein he seems to challenge the Invention of this Instrument to
himself and Mons. Picard, Iourn. des Scavans, 28. Iuin. 1667. and Philosoph.
Transact. Number. 21. page 373. But last of all a Candid Englishman of our own,
Mr. Rich. Townley, does vindicate the first Contrivance hereof to its true and
original Author, Mr. Gascogne an English Gentleman, who was killed in King
Charles I. Service, Vid. Philosoph. Transact. Number. 25. page 457. wherein Mr.
Townley (who is of undoubted Credit) asserts, Inventor of the Micrometer.
that Mr. Gascoigne made and used this Instrument before the Civil Wars in
England: And that Mr. Townley had then in his Custody two or three of these
Instruments first devised by Mr. Gascoigne; to which Mr. Townley himself had
added some considerable Improvments. All which, with the exact Fabric, and
fitting of the Body of the Instrument to a Telescope, we shall find accurately
described in Number. 29. p. 541. Philosoph. Transact. to which I shall therefore
refer the Reader; and shall hint only such things concerning it in this place;
as may be there wanting for the clearer Instruction of the unexcercised
Beginner.

First therefore for a brief Description thereof (as much as is requisite to
maintain the order of our Discourse); it is in short this. In the Focus of the
Object-Glass of a Telescope, there are placed two fine parallel Hairs, or
smooth Edges of Brass Plates; these are made by Screws to open or close at
pleasure, as wide as the Telescope admits. The Turns of these Screws are
reckoned out by proper Indices; so that in opening the Edges of the Micrometer,
the Indices do show, how many Revolutions of the Screws, and Parts of a
Revolution are completed in that Opening. Suppose therefore the Screws to be
of so fine a Thread, as to contain 30. Threads in an Inch length; then every
Revolution of the Screw opens or closes the Edges of the Micrometer a thirtieth
part of an Inch. By one Revolution of the Screw, the Index receives one
Revolution: Then, the Circumference of the Plate, over which the Index moves
(as the Hand of a Watch over the Hour-Plate) being divided into 100 Parts; when
the Index moves one of these Parts, the Screw moves the Edges a three
thousandth part of an Inch; (or the one thirty six thousandth part of a Foot;
by which we find how easy it is to divide a Foot into thirty six or forty
thousand Parts) And this Motion, tho every Minute, is made, by the Eye-Glass of
the Telescope, perceivable.

The way of taking small Angles by this Instrument is thus; Suppose it were the
Diameter of the Moon; Open the Micrometer till the two Edges do just clasp or
touch the Moons Edges; then observe by the Indices how many Revolutions and
parts of a Revolution were completed to this opening; and by a proper Table
(the way of composing which I shall show presently), convert these Revolutions
and Parts into Minutes and Seconds. In like manner, for observing small Angles
on the Earth, the Diameters of the other Planets, the Distances of Jupiter's
Satellits from his Body, or the Moons Spots, etc.

But now for making the Table, First we are to fix the Micrometer exactly in
the Focus of the Object-Glass (by the Rules before given, Chap. 5. Sect. 4.) if
it be at very distant Objects we design to use it: Or otherwise in the
respective Focus, if it be designed for nigh Objects. We may then compose the
Table two manner of ways: The first is more easy, tho not so very certain and
accurate, yet exact enough for most Uses. Measure by Inches and Decimal Parts
the Distance between the Object-Glass and Micrometer, taking into the Account
two Thirds of the Object-Glass's Thickness: Let us suppose the Distance 10
Foot, or 120 Inches, or 120000 Parts; and we desire to know what Angle is shown
by the Micrometer, being open 2 Inches, or 2000 Parts. The Computation is plain
( Tab. 35. Fig. 4.) T. 25. F. 4.
e y = 120000, f d = 2000, then e d = e f = 1000. And As e y: To Rad.:: So e d:
To Tang. e y d = e y f = 0 28' 38", and therefore f y d is equal to 0 57' 16".
Then finding by accurate Admeasurement, how many Revolutions of the Screws or
Index, are requisite to open the Edges 2 Inches; the same compleats the Angle
0' 57' 16". Suppose therefore 60 Revolutions open the Micrometer 2 Inches; then
60 Revolutions show, that the Object, that just appears through the Edges at
that opening, subtends an Angle of 057' 16". Then 30 ( viz. half 60)
Revolutions give 28' 38", viz. half 57' 16". And one Revolution gives an Angle
of 57" 16". and the hundredth part of a Revolution gives 34" +. And thus the
Table is composed to any Number of Parts and Revolutions requisite. But this
Way, depending on the exact Admeasurement of the Distance of the Micrometer's
Edges (which can hardly be obtained to sufficient Accuracy, unless we know most
nicely what Number of Threads in the Screw there were in an Inch length; for
then we know what Number of Revolutions complete an Inch), it is not so accurate
as what follows, which is,

The second way for composing the Table, is this: Having fixed the Micrometer at
its due Distance from the Object-Glass; on the side of a Wall or House far
distant mark out two conspicuous Objects, that may both at a time be received
into the Telescope: Measure nicely the distance of these Objects from each
other; and also the distance of either of them from the Object-Glass (which we
suppose directly before the Point in the Wall middle between the two Objects).
And by Trigonometry calculate the Angle, which the distance between these two
Objects subtends before the Object-Glass. Then looking through the Telescope,
open the Micrometer, till the two Edges thereof exactly meet with or embrace
these two Objects; and observe, how many Revolutions and parts of a Revolution
are performed in this opening; for so many complete the Angle before
calculated. And having the Revolutions and Parts that complete any one Angle,
we may easily find all the rest, as aforesaid. For in these small Angles, the
Angles and Revolutions are proportional; that is, if a certain Number of
Revolutions give a certain Angle; half this Number gives half this Angle; and
the hundredth part of this Number gives the hundredth part of the Angle, etc.

In the first Method that I proposed for adapting the Micrometer, and composing
the Table, I have allowed for the Object-Glasses Thickness in measuring its
distance from the Micrometer. But this Nicety is hardly requisite; unless it be
in short Tubes. For at the Radius of 10 Foot, 1 Inch is the Tangent of 28' 38";
and at the Radius of 10 foot + one tenth of an Inch, 1 Inch is the Tangent of
28' 37"; so there is but one Second difference; tho we should err one tenth of
an Inch in admeasuring the distance between the Object- Glass and Micrometer.

I might now mention the Application of a Lattice of fine Hairs in the Focus of
the Object-Glass of a Telescope, Other Telescopick-Instruments.
as an help to draw distant Objects in Perspective: And of applying there a
pretty contrived Parallelogram for the same purpose. But the first is obvious
enough by the least intimation thereof; and the latter is so amply described by
Pere Cherubin d'Orleans in his Dioptrique Oculaire; that it is needless to add
any thing farther in this place.

I conclude this Chapter with a brief hint of what I have found very commodious
for many purposes; Instead of cross-Hairs.
that is; instead of the forementioned cross-Hairs, I have often used a curious
piece of clear, thin, flat Glass, whereon there are drawn two very fine
cross-Lines by the curious Point of a Diamond, smaller than the most fine Wyre
or Hair; not easily disturbed by a slight Touch (unless we break the Glass),
nor alterable by Heat and Cold. Thus also may we make a Lattice.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Invention, Discoveries made by, and other Applications, of
Optick-Glasses.
(1.) Optick-Glasses unknown to the Ancients. (2.) Pretended Passage in
Plautus. (3.) An other Passage in Pliny. (4.) Probably invented about 1300.
(5.) Friar Bacon's Pretense. (6.) Inventers of the Telescope. (7.)
Optick-Glasses long known before the Telescope. Remark thereon. (8.) Celestial
Discoveries by the Telescope. (9.) In the fixed Stars. (10.) In Saturn.
Examination of Gallets Hypothesis. (11.) In Jupiter. Motion of his Satellits
diligently prosecuted by Cassini and Flamsteed. Satellits all disappearing.
(12.) Reflection on the Motions of Saturn's and Jupiter's Satellits. (13.) In
Mars. (14.) In the Sun. (15.) In Venus and Mercury. Hence the Falsity of the
Ptolemaick Hypothesis. (16.) In the Moon. (17.) Planets whether inhabited.
(18.) Telescopes Use on Earth. (19.) Uses of the Celestial Discoveries of the
Telescope. (20.) Microscopick Discoveries and Writers. (21.) Viewing nigh
Objects with a Telescope. Use thereof in Maniature-Painting. (22.) Measuring
Distances at one Station by the Telescope.

(1.) THat the Ancients had no knowledge of Optick-Glasses, Optick-Glasses
unknown to the Ancients.
is most evident from their universal silence in this Matter: Their most
learned and inquisitive Philosophers making no mention, or the least hint
thereof, in their Writings. And doubtless a Contrivance of that universal Use,
beneficial to all old Men, both in Reading and Writing, could never have been
so concealed, as that not the least Footsteps thereof should remain to
Posterity. The only Reliefs they had for their decayed Sights were certain
Collyria or Eye-Salves; and when these failed them, they were left almost in
the dark for minute and close Objects.

We hear indeed mighty Stories of Archimedes burning the Ships of Marcellus, at
a great distance from the Walls of Syracuse. But whether the Matter of Fact be
true or false (as I am very inclinable to believe it false), yet there is no
mention of his performing this admirable Effect by OptickGlasses. Perhaps, if
there were any such thing done at all; it was performed by Concave Speculums:
And no one denies the Ancients the knowledge of Catoptricks. For Archimedes
himself writ a Book (as it is said) De Speculis Ustoriis Parabolicis; but it has
never yet seen the Light.

And yet there are in the World a sort of Men, so devoted to the past Ages,
that they will not allow any Improvements of Arts in the modern Generation,
unknown to the Ages some Centuries before us. Of this Class was he, (whoever he
was) that, rather than the Ancients should be ignorant of Optick-Glasses, would
forge a Passage in Plautus (which really is not at all to be found in him), for
Confirmation of his Opinion.

(2.) Pancirollus (who surely was too candid a Person to be the first Author of
this Fiction) in the Second Book De Rebus Inventis, Pretended Passage in
Plautus.
Tit. 15. quotes this Passage from Plautus, Cedo Vitrum, necesse est
Conspicilio uti: Which, says he, cannot possibly be meant of any other thing
but of the Glasses which we call Spectacles. And his Commentator Salmuth takes
some pains to cite Christianus Becmannus (I suppose in his Oration de Barbary
and Superstitione superiorum Temporum) for clearing this Passage of Plautus:
But yet he is so hard pressed with it, that by no Art, but by main strength he
breaks through it, and says, That notwithstanding that Passage, yet certainly
Optick-Glasses are a modern Invention.

Whereas, had he been aware, Passage out of Plautus forged.
that that Quotation from Plautus is a mere Fiction; and that no such Passage
can be found in all his Writings; he might easily have avoided its Force,
without all that stir. For so we shall find it answered in the Lettere
Memorabili del Abbate Michele Giustiani Part Terza, Let. 16.

(3.) Another place cited for the Antiquity of Optick-Glasses* Passage in Pliny.
is that of Pliny, Lib. 7. Cap. 53. Hist. Not. wherein we find the word
Specillum. To this Passage we have this Answer in the forementioned Letters of
Giustiani; that Specillum cannot possibly be here meant of a Spectacle-Glass,
seeing we find the Expression, Inungit Specillum; which, says he, cannot be
understood of Spectacles, which we rather wipe and cleanse, than anoint and
grease. But this Construction of the Learned Authors is much forced and
unnatural: For the plain sense of that Passage in Pliny is this. Pliny in that
Chapter is giving Instances of the sudden Deaths of many Men; and telling how
they were seized, whilst they were doing so or so, and wholly thoughtless of
that fatal moment. Amongst many other Examples, Specil^um^ a Chyru^geon's Probe.
he has this; Super omnes C. Julius Medicus dum inungit, Specillum per Oculum
tra^ens. The meaning whereof is no more, than that the Physician C. Julius was
on a sudden seized by Death, whilst he was applying an Unguent to his Patients
Eye, and drawing his Probe (called Specillum) through it. Whereas, to join
^ungit and Specillum, spoils the Grammatical Sense of the whole, and renders it
unintelligible.

It Is evident therefore, Optick-G^^sses probably invented about 1300.
that from neither of these Passages can we draw any Argument for the Antiquity
of Optick-Glasses.

(4.) Wherefore seeing we must necessarily allow this Invention due to the
Modern Age of the World; our next Enquiry shall be, Where first to fix it. But
herein we shall find but faint Traces to direct us.

Monsieur Menage a learned and ingenious Frenchman, in his Origini della
Lingua Italiana, Menage`s Opinion.
Genevae, 1685, commenting on the Word Occhiali del Galilaei, discourses there
of the Time of the invention of Spectacles: And after relating the known Story
of Friar Jordan, (of which more anon) he has this notable Passage; That
Monsieur du Cange had told the Authot ( Monsieur Menage) of a Greek Poem, the
Manuscript whereof is now in the French King's Library, wherein the Poet, who
lived An. 1150, Jesting on the Physicians of those Times, says of them to this
Purport in French, Qu`ils tatent le Poux, and qu'ils Regardent les Excremens du
Malade aver une Verre. That they observe the Excrements of their Patients with
a Glass. But Mons. Menage is of Opinion, that this was a Transparent Glass,
whelmed over the Vessel, more for the Relief of their Nose against the Stench,
than of their Eyes.

But however we may doubt of Spectacles being so ancient as 1150. We may (...)
that about the Thirteenth Century, they were commonly known and used. For
(beside what we shall say hereafter of our Countryman Friar Bacon) the most
learned Mons. Spon in his Recherches Curieuses D' Antiquite, Dissert. 16.
inserts a Letter of Signior Redi to Paulus Falconerius, concerning the Time
when Spectacles were invented; and this he fixes between 1280 and 1311. from
the Testimony of a Manuscript Chronicle in Latin, in the Library of the Friars
Preachers of St. Katherine at Pisa, Fol. 16. Wherein it is said, that Frater
Alexander de Spina, Vir modestus and bonus, Spina's Pretense.
quaeacunque vidit aut audivit facta, scivit and facere. Ocularia ab aliquo
Primo facta, and communicare nolente, ipse fecit and communicavit cord hilari
and volente. And this Alexander de Spina was a Native of Pisa, and dyed there,
An. 1313.

Signior Redi has in his Library a Manuscript written An. 1299. Another
Authority.
Di Governo della Famiglia de Scandro di Pipozzo. In which there is this
Passage; Mi truovo cosi Gravoso di Anni che non arei Valenza Di Leggere e
Scrivere senza Vetri appellati Okiali, Truovati novellamente per Commodita
delli Pouveri Veki, quando affiebolano del Vedere. Thus in English, I find my
self so pressed by Age, that I can neither read or write without those Glasses
they call Spectacles, lately invented, to the great Advantage of poor Old Men,
when their Sight grows weak.

The Italian Dictionary, Friar Jordan's Authority.
de la Crusca, on the Word Occhiale, makes this remark, That Friar Jordan de
Rivalto, who dyed at Pisa, An. 1311. in a Book of Sermons which he writ An.
1305. tells his Auditory in one of them, that it is not Twenty Years since the
Art of making Spectacles was found out, and is indeed one of the best and most
necessary Inventions in the World.

About the same time viz. 1305. Gordon.
Bernard Gordon a famous Physician of Montpelier, in his Lilium Medicinae, thus
commends a certain Eye Salve: Et est tantea Virtutis, quod decrepitum faceret
legere Literas minutas absque Ocularibus. And An. 1363. Guido de Chauliac,
Chaueiac.
in his Book entitled Grand Chiruigery, after proposing several Collyria,
says; If these or the like will not do, you must make use of Spectacles.

From all which we may be pretty certain, That Spectacles were well known in
the 13th. Century, and not much before. But who the Happy Man was, that first
hirt upon this lucky Thought, may yet be questioned. It Is true indeed, if we
credit the forementioned Chronicle of the Convent at Pisa, Friar Spina makes as
fair a Challenge to the Invention, as the first Author, who refused to
communicate it. But I am apt to believe, That, whoever this close Man was that
would not impart to Spina, He was a Friar; and that these Monkish Men, and
Jordan amongst the rest, had this Invention whispered amongst themselves,
before it was public; and that they all had the First Hint thereof from our
Countryman Friar Roger Bacon.

(5) That this learned Friar Bacon who dyed An. 1292. (...)
and lies buried at Oxford) did perfectly well understand all sorts of
Optick-Glasses, shall be plainly made out, from the natural and easy sense of
his own Words, in his Book of Perspective: Whereby we shall find, that he not
only understood the Effects of single Unequal and Concave-Glasses; but knew
likewise the way of combining them, so as to compose some such Instrument as
our Telescope. This perhaps will be looked upon as a Great Paradox, and as
great Partiality in an English Author to his Countryman; especially
considering, how universally the contrary has prevail`d; the Votes of most
learned Men having conferred the Honor of this Invention on other Pretenders.
But if, from the unconstrained Words of his Books, we plainly make out this
Assertion, I hope the Attempt may not be counted unreasonable or partial.

And First in his Book of Perspective Part III. Dis. 2. C. 3. he has these
words; Si vero Corpora non sunt plana ( having treated of them before) per quae
Visus videt, sed sphaerica; tunc est magna Diversitas, nam vel Concavitas
Corporis est versus oculum, vel Convexitas, etc. By which it is manifest, he
knew what a Concave and Convex-Glass was. Moreover, in the same Place Dis. ult.
he proceeds thus; De Visione fracta majora sunt, nam de facili patet, maxima
posse apparere minima, and e contra; and long distantia videbuntur
propinquissime, and e converso: Sic etiam faceremus Solemn and Lunam and Stellas
descendere secundum Apparentiam hic inferius, etc. Thus in English, Greater
Wonders than all these are performed by refracted Vision; For thereby, it is
easily made appear, that the Greatest Object may be represented as very little,
and contrarily; And so likewise, the most distant Objects as just at hand, and
contrarily. Hereby also may we bring the Sun and Moon and Stars down here below
in Appearance, etc. This, I think, is so express in the Point, that it leaves
no room to doubt, but that he had some admirable Secret in Optic Glasses. Add
to this what he has in his Epistle ad Parisiensem, of the Secrets of Art and
Nature, Cap. 5. Possunt etiam sic figurari Perspicua, ut longissime posita
appareant propinquissima, and e contrario; Ita quod ex incredibili Distantia
legeremus literas minutissimas, and numeraremus Res quantumcunque parvas, and
stellas faceremus apparere quo vellemus. Glasses or Diaphanous Bodies, says he
may be so formed, that the most remote Objects may appear as just at hand, and
contrarily; So that we may read the smallest Letters at an incredible Distance,
and may number things though never so small, and may make the Stars appear as
near as we please.

And that these Things may not seem incredible of this Great Man; who, in that
dark, ignorant Age could be master of these admirable Inventions; I shall refer
the Reader, for a more complete Account of him, to Ant. a Wood Hist. and
Antiquit. Universit. Oxoniensis, Lib. 1. Page 136. and to Dr. Plott's Not.
Hist. of Oxfordshire, Cap. 9. Sect. 2, 3, etc. and Sect. 39, 40, 41. Where we
may find, how he was persecuted by the ignorant malicious Friars of his Order,
as practicing Magic and Necromancy: for which they cast him into Prison, and
there detained him for a long time, some say to his Death, in the 78th. Year of
his Age. There we shall find, how he was the first Promoter of the Emendation
of the Calendar. completed afterward in the Time of Pope Gregory II, But
above all, Bacon invented Gunpo^der.
his Pretense to the first Invention of Gunpowder seems as well founded, as
possible, on this Passage in his Epistola ad Parisiensem, Cap. 6.(a Hundred
years before Barthold. Swartz. lived) In omnem Distantiam quam volumus,
possumus artificialiter componere Ignem comburentem, ex sale Petrae and Aliis;
(These Alia, in another Manuscript Copy, are, Sulfur and Carbonum Pulvis) And
soon after he adds, Praeter haec (i. e. Combustionem) sunt alia stupenda
Naturae, nam soni velut Tonitrus and Coruscationes possunt fieri in Aere, imo
majore Horrore quam illa quae fiunt per Naturam: Nam modica materia adapta, sc.
ad Quantitatem unius Pollicis, sonum facit horribilem, and Coruscationem
ostendit violentem, and hoc fit multis modis, quibus Civitas aut Exercitus
destruatur.: Igne exsiliente cum Fragore ^^estimabili. Mira haec sint, si quis
sciret uti, in debita Quantitate and Materia. By which last Passage we may
guess, he had not the way of applying it to a Gun; though it is manifest, he was
sensible that some such Use might be made of it. But the particular Manner did
not offer it self to him at first.

I Confess, Note.
I have not by me at this time the Originals, from whence these Passages are
quoted; the present Distractions of our miserable Country having separated me
and my Books; and the Place, where I am, affords not the Copies: Therefore, if
in these Quotations I am any wise mistaken, I must not be blamed, acknowledging
that I have them at second hand from the forenamed Authors.

But to return to our Optick-Glasses. It Is evident that Bacon was acquainted
with them; and probably knew how to adapt them in a Telescope. But the long and
close Imprisonment he suffered before his Death (for it is said no one was
permitted to speak to him; and that all his Writings, Books and Instruments
were seized and burnt; except only those few Fragments of his which we have
saved accidentally) was the Reason, that we have no farther Advancements of his
in this kind transmitted to Posterity. But it is very probable that the use of
single Glasses in Spectacles, as being an Invention of immediate Advantage to
Human Life, and in it self very easy and simple, might therefore be presently
catched at by the World, and put into Practice: Whilst his other more curious
Combinations of Glasses might be lost and forgot. And this I am the more
inclinable to believe; First, because Friar Bacon's Time agrees so well with
Friar Iordan's forecited Testimony An. 1305. That it was not then twenty years
since the Invention of Spectacles: And secondly, because we find this sort of
Monkish Men first take notice of the Invention, before all other Men; which
shows, they had it delivered amongst themselves only, for a while before others.

(6.) And thus much concerning Friar Bacon's Pretense. (6.) More Modern
Inventors of the Telescope.
But that I may not seem altogether partial, I shall here add the Opinions of
others, concerning Other Inventors of the Telescope. For I find no other
Pretenders to the Invention of single Unequal and Concave Glasses, but the
forenamed. Borellus has written a small Tract purposely on this Subject, De
vero Telescopii Inventore: Wherein, Cap. 12. he seems to give the Invention to
Zacharias Ioannides of Middleburg in Zeland, Zacharias Johnson.
An. 1590. Another Candidate for this Discovery, he names Johannes Lipperhoy,
or La Prey, Jo. Lipperhoy.
An. 1609. A Dutchman also, whom Surturus calls Lippersein. Adrianus Metius
Mathematick Professor at Franequer says, Ja. Metius.
his Brother Iacobus Metius of Alkmaer was certainly the first Inventor of the
Telescope. And if we believe the Italians, we shall have the Honor of
inventing this Instrument conferred on the incomparable Galileo. But he himself
in his Nuncius sidereus confesses, that the first Intimation he received of
this Instrument, was, that a Dutchman had then lately made one; which set him (
Galileo) upon the thought how to effect it; which, he says, he successfully
discovered by the consideration of Refraction, and found that a Concave and a
Unequal Glass rightly adapted would perform what he only heard in general of the
Dutch Invention.

But certainly the first Public notice of this Contrivance came from some of
the forementioned Dutchmen (for Friar Bacon's Hint mentions not the particular
Combination of the Glasses) and therefore the Instrument is deservedly called
Tubus Batavus. Though we must confess at the same time, that Galileo, An. 1610.
(see his Nu^cius sidereus) did first apply this curious Instrument to Celestial
Observations; and had then made such wonderful Discoveries in the Heavens
thereby, that all his Philosophic Successors have ever since attempted to
climb higher, by lengthening their Ladders, and advancing this Instrument by
many Degrees. However I must not here conceal the Pretense of Baptista Porta,
Baptista Porta.
who, in his Magia Naturalis, Lib. 17. Cap. 10. Printed An. 1589. has these
Words, Si utramque (Lentem sc. Concavam and Convexam) recte componere noveris,
and longinqua and proxima, majora and clara videbis. But Porta's Character is
so well known, that we may easily imagine, he had got this Hint from Holland.

Franciscus Fontana Fontana.
a Neapolitan, in his Observationes coelestium terrestriumque rerum, contends
that he himself An. 1608. first invented the Telescope, composed of a Unequal
Object-Glass and Unequal Eye-Glass: For the Tubus Batavus, and Galileo's Tube
was furnished with a Concave Eye-Glass; and Fontana confesses, it was before
his; and that An. 1618. he first invented the double Microscope. Rheita Rh^ita.
in his Oculus Enoch and Eliae, Lib. 4. toward the end, pretends to be the
first Discoverer of the erecting Telescope of three Unequal Eye-Glasses, as also
of the Telescope for looking with both Eyes, called Telescopium binoculum: Of
which latter, Cherubin has writ his whole Volume, La Vision parfait, etc.

Optic Glasses long known before the Telescope.
Thus we see, how long the Use of single Optic Glasses was common in the World
(even about 300 years) before M^n rightly understood their due Application, in
the Composition of this admirable Instrument. They had them in their hands,
they looked through them, now a Unequal, then a Concave, and admired their
Effects, and the Help they gave to disordered Eyes: but still were ignorant of
the vast Advantage the most acute Eye might receive by them, even to the
Increase of its Power, some Thousands of Degrees beyond its natural Abilities.
This was reserved for some lucky Chance in a future Age, to be discovered by
him that should first be so fortunate, as to adapt these Glasses at their due
Distance: for to some such happy Hitt, I imagine the Invention is due; and not
to any profound Thought on the nature and properties of Glasses, that first
suggested the Contrivance to the Dutch Mechanic, Remark thereon. Uses of
Discoveries not immediately known.
that was its Author.

And this does naturally suggest a Thought to us, of some encouragements in
natural Enquiries, by the method of experimental Philosophy; that perhaps we
are every day engaged amongst some particular Things, which we commonly see,
handle, use, and are conversant with; and which have in them some latent,
hidden Properties, which, upon a right Application, (to be discovered perhaps
by some lucky Hitt) may be of the most useful and surprising Effects. And that
therefore, we should not despair of making the greatest Discoveries about even
the meanest Things. Who could expect to see such Wonders from an easy
Composition of three such plain, simple Bodies, Niter, Sulfur, and Charcole, as
we daily see from Gunpowder? And the Property of the Magnet's drawing Iron was
commonly known many generations, before it was so happily applied to guiding a
Ship: Who could have thought, by looking upon that dark unpromising stone, that
future Ages should use it to such a stupendous and advantageous a Purpose, far
exceeding the Virtues of the most illustrious Gemms? Hence may we learn, not to
despise the Products of Nature, even of the meanest Appearance. And let us not
say, that any Discovery is useless, since we know not what Time and Posterity
may produce from the simplest Truth. And this naturally leads me to the
discoveries made by Optic Glasses.

Celestial Discoveries of (...) ^elescope.
Galileo (as is noted before) is deservedly reputed the first that raised up
this Gigantick Instrument, that ventures to climb Heaven and from thence brings
down the Stars. He first, was surprised and struck with wonder, to see four
little Moons dancing round Jupiter, that from their first Creation to the lucky
Moment when he first discovered them, had never struck the eye of any mortal
Inhabitant of this Globe. Were these then made for the Use of poor Man, from
whose Knowledge they were concealed for 5000 years together? Vain Man! that thus
presumes to confine the Designs of the Almighty Creator to miserable Dust and
Ashes; when his infinite Power can make Millions of intelligent Beings, and all
intelligent after different ways, to serve and praise him: And these perhaps
are the Inhabitants of these distant Worlds, Whether all for the use of Man.
and of those again infinitely extended beyond these. It Is true indeed, now
these little Planets are discovered, we have happily applied them to an
advantageous purpose (as shall be showed hereafter) But this we are to esteem
as a particular Benefit of Providence to these latter Generations; and respects
not all the general Race of Mankind, that lived and were busy for 5000 years
together; and knew nothing of them. But in this stupendous Enquiry I stop, as
not being able to reach it with the longest Telescope.

To keep therefore to our Subject: I shall take the Heavens in order, as they
lie; considering first the uppermost, and so descend down to our Earth, and
shall briefly declare the Discoveries made in each, and (as far as I can attain
it) by whom and when; with farther References to those Authors, where each
particular may be found more fully treated of.

In the ^ixt Stars.
And First, for the Fixed Stars: That whitish Band or Zone, the Galaxia or milky
Way, that so irregularly incompasses a great scope in the Heavens, and of which
the Ancients could give no tolerable Account, is found by the Telescope to be
no other, than an heap of very minute Stars thickly set together; which, by
their great Distance, Smalness and Closeness, appear to the naked Eye, as one
united whitish Cloud. In like manner, the Nebulosa Orionis, Praesepe Cancri,
etc. are found to be a Congeries of small Stars closely set together, but
easily distinguishable by the Telescope. The Pleiades or seven Stars (tho
scarce more than six appear) are found by an ordinary Glass to be nigh forty.
And in the single Constellation of Orion, the Telescope discovers more Stars
than the naked Eye can number in all the Heavens. On this Account, the Seed of
Abraham, that was to be made numerous as the Stars in the Firmament, may yet
(for ought we know) admit of Propagations through many future Generations,
before it comes up to its Limits. And the number, which Archimedes demonstrated
greater than that of the Grains of Sand composing this Globe of Earth, may
perhaps fall short of the Stars in the Heavens: For hardly any Corner of the
Firmament so dark; But the Telescope, turned toward it, descries Multitudes of
glittering Spangles therein.

(10.) (10) In Saturn.
From the fixed Stars let us contract our Prospect, and in a vast, long, and
almost immense Course homewards, we first meet with Saturn. By his slow Motion
he takes State upon him, as carrying about him something more weighty than
ordinary. But the short sight percieves nothing thereof, and sees only a plain
round Globe, as the rest of the Chorus dancing round the Sun. All his Equipage
and Attendants are hid from our View, 'till surveyed more closely by the
Telescope: And then behold a mighty Ring parallel to the Equator, bright as the
Planets own Face, encompassing round his Body; very thin, and separated in all
Appearance on all sides from his Globe: sometimes appearing broader, sometimes
narrower, and sometimes almost vanishing; then again returning by a regular
Period, and resuming by Degrees its former Shape; which again by degrees it
looses according to his own Periodical Motion. But this is not all his
Equipage, for besides this Throne of Light, this Majestic Planet is constantly
attended by a Guard of five Satellits, that follow his Motion and dance round
him continually in a Circle.

Galileo Ga^ileo.
was the first that observed any thing extraordinary in Saturns Appearance An.
1610. October. as he tells us in some of his Italian Letters: But his Glasses
were too short to give the true Shape of this Planet. All that he descried was
something appendent on each side of him, which he took to be two Globes much
less than Saturns own Body; and therefore he first published (and at the same
time concealed) this Discovery, by transposing the Letters of this Sentence,
altissimum Planetam tergeminum observavi. But when the Telescope was better
advanced, (as what Invention is it, that receives not Advancements in Time?)
the true and genuine Appearance of Saturn began to show it self, and its
regular Changes were taken notice of. But though several Authors writ Treatises
of this surprising Appearance, and particularly the celebrated Hevelius
Hevelius.
(de nativa Saturni facie) Hodierna, etc. yet all their Observations were
imperfect and deficient; and chiefly for want of excellent Glasses: Till the
incomparable Christ. Hugenius Hugenii Systema Saturnium.
has put the last hand to this Affair; and in his ingenious Treatise, Systema
Saturnium, Hag. Commit. 1659.4^. has published to the World a complete History
of all Observations of this Planets Appearances with a most ingenious Theory
for their Explication. In the beginning of the year 1655. his excellent Person
first discovered the biggest of Saturns Satellits with a Telescope of 12 feet,
charged with an Eye-Glass of 3 Inches; afterward, An. 1656. he doubled that
Length, retaining the same Eye. Glass. The Satellit he discovered, is the
Fourth from Saturn; and in the forenamed Treatise, he gives us the Epochae and
Tables of its Motion; But our most ingenious Countryman, Mr. Halley, deservedly
celebrated for his Astronomical Labors, discovered in the year 1682. that
Hugenius's Numbers were considerably run out; and therefore he set himself to
correct the Period of this Satellit, which he has done accordingly, Number. 145.
Page 82. Philosoph. Transact. And in Number. 187. Page 299. we shall find Mons.
Cassini's Tables of the Motions of all Saturns Satellites, together with their
distances from Saturn correspondent to their Periodical Times: Of which more
hereafter.

The other four Satellites were all discovered by Mons. Cassini in the Order
following. Cassini's Discoveries about Saturn.
The third and fifth were first seen by him, An. 1671, 72 and 73. by a 17 Foot
Glass of Campani, and 36 Foot Glass of Divini, and by such another of Borelli.
An Account whereof may be seen at large in Number. 92. of the Philosoph. Transact.
But the innermost or first, and the second were not seen by him till the year
1684. at which time, having procured Glasses of an extraordinary length, as 80,
100, 150 and 200 Feet; the vast distance and smalness of these Planets could no
longer conceal them from his sight. Vid. Philosoph. Transact. Number. 181.

The last thing I shall take notice of, relating to this Planet, Examination of
Gallet's Hypothesis.
is, That Mons. Gallet, Provost of S. Symphorian at Avignon, in the year 1684
has advanced an Hypothesis for solving its Appearances; which, as it relates to
the Telescope, may p^operly be here considered. I shall therefore briefly
propose some of the chief difficulties, that seem to attend this Theory: And
that I may not be prolix, I shall suppose the Reader acquainted with what Mons.
Gallet lays down in the Iournal des Scavans, An. 1684. May 15. and June 12. and
in Latin in the Acta Lipsiae, An. 1684. September. Page 421.

First therefore, he supposes Saturn and the other Planets, except the Moon,
polite Globes, reflecting the Image of the Sun as a Unequal Speculum. Which
seems not at all to be founded on more than mere Conjecture: For we have no
Reason to think them different in this particular from the Moon; which is found
of a rugged uneven Surface.

But secondly, granting that they (and especially Saturn) may be polite
Spheres, (for we will not confine the infinite Variety of the Creation;) and
granting that Saturn reflects two sorts of Light; one whereby his whole Body
becomes visible; and the other the bright Image of the Sun from his Unequal
Surface; as we see a Unequal Speculum is it self visible, by the Rays it
reflects disorderly from its whole Surface; (which so far partakes of a little
Roughness) and at the same time reflects a bright and orderly Image of the Sun,
from one certain part of this Surface to the Eye rightly posited: Yet this
bright Image of the Sun, which is reflected from Saturn, (how far soever Saturn
be removed) can never be projected by an Object-Glass, in its distinct Base,
greater than the Projection of the whole Body of Saturn in the same distinct
Base. And yet (if I mistake not) this is the Foundation of Mons. Gallet's
Theory. This is so evident to any one the least versed in Dioptricks and
Catoptricks, that it is needless to insist upon it any longer. We may make a
convincing Experiment hereof: Expose a reflecting Convex-Speculum before the
Sun, and by a Convex-Glass project the Image of this Speculum on a Paper in a
dark Room: we shall there see the Representation of the Speculum it self, and
of the bright Image of the Sun on the Speculum. And indeed by the least
Consideration of the matter, it will be evident to us, that it is impossible it
should be otherwise: For the little Image of the Sun, reflected from the Unequal
Speculum, possesses but a very small part of the Speculum's Surface; and
therefore cannot possibly be projected, by the Object-Glass in its distinct
Base, greater than the Projection of the Unequal Speculum itself. The same may
we conceive of Saturn, by supposing him a Unequal, polite, reflecting Speculum;
for though he should then, besides the figure of his own Body, reflect the
bright Image of the sun, from a small part of his Spherick Surface on the
Object-Glass; yet the Object-Glass could never project, in its distinct Base,
the Representation of this Image of the Sun greater than the Representation of
the whole Body of Saturn. And, notwithstanding the Evidence hereof, Mons.
Gallet affirms, the Appearance of Saturns Ring or Ansae proceed to from hence;
that the Object-Glass projects, in its distinct Base, the representation of the
bright Image of the Sun, reflected from Saturn's Unequal polite Surface, greater
than (or clearly without) the Representation of his Body itself.

Thirdly, Mons. Gallet affirms, that the Reason why Jupiter, Mars, etc. are not
projected by an Object-Glass, in its distinct Base, with a Ring or Ansae, is
because these Planets are nearer to us than Saturn: And therefore in the
Projection of Jupiter, the bright Image of the Sun reflected from its polite
Surface, is represented by the Object-Glass in its distinct Base, equal to the
Representation of Jupiters whole Body; in the Projection of Mars it is less,
etc. But the Distance of these Planets (even of the nighest) is so very great,
(and as it were infinite) in respect of the small Breadth of an Object-Glass;
that in comparison to this small breadth of an Object-Glass, we can make no
difference between the Distance of Saturn and even Mercury.

Lastly, the Experiments, on which Mons. Gallet founds his whole Hypothesis,
seems not at all to confirm, or in the least wise to respect what he builds
thereon. The Phenomenon arising from reflecting the Sunbeams by an
Object-Glass on a Wall posited obliquely, proceeds from the Object-Glass being
considered as a Concave Reflecting Speculum, having also another Surface either
Plain or Unequal besides the Concave, (as I have noted before, Chap. 4. Sec. 4.)
and yet he superstructs hereon a Theory, for explaining the Appearances of
Unequal Polite Surfaces, such as he makes the Planets. This will be manifest by
Tab. 40. Fig. 4. T. 40. F. 4.
wherein, for ease sake, we take a Plano-Convex Glass a b c, and exposing its
plain side a e c obliquely to the Suns Rays de, de, de, some of them shall be
reflected by the plain Surface a e c into of, of, of; but others of them
entering the Glass run on in ei, ei, ei, (we do not here consider the Refraction
they suffer) and so falling on the Concave Surface a i b i c (for so I Will call
it) are reflected by it, according to the Laws of Spherick Catoptricks: But the
Reflections of these immerged Rays I have not expressed, for avoiding Confusion
in the Scheme. I acknowledge, the Physical Cause of this latter Reflection,
from the Surface of the Glass a i b i c, is perhaps not to be accounted for by
Human Understanding; but the matter of Fact is certain. One should think, when
the Rays are arrived at the extreme Points i, i, i, of the hindmost Surface of
the Glass, they should, without any of them being reflected at all, emerge from
the Glass: But it is manifest some of them are reflected, and that too, just in
the same manner, as if the Surface aibic were a Polite, Opake, Concave Surface;
and not covered by the Surface a e c. They that desire to enquire farther into
the natural Cause hereof, may consult Grimaldi Physico-Mathesis de Lumine and
Coloribus, Bonon. 1665. 4^.

It Is then by the Reflection from this Concave Surface aibic, (give me leave so
to call it) that the similitude of Saturns Ansae are represented in Gallets
Experiment; and by the Reflection from the Plain Surface aeec, that the
Similitude of his Body is represented in the said Experiment. And how this can
be accommodated to the Reflection, which Saturn himself makes from his own
Body, and to his Appearance through a Telescope, I confess I cannot apprehend.
Moreover Gallet's Hypothesis gives no Account of the two dark Spaces on each
side the Globe of Saturn, between his Body and the Ansae. For the Experiment,
on which he founds his Fancy, shows no such Distinction; all being enlightened
therein: As will be visible to those shall try it.

'Twere too tedious in this Place to consider particularly Mons. Gallet's
Scheme, and his Particular System of Saturn; which might easily be shown
defective. But thus much I thought requisite to say in this Place; because the
Theory he proposes is of a Dioptrical Consideration: Because it has never yet
been taken notice of by any other: And because he advances it in Opposition to
Mons. Hugens System, which carries with it so much Probability.

Jupiter In Jupiter.
next presents himself less encumbered than Saturn, yet not wanting a Courtly
Train: For tho his Guards are but four in number, yet their size and brightness
show their Strength, and their quick Motion round him shows their Diligence.

Galileo Galileo.
was certainly the first Inhabitant of this Globe, that ever saw these
Satellites, Ian. 7, 1610. And from that Moment to this, no more could ever be
discovered about him: Though Vanity and desire of being the Author of some
Novelty, made Friar Ant de Rheita Rheita.
proceed so far, as to write a Tract of 5 more Satellits (9 in all) about
Jupiter. But Hevelius, in the fourth Chap. of his Selenography, has
demonstrated the Friar to be mistaken, and has shown the small fixed Stars (only
discoverable by the Telescope) that deceived him.

These Satellites are easily seen by a 3 Foot Glass, and I have just perceived
them with one of 15 Inches. But to make exact Observations of their Motions,
it is requisite, we use Tubes of 10 and 12 Feet and upwards. From the time of
their Discovery, many curious Astronomers have attended their Motions round
Jupiter with a diligent Eye; and have found, that sometimes falling into the
Shadow of Jupiter Body, they disappear; and thence emerging, they again become
visible: sometimes they are hid behind the very Globe of their great Lord; and
sometimes being just in his Face, his Splendour overcomes theirs, and they
become invisible, as a glimmering Lamp between the Eye and Sun.

Ioh. Alfons Borellus Borellus
has published a Tract of the Theoricks of these Medicea Sidera (so named by
Galileo in complement to his great Patron the Duke of Tuscany) Theoricae
Mediceorum siderum, Florent. 1666. 4. But none have labored more to reduce the
Observations of these little Planets to something of Use and Advantage to the
World, than the two celebrated Astronomers of the present Age, Cassini and
Flamsteed: Cassini. Flamsteed.
The former has taken great pains in Publishing Hypotheses, Tables, and
Precepts for calculating their Appearances and Eclipses, (in his Ephemerides
Mediceorum siderum, 1668. Bonon.) in order to settling the Longitudes of Places
to a great Certainty. And the latter finding the Numbers of Cassini's Tables
not so just to the present Time, from most accurate Observations of his own,
taken by the Telescope and Micrometer, has fixed new Numbers, that agree about
this time most exactly to the Phenomenon; but with the Liberty to himself of
altering these Numbers, as by future Observations he shall find Occasion; For
he is not so positive as to say, that what he settles (for 15 or 20 years)
shall be perpetual. What he has hitherto published of this kind may be found
dispersed in the Philosoph. Transact. wherein, he has given the World the
Catalogues of these Satellits Eclipses for several years consecutively. In Number.
154. Page 404. he shows their Uses, and how (by their Help) the difference of
Longitude betwixt any two Places on Earth, where they should be observed, might
be determined: And teaches a Method of finding out, within what space on our
Globe any of them are observable. These Directions he repeats in Latin, Number.
165. Page 7^0. for the use of Forreiners. In Number. 177 and 178. with the
Catalogue of Eclipses for the year 1686. he describes a small Instrument; and
shows how by the help of it, of the said Catalogue, and of the Tables of
Jupiters Geocentrick Places and Parallaxes, the Appearances of the Satellites
at any time in that year might be discovered, and delineated by Scale and
Compass on Paper. But the Curiosities, which this excellent Astronomer has yet
unpublished, relating to this useful Part of Astronomy, are very great and
ingenious; which I hope, in time, he will impart to the World; as with much
Freedom and Generosity, he now communicates them to his private Friends: In the
Number of which I am very proud to reckon my self.

Before I quit this Article of the Satellites, Satellites all disappearing.
I cannot omit taking notice of an Observation, which, by mere Accident, I made
some years ago, of a Total Disappearance of all the Satellites. I had often
attended their Motions with a good Telescope of 12 Foot; and often had them all
four conspicous at a time, very often three, frequently two, but never less
than one, and this but very rarely; till An. 1681. November. 2. Hor. 10. p. m.
Dublinii St. Vet. there was not one of them visible; Jupiter there stood by
himself, in all Appearance, without his Guards; and a bold Lucian might have
pulled him from his Throne without Resistance. Some years after, I obtained
from my learned Friend Mr. Flamsteed his Tables of the Motions of these
Satellites; And the Postures of these Jovial Moons, at that time, are found by
them to be as is expressed in Tab. 40. Fig. 3. T. 40. F. 3.
The first, third and fourth were just in his Face; and were therefore drowned
by his Light, and the second was behind his Body. The rarity of this Appearance
(at least to me) makes me note it so particularly: perhaps those that are more
frequently employed in watching their Motions may meet sometimes with the like
Conjuctions; but I believe it is very seldom. Hevelius, in his constant
Attendance on them, for more than a year and half, hit not upon such an
Appearance; as may be seen by the History of his Observations at the end of his
Selenographia; Nor Cassini, as is manifest from his forementioned Ephemerides.

Besides these four little Moons about Jupiter, Jupiter' s Belts.
the Telescope discovers other Remarkables even in his Body. As first: his Face
is not all of a Color; But there are in it brighter and darker Parts; and
these are drawn athwart him, like broad Zones or Belts almost parallel to the
Ecliptic, as is expressed in Fig. 3. Tab. 40. T. 40 F. 3.


The last thing that has been observed in this Planet is a Spot, first seen by
our Ingenious Mr. Hook May 9. h. 9. p. m. 1665. Jupiter's Spot and Rotation.
By this Spot it is manifest, that Jupiter turns round his own Axis in the space
of less than 10 hours, or about 9^. 56^. Hence the Rotation of our Earth.
A very strong Argument to prove, that our Earth may do so likewise; since
Jupiter, who is so considerably bigger than the Earth, has a Motion much more
quick than ours in 24h. Kepler, upon the Restoration of the Pythagorean or
Copernican Hypothesis, did conjecture, from the Motion of the Primary Planets
about the Sun as their Center, That the Sun moved about its own Axis; but could
not evince it, till future Observations by the Telescope discovered Spots in
the Sun, and by them demonstrated, that the Sun revolves on its own Axis, in 25
days. Jupiter has four secondary Planets moving round him, and he himself in
their Center turns on his Axis: our Earth has a secundary Planet, the Moon,
that moves round her once a Month: is it not therefore highly probable, that
the Earth also revolves diurnally on its Axis? For a farther account of this
Spot in Jupiter, I refer to the Philosoph. Transact. N. 1. P. 3. N. 4. P. 75.
N. 8. P. 143. N. 12. P. 209. N. 15. P. 246. N. 82. P. 4039.

(12.) (12.) Reflection on the M^tions of Saturn's and Jupiter's Satellits,
even^ing the Order of the C^ e^tion.
But before I leave Saturn and Jupiter, I cannot but take notice of one
admirable Property, for the Knowledge whereof, we are beholden to the
Telescope; and that is, the wonderful Agreement which is found in all the
several Systems of our Vortex; as well between the General System of the Sun,
and Primary Planets with the particular System of Saturn's or Jupiter's
Planets, as between the particular Systems themselves, in this single Property,
That the Periodical Times of the Planets Revolutions are in a sesquialtera
Ratio of their Distances from the Center of the Planet about which they
revolve. That is, As the Square of the Period of the first Satellite (for
instance): To the Square of the Period of the second:: So the Cube of the
Distance of the first from Jupiter's Center: To the Cube of the Distance of the
second from his Center. This holds most exquisitely true in Jupiter's
Satellites, as is noted by the admirably learned Mr. Newton, in his
incomparable Treatise, Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, Lib. 3.
Hypoth. 5. And the same Law of Motion is strictly observed by the five Primary
Planets, and the Earth about the Sun. As he notes, Hypoth. 7, 8. This is also
verifyed by Mons. Cassini in the five Satellites of Saturn; as appears by his
Account of them in the Philosoph. Transact. Number. 92. P. 5178. N. 133. P. 831.
N. 181. P. 79.

And from hence may we justly fall into the deepest Admiration, that one and
the same Law of Motion should be observed in Bodies so vastly distant from each
other, and which seem to have no Dependence or Correspondence with each other.
This does most evidently demonstrate, that they were all at first put into
Motion, by one and the same unerring Hand, even the infinite Power and Wisdom
of God, who has fixed this Order amongst them all, and has established a Law,
which they cannot transgress. Chance or dull Matter could never produce such an
Harmonious Regularity in the Motion of Bodies so vastly distant: This plainly
shows a Design and Intention in the first Mover. And with Submission to the
Reverend and Learned Divines, I am apt to think, that one Argument drawn from
the Order, Beauty and Design of Things, is more forecible against Atheism, than
Multitudes of Notional Proofs drawn from Ideas, Apparitions of Specters,
Witches, Be^^ty Order and Design of natural Bodies strong Proofs of a (...)
etc. (not that these should lose their due Strength) For besides the Heavens,
even the little Globe we inhabit affords us infinite Variety in this kind: And
for my own part, I must confess, I can read more Divinity in Mr. Charlton's
admirable Musaeum, on a Box of beautiful Shells, of delicately painted Plants,
curiously adorned Insects, Serpents, Birds, or Minerals; than in large Volumes
of Notional Writers. For Animals, Plants, and Minerals do yield us abundant
Instances, which visibly show a Design or End proposed; which, as it cannot
possibly consist with Chance, so neither can it be apprehended to have been so
ab+aeterno: For it is absolutely unconceivable, that a thing designed for some
End or Purpose, should not be so designed in time, by some designing Being. But
I beg Pardon for this Digression, in which I am thus engaged before I was
aware. To return therefore to our Subject.

Mars Mars
offers himself next; who, trusting in his own Strength, is attended by no
Guards; But the Prying Telescope discovers in his Face Scars, Spots, and
Ruggedness; as we may find in the Philosoph. Transact. Number. 14. P. 239. etc. By
these Spots the acute Cassini has determined, Rotation.
that he turns on his own Axis once in 24h. 40^. tho others assign his
Revolution performed in just half that time (a Mistake easy enough) vid.
ibidem. The fiery Face of this Planet requires a very good Telescope to view
him, and a small Aperture on the Object-Glass: or else this Glaring Light makes
but a confused Appearance. But however furious his Beams are, he is beholden
for them (as all the rest of the Planets) to the great Fountain of Light and
Heat the Sun. For what the great distance of Saturn and Jupiter, and their
being so much above the Sun (as I may so speak) hinders us from seeing,
Increases and Decreases.
viz. their Increase and Decrease in Light like our Moon, is very visible in
the Planet Mars; who, in his Quadratures with the Sun, and in his Perigeon, may
be seen almost bissected, but never corniculated or falcated as the other
Inferiors, Vid. Hevelii Selenograph. Cap. 4. P. 66.

The Sun. S^n's Spots.
The glorious Sun does next present; in whose bright Face, we can hardly expect
to find dark Spots. yet such there are, and frequent too. Scheinerus in his
Rosa Ursma has published a large Book in fol. of nothing else; and Hevelius, at
the end of his Selenography, has many Observations of these Maculae; as also of
some brighter Spots in the Sun, called Faculae. The Way of observing them is
taught at large, in the foresaid Authors; and is in short, either by admitting
the Light of the Sun through a Telescope upon a white Paper, in a dark Room; or
by arming the Eye with a small thin Glass smoaked over a Torch, Lamp, or
Candle, and with it looking through a Telescope at the Sun's Body. Sun's
Rotation.
The only Discovery that has been made by these Maculae, is, that the Sun
revolves round his own Axis, in the Space of about 25 days. But for a complete
and succinct Account of the Theory of these Maculae and their Motions, I refer
the Reader to the excellent Mathematician Andrew Tacquet, Astronom. Lib. 8.
Tract. 3. Number. 7. It Is only to be noted, that for these several years past, the
Appearance of these Maculae has been much more rare, than when Galileo (who
certainly first discovered them) Scheinerus, Hevelius, attended their
Observations, Sun's Spots rare of late.
viz. about 50 or more years ago. About that time, one should seldom see the
Sun^s Face (no more than now our brighter Beauties here ^elow) free from one or
more black Patches; but now (as if they were grown out of Fashion) he seldom
wears any: One in 5 or 7 years hardly appearing: As if now he put them on, more
of necessity, to cover an odd Pimple, that may otherwise disfigure his
Countenance, than to adorn his Face. How far the Fair Sex should follow his
Example, I dare not venture to determine. But from them we naturally fall to
Venus.

Venus, Venus and Mercury.
the brightest Planet in the Heavens. She fears not sometimes even at Noonday
to display her Beauty; and in this Armor reposing an entire Confidence,
performs her Course alone, and free from all other Attendants.

Mercury's Wit and Quickness secures him, therefore he has no Train, but
generally shelters himself under the Beams of his potent Lord the Sun.

But both these Inferior Planets are found by the Telescope to increase and
decrease, ^ncrease and Decrease.
as our Moon. For sometimes they appear corniculated, sometimes falcated,
sometimes gibbous, and sometimes full even on, or nigh to their Conjunctions
with the Sun. F^lsity of the Ptolem^^ck Hy+pothesis.
By which last Phenomenon, it is manifest they move about the Sun, sometimes
farther from us, sometimes nigher to us than he: and consequently the
Ptolemaick Hypothesis is absolutely false. (whatever Hyothesis be true.) And
for the Demonstrable Detection of this Error, we are beholden to the Telescope:
And I doubt not but Posterity may, by the same Instrument, discover some
Hypothesis as positively true: For the Probabilities of the Copernican System
are already so strongly confirmed thereby, that there seems no Room left for
any farther Doubt; But Time and Labor will yet discover farther Proofs. How
successfully Mr. Hook has applied the Telescope to prove the Motion of the
Earth, I leave the Reader to judge upon Perusal of his Attempt.

(16.) (16) Discoveries in the Moon.
And thus at last are we arrived at home to contemplate our Neighbor the Moon.
Her may we properly call our own, as making us the Center of her Periodical
Motion. For, as the Satellites about Saturn or Jupiter move round them; so
moves the Moon as a Satellite about our Earth. Galileo with his Telescope first
discovered great Ruggedness in the Moons Face, after him Langrenus the King of
Spain's Cosmographer, attempted to draw her Picture. But the noble Hevelius in
his curious and costly Work of Selenography, has perfected this Affair, perhaps
beyond Amendment. There may we see the Moons Countenance distinguished in an
admirable difference of Parts, both for Shape and Color. We may there see
greater Parts that resemble our Seas, Lakes, Rivers, Islands, Peninsulas and
Continents; other lesser Spots (almost infinite in number) that resemble our
Mountains, Hills and Valleys. Of the greater Parts, those that are something
obscure, may we reckon Seas and Lakes; and the brighter may we account Land.
For just so does our Earth appear, when, from a distant Height we look upon a
Mixture of Land and Water enlightened by the Sun. Of the smaller Spots, those
that are brightest and shine, are Mountains and Rocks; and the darker Parts,
which are usually encompassed with these brighter Verges, may we esteem Valleys.

Now that some Parts of the Moon are much higher than others, Mountains in the
Moon.
is as manifest by the Telescope, as that some Parts of our Earth are higher
than others. For if we look upon it about the Quarter-days, we shall plainly
see the Edge, toward the dark Part, broken and cragged; and many little bright
Spots, that are clearly separated from the rest of the enlightened Part. Which
is an evident Proof that these are the high Tops of Eminencies, which receive
the Suns Light, before the Parts below them are enlightened. Moreover the Moons
Spots cast their Shadows opposite to the Sun, that is, to the Eastward, whilst
the Moon is Increasing, and to the Westward, on her Decrease. That these
Mountains are very high, is manifest from the way of Measuring them, delivered
in Riccioli Almagest. 1. Page 208. And Tacquet Geom. Prac. Cap. 8. Prob. 2.

For the better distinguishing these Spots, Names imposed on the Spots.
and making them more useful in the Observation of Lunar Eclipses, there are
names imposed on them by Authors: Hevelius assigns to them the names of Places
here on Earth: Grimaldus and Ri^^iolus give to them the names of famous
Mathematicians and Astronomers.

By means of these Spots, Eclips^s accurately observed by t^em.
Lunar Eclipses are now much more accurately observed than formerly; to the
great Advancement of Geography and Navigation, in settling the Longitudes of
Places. For now the Immersions and Emersions of these Spots from the Shadow of
the Earth are most nicely determined.

Moreover, by these Spots the Moon is discovered to have various librating
Motions, from East to West, and from West to East, also from North to South,
and from South to North. But hereof we cannot now enlarge, vid. Bullialdi
Astrom. Philolaic. Lib. 3. Cap. 13. Hevelii Selenograph: Riccioli Almagest. 1.
Lib. 4. Cap. 9. Neither is it needful to insist on the Moons Transits over, and
Appulses to, fixed Stars and Planets; which can never be accurately observed but
by the Telescope. I cannot tell whether it be worth our while to take notice in
this Place, that Mons. Isaac Vossius has published a fantastical Conceit of his
own, for explicating the Appearance of the Moons Spots; in his Liber va^iarum
Observationum.

(17.) (17.) Planets whether inhabited.
And now perhaps we may be allowed to sit down, and think awhile, whether all
these Celestial Bodies, that thus dance round our Sun, may not be inhabited.
But this Disquisition has been already so ingeniously managed by several,
(particularly by the Reverend Dr. Wilkins Bishop of Chester, in his World in
the Moon; and by Mons. Fontenel his Plurality of Worlds) that there is little
left to be said on the Subject. I shall only add, that there is nothing in
Nature, Morality or Religion, that contradicts the Affirmative of this Opinion.
And it is through a narrowness of Thought that some men deny it. They will not
think on any other sort of Creatures, than what we see here on Earth; and
presently begin to ask, how should Men possibly live in Saturn's cold Climates,
or in the scorching Heat that affects Mercury. But shall we thus confine the
Great Creator to our poor Conceptions? Cannot he that has made a Man, a Whale,
an Elephant, a Fly, be able to create indefinite Varieties of Creatures, and
all endowed with different Faculties, and various Ways of Perception? Some
adapted to one Planet, others to others? And all these may be engaged in
different Ways of Life and Thought; but should all be engaged in Praising and
Serving him that gave them all their Beings.

(18.) (18.) Telescopes Use on Earth.
But here I quit these remote Thoughts; and from viewing the admirable Extent,
Beauty, Order and Variety of the Creation abroad, betake my self home to our
own Globe. And here we shall not lay aside our Telescope as useless: We may
employ it on various Occasions and diverse Concerns of Human Life. The Merchant
may with this discern afat his rich-laden Vessels, whose Sides and Sails are
swelled, and look big with imported Wealth. The Seaman may discern his Friend
or Foe. The wealthy Countryman may survey his distant Herds, Plantations, and
Laborers; and Generals may observe their wide-spread Troops. But endless would
it be to touch on all; the contriving Head will find it useful, and adapt it to
his own particular Concerns on many Occasions, that cannot now be thought of.

Uses of the Telescopes Celestial Discoveries.
And thus much shall suffice in short, concerning the Discoveries made with the
Telescope. And now I hope it will not be asked, Cui Bono? To what End are all
these Discoveries? What Advantage is there in them? For, if the Advancement of
Astronomy have any good in it; if the furnishing us with a Contemplation from
whence we may evince the Power and Wisdom of an Almighty Creator be any Good;
If affording an Opportunity of admiring the vast Extent, Order and Beauty of
the Creation be any Good; I am sure, hereby we reap all these Goods in an ample
manner. But supposing that nothing of all these Advantages were at hand just at
present, let not the inquisitive Philosopher therefore despond in his
Enquiries. The consideration of the Magnet (as I have noted before) teaches us
what Secret Virtues may lurk in the simplest Things: And what admirable Uses
Posterity may raise out of them. The Torricellian Experiment was long applied
only to Disquisitions concerning a Vacuum, before our incomparable Philosopher
the Honorable Mr. Boil, one of the chief Glories of the English Nation,
discovered its Usefulness in predicting the Weather, by which it is become one
of the most pleasant Instruments in the World. But this I say, not so much to
encourage men in the Prosecution of useless Enquiries (for doubtless he is best
employed that can propose the best Advantages to Mankind from his Studies) But
to discourage some men from exclaiming against all Labors as absolutely
useless, whose immediate Use they do not apprehend.

(20.) (20.) Of the Microscope.
And now that we are arrived at home, let us change our Instrument, and take
into our hands a Microscope. And indeed with this, our Contemplations may be
endless; all things affording such admirable Appearances, such curious
Contexture of Parts, and such delicate vivid Colors; that the Contrivance of
the Almighty Creator is as visible in the meanest Insect or Plant, as in the
greatest Leviathan or strongest Oak. To touch upon all the Wonders this
Instrument shows us, would be infinite; I shall therefore only refer to those,
who have prosecuted Enquiries therewith to great Exactness.

Franciscus Fontana Fontana.
in his Observationes Coelestium Terrestriumque Rerum (wherein he challenges to
himself the Invention of the double Microscope, An. 1618.) is the first (that I
can learn) who published Microscopical Observations of some few Bodies. After
him Borellus Borellus.
at the end of his Tract, De vero Telescopii Inventore, An. 1650. does the
same. Power.
Next a learned Englishman Dr. Power, An. 1664. did the like. But all these
went no farther than verbal Description; they want those curious and lively
Schemes, which the learned and ingenious Mr. Hook Hook.
presents to the World in his Micrographia, An. 1665. a Book full of admirable
Discoveries by the Microscope, and other curious Enquiries. The learned Dr.
Grew, Grew.
and the excellent Bononian Philosopher Marcel. Malpighius, Malpighius.
have labored most successfully in the Anatomy of Plants by the Microscope;
and the latter has used it much in his Books, de Ovo incubato, de Bombyce, de
Viscerum structura, Lewenhoeck.
etc. The Here Le^enhoeck of Delft in Holland, has lately applied himself with
great Diligence to the use of Microscopes: of which Instrument he thinks he has
a better kind than was ever yet known. When I visited this Gentleman at Delft,
he showed me several that indeed were very curious; but nothing more than what
I had ordinarily seen before; being composed only of one single, very minute
Glass-Sphere or Hemisphere, placed between two very thin pierced Laminae, or
Plates of Brass, and the Object was brought to its due distance before the
Glass by a fine Screw: But for his best sort, he begged our Excuse in concealing
them. The Observations he has made with his Glasses are Printed in several
Letters of his in Dutch; but for the most part, they are to be found dispersed
in the Philosophical Transactions. The last Author that has professedly treated
of Microscopick Observations, is Johan. Fran. Griendeli^s Griende^^us.
in his Micrographia nova Norimberg. 1687. wherein he has taken a great deal of
pains in giving the genuine Representations of his Objects as magnified.

I have been often delighted with the curious Appearance of many Objects seen
through the Microscope. Circulation of the Blood in VVater-New^s.
But none ever surprised me more, than the visible Circulation of the Blood in
Water-New^s ( Lacerta aquatica) to be seen as plainly as Water running in a
River, and proportionably much more rapid. Of this I have formerly given the
Account at large to the Royal Society. And it is published in the Philosophical
Transact. Number. 177. P. 1236.

Vie^ing nigh Objects with the Telescope*
I shall conclude all, with two remaining Uses of the Telescope. The first is,
To view nigh Objects therewith. The most apposite Telescope for our Purpose, is
that consisting of a Unequal Object-Glass and Unequal Eye-Glass. But what is
delivered hereof, is easily accommodated to the Telescope with a Concave Eye
Glass; but this latter, taking in but a narrow space of the Object, is not so
proper for our Purpose.

Wherefore, suppose we have a Telescope, whose Object-Glass has its Focal
Length for very distant Objects just 3 Foot, (how to find this exactly, I have
shown Chap. IV. Sect. 3.) This we'll call the Solar Focus. And suppose the
Focus of the Eye-Glass be just 2 Inches; and that we were to view with this
Telescope an Object 20 Foot distant from the Object-Glass. It Is required to
find the distinct Base of this Object-Glass exposed now to this nigh Object 20
Foot distant, which in the First Part is called the Respective Focus.

And this is done by Prop. V. of the First Part: By this Analogy,

As the difference between the Distance of the Object and Glasses Focus:

To the Glasses Focus::

So the Distance of the Object from the Glass:

To the Distance of the respective Focus, or distinct Base from the Glass.

In the Numbers of our Example thus,

204. 36:: 240. 42^35 + = equal to the distinct Base of this Object-Glass
exposed now to this nigh Object. So that the Distance of the Object-Glass from
the Eye-Glass, which, for viewing distant Objects, was 36 + 2 = 38 Inches; must
now be 42^35 + 2 = 44^35 Inches; and so much is the Telescope to be lengthened
to view this Object distant only 20 Foot.

The use of this Theorem is very pretty; Viewing Pictures in Miniature.
and they who draw Pictures in Miniature, may practice it to good Purpose. For
the small Picture (being inverted that it may appear erect, and placed in a
strong Light, and thus looked at with a Telescope) may be made to appear full
as bigg as the natural Face, or bigger if we please. And by this means, the
least Errors of the Painter may be easily discovered, which cannot be done so
well by a single Convex-Glass as will be manifest to those who shall try and
compare both Ways. And this naturally leads me to the last Use of the Telescope
I shall here mention; and it is as it were the Converse of this I have just
spoke of. It Is,

(22.) (22.) Measuring Distances by a Telescope.
To Measure the Distance of an Object at one Station by a Telescope.

This is the great Desideratum in Practical Geometry; and always reputed
impossible. Whatever Attempts have been made toward it have been always found
to result at last to a double Station, tho some way or other disguised by the
Contrivance. This is evidently shown by Tacquet (Geom. Pract. Lib. 1. ad Finem
Cap. 5.) concerning the Method proposed by Clavius. And may be shown of any
other, that I have ever yet heard of.

Toward the latter end of the year 1665. History of this Affair.
(as we may find Number. 7. P. 123. Philosoph. Transact.) Mons. Auzout did propose
to Mr. Hook, to exchange with him a Secret he had in Optics, for another which
Mr. Hook had. Mons. Auzout's was, Locorum Distantias ex unica statione, absque
ullo Instrumento Mathematico metiri. And therein he declares the Instrument, he
uses for this Purpose, to be a great Telescope, with some necessary Tables.
Adding withal, That tho the Practice do not altogether answer the Theory of his
Invention, because that the Length of the Telescope admits of some Latitude;
yet one comes near enough, and perhaps as just, as by most of the Ways
ordinarily used with Instruments. But tho Mr. Hook discovered the Secret which
Mons. Auzout desired from him, (which is that I mention at the End of Chap*
IV.) yet Mons. Auzout never (that I know) published any thing farther of this
Invention of his own. And indeed I cannot see, how justly Mons. Azout could
say, that his Performance was, absque ullo Instrumento Mathematico; and at the
same time tell us, that it was done by a great Telescope; which surely is a
Mathematick Instrument in the highest sense: Perhaps he means, it is none of
those Mathematick Instruments commonly used in this Practice.

Mr. Oldenburg, who then published the Philosoph. Transact. adds Page 125. That
the Secret of measuring the Distance of Places by a Telescope fitted for that
Purpose, and for one Station, is a Thing already known (if I am not
missinformed) to some Members of the Royal Society; who have been a good while
since considering of it, and have contrived Ways for the doing of it. Whether
the same with those of Mons. Azout, I know not; nor have I (at the Distance
that I am now from them) Opportunity of particular Information.

This is in short the History of this Affair. Wherein (for ought as ever I
could learn) nothing more has been done hitherto. So that what I shall propose
therein is my own Thought and Contrivance. Whereof I shall first declare the
Method; and afterward shall not conceal the Difficulties thereof: not doubting
but more ingenious Heads may have Contrivances of the same kind far exceeding
mine; tho nothing herein has ever yet been published.

Wherefore let the Distance of the Object from the Object-Glass be called d,
The Author's Proposal.
the Solar Focus of the Object-Glass, or its Focus at very distant Objects f,
the respective Focus or distinct Base at a nigh Object r.

By Prop. V. and the Rule immediately mentioned:

It shall be -- d - f. f:: d. r

And Compounding -- d. f:: d + r. r

Permute -- r. f:: r + d. d

Divide -- r - f. f:: r. d

Which last Analogy is the Rule I give for finding the Distance of an Object by
a Telescope, thus expressed in Words,

As the Difference between the Respective Focus and Solar Focus:

To the Solar Focus::

So the Respective Focus:

To the Distance of the Object from the Object-Glass.

It now remains to show how to obtain exactly the three first Terms of this
Analogy; That thereby we may find the fourth required. And first for the Solar
Focal Length of an Object-Glass, it is shown before in Chap. IV. Sec. 3. how to
procure it exactly. Secondly for the Respective Focus, or distinct Base of any
nigh Object we look at, I propose the Way to obtain it thus:

As the Micrometer is contrived to open and close in the Focus of the
Object-Glass, and the Indices give the exact Measure of this Opening: So may we
adapt an Instrument, which may advance or withdraw the curious Point of a
slender Needle to or from the Object Glass. And an Index (after the manner of
the Micrometer) may show how much the slender Point is withdrawn from the
Object-Glass. Then looking through the Telescope at the Object, whose Distance
we measure, let us withdraw the Needle, till by moving the Eye before the
Eye-Glass, we perceive the Needle, as it were, fixed upon the Object: (as is
taught Chap. V. Sect. 4.) Then is the Needle in the Respective Focus. And by
observing the Index aforementioned, we have the Measure of this Respective
Focus from the Object-Glass: And consequently the Difference between it and the
Solar Focus. With which we are to work according to the Rule, and we obtain
what was required, viz. the Distance of the Object. Thus suppose, in the
foregoing Example, the Glasses Focus be = 36 Inches, and the Respective Focus
be measured 42, 45: The Analogy will then stand thus,

42, 35 - 36=6^35. 36:: 42^35. 240 = to the Distance of the Object from the
Object-Glass. And thus may we make a Table to any Telescope, that upon the
first Sight of the Respective Focus shall give the Distance of the Object.

But now I shall not conceal the Difficulties, Difficulties and Uncertainty
thereof.
that attend this Method of observing Distances. And first, The Eye can never
be justly certain, when the Needle's Point is exactly in the Respective Focus;
for tho the Way I propose of examining it ( viz. by moving the Eye before the
Eye-Glass, and observing whether or not the Needle seems to move on the Object)
be the best Expedient, and most certain that I can think of at present: Yet we
shall find, that it admits of some Latitude; and that the Needle may be moved a
little more forward or backward, without showing any visible Motion thereof on
the Object; and this too most especially, the longer the Telescopes are that we
use, and the wider the Aperture. But for the Remedy hereof, it is best to
observe where the Needle (being too nigh the Object-Glass) begins first to move
on the Object; as also to observe, where the Needle (being too far from the
Object-Glass) begins first to appear to move on the Object; and to take the
middle between these two Stations of the Needle for the true Respective Focus.

Secondly, where the Distance of the Object is very great, and vastly
disproportional to the Solar Focal Length of the Object-Glass; the Observation
will not be very accurate. And therefore it is that Mons. Auzout in the
forementioned Passage out of the Philosoph. Transact. confines his Practice to
great Telescopes. For unless they be so, a considerable Alteration in the
Distance of the Object makes no sensible Alteration in the Respective Focus of
the Object-Glass.

But if we believe the said Mons. Auzout, by this Way, (if this Way which I
propose be his, as I know not whether it be or not) one comes near enough to
Exactness, and perhaps as just as by most of the Methods ordinarily used.
However, tho the Practice, through some accidental Difficulties, do not so
exactly answer the Theory: Yet it cannot be denied, that the Theory is true.
And perhaps farther Improvements may bring it to Perfection.

CHAP. VII.
An Optic Problem of Double Vision.
IN Tab. 4^. Fig. 1. Tab. 41. Fig. (...)
A B are the two Eyes, C the nigher Object, D the farther Object; If both Eyes
open are fixed upon C, the Object D shall seem double, and then shutting the
left Eye A, the left Image of D disappears; and shutting the Right Eye B, the
right Image of D disappears.

But if both Eyes open are fixed on D, then C shall seem double, and if the
left Eye A be shut, the right Image of C vanishes, if the Right Eye B be shu^,
the left Image of C vanishes.

This is the Declaration of the Phenomenon, which any one may experiment by
placing two Candles, D 3 Foot, and C 1 Foot distant from the Eyes, and then
standing so that the Nose and two Objects may lie in or near a right Line, he
fixing his Eyes on either Object, alternately open and shut them I choose two
Candles, and at that Distance and Posture, because the Experiment thereby will
be more sensibly evident; tho it hold in any two Objects at whatever Distance,
till the Distance be so great, that the Interval between the two Eyes bears no
sensible proportion thereto, that is, till the Angle ACB (and much more A D B)
is so very small, that the Lines AC, BC, may be taken to run as it were
Parallel.

This being declared, I explicate the Reason of this Appearance, as follows.

In the first Case, both Eyes being fixed on C, if the Right Eye B be shut, the
Object D will appear to the left hand of C; then shutting the Left Eye A, and
opening the Right Eye B, and looking at C, D will appear to the Right Hand of
C; therefore opening both A and B, and looking steadfastly on C, the Object D
will appear on both sides C, that is, both to the Right and Left Hand of C, and
therefore double. And it is manifest, the Right Eye B receives the Right Image
of D, and the Left Eye A the Left Image of D; therefore in this Case, to the
Right Eye being shut, the Right Image of D disappears, and to the Left Eye
being shut, the Left Image of D disappears.

But in the second Case, fixing both Eyes on D, C seems double, for the Left
Eye A being shut, C appears to B on the Left Hand of D; then the Right Eye
being shut, the Left Eye A sees C on the Right Hand of D; so that in this Case,
the Right Eye receives the Left Image of C, and the Left Eye the Right Image of
C, and consequently the opening or shutting of either, does in this Case make
the contrary Image of C disappear. And why C should seem double, is plain in
this Case; for the Right Eye sees it on the Left Hand of D, and the Left Eye on
the Right Hand of D; so that both Eyes see it on both Hands of D, and therefore
double. But then in the first Case, the Object D, and not the Object C, seems
double. And in the second Case, the Object C, and not the Object D, seems
double. For in Vision, there is a Difference between looking and seeing;
whatever Object I look at with both Eyes appears single, and all others more
remote or nigher, that I see, appear double; for upon the Object, I look at,
the Optic Axes do concur, but not so on those I only see. And this is the
Reason that at any time I can make all the Objects about me seem confused, only
by turning the Optic Axes so, that they may concur in the free Air; as if
there were a certain visible Object there before them, tho really there be none.

And that the Concurrence of the Axes Optici in a single Point or Object is
sufficient to make that Object seem but one besides the Proof of the foregoing
Experiments, I shall endeavor to evince, or at least to explicate, by an other
known Affection of Vision; the Explanation whereof is allowed by all men as
satisfactory, it is this, in Tab. 41. Fig. 2. ^. 41. F. 4.
the Image a b of the Object A B is painted on the Retina inverted, and yet the
Eye (or rather the Soul by means of the Eye) sees the Object erect and in its
natural Posture; Because the Mind takes no notice of what happens to the Rays
in the Eye by Refraction or Decussation, but in its direction toward the
Object; it follows straight along the Rays as they by their Impulse and in
their plain Course lead it, and consequently following the Rays a A, it is
directed strait to the upper part of the Object; and also following the Rays b
B, it is directed to the lower part of the Object, and so of the rest: for
suppose the Ball of the Eye taken out of its Socket, or Cavity in the Skull,
and a Man receives in the Socket an impulse by a Stick coming in the posture of
B b, and hitting him on the upper part of the Cavity, surely he would never
look for the Original of this Blow at A, but would be certainly directed to
hunt back as it were along the Stick b B toward the Place from whence the
Stroke comes. So the mind does hunt back by means of each Pencil of Rays (which
are as it were a Stick giving the Retina a certain Impulse) to the Point from
whence it comes, and is thereby directed strait thereto. To apply this to what
I intend, I say then, that the Mind or visive Faculty (if I may have leave to
use that Word for a thing we all understand and cannot better express) takes no
notice that there are two Axes Optici, or two Pictures made by those Axes
Optici on each Retina, but following back, and hunting counter along these
Axes, it is directed to, and determined in one single Point, and therefore it
sees it as one.

And seeing this Speculation does naturally lead me to the Consideration of an
Opinion, first as I think started by the celebrated Gassendus, and since
embraced by many, viz. that we see but with one Eye at once one and the same
Point of an Object, otiante alio, (as they term it) whilst the other is idle
and does nothing. I shall not think it improper to subjoyn to my former
Discourse something relating to that Opinion, confining my self only to what
may something illustrate my former Explanations, for to enumerate all the
Experiments that prove we see with two Eyes, would swell this far beyond the
limits I design it. Therefore to the Matter.

Against our seeing with two Eyes at once one and the same Point of an Object,
it is commonly objected, that if it were so, every Object would seem in two
places at once, vide Gassendi Epist. 4. de Magnit. Solis humilis and sublimis,
and Taqueti Opt. lib. 1. Prop. 2. Thus in Tab. 41. Fig. 3. T. 41. F. 3.
If the Eyes A, B, look at the Object C, and both see it at a time, A would see
it on the opposite Wall suppose at E, and B at D.

I am so far from thinking this an Objection, that I assert first, that we do
see all Objects in two places, and that this is not taken notice of by us upon
these Accounts. First, the common Objects of our sight are large, and the Axes
of our Eyes directed to but one Physical Point thereof at a time, and then we
cannot be expected to see such in two places at once; for when I read on a flat
broad Book, where is the opposite Wall for a single small Letter to be seen on
at two places, the Letters themselves are fixed to the Surface that determines
the Sight. What I Instance in Letters on a Book may be accommodated to most
other Objects. Secondly, There are few Objects disposed fitly for showing us
that we see them in two places, for either their Bulk hinders the Experiment
from appearing so plainly, or their distance from each other or from the Eyes.
Thirdly. The Wall DE and the Parts thereof are seen so confusedly by the Eyes
A, B, when fixed on C, that we cannot so clearly observe this Experiment; and
this happens to all Objects more remote or nigher to us than C, when the Eyes
are fixed on C, still supposing that it self be but in a moderate Distance from
us, that is, in such a Distance from us, as may bear some considerable
Proportion to the Distance of the two Eyes from each other. Fourthly, the chief
Reason why we do not perceive so plainly the Object C to cover both D and E is,
because, though D be covered by C from the Eye B, yet it is not covered from
the Eye A, and therefore we think it not covered at all. Also though E be
covered by C from the Eye A, yet it is not covered from the Eye B, and
consequently because we see E, tho but with one Eye B, we imagine it not
covered at all, so that both the Points D and E being open to both the Eyes A
and B, viz. the Point D to the Eye A, and the Point E to the Eye B, we think
neither of them covered, whereas really they are both obscured, each to its
proper Eye, as will be evident by winking. And from hence is manifest the
^alsity of Taquets Assertion in the forecited Place, viz. that opening both
Eyes A and B ( Fig. 3.) and looking at C, it shall appear only to cover E (he
imagining that most Men see generally with their left Eye) whereas I say it
shall appear to obscure neither E nor D, tho to each Eye respectively it cover
each. Fifthly, whereas the Bulk of Objects (as I have noted) does hinder the
Experiment from being so sensibly evident; if by any Experiment I can show how
a large Object may be doubled, I think 'twill be sufficiently plain. Therefore
in Tab. 41. Fig. 4. ^. 41. F. 2.
let A, B, be the two Eyes, before which at a convenient Distance place the two
Candles C, D, then take a large piece of Paper E F G H K, in whose middle at K
there is a small Hole. This Paper so place between the Eyes and Candles, that
the Eye A may through the Hole K see the Candle D; and at the same time the Eye
B may see through the Hole K the Candle C; the due Distance of the Paper that
is requisite for this will be found by Trials, and winking alternately with the
Eyes. When all things are in this Posture, open both Eyes A and B, and direct
them to look at either of the Candles, I say the Hole K shall seem double; and
what is proved of the Point K is true of all other Points in the Paper, so the
whole Paper appears double; but no Points thereof are so evidently doubled as
the Point K, because they want the Advantage of Lights behind them to render
the Experiment more sensible. And upon this Occasion I cannot but hint to all
Persons that are desirous to make Experiments about Vision, that they always
employ the most luminous and vigorous Objects they can possibly, for many
Experiments will be evident by them, that will not sensibly succeed with others.

But I assert secondly, that unless we saw with both Eyes, the two first
mentioned Experiments would not succeed, and they may be reckoned amongst the
greatest Arguments that can be produced for it. For suppose in Fig. 1. A and B
to look steadfastly on C, I say they see C in two Places at once, for they see
it both on the Right hand and Left hand of D. For it is the same thing to see C
between two Ds, as to see it at two Places at once. And this I Will declare more
fully Tab. 41. Fig. 5. T. 41. F. 5.
supposing the two Eyes A and B fixed on the Object C, I say C appears on the
opposite Wall X Z in two Places, viz. at E and F (tho neither E nor F are
obscured thereby for the foregoing Reason) for let us suppose the Object D of
the first Figure to be placed duly on this Wall; shutting A, the Object C shall
appear to B on the left hand of D by the Angle D B E: then shutting B, the
Object C shall appear to A on the right hand of D, by the Angle DAF; wherefore
to both open at a time and looking at it, it shall appear on both sides of D,
to A on the right side, to B on the left side, and this happens by doubling of
D; so that from hence this Paradoxical Corollary arises, That an Object may be
seen in two Places, and yet ^ot seen double.

They that assert that we see but with one Eye, whilst the other is idle and
does nothing, assert likewise that all visual Spirits recede from the idle Eye,
and only supply the Eye that sees; but I see no Reason why the Eyes A, B,
looking at C, either of them should be said destitute of Spirits in respect of
C, which they see single, and yet both replenished with Spirits in respect of
D, which they see Double. The Images of C and D both are painted on the Retina
of A as well as of B, and therefore A and B both being replenished with Spirits
to ^ee D, (even by the Concession of our Adversaries) why not to see C also, at
which they steadfastly look?

To conclude, I propose it to the learned and ingenious Dr. Briggs, or to any
other of the Philosophical Spirits of this Age to explain the foregoing
Phenomenon by the Doctor's Theory of Vision. And as a Conclusion to the whole
shall only add one Experiment that Demonstrates we see with both Eyes at once;
and it is, that which is commonly known and practiced in all Tennis-Courts, that
the best Player in the World Hoodwinking one Eye shall be beaten by the
greatest Bungler that ever handled a Racket; unless he be used to the Trick,
and then by Custom he gets an Habit of using one Eye only.

APPENDIX.
WHilst this Book was in the Press my Affairs were such, that I could not
attend the Perusal and Correction thereof, but therein have made use of my
Friend Mr. E. Halley, who was willing to do me that Service: He, after the
first Part hereof was finished, sent me a Proposition of his own, which I took
to be of that Consequence in Dioptricks, that I importuned him to permit it to
be subjoyned by way of Appendix to my Treatise, it being of that Extent as to
comprehend the whole Doctrine of the Foci of Spherical Glasses of all Sorts,
exposed either to Diverging, Converging, or Parallel Rays. It is as follows.

PROPOSITION.
TO find the Focus of any Parcel of Rays Diverging from, or Converging to a
given Point in the Axis of a Spherical Lens, and inclined thereto under the
same Angle; the ratio of the Sines in Refraction being known.

Let G L Tab. 42. be the Lens, P any Point in its Surface, Tab. 42.
V the Pole thereof, C the Center of the Sphere whereof it is a Segment, O the
Object or Point in the Axis, to or from which the Rays do proceed, O P a given
Ray: and let the ratio of Refraction be as r to s; make C R to C O as s to r
for the immersion of a Ray, or as r to s for the Emersion, (that is, as the
Sines of the Angles in the Medium which the Ray enters, to their corresponding
Sines in the Medium out of which it comes) and laying C R from C toward O, the
Point R shall be the same for all the Rays of the Point O. Then draw the Radius
P C if need be continued, and with the Center R and Distance O P sweep a touch
of an Arch intersecting P C in Q; the Line Q R being drawn shall be parallel to
the refracted Ray, and P F being made parallel thereto shall intersect the Axis
in the Point F, which is the Focus sought Or make it as C Q:C P:: C R:C F and C
F shall be the Distance of the Focus from the Center of the Sphere.

Demonstration.
Let fall the Perpendiculars P x on the Axis, C y on the given Ray and C z on
the refracted Ray. By the Construction P F and Q R are parallel, whence the ^ Q
R C and P F C are simular, and C R to Q R as C F to P F, that is, C R to O P as
C F to P F. Now C F: P F:: C z: P x ob similia Triang. whence C R: O P:: C z: P
x, and C R: C z:: O P: P x. Again C R is to C O as the Sines of Refraction, by
construction, that is as s to r or r to s; and as C R to C z, so C O = r^ or ^r
CR to r^ or ^r C z, and so P O to P x: But as P O to P x, so C O to C y. Ergo C
y = r^ or ^r C z, that is, C y to C z is as the Sines of Refraction, but C y is
the Sine of the Angle of Incidence, and C z of the refracted Angle. Ergo
constant Propositio.

The several Cases of Rays Diverging or Converging as they enter the curve
Surface of a Unequal or Concave Lens, are for the Readers Ease delineated in the
first four Figures of Tab. 42. as are in Fig. 5 and 6 thereof, and in Fig. 1,
2. of Tab. 43. the like Cases of emerging Rays. All which are drawn with the
same Letters to their respective Points, only in some the Point F falling far
distant, is to be understood in the Intersection of the Line P F with the Axis.

This thus demonstrated in the most difficult Cases, will give all the Rules
^or the Foci of Rays parallel to the Axis as likewise for the principle Focus,
where the Rays nearest the Axis do unite, all which Rules I shall collect in
these following Corollaries.

Cor. 1. If O P be equal to C r, then the Points Q and C are coincident, and
the Rays O P after Refraction run on parallel to the Axis.

Cor. 2. If the Point Q fall on the same side the Axis as is the Point P, then
the Beams after Refraction do tend on, either diverging or converging as
before: But if Q fall on the other side the Axis, as in Fig. 1. the diverging
Rays are made to converge by a Unequal, or the converging to diverge by a
Concave Glass.

Cor. 3. If O P do exceed C R, the Focus is in all Cases on the same side of
the Glass as is the Center of the Sphere C. But contrariwise if O P be less
than C R, the Focus falls on the other side of the Glass beyond the Vertex V.

Cor. 4. An Object may be so placed, that the Rays next the Axis of a
Convex-Glass shall have an imaginary Focus, transmitting diverging Rays, when
the more remote Parts thereof shall make them converge to a real Focus.

Cor. 5. If O V the Distance of the Object from the Pole or Vertex of the
Glass, be taken instead of O P, then will C Q be the difference of O V and C R,
and as that difference to C R, so the Radius C V to C F the Distance of the
principal Focus from the Center of the Sphere whereof the Glass is a Segment:
or else as C Q to O P or R Q:: so P C to V F the focal distance from the Pole
of the Glass. Whence follows a general Rule for the Foci of all Glasses, only
according to Corol. 3. if O V do exceed C R, the Focus is on the same side of
the* Glass as is the Center of the Sphere. But if C R be the greater, then the
Focus is on the opposite side of the Glass, whence it will be determined
whether the Focus be real or imaginary.

Cor. 6. What has hitherto been said of one Surface of a Lens is easily
applicable to the other; taking F the Focus of the first Surface as an Object,
and using it as O in the Figures for emerging Rays, whereby the Focus of both
Surfaces will be determined, as in Tab. 43. Fig. 3. where I have given an
Example.

Cor. 7. Hitherto we have considered only oblique Rays either Diverging or
Converging; it now remains to add something concerning Rays parallel to the
Axis: In this Case the Point O must be considered as infinitely distant, and
consequently O P, O C, and C R are all infinite; and O P and O C are in this
Case to be accounted as always equal, (since they differ but by a Part of the
Radius of the Sphere G P V L, which is no part of either of them,) wherefore
the ratio of C R to O P will be always the same, viz. as s to r for immerging
Rays, and as r to s for those that emerge. And by this Proposition C F is to P
F in the same ratio. It remains therefore to show on the Base C P, to find all
the Triangles C P F wherein C F is to P F in the ratio given by the degree of
Refraction. This Problem has been very fully considered by the celebrated Dr.
Wallis in his late Treatise of Algebra, page 258. to which I refer; but I must
here repeat the Construction thereof, Tab. 43. Fig. 4, 5.

Let G P V L be a Lens, V C or P C the Radius of its Sphere, and let it be
required to find all the Points f, f, such as C f, may be to P f in the given
ratio of s to r for immerging Rays, or as r to s for the emerging. Divide C V
in K, and continue C V to F, that C K may be to V K, and C F to V F in the
proposed ratio: Then divide K F equally in the Point a, and with that Center
sweep the Circle FK F; this Circle being drawn gives readily all the Foci of
the Parallel Rays O P, O P. For having continued CP till it intersect the
Circle in F, P F shall be always equal to V f the Distance of the Focus of each
respective Parcel of Rays O P, from the Vertex or Pole of the Lens.

To demonstrate this, draw the pricked line V F, and by what is delivered by Dr.
Wallis in the aforecited Place, V F and C F, will be always in the same
proposed ratio. Again V f being made equal to P F, C F and C f will be likewise
equal, as are C P, V C; and the Angles P C f, V C F being ad verticem are also
equal: Wherefore P f will be equal to V F, and consequently C f to P f in the
same ratio as C F to V F, whence and by what foregoes, the Points f, f are the
several respective Foci of the several Parcels of Rays, O P, O P. Q. E. D.

That C F is to P F in the ratio of the Refraction, in the case of parallel
Rays, will be yet more evident, if it be considered, that the Angle at C is
equal to the Angle of Incidence, and the Angle at P to the refracted Angle;
wherefore PF the side opposite to the Angle at C, is as the Sine of the Angle
of Incidence, and C F opposite to the Angle at P, is as the Sine of the
respective refracted Angle; whence in all Cases of parallel Rays, C F is to P F
in the same constant ratio of Refraction.

If it shall be desired to effect in Numbers what we have here done by Lines,
it will be most easy to adapt a Calculus to the foregoing Geometrical
Construction. For if in the Triangle P O C there be given the Radius C P equal
to Unity, C O the distance of the Object from the Center of the Sphere, and the
Perpendicular P x equal to the Sine of the Angle P C O, the side P O = Q R will
be equal to ^ in ^ Then as Q R or P O to P x:: so C R to the Sine of the Angle
C Q R, and the Complement to 180gr. of the sum of the Angl^s C P O and C Q R is
the Angle C R Q = C F P; and as P x to P O so the Sine of the Angle C R Q to C
Q; and as C Q to C P so C R to C F, which is the distance of the respective
Focus of all the Rays P O from the Center of the Sphere C.

But the Foci of Rays parallel to the Axis may be more readily computed,
following the Footsteps of the Construction delivered in Coroll. 7. (Tab. 43.
Fig. 4, 5.) for thereby it will appear, that the Radius of the Circle K F, viz.
a F, is equal to ^ C P, and C a = ^ C P, for emerging Rays, as in Fig. 4; but
for immerging Rays, as in Fig. 5, Ca will be found to be ^ C P: and supposing
the distance of the Ray from the Axis = P x, in the Case of parallel Rays
Emerging, the distance of the Focus will be found, P F = ^ C P: that is, r to s
being as 3 to 2, P F = ^ C P. And for immerging Rays, the Focal distance is
found by a like Rule, P F = ^ + C P: that is r and s being as 3 to 2 as before,
PF is equal to ^ + C P. These Canons are so easily deduced from the
Constructions, that I shall not need to trouble the Reader with their
Demonstration; only I shall add two Tables which I computed from them, with
little more work than a continual Addition; which may by way of Example, serve
to instruct and exercise the young Student in this part of Mathematics.

Suppose CP the Radius of the Sphere of Glass 2 Inches, and the ratio of
Refractio as 3 to 2; at each tenth of an Inch distance from the Axis, the Foci
are as follows. For Emerging Rays.
Px PF 0 12,9600 + 5,7600 - 2 1 12,9276 + 5,7276 - 2 2 12,8304 + 5,6304 - 2 3
12,6684 + 5,4684 - 2 4 12,4416 + 5,2416 - 2 5 12,1500 + 4,9500 - 2 6 11,7936 +
4,5936 - 2 7 11,3724 + 4,1724 - 2 8 10,8864 + 3,6864 - 2 9 10,3356 + 3,1356 - 2
10 9,7200 + 2,5200 - 2 For Immerging Rays.
Px PF 0 2,5600 + 5,7600 + 2 1 2,5536 + 5,7536 + 2 2 2,5344 + 5,7344 + 2 3
2,5024 + 5,7024 + 2 4 2,4576 + 5,6576 + 2 5 2,4000 + 5,6000 + 2 6 2,3296 +
5,5296 + 2 7 2,2464 + 5*4464 + 2 8 2,1504 + 5*3504 + 2 9 2*0416 + 5*2416 + 10
1*9200 + 5*1200 + 2

But it is to be Noted, that these Foci for Immerging Rays, must not be taken
for the Foci of a Plano-Convex, when the Unequal Side is toward the Object, for
the plane Side by its Refraction, does contract the Focal length by about a
Semidiameter of the Sphere; These suppose the Body of Glass continued, as in
the First Proposition of this Treatise.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page Line For Read 3 26 V IV 4 12 Propositions Proportions 50 23 6th. 16th. 57
17 Convexity Concavity 58 5 Plano-Convex Plano-Concave 67 8 4th. 5th. 141 24
Breadth of the Object Breadth of the Object 143 6 Dele XV 149 12 We cannot add
We are to add 160 4 Lemma Lemma. I. 193 4 C F or F Z + F D C F (or F Z) + F D.
219 13 l h more than l i l h is greater than l i 219 14 h g less h g is less
220 1 shall be as shall be 264 22 his this

ADVERTISEMENT.
ALL the abovenamed Instruments as Telescopes of all Lengths, Microscopes
single and double, Perspectives great and small, Reading Glasses of all sizes,
Magnifying Glasses, Multiplying Glasses, Triangular Prisms, Speaking Trumpets,
Spectacles fitted to all Ages, and all other Sorts of Glasses, both Concave and
Unequal are made and sold by JOHN YARWELL at the Archimedes and Three Golden
Prospects, near the great North-Door in S. Paul's Churchyard: London.


