A Modest Vindication of the Petition of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal for
the calling of a Free Paliament.
THis Defense is grounded upon three fundamental principles; I. The Right of
Petitioning. II. The Necessity. III. The Duty.

I. It is the undoubted Right of the Subjects to Petition, being founded upon
an Act of Parliament, and the highest reason in the world; for that is a very
monstrous government, where the People must not approach their King, and
acquaint him with their grievances. The people have the greatest property in
the Land, and therefore the most concerned when a Foreign Enemy is upon it;
their welfare is the supreme Law; and yet they must not desire to meet in order
to consult their own preservation. The Jesuits (the sworn enemies to the
English Nation) will take care of us, and our posterity; therefore why should
we trouble our selves at this juncture? They can levy money with a Proclamation,
they can dispense with all Laws, and what should we do with a Parliament, when
the whole Statute-Book serves for no other end but to wipe the Tails of these
Reverend Satyrs; who fly into their Dens and Thickets, at the very sound of a
House of Commons. II. The necessity, and that an indispensable one: The
Government turned Topsie Turvy, no Law, no Rule, all in a state of War; all
Treaties broken, all Obligations ceased; and yet the People must not come
together to know why or wherefore they fight, or how they may avoid destroying
one another; they must hack and cut one another to pieces blindfold, and to no
other end, but to save the Jesuits, and the Knaves, and to ruin themselves: But
the most Reverend Bishops are told, that they shall have a Free Parliament as
soon as ever the Prince of Orange has quitted this Realm; that is, such a Free
Parliament as they were like to have had before the Prince came hither,
shuffl'd, cut, and pack't by Mr. Brent and his Missionaries, or perhaps ten
times worse, or rather none at all; for the Church of Rome is grown such an
infamous Bankrupt, that no body will trust her further than they can command
her: She may be compared to the Tiger, which fawns, sneaks, and lurks as long
as the Hunter is armed with his Spear and his Gun, but when once the Weapons
are laid down, the Beast flies upon the unwary Forester, tears, and devours
him. III. The Duty: For what better Office could those pious Prelates and
Patriots of their Country do for the public Good, than to make all People
Friends, to save the lives of many Thousands, and to heal all our Wounds and
Sores, which they of the Roman Faith have inflicted upon a People too kind and
good natured for such ravenous Monsters, who go about seeking whom they may
devour. France, Hungary, and the Valleys of Piedmont are still reeking with the
blood of their poor innocent Preys, and ecchoing with the lamentations of a
People ruined, by trusting these Crocodiles too much; and if God in his
infinite mercy had not watched over these Kingdoms, and sent a Gabriel to guard
them, they had certainly fallen a Victim to the intolerable Pride, the lawless
Fury, and untractable Barbarity of a sort of Animals, called Catholics,
subtle, and treacherous by custom and discipline, not to be chained by any Law
either of God or Man; and therefore every body knows how far we may rely upon
them, when the Archangel leaves us. The Devil was sick, the Devil a Monk would
be;
The Devil was well, the Devil a Monk Was he.

Exeter, Nov. 21. 88.
FINIS.

