The SPIRIT of Calumny and Slander, Examined, Chastis'd, and Exposed, IN A
LETTER TO A MALICIOUS LIBELLER. MORE Particularly Addressed to Mr. GEORGE
RIDPATH, Newsmonger, near St. Martins in the Fields. CONTAINING Some
Animadversions on his Scurrilous Pamphlets, Published by him against the Kings,
Parliaments, Laws, Nobility and Clergy of Scotland. TOGETHER With a short
account of Presbyterian Principles and Consequential Practices.

Tenue est mendacium, perlucet si diligenter inspexeris. Senec.

London: Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh, at the Golden-Ball over against the
Royal Exchange. 1693.

TO THE READER.
IT is not much worth the while to inform the World, that now Mr. George
Ridpath is at the Head of the Presbyterian Party in Scotland. His Associates
there, and here, have such an Opinion of him, that they consider him as the
Invincible Champion of their Cause; and the truth is, if any Man be so
inconsiderable, and so much a Brute, as to fight him at his own Weapons, Mr.
Ridpath will certainly carry the Prize. He Is the Man, that is now most likely
to pull down Antichrist, and the Whore of Babylon. And as for the Scotch
Episcopal Clergy who yet retain any kindness for the Hierarchy, and the former
Government, if he lives another year, they must all of them be banished the
Isle of Britain. It is enough for you to know, that now the Presbyterians, as
is probable, have by an unanimous Suffrage chosen him to manage the Libels
against their Opposites. He now appears in the Field of Battle, with all the
Noise, Lies, and Clamor, that becomes a Zealous Covenanter. He began this last
years Campaign with a Libel against Dr. M -- o, which valuable Book he
Dedicated to the Parliament of Scotland; by this, one may easily infer, that
either he had a mean Opinion of the Parliament, or extraordinary thoughts of
himself.

If the following Treatise cannot be reduced into any certain Method, this is
not to be imputed unto me; for I must confess that I too much followed the
Excursions of Mr. Ridpath's invention. I was willing to contract the
Animadversions that I made upon his Book into as little room as was possible;
and therefore the frequent Transitions from one thing to another, are best
understood, by such as have Read his Continuation, etc. I hope most Men are
better employed than either to think or speak of the Calumnies and Lies, that
he industriously heaps together against the Clergy. His Party is resolved to
make use of such Engines against the Church, as they and their Forefathers
found most successful to the Extirpation of Root and Branch: and they that are
unacquainted with their Malicious Methods, are great Strangers to our Nation,
and History.

If the Reader meet with some Paragraphs that are more particular, and peculiar
to Mr. Ridpath, than the Public is obliged to take notice of, I must be
excused, since I was compelled; for I assure you, that I value personal
altereations no otherwise than a good Christian ought to do: Nor did I ever
Write to satisfy or convince Mr. Ridpath, that being a thing in it self
impossible. There is a certain Order of Mean Spirited Fellows (I do not mean by
their External Quality) who think that there is nothing written by their Party,
(were it never so ignominiously fulsome and scandalous) but what is invincible
and unanswerable. Their Pride, and Vanity are Incurable. It is not my meaning
that we ought to put our selves to the Drudgery of answering all the Scurrilous
and Obscene Libels that are propagated by our Enemies, but it is reasonable to
let our Friends see, that at some times we can Confute them if that be thought
convenient. I am so far convinced of the weakness of their Reasonings, that I
know no Sect, Ancient, or Modern, that ever broke the Peace of the Christian
Church, but may be more plausibly defended, than the latest Edition of
Presbytery in Scotland.

I never thought that the Reputation of my Friend was in any hazard by being
attacked by Mr. Ridpath, or the Little Creatures who instigate him; yet by the
following Papers, I make it plain to all disinteressed persons, that Mr.
Ridpath lies Wilfully and Deliberately in several Instances; and therefore I
may be allowed to take leave of him for the future, if he does not manage his
accusations, as becomes the Spirit of Truth, Innocence, and Ingenuity. If you
think that the Style is more sharp than is Decent or Just, then I entreat you
may Read his Books which occasioned these Papers, and then I am confident that
you will retract your Censure, and find that I have meddled with his Person as
little as was possible. He is in some places so Obscene that there is no coming
near him, and therefore I made all possible have to rid my imagination of him,
and the paultry Trash that he gathers together.

The Bookseller was willing to Print a Sheet or two more than the Letter that I
addressed to Mr. Ridpath, and therefore I gave him some Propositions that are
extracted out of such Books as are most in Vogue amongst the Scotch
Presbyterians, that the Reader might have a sample of their Moral Theology with
regard to Obedience, Government, and Subjection. To which I have added a
Letter, written from the Tolbooth of Edinburgh by the Famous Assassin Mr. James
Mitchel, who endeavors to prove from several Texts of Scripture, that he ought
to kill Dr. Sharp, Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews. In short, to use the words
of a Great Man, Rebellion is the Soul of the Kirk. And though we had not known
the History of that Parliament Anno 1645. (So they called the bloody Meeting at
St. Andrews) we have later Instances of their Arbitrary and Tyrannical Malice
against the better half of the Nation. Their very Patrons are ashamed of them
(not through any ingenuous remorse) but because their bare faced Villainies are
frequently exposed. I think the following Letter needs no other Preface than
what is already hinted by

Sir, Your humble Servant, S. W.

The CONTENTS.
THE Occasion of this Letter.

Mr. Ridpath, the Author of two or three Scurrilous and abusive Pamphlets
against the Kings, Parliaments, Laws, Nobility, and Clergy of Scotland Page 1

His Rage and Passion against the Author of the Apology for the Clergy of
Scotland Ibid.

His Challenge fairly embraced. The Author of this Defense undertakes to prove
that there is not a good Consequence in Mr. Ridpath 's Books from the beginning
to the end p. 2

The Character bestowed upon Mr. Rutherford by the Author of the Apology, no
justifiable ground of Mr. Ridpath 's clamourous bawling against the Learned
Advocate Ibid.

^^^path 's accusation against Sir George Mackenzie in the case of C. of C.
founded only on his own Petulance and Malice p. 3

Ridiculous advices to the Ministers of State in England, and his Civilities to
K. W. and Q. M. Ibid.

His imitation of the famous Presbyterian Buffoon Dr. Bastwick, when he reviles
the present Clergy of the Church of Scotland p. 4

His impudence in charging the Archbishop of Glasgow with so many unheard of
Crimes p. 5

His Vanity in thinking that his Books do greater Feats than the other
Scriblings of his Party p. 6

His Civilities to the Clergy of the Church of England; and his particular
Forgeries against the Author of the Apology Ibid.

His Critical Skill examined. And his officious interposal in the Defense of
Mr. Rule further Chastis'd Ibid.

Train of many impertinent Lies together against Dr. Monro exposed p. 7

His stupid ignorance in the History of the first Reformation of Scotland; and
in the Doctrine of the first Reformers p. 8

His Feeble attempts to prove the Divine Right of Presbytery Ibid.

His abominable Lies in charging the Government with unheard of Cruelties p. 9

The Cameronians proved to be the most zealous Presbyterians. And Mr. Radpath
's Argument against their Authority, proved from Presbyterian Principles to be
no Argument at all Ibid.

His Argumentum ad hominem from the Viscount of Dundee 's Practices proves no
more than that he is ignorant in the first Elements of Logic p. 10

His comparison between the Practices of the Church of England, and those of
the Scotch Presbyterians, scandalous and impertinent Ibid.

Presbyterians more cruel and barbarous than any other People. This proved by a
memorable instance in the year 1645. p. 11

The Covenanters less skilful than the Inquisitors, but equally Cruel p. 11

His ignorance further exposed p. 12

The Dr. used no Equivocation when he said, that the Covenant was rigorously
imposed upon Children Ibid.

This proved by an Act of the Genesis Ass. 1648. p. 13

The Charge of Equivocation disproved and retorted p. 14, 15

The Practice of the Episcopal Clergy in exposing the Presbyterians, vindicated
from Levity and Profanity Ibid.

The Cameronians the most active, and the most consequential Presbyterians p. 16

His derivation of the Word Enthusiasm, compared with such another Critical
Essay of a Bedlamite Ibid.

The Acts of the General Assembly, especially those of 48, and 49, do
sufficiently Vindicate K. Chapter 2. from all imputations of rigor and cruelty p. 17

Sir George Mackenzie gave a true Narrative of the first Rise and Occasion of
those Laws that the Presbyterians complain of p. 18

One of the Pedling Scribles in favors of Presbytery, his weakness, silliness
and ignorance, fairly exposed in some Particulars p. 18, 19

Mr. Ridpath 's Lies, viz. that Sir Geo. Mackenzie persecuted Hamilton of
Hallside, refuted by Hallside himself Ibid.

No Laws made against Presbyterians as such, but against Seditions, Tumults,
and Insurrections Ibid.

His method of answering Arguments by suppressing such Words, upon which their
strength depends p. 19, 20

The Presbyterians in general charged with Rebellious Principles and Practices.
This made good against the whiffling exceptions and evasions of Mr. Ridpath p.
21

The King and Parliament did not consider them as Presbyterians, but as
stubborn and incorrigible Rebels Ibid.

The Majority of the People for the Episcopal Clergy Ibid.

His rude and inconsiderable Lies against the Earl of Airly, and the Lord of
Meldrum p. 22

The Doctrine of Passive Obedience fairly stated and defended p. 23, 24

The Presbyterian Exceptions disproved and retorted Ibid.

Mr. Ridpath 's incurable infelicity in mistaking true Sense for Contradictions
Ibid.

The Writings of Mr. Rutherford proved obscure, and Mr. Ridpath invited to
defend them p. 25, 26

Mr. Ridpath 's impudence in denying the Blasphemies that are to be seen in Mr.
Rule 's Books p. 26, 27

His blustering ignorance further exposed p. 28

The Presbyterians proved to be the first aggressors in the Trade of Libelling,
and the only experienced Practitioners p. 28, 29, 30

The additional accusations against Dr. Monro proves no more than Mr. Ridpath
's wickedness and malice p. 30, 31

The Murder of Archbishop Sharp proved to be the result of Presbyterian
Principles p. 32

The Presbyterians by their Principles not obliged to Forms p. 33

The Charge of Pedantry brought against the Doctor disproved and retorted p.
33, 34, 35

Our Ecclesiastical Superiors did not connive at the Faults of the Subordinate
Clergy, tho they proceeded against such as were complained of by the Orderly
and tedious Methods of the Law p. 35

Mr. Ridpath further chastis'd for his ignorance in the History and Principles
of the Presbyterians p. 35, 36

His ungovernable Malice against Dr. Canaties in many rude and impertinent
efforts canvass'd aad examined p. 37

His willful and affected mistake of the Author of the Postscripts meaning p. 38

His ignorance of a formal Contradiction p. 39

The Presbyterians accuse all Men of plotting against the Government, because
plotting is their only Element p. 40

Mr. Ridpath 's Hypocrisy, wishing, that both Parties may be tender of one
another, when his Practice in the next Line confutes all his pretenses of Piety
Ibid.

His common Topic to justify his Calumnies, viz. That he does not know what
he writes to be false, further exposed and ridiculed Ibid.

His Ignorance in opposing the knowledge of Arms to the Liberal Arts and
Sciences p. 41, 42

The charge against the Clergy of Stealing their Sermons retorted upon an
Impudent Presbyterian Plagiary p. 42, 43

His Vanity and Ignorance further Chastis'd p. 43, 44

His affectation of Theology, Logic and Wit, exposed by plain and palpable
instances p. 45, 46

His Catalogue of Cruelties and Treacheries paralelled p. 47, 48, 49.

Another Objection against the Bishops of Scotland considered p. 51, 52, 53

Several Certificates and Letters in favors of the Calumniated Clergy p. 55,
56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66

Several Propositions extracted out of the Presbyterian Books p. 68, 69, 70,
etc.

Mr. James Mitchel the famous Assassin his Letter. Justifying from Scripture
his Villainous attempt to Murder the Archbishop of St. Andrews.

Mr. Ridpath,
I Have good information from several Persons of known integrity here at
London, that you are the Author of two abusive Pamphlets by which you endeavor
to defame our Kings, Parliaments, and Nobles, such as we had in Scotland before
the Revolution. Our Kings were perjured Tyrants, and K. Charles II. knew that
he himself had forfeited his Title to the Crown Continuat.
. Our Parliaments were but packed Clubs, a company of slavish Parasites, that
contributed all they could to the ruin of our Liberties, Civil and Religious;
and consequently our Nobility can deserve no better Character, who made so
great a Figure in all our Parliaments. As for the Episcopal Clergy whether
Bishops or Presbyters, you give them so many names, that it is a wonder you did
not think such a despicable company of men below your Notice.

The Book which you call your Continuation, most of it is levelled against one
particular man; and when I undertake his Defense (if that be necessary) I find
that the reading over your book, and transcribing so many parts of it was all
the toil I was likely to undergo, and tho you call him whom you fancy to be
your Adversary a man of ungovernable passion; yet I must tell you that he could
not but be mad to the last degree, if he were angry at the names you give him,
since they of the first quality in Europe, have no fairer quarter at your
hands; A Scribler. a Pedant, a Hawker, a Villain, an Ass, an Ignoramus, a
Blunderer, are all of them words that he can hear with patience, when his
Superiors are not better treated. One may modestly conclude that you are very
angry, and that is a greater punishment than any of your Adversaries can inflict
upon you. The Author of the Postscript to the Apology for the Clergy of
Scotland, told you already, that he was not at all concerned in that Scuffle
between you and your Antagonist, nor is he likely to offer his mediation to end
your Debate; and he is still of the opinion, that he can employ his time better
than to read again your Answer, or the Book that occasioned it. His Postscript
is a short Epistolary account of the first, or rather a Character of the
present methods of Presbytery, in imitation of their Predecessors, than any
particular view of your Book, and I am content that you impute this to his
ignorance or weakness or what else you please to call it. It is very odd that
you should think that you have power to summon any body to the Press when you
please, even when you lurk behind the Curtains. You take it for granted that
Dr. M. -- was the Author of that Postscript, and it may be you hit right
enough; yet tho your Party be lashed in it with some severity, he takes no
great pleasure in meddling with particular men further than necessity constrains.

He said, that there was not a good consequence in your Book from the beginning
to the end; this could not but provoke a man of your courage and mettle. By a
Consequence, I humbly think he understood a truth deduced from true and solid
Principles that overthrows the common cause of Episcopacy, or the reputation of
those men whom you asperse, I mean such of the Clergy who were never under any
public censure of the Church. He told you likewise that he had no inclination
particularly to examine the imaginary contradictions that you charge your Enemy
with, and now I give you the reason, partly because the Theme, as you manage
it, yields no edification, partly because the public is not at all concerned
to read such Libels and altercations, and he gives you liberty to triumph as
much as you please upon this Head: but if your honor and credit is at stake,
and that you find your self concerned more particularly to run him down than
any other, he is content to meet you before any competent number of grave
witnesses, who by their authority may mitigate such excursions of rudeness as
may be feared, if your blood should boil to its usual fervor: and to reason the
matter calmly, and (without either huffing, or the terrible language of an
Almanzor) to demonstrate that there is not a good consequence in your Book from
the beginning to the end. And indeed you may excuse me to tell you, that in
your last Pamphlet you seem not to understand the very first Elements of Logic.

Moreover, the Author of the Postscript incurred your high displeasure, by
saying, that there were abusive Metaphors in Mr. Rutherford's Letters, and some
dark and unintelligible passages in his Scholastical Essays: and is this the
unpardonable Crime for which there can be no atonement? Mr. Ridpath, this was
no reflection upon his Morals, but a plain matter of Fact to be seen by every
body that peruseth the Books that are cited. And therefore this could not at
all justify your accusing Sir George Mackenzie to have suborned Witnesses; a
practice so infamous and so wicked, that I am confident no man of honor will
ever say any such thing of the truly Just, and Learned Advocate. A previous
examination of Witnesses in criminal Cases is not Subornation, but
precognition, practiced at all times in Scotland before they deponed
judicially; and Sir George Mackenzie wanted not many clear evidences to prove
that C. of C. was plotting an insurrection against the King and Government
about the time of Argyle's rebellion. You may read the elegant History of that
insurrection written by the A true Account of the horrid Conspiracy against the
King, etc. printed by Tho. Newcomb. Edit. 2. 1685.
Bishop of Rochester, and there you may see with your own Eyes several
authentic Evidences, upon record, against C. of C. and I must tell you that
Sir George Mackenzie needed not that Gentleman's Assistance to re commend him
to the present Court, if he had been ambitious to have been a Favorite; and if
he told C. of C. that he had done him an Injury, and begged him pardon, how
came this Confession to be made public? if he to whom it was first revealed,
under trust, spread it abroad, he is guilty of something that no Gentleman will
readily own; but the plain truth is Sir George Mackenzie never told him any
such thing, after the manner you represent it; and he had very good reason to
expect that the Witnesses against C. of C. would judicially depone in public,
the very same things that they asserted in private; and if you please you may
remember that there is a greater difference between Sir George Mackenzie and
your self, than between Mr. Rutherford and those of our Clergy you trample upon.

Your Advices and Threatenings to the Ministers of State in England are idle,
and of no use at all; for Ministers of State will advise according to their
Light and Conviction, without any regard to the short-lived Pamphlets that fly
about the City; nor are they likely to receive their Measures either from you,
or any of us who see so little in their Sphere. The Presbyterians in England
are not yet ripe for a Rebellion, and they in Scotland can do little to disturb
England, without their Assistance, and therefore you had best forbear your
Threatenings, for I am apt to think that your Influence in either Nation goes
but a little way.

You treat King William no better than other Kings, since, you say, he is
prevailed upon to write Letters to the General Assembly that they are not
obliged in Law to comply with; but better Lawyers are of another Opinion, and
if King William venture upon such Essays of Arbitrary Power, in a little time
(according to your Hypothesis) he Contin. p. 4.
may forfeit his Title, since he has none but such as is twisted with the
Divine Right of Presbytery. But indeed, Mr. Ridpath, I think we had Kings in
Scotland, before we had either Covenants, or Presbytery, or the Claim of Right;
and that our fundamental Constitution does not depend upon an Act of the
General Assembly, tho the General Assembly sometimes venture, in terminis, to
make an Act against an Act of Parliament.

It is a gentile Compliment that you bestow upon Queen Mary, when you allow the
Jacobites to invite her Father to keep the Solon-Geese in the Bass; and I think
none is permitted to speak so but Mr. Ridpath. It is not safe for any
Government to suffer Buffoons to treat crowned Heads so familiarly; whatever be
the Quarrel between Princes, this Language is intolerable; yet some Animals are
privileged to bark at this rate. The Clazomenians, coming to Sparta, fullied
Aeli. Hist. Var.
the Thrones on which the Ephori sat; when the Ephori came to know this
Indignity, they bore it patiently, and called for a public Herald, and ordered
him to proclaim through the City, that it was lawful for the Clazomenians to do
things that were unbecoming and undecent, that is to say, such barbarous
Rascals were below Reproof and Revenge.

Two of our Archbishops you treat in the same Language that Dr. Paterson, Dr.
Caincross.
Dr. Bastwick, the famous Presbyterian Buffoon, used toward the Archbishop of
Canterbury and his Colleagues, when he tells them that the Hierarchy came from
the Pope and the Devil, Diabolus caccavit illos; Nals. Coll. 1 Vol. page 499.
Vid. p. 500, and 501.
They forsooth must be called Magnates Ecclesiae, and the Verity of the matter
is, They are Magnae Nates Ecclesiae. It is tedious to transcribe his Civilities
to Archbishop Laud, and his Venerable Brethren, and therefore I refer you to
the Book cited in the Margin: only there is one of his Complements which I set
down, because it has in it the mean and scurrillous Spirit of the Party; which
you copy so exactly Ib. p. 503.
that one would have thought Dr. Bastwick had been your Father; thus he goes on
(speaking of the Priests of the Church of England) They Ib. p. 502.
are secundum Ordinem Diaboli, a Generation of Vipers, proud, ungrateful,
illiterate Asses: the Church is as full of Ceremonies as a Dog is full of
Fleas. And again, One would think that Hell were broke loose, and that the
Devils in Surplices, in Hoods, in Capes, and Rochets, and in four-squared
Cow-turds upon their Heads, were come among us, and had beshit us all. Pho! how
they stink! This is the Wit and Civility of an enraged Presbyterian; these are
the Flights of a Zealot, when inspired to the height. You treat Archbishop
Sharp and the Archbishop of Glasgow, in the same Language that Archbishop Laud,
and Archbishop Spotswood were complemented by your Predecessors.

There is a Letter here, which I have seen, from the Archbishop of Glasgow to
one of his Friends; which, some time or other may see the light in a larger
Treatise. It was occasioned by your obscene Libels against him; I must tell you
one thing that is in it, and it may provoke your Curiosity to see it; He
promises two hundred pound sterling. to any Man that will prove, by Witnesses of
known Probity, any one Particular that is maliciously vented against him by
your self or any of your Informers. Why then do not ye appear openly
above-board, for the Bishop declines no competent Judge in Scotland? It Is true,
He thought that the Book that treated him so barbarously had been writ by some
of the fluttering Damme's about the City, whose most compendious Method to
destroy Religion, is, at any rate, to run down the Clergy; but if he had known
his Accuser, it is more than probable he would forbear any Vindication. He was
sometimes opposed by Persons of the first Quality in the Nation, and if he had
been so wicked a Wretch as you represent him, he had certainly forfeited his
Life to Justice, and his Name to Infamy, as he expresses it himself in his
Letter. Mr. Ridpath, do not take it ill that I do not go through the
Particulars of your Libel against the Bishop, for I have made you a fair Offer
already; and besides, when you are better informed, you will find your self
that you name some Persons in your Libel, who are lasting Monuments of the
Disgrace of your Faction; so that you have as little of the Wisdom of the
Serpent, as of the Innocence of the Dove. You may go on and accuse the Bishop
and his Colleagues of all the Crimes that your Predecessors charged the former
Bishops with, in the year 1638; nay, which is more, you may accuse him of all
the Villainies which your own Major Wier actually committed, when he ran about
with so many of the Sisters, from one Communion to another: and I assure you
that neither he nor any of his Friends will take notice of you. We know very
well that you are at extraordinary pains to gather Intelligence against the
Clergy, but all your Evidences hitherto are of no Authority at all.

You think that if Mr. Rule's Book provoked the Author of the Contin. p. 10.
Postscript to Undecencies of Passion, the reading of yours would make him
stark mad. Not so, Mr. Ridpath, we may sometimes get a more deadly Wound by an
Arrow that flies near the Earth, than by the Thunder that goes over our Heads.
He begins, you say, with downright Nonsense and a notorious Lie; but one and
the same Proposition cannot be both Nonsense and a Lie; one cannot tell what to
make of the first, and therefore it is neither a Lie nor a Truth: he continues
still in the same Opinion, that the Principles and Practices of the Covenanters
occasioned the Laws that you complain of, whether you mean their Practices from
the Year 1637, to the Year 1650; or their Behavior after the Restoration of
King Charles II, all is one to me; they overthrew the Monarchy under King
Charles I, disturbed it by frequent Insurrections under King Charles II, and
are ready to do so still, if at any time their boundless Tyranny and Ambition
be restrained.

The rest of that Paragraph is a Declamation against Prelacy, and the Clergy of
England must be lashed with the same Severity, wherewith page 12.
you chastise those of Scotland; and in your first Book you represent those of
England as a Company of treacherous Prevaricators: Ans. Scot. Eloq. p. 4.
that the Crown set them up by a daring Perjury, and that the same Party has
thrust that Family from the Throne, by a Copy exactly answering the Original.
They are obliged very much to your Civilities, if the Family be thrust from the
Throne, you are the Author of a new Discovery; but I leave this to their
consideration who are more concerned.

You are diffident of your Arguments against the Author of the Postscript, and
therefore you will take more effectual and compendious Page 14.
methods to ruin him: for you tell us that upon the taking of Namure, he was
heard in St. James's Park to salute Mr. Shields by the title of a Bishop, no
doubt in view of a Revolution which was likely to follow. There is one thing
that I thank you heartily for, viz. that this accusation is express,
particular, and circumstantiated, for when accusations are loose, general, and
indefinite, nothing can be fixed upon that can lead us unto the Truth, and
therefore Mr. Ridpath, here I plainly give you the Lie; I know a man of your
honor will resent this affront. The affirmative part is your own, and
therefore common sense obliges you to prove it if you can, you are here upon
the place, so are they whom you accuse; the Dr. declines no competent Judge in
England, and if you can prove that ever he spoke with Mr Shields in St. James'
Park, he will acknowledge all the Libels against him to be true, and the only
method to save your Reputation in this particular, is to put it to a fair
Trial. But I perceive that you are as unfortunate in the informations that you
receive against the Clergy, as you are hasty and unadvised in publishing of
them.

Whether the error in Scotch Grammar with which you charge the Ibid.
Dr. be an omission of the Printer or his inadvertence, is not material to
enquire, he had rather commit a thousand such, than one Latin Solecism in a
public Harangue ex Cathedra. It is uneasy to live next door to a Grammarian.
Read over again the 2d. page of your Continuation, l. 21. or the 5th. p. of
your Preface, l. 30. and tell me if it be exact Grammar. It is impudence beyond
comparison, to say, that the Dr. charged Mr. Rule falsely with speaking wrong
Latin; it is a wonder to me, why he himself or any of his Friends should be so
zealous to defend him upon that Head, and if you would be so wise as to let
those stories alone, I know none would be so idle as to revive them; and
because you will not suffer us to forget his Latin, I will give you one
instance more of the purity of his Style. Asking one of the Students what was
his Name, the Youth told him so and so, but not adding his Surname; He asked
again, quid est totum nomen? At another time missing the Key of a certain Box
which is kept in the Library, when he would have opened it, he told them that
were about him, Nescio quid factum est de iis, habui mox. Now the Affirmative
is mine, I am obliged to prove it when ever you put me to it. You are all of
you so tender upon the point of Honor, that you let nothing pass without
present Revenge, and Mr. Rule himself may know the Witnesses when he pleases,
tho it be not decent to print their Names.

The next accusation against the Dr. is, that he cannot forbear Swearing. Mr
Ridpath, I hope it is otherwise; and this is but an Article of the original
Libel, answered already in the Presbyterian Inquisition. You was advised by the
Author of the Postscript, rather to insist on the old Libel than to trust to
your own invention. Moreover you say that it can be proved, that he said to a
certain Minister, that if the Episcopal party had not the Government, he cared
not if the Devil had it. By other accusers this Calumny is otherwise
represented, viz. that if the Episcopal party had not the Government, he cared
not if the Papists had it; but both are beat out upon the same Anvil This is
glanced at in a late Letter written by a Presbyterian Minister to a member of
Parliament, p. 11.
. I wish you had named the Minister to whom this was said; the Devil has but
too much of the Government of the World already, and I am afraid that they who
publish such malicious and indefinite reports, are more governed by him than
they are aware of.

You charge him again, that he hindered the printing of Mr. Jameson's P. 15.
Book, against Quakerism; he had no authority to do so, nor was it possible for
him to treat Mr. Jameson with greater civility than he did. As for the Oath
imposed on the Scholars in King James his time, that is sufficiently accounted
for in another Presb. Inquisit.
Treatise, and whether you are satisfied or not, it matters not much. The
Objejections started against it, were but the Whimsies of a malicious Pedant
who knew not well what he said.

It must be confessed that He preferred the French Refugies to the Scotch
Presbyterians, when both petitioned the Town-Council for the use of the public
Hall to preach in upon the Sundays. I am not obliged to believe, upon your
authority, that he had any undecent expressions upon that occasion. I incline
to think that if the Presbyterians had the public Hall of the College, very
many naughty persons would resort unto it, though the Presbyterian Ministers
should endeaviour to hinder it. Now I would gladly ask you one Question,
whether ever you had a Scholar, that answered you with greater submission and
obedience than I do.

You name a Person at the foot of the 15 page whom you say, the Dr. was careful
to vindicate, that he never so much as mentioned his Name; but Newsmongers have
a greater privilege than their Neighbors.

It Is certain that the Scheme of the Presbyterian Religion, as far as they page
16.
differ from the Episcopalians, is nothing else but ungovernable Humor and
Rebellion. Now is it necessary to strike off the Doctor's Head for this one
Expression. The Presbyterian Opinions, as such, are new and lately started, and
peculiar to themselves, nor is there any of the Reformed Churches that ever
asserted Presbyterian government to be founded upon such Divine Right as is
exclusive of all other Ecclesiastical Polities. The Church of Scotland, which,
you say, was Presbyterian from the beginning of the Reformation, declares
positively, in her Confession of Faith, that Church Polity is variable, and the
Order of Bishops was never condemned by our Reformers; and Buchanan tells us
expressly, that our first Reformers were so far from being Presbyterians, that
Scoti ante aliquot annos Anglorum auxiliis e servitute Buchan. Hist. lib. 19.
Gallica liberati Religionis cultui and ritibus cum Anglis communibus
subscripserunt.

To say that the Church of Scotland should be governed by Presbytery, because
Presbyters were most active in the first Reformation, is an unpardonable
Impertinence. If all the Bishops in the Church of Scotland had been as zealous
to promote the Reformation as the Bishops of Galloway and Argyle, would it
therefore follow, that if the Bishops had reformed the Church without the
assistance of Presbyters, there ought to be no Presbyters in the Church when it
was fully reformed. No, I think this could not follow; and therefore when the
Bishops own the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, they must be obeyed, and our
Reformers never declaimed against their Order; and if they would adhere to the
Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, Calvin determines positively in that Case,
that nullo non anathemate digni sunt, who stubbornly oppose their Authority;
but Calvin. Inst. lib. 4. And again, Lib. 4. c. 10. 6. Sane si very Episcopi
essent, aliquid eis in hac part Auctoritatis tribuerem, non quantum sibi
postulant, sed quantum ad Politiam Ecclesiae rite ordinandam requiritur.
we had no such thing as Presbytery in Scotland, settled by Authority in all
its Pretenses, until the Rebellion brake out in the Year 1638. Presbyterians we
had, Tumults, Combinations and Factions in abundance, and Interruptions of the
legal Government, and Parliamentary Concessions to pacify the Faction; but a
total abolishing of the Order of Bishops, before the Rebellion in King Charles
I. his time, was never heard, and to say otherwise contradicts the Series of
all our Records. Vid. Nals. Coll. 1. Vol. and the K's large Manifesto.


If the places of Scripture that you cite, prove that the names of those
Clergymen that were above Deacons were not distinguished; yet this cannot
infer an Equality among them, for the Apostles themselves were called sometimes
Presbyters, and the Church was never governed by a perfect Equality of
Presbyters. The Ecclesiastical Senate had its constant Praeses, without whose
Authority nothing of any moment was transacted. How often do you meet, in the
Old Testament, the Jewish Clergy dichotomized into Priests and Levites? Will it
therefore follow, that there was no High Priest among them to govern the whole
Society? you seem to have no other Notion of a Presbyter than what you meet
with in your late Pamphlets; but it was an honorable Appellative, bestowed, in
the Apostolic times upon all Orders of Ecclesiastics above a Deacon. Let us
know where this Superiority and Jurisdiction of one Presbyter above another is
forbidden. It was established by God himself in the Old Testament, let us see
it repealed in the New. I think we may leave this Dispute to other Combatants,
who may have occasion to discourse of it more fully, when the Mortar pieces are
shot that you threaten us with. Only be mindful to let us see those Epistles of
St. Augustine to St. Jerome, wherein you say that Episcopacy is proved to be of
humane Appointment.

Your next contains a lamentable Catalogue of Crueltiess that you say the
Presbyterians in the West did undergo under the former page 17.
Reigns, viz. that some were roasted before Fires, etc. I thank God I never
heard any such thing before, and if it had been true all Christendom would have
heard of it, and tho you had the Aauthority of the General Assembly to vouch
it, you must excuse me if I continue in my former Unbelief.

All your Bauble about the Cameronians is neither to your Purpose page 18.
nor mine, their Practices can never be condemned by Presbyterian Principles,
and they may be the Standard of Presbytery as much as the Ministers you name in
that Paragraph. The Protesters were not so numerous as the Resolutioners, yet
you must acknowledge they were the only orthodox Presbyterians; for the
Resolutioners were rottenhearted Malignants, and the Protesters are the present
visible Church of the Presbyterians; and if they had stood upon the Plurality
of Votes, they had yielded to the General Assembly against whom they protested.
And this is the fatal and fundamental Error of your Party, that they have no
principles of Unity, but such as a plausible Protestation seconded by the
Rabble can shake your Ecclesiastical Authority upon all occasions, according to
the Original Maxim of Mr. Andrew Melvil, Vota sunt ponderanda, non numeranda.

Your Argumentum ad hominem taken from the Viscount of Dundee's Practices,
proves no more than your thick and palpable Ignorance in the first Principles
of Logic. Nothing can be improved as an Argumentum ad hominem against any Man,
but such Practices as naturally overthrow his own Principles; and do you think
that my Lord Dundee owned any true and indisputable Right in them against whom
he sought? and if upon his Hypothesis there was no Title, pray what becomes of
your Argumentum ad hominem? My humble Advice is, that some one or other of your
Friends may teach you the Vocabula Artis, before you write so magisterially:
and you will find this to be but a friendly Advice before I have done with you,
and whatever Proficiency you have made in Grammar, your Logicks are but of
about two Months standing.

Your Parallel between the Practices of the Church of England toward King
James and those of the Scotch Presbyterians toward King Charles 11. is a true
Specimen of your Skill. We know no such Practices of the Church of England, nor
are we to learn her Doctrines from Scurrilous Pamphlets, but from her Articles,
Homilies, Liturgy, and Canons.

That the Presbyterian Cruelty toward the Episcopalians after the Year 1637.
were unparalled in History, remains still a Truth, because they suffered from
Men who declared themselves to be of the same Religion with their Neighbors;
the Cruelties of Papists toward Protestants, and of Infidels toward
Christians, and of Pagans toward them who worship one God, cannot make up an
exact parallel, because the Rebels by whom our people were persecuted,
pretended to be of the same Communion. But since you name the Massacre at
Paris, you may call to mind that in the Year 1645 the Presbyterians Page 19.
under the Command of General Leslie, cut in pieces some hundreds of the
Marquess of Montross his Infantry, in cold blood, after quarter given; when the
Marquess was betrayed, and that he was forced to retire, a considerable body of
his Army surrendered their Arms upon Articles, and stood, as they were directed
by the Covenanters, in a plain open Field, having nothing to defend themselves
with but their Nails; then it was time for the Presbyterians to discover their
true Intentions, and to let the world see that no Promises; no Capitulations
could bind up the hands of Covenanters, when it was in their power to do
Mischief, and you are to remember that this horrid Tragedy was acted at the
special Instigation of the godly Ministers in the Army, for Soldiers know no
such Villainies. But the Enthusiastic Vid. Hist. Obs. MSS. by Guth.
Zealot who preached, thought that the Blood of so many innocent people was a
good beginning of a through Reformation. He chose his Text 1 Samuel 15. 14. What
means then this bleating, etc. infinuating that they could not be said to
obey God, as long as they left any alivethat were not Covenanters, and when
General Leslie, contrary to Montross def. at Philiphaugh.
his own Inclination, Honor, and Authority, yielded to their Fury, he asked
this Sanguinary Enthusiast, Mas John ha not you Blood enough now? Compare all
Circumstances, and match this in History if you can; not to mention now the
throwing so many Women and Children over the Bridge of Lithgow, without either
Form or Process, for no other Crime, but that they followed their Husbands and
Relations to Montrose his Army. And the former instance is by so much the more
remarkable that the poor people who were murdered in cold blood, contrary to
the Laws of Nations, the faith of mankind, and the ancient honor of the Scots,
were all of them Protestants, and laid down their Arms upon capitulation for
their full freedom and safety: to embrew their hands in the blood of their
Countrymen, contrary to the solemnity of Promises, was a thing that could only
be acted by Covenanters; so that your instances of the Massacre at Paris, and
the Duke of Alva's butchery in the Netherlands, are indeed sad abuses of
Supreme Authority, and lasting Monuments of cruelty: but that which I just now
named, adds to cruelty perfidious treachery, such as blows up the foundations
of humane Society.

But Mr. Ridpath, you ask if ever you put the Prelatists in Dungeons Page 20.
to be eaten up of Toads and Serpents and if not, you think you may conclude
that you fall short of the cruelty of the Inquisitors. I answer, whether there
are Toads and Serpents in the lower Vaults of the Tolbooth of Edinburg, I
cannot tell, but I am very sure the Reverend Bishop Wiseheart was almost eaten
up of Vermin in that Dungeon, and bore the marks of the Covenanters cruelty, as
well as the evidences of his own invincible patience to his dying hour; and if
your Covenanters at that time were not so ingenious in inventing instruments of
bodily torture as the Fathers of the Inquisition were, yet you cannot deny but
that they were equally fierce and bloody: the Presbyterians were only acted by
a lower order of Demons, who had not so much light and art, (yet altogether as
furious and as opposite to true goodness) as those by whom the Inquisitors were
guided.

But you think that though the Dr's Conscience be prostituted to a Ibid.
Prodigy, yet it flies in his face, when such and such things are said of the
Covenanters. Mr. Ridpath, I am now pretty well acquainted with this Noise, and
you see that I meet your loudest Thunder without any disturbance, and all that
I return to this Civility is no more, than to advise you to distinguish between
a little fluttering Rhetoric and common Sense; when ones Conscience is
prostituted, as you say, to a Prodigy, he feels no remorse at all; and
therefore his Conscience cannot fly in his face, it is seared with a hot Iron,
he is proof against all light and conviction, altogether blinded and stupefied
under the power of his Error. And if the Dr's Conscience fly in his face, he is
still within the possibilities of being recovered, but you must treat him a
little more softly if you intend to make him a Proselyte.

But you tell us next, that the Dr. learnt the art of Equivooation Ibid.
as well as if he had been at Rome; for he says, that the Covenant was
rigorously imposed upon all, Children at the Schools not excepted. To this you
answer, that you believe it was required of little Children that offered to
take the degree of Masters of Art about the age of thirty years, and then you
hoise all your Sails, and leave the poor Dr. exposed to all the contempt that a
silly Sophister deserves. Now Mr. Ridpath, we are again closely engaged, and if
I do not get the Dr. out of this mire, I must run for it. If you was your self
near thirty years old when you went to the University, as you seem to
insinuate, one might reasonably presume, that your blood had been colder before
now; and that you would not vapor at this rate, when you had no reserve to
defend you, but your ignorance in a plain matter of Fact; and therefore all
that know Scotland, know very well, that the Children in our Country ordinarily
go to the University at the age of twelve, thirteen, or fourteen years; and
such may in the strictest sense be called Children, and of such it was required
to take the Covenant: for my part I never knew one amongst them that arrived to
the age of thirty before he received his degrees. There was no Equivocation in
the case, when the Author of the Postscript told you, that the Covenant was
imposed upon Children at the Schools, for he meant it of no other Children than
those younger ones who entered the University, and who were not allowed to
delay their swearing the Covenant until they left it, but were forced as soon
as they entered, to take it upon implicit Faith; if this is made evident, you
must acknowledge that there was no Equivocation used by the Author of the
Postscript. If you set up for a Patron of Presbyterian practices, and must
needs hector the World into a belief of your blustering Romances, if you intend
to be succesful, you ought to read more and write less; and because the
Affirmative is now mine, I am obliged to prove it, and if you desire better
proof, I Will make you amends; it is the following Act of the General Assembly.

Act for taking the Covenant at the first receiving of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and for the taking of Genesis Ass. 1648. p. mihi 44. printed by Ev.
Tyler, Edinb. An. 1648.
it also by all Students at the first entry to Colleges.
THE General Assembly according to former recommendations does ordain, that all
Young Students take the Covenant at their first Entry to Colleges, and that
hereafter all Persons whatsoever take the Covenant at their first receiving of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Requring hereby provincial Assemblies,
Presbyteries and Universities to be careful that this Act be observed and
account thereof taken in the Uisitation of Universities, and particular Kirks,
in the trial of Presbyteries.

Now Mr. Ridpath, I hope you are satisfied, that by Children were meant those
young ones who are but newly come from Country Schools.

The word Equivocation brings to my mind some practices of the Presbyterians,
still upon Record; I mean public and Solemn Deeds, which seem to justify
Equivocation, if it be for the glory of God, i. e. if it promote the ends of
the Covenant. It is nothing to see you or me equivocate; these are the failings
of us two private, obscure, and particular Persons, but to see the General
Assembly, the true and only supreme Representative of the Kirk of Scotland,
shift, double, and equivocate, is treachery and hypocrisy with a witness. To
make you sensible of this, you are to remember as an introduction to what
follows, that the Covenanters who went to Aberdeen to recommend the Covenant to
the Clergy and An. 1638.
Professors of Divinity there, told them, that notwithstanding they should
swear the Covenant, yet they were left at liberty to Vote for Episcopacy when
the General Assembly met; but when the General Assembly met, they concluded
prima instantia, that Episcopacy was abjured in the Covenant: This
prevarication is complained of by the Marquess of Hamilton, His Majesty's
Commissioner, in a printed Declaration, Anno 1639. To this they Nals Hist Col.
1. Vol. p. 128.
answer, that they did not expressly and Specifice abjure Episcopacy, but only
generally and virtually, by abjuring whatsoever was abjured in the Confession
1580. Now the meaning of this is, by their Covenant they abjured Episcopacy
virtually, but not specifice. But how could the Members of the Assembly be left
at liberty to vote freely for Episcopacy after they took the Covenant, if
Episcopacy was virtually and generally abjured in the Covenant? this is as much
to say, as, tho I am obliged by the Christian Religion virtually and generally
against all degrees of Theft, yet I am not obliged specifice by my Baptismal
Vow against picking a Man's Pocket of his Watch. What a juggle was it to say,
that Men might vote freely for that Government which was, for the matter,
abjured? These are the Metaphysical Lectures that are to be learned in
Presbyterian Schools, who think nothing to dally with Men's Consciences, by the
jingle of a distinction, which, at bottom, is but Hypocrisy and Impertinence.

But would you have another sample of their Casuistical Theology? V. King's
large Manifesto. and Nals. Hist. Coll. 1 vol. page 151.
read what follows, Nal. Hist. Coll. 1 vol. Ans. to the 3 Reasons. page 152.
in their Answer to the third Reason, Albeit by the meaning of the Prescriber
of an Oath, the Swearer were tacitly bound to maintain Episcopacy, five
Articles of Perth, and such like; yet according to the premitted Considerations
he is more obliged to the reality rei juratae, which is now declared and found
to abjure Episcopacy, than.
nor to the meaning of the Prescriber, or his own either, being contrary to the
Explanation of the sovereign Judge competent. Thus far the Covenanters.

Now Mr. Ridpath, name any one Proposition more knavish, hypocritical and
damnable than this is, that the Swearer is neither bound to the meaning of the
Imposer, nor to his own meaning who takes the Oath, but to the reality of the
thing sworn, as it shall be afterward explained by the competent Judge; which,
in their meaning, was none else than the General Assembly. Did you ever read
any thing worse in the Casuistick Writings of the Jesuits? But it may be that
your Curiosity reaches not so far as the moral Theology of Escobar, Filiucius,
or Emanuel Sa. Did ever the transcendent Power of Rome go higher? If Oaths
neither oblige sensu dant is nor jurant is, but in the sense of the Kirk, then
we are obliged, without any further Enquiries, to submit our Necks to the
infallible Decrees of the Assembly, tho we neither know what is in them, nor
never intended to oblige our selves by them. I cite a very authentic Paper,
being under the hand of Mr. Archibald Johnston, Clerk of the Assembly. So that
the Mother Kirk can evacuate the force of all Oaths, Promises and
Subscriptions, to the End of the World: for they do not oblige in the sense of
the first Imposer, nor according to the meaning of him that swore, but
according to the Commentary and Interpretation of the General Assembly; and so
the next General Assembly may pronounce, that by the Test (against which they
objected so many sad Stories) we are obliged to maintain and support
Presbytery, tho we swore it with quite contrary. Intentions; and indeed there
is not any thing to be met amongst the Jesuits, more subversive of all Religion
and true Morality, than that memorable Position that I named from the
Authentic Records of the Covenanters.

Some grave Men have been displeased that the Presbyterian Fooleries have been
exposed to laughter; and for my part I was not of their Council who first
assaulted them in that manner, yet those Gentlemen who accuse the Episcopal
Clergy of Scotland, as if they had exposed Religion it self, by publishing some
of the impertinent and ridiculons Bauble of Presbyterians, must consider, that
the learnedest and gravest Divines, in this as well as other Nations, have
treated Enthusiasts in no other manner. I have no room to insert Monsieur
Paschal's excellent Letter to the Jesuits, wherein he proves, from the Example
of God himself, I. Theology Morale des Jesuits, page mihi 149, 150. A
Cologne, An. 1666. En verite, mes Peers, il ya bien de la difference enter rire
de la Religion, and rire de ceux qui la profanent par leurs opinions
extravagantes. Ce seroit une impiete de manquer de respect pour les veritesque
l' esprit de Dieu a revelees: mais ce seroit une autre impiete de manquer de me
pris pour les faussetez que l' esprit de l' homme leur oppose.
our Savior Jesus Christ, the Prophets, the Fathers of the Christian Church,
and the holy Men of all Ages, that it is ordinary, just and lawful, to ridicule
such as profane and pervert Religion by visionary and fantastic Glosses, or
such as deprave its Morals by loose and scandalous Interpretations of God's
most holy Law. Must we be said to laugh at Religion, if we smile when we hear a
Man gravely telling us, that Abraham left the Land of Chaldea for Debt? No; we
are as far removed from that profane humor, as this Commentary is from the
Gravity and Authority of the Holy Scriptures; it is one thing to laugh at
Religion, and another thing to laugh at them who profane it by their
extravagant Opinions; and they ought to remember, that the Friendly Debate
treated them in as familiar a manner as some of our Party have done; nay the
most leading Men among the Presbyterians, in their most public Appearances had
always something or other to provoke the People to laughter, I instance in Dr.
Burgess's Sermon before the House of Commons, 1640. the fifth Motive by which
he persuaded them to take the Covenant was, that Nals. Hist. Coll. 1 vol. page
532.
the Devil himself will have a Covenant from all his Vassals that expect any
extraordinary Matters from him; there is not a Witch that has the Devil at her
beek, but she must seal a Covenant with him sometimes with her Blood.

Mr. Ridpath, you are very angry when we charge the Presbyteterians with the
odd and extravagant practices of the Cameronians, as if such things were
unagreeable to their Sentiments: to tell you the truth, I think the Cameronians
are the most active and ingenuous Subdivision of the Presbyterians; they are
the Pioneers in your Camp, whom you hug and embrace as your dearest Brethren,
when the roughest part of your Work is to be performed. Upon the late
Revolution they drove the Clergy out of the West, and guarded the Convention,
and many other considerable Services (they will tell you themselves) they have
done you; and yet forsooth they must not be allowed to be Presbyterians. The
Act of the West-Kirk, and the Remonstrance in the Year 1650. are better
Evidences of Presbyterian Principles, than all your little whiffling Excuses
and Evasions. Our People took care to publish an Epitome of the Hind let loose,
not because it was written by any of the Cameronians; but rather because he
that wrote it, gathered together the Public Papers, Remonstrances,
Declarations, and Wrestlings of that Party against the State, in which they
lived since the Reformation; and therefore if any suffered hard things under
the late Reigns, they were the high-flown Presbyterians; such of them as lived
peaceably and modestly, suffered nothing at all: for our Laws never forbad any
man to think but that Presbytery was preferable to Episcopacy, if his Opinions
and Education led him to think so; but our Governors took care that the
Principles of Presbyterians might not break out into Tumults and Insurrections;
such as formerly pulled down the Monarchy, overthrew the Fundamental
Constitution, and turned our Nation into a Field of Blood.

We are very much obliged to your Wit and Invention for your Page 23.
Derivation of the word Enthusiasm; you prove us Enthusiasts from two
Arguments, first because we are Drunkards, and next because we use unscriptural
Ceremonies. I cannot deny but I was refreshed a little with this extraordinary
Flight of your Fancy, and I leave it to all impartial Men to judge whether this
Witticism of yours, or another which I am going to tell you, be more coherent,
rapturous and gentile; nay, I think I may leave it to your own decision, if you
are but a little recovered from the career of your Passion: the Story is this,
One of my Friends once persuaded me to go along with him to see that sad sight
of Bethlehem Hospital; as we entered the lower Apartments, we drew near to the
Cell of a little grave Man, whom we found reading Ovid de Tristibus with great
Application. My Friend and I asked him several Questions, all which he answered
very pertinently, so that we could not discover for a good while where his
Madness lay: at last I asked him if he understood the Book he read, he told me
he did, and convinced me that what he said was true. I asked him again, how he
came to have such a kindness for that Book beyond other Books; at which he
smiled with some appearance of Disdain, pitying my Ignorance, that I did not
know a thing that he thought was known all the World over: why (said he) Ovid
is of our Family; and do not you know, (said he) that Ovidius is from Ovis a
Sheep, and the Butchers take Ovis by the Neck, and therefore he began his Book
de Tristibus, with Parve nec invidio; from all this he concluded that Ovid was
of his Family; and, I think, he argued as wisely as you do to prove us
Enthusiasts.

It is true, the Author of the Postscript said, that the Acts of the General
Assembly did sufficiently vindicate King Charles II. and his Ministers of State
from any Shadow of Rigor or Cruelty; but I must tell you that he meant other
Acts than those you guess, and it is a sad thing to have to do with such an
Adversary as you; it appears that you have a very good Opinion of your self,
and there is not a Quality more essential to a Presbyterian than Pride and
Vanity, you have not read the Books you are concerned to read, if you set up
for the public Advocate of the Kirk; how came you to guess what Acts your
Adversary meant, unless he had cited those Acts particularly: and therefore I
advise you to read the Acts of the General Assembly more narrowly, and see if
you can name any of the Papal Enchroachments upon the Civil Magistrate more
daring and ambitious than that one Act which is cited in the Margin, and July
28. 1648. ante mer. Sess. 18. p. mili 7. Act and Declar. against the Act of P.
page 17.
which is recorded to the Honor of Presbytery. Mr. Ridpath, you see that I
have a great desire to court your Friendship, since I cite the Books exactly,
that you look upon as Oracles.

You tell us, after a long Declamation against King Charles II. his Government
and the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, that Sir George Mackenzie's Arguments in
the defense of his Reign, are all of them built upon a false Narrative of
Matter of Fact; as if the Rebellions against King Charles I, and II. were not
notorious, and known all Europe over. The Scotch Rebels laid King Charles I.
upon the Altar, and the English Rebels sacrificed him; and this is no other
Censure than what is obvious to every Man's Observation. Must we sit down and
transcribe all the Presbyterian Protestations, Remonstrances, seasonable
Warnings, and Declarations, when every little Pamphlet is answered? Must we
prove that Presbyterians are Rebels? that is as needless as to prove first
Principles: for since the Covenant is the Magna Charta of your Religion, as you
are distinguished from other Christians, why should you think the Imputation of
Rebellion to be any Reproach? Sir George Mackenzie gave the World a true
Narrative of the first Rise and Occasion of those Laws that you complain of.
And we are very glad how much you write against it, you but wound your own
head, and kick against the pricks: for his Narrative remains true, and founded
upon the Records of Parliament, and Progress of your Rebellion, and still
unanswered, as it is unanswerable. I know that one of your Club wrote a
Pamphlet against his Defense of King Charles II' s Government, entitled, a
Vindication of the Presbyterians in Scotland, etc. It peeped out, as if it were
afraid to see the light, but no body knows where to find it, and in a few days
it evanished. It Is said to be printed for Edward Golding, 1692. I got one Copy
accidentally, but all my Industry could not procure another. The Author is a
very accomplished Gentleman, no doubt of it; he tells you, in the very first
page of his Pamphlet, that he left the Law part unanswered. And this one
Expression is enough to proclaim him a Fool, that he who had no knowledge in
the Laws, should venture to answer Sir George Mackenzie's Book; just as if one
should censure the Works of Tully and Quintilian, without any knowledge of the
Rules of Oratory and Rhetoric; and, to let you see how grossly ignorant this
poor Creature is, he tells us, that King Chapter I. when the Earl of Traquair sat
at the Helm of Affairs, imposed on Page 3.
the Subjects an Oath, commonly called the Tender, with great Severity, and
that, it is not improbable but that the Covenant was a Counter-Oath to that.
Now Mr. Ridpath, I ask you how any Man can forbear smiling to see how such a
little Shuttle-cock can assault the Memory and Writings of Sir George
Mackenzie? Was the Covenant no older than the Tender? and was the Tender, (by
which Men were made to part with all degrees of Loyalty; and to renounce the
Family of the Stewarts) imposed with great Severity by King Charles I. and is
this the Book that you think confutes Sir George Mackenzie's Vindication,
better than the Doctor can defend it? But your learned Author goes on, and
tells us that the General Assembly (I suppose he means that in 1638.) did not
throw out the Page 4.
Bishops without the Authority of Parliament, since they had their allowance
for it; as if the General Assembly that threw out the Bishops had waited for
the determination of a Parliament: and when Sir George pleads, that the
Ecclesiastic State were always the first of the three Estates of Parliament,
your little Man tells us, in opposition to this, some Stories of Monks and
Culdees, by which the Church was governed from the beginning of Christianity in
Scotland. But is this any thing to our purpose, when we plead, that by so many
Laws and Parliamentary Constitutions, our Bishops make up the first of the
Three Estates of Parliament; and which is more, those very Laws are not yet
repealed, by which the Ecclesiastic State is declared to be the first. And tho
in the days of the Covenant, when the Bishops were expelled by Tumult and
Violence, one of the three Estates was split into two, contrary to the
fundamental Constitution of Parliaments, yet by unrepealed Laws and immemorial
Possession, they remain the first of the three Estates of Ibid
Parliament. He tells us next, that there were no Bishops during King James' s
Residence, and consequently none sat in Parliament; and must we be put to the
drudgery of confuting such a sad Creature as this is, when the Records of
Parliament give him the lie? And I speak it sincerely, I never saw any thing in
Print more ignorantly writ than that Pamphlet is: for he tells us again, that
he knew of no Persons Page 5.
of Quality put to death by Covenanters, save the Earl of Montross. And if you
please to defend your learned Brother, you may; for my part, if I am not
constrained to it, I am resolved never to look into his Pamphlet; nor do I know
how to excuse my self at the Reader's hands, for inserting so many of his
lamentable Impertinencies.

In another place of your Book, you accuse Sir George Mackenzie of having
persecuted Hallside; but this Gentleman is here also, and no Man can speak more
to the advantage of Sir George Mackenzie, in all Companies, and upon all
occasions, than he does; and he flatly denies all the malicious Fictions that
you have heaped together on that Subject.

If Laws have been made under the Reign of King Charles II, to restrain the
Fury of Madmen and Incendiaries; neither the State, nor such as advised those
Laws to be made are to be blamed; for there were no Laws made against the
Speculations of Presbyterians, but against the Practices of such of them, whose
Principles and Endeavors were equally destructive to humane Society, as they
were pernicious to the particular Settlement of our Nation.

The Paragraph that follows is a true sample of your way of reasoning, Ibid.
when you say that Nero and Julian the Apostate had the Advantage of the
Primitive Christians, in regard of Quality, Sense, and Interest. But I still
think that the Apostles and Primitive Christians were Men of the best Sense,
and far beyond all their Persecutors. Mr. Ridpath, to do you no piece of
Injustice (for I disdain it, and one needs not take any Advantage of you) I let
the Reader know, that in the Correction of your Errata's, you advise to dash
out the word Sense out of lin. 32. of page 27. but then when the word Sense is
dashed out, you do not repeat faithfully the Doctor's Argument: for you know
very well that he reckons the Quality, Sense and Interest of the Nobility that
are for Episcopacy, as things that bear down the noise and clamor of all their
Antagonists; you may raise Monsters as many as you please, and then fight with
your own Dreams and Imaginations; but since you do not repeat an argument
faithfully, you should let it alone. And what followed in the same Paragraph of
the Postscript, viz. That the Episcopal Nobility were men of parts, honor and
integrity, was to be considered in conjunction with the former; the Characters
last named you do not deny to be true, and if so, how can men of honor and
integrity be perjured oppressors? For my part, I never thought that Honor in
its true notion could be separated from a good Conscience: and the Author of
the Postscript intended to baffle the Calumnies of their opposers, by a
compendious enumeration of the outward and inward advantages that the Patrons
of Episcopacy possessed; so that if you was at the pains to answer this
Argument, you ought not fraudulently to suppress such words, as contained its
frame and energy: and I am content that you call me as well as the Author of
the Postscript, a Pedant, an Ass, a Blunderer, a Villain, a Liar, and a Papist;
if I tell you that you seem to have nothing in your view than to raise a little
Dust, when you repeat an argument but not in the Authors words, it is no more
his but yours; you may be taught your mistake by that of the Poet,

Quem recitas meus est O! fidentine Libellus
Sed male dum recitas incipit esse tuus.
You tell us next, that Sir George Mackenzie owns, that Presbyterian Ministers,
and Presbyterian Jurors who were summoned to the Page 28.
trial of Malefactors of their own persuasion, seldom failed to condemn them;
From this you conclude, that Sir George gives himself and the Dr. both the Lie,
when they charge those Principles upon the Presbyterians in general: and this
you say, discovers the falsehood of that necessity, that the Episcopalians
pretend the Government was under to make such Laws against the Presbyterians in
its own defense. Your argument may be reduced into form thus: Some Presbyterian
Ministers who lived peaceably at Edinburgh, blamed and condemned the practices
and rebellions of the Cameronian Presbyterians: Ergo, the principles of
Rebellion are not to be charged upon the Scotch Presbyterians in general. But
Mr. Ridpath, here I deny your Consequence. For when we charge the Presbyterians
in general with rebellious principles and practices, we do not intend to
include every individual of that persuasion; for many of them do not see the
just consequences of their own Principles, many of them have not courage enough
to put them in execution: many of them may be naturally of so sweet a temper,
that the felicity of their complexion resists the malignity of their Tenants;
yet notwithstanding of all this, the Presbyterians for the most part are guided
by a Spirit of rebellion and ill nature. When one says such a thing is true of
such a Sect or Fraternity; generally speaking, he does not intend that it
should be understood in a strict universality, but with that latitude that the
subject matter will allow; and if you say, that the severe Laws that you
complain of were made against such Malefactors, as Presbyterian Ministers
themselves condemned; then I infer, that the Laws were not made against
Presbyterians as such, but against those Rebels who improved their Covenants
and Associations into Seditions, Tumults, and Insurrections.

It Is very true, that those Presbyterian Ministers who were of a calmer temper,
were sometimes employed to reclaim the Malefactors Ibid.
to their Duty, yet they could not prevail with them, because the Western
Enthusiasts had a higher opinion of their own Preachers, who were Remonstrators
and through paced Covenanters, than they had of the more peaceable and sober
Presbyterians; why then are our Laws and Governors blamed for restraining the
madness of such who were thought intolerable by Presbyterians as well as by the
King and Parliament, and your reasonings in this Paragraph plainly infer, that
the King had nothing in his view but to preserve his hereditary Right, and the
peace of his Subjects, when such and such Laws were made against illegal and
tumultuous meetings, as men of all persuasions were necessitated to condemn.

But you add further, that this concession of Sir George Mackenzie's, discovers
the falsehood of that necessity which the Episcopalians Ibid.
pretend the Government was under, to make such Laws against Presbyterians in
their own defense. Mr. Ridpath, if the Government was assaulted, and the peace
openly disturbed, there was a plain necessity to make such Laws as were thought
proper to restrain the fury of such Zealots, whether they were Presbyterians or
Anabaptists, all is one to me; and if you say that Presbyterians were not
guilty of such practices, then I say there were no Laws made against the
Presbyterians: for the King and Parliament did not consider them as
Presbyterians but as heady, incorrigible, and stubborn Rebels, who were
restless in their nature, and gave them perpetual disturbance.

What follows is of the same nature with the former; You Ibid.
tell us that Sir George says, that the hereditary Sheriffs refused to put the
Laws in execution against Conventicles, by which they became formidable. This
you pretend destroys two other Assertions propagated by our Party, viz. That
Presbyterianism is not popular, and that none but the Rabble are their friends.
But Mr. Ridpath, all this proceeds from your incurable precipitancy and
ignorance. For some heritable Sheriffs might be inclined to favor Presbytery,
and yet it is very true, that the most of their friends are among the Rabble;
and when we say so, we do not intend to say, but that here and there an
heritable Sheriff, or a Gentleman, may be a stiff Covenanter, and may differ
very little in his Education and principles, from the inferior sort of people,
and if at any time we say that the Rabble only favors the Presbyterians, we
understand that Proposition in a limited sense, as all such Propositions must
be understood, for generally speaking (except it be in the West of Scotland)
the Presbyterians have very few Friends among the Nobility or Gentry; and
though they had not the majority of the Nation, yet they might prove
formidable, and when Sir George says that they were formidable, can you infer
from it that they were more numerous than their opposites. At this rate you may
prove, that High-waymen, and Robbers are more numerous than honest Citizens and
Subjects, because a very few of them are able to frighten a whole County.

We are ever and anon told by you and the rest of your Party, that the Majority
of Scotland is for Presbytery; but the wiser men of your Faction think
otherwise, and therefore they took care to secure their enclosure (into which
they stumbled by a fortuitous concourse of many accidents) by several Laws and
barricadoes not to be named in this place.

When you recollect your self a little, perhaps you may acknowledge Ibid.
that it is not wisely done of you to abuse so many of the Nobility of
Scotland, by such infamous Lies and Forgeries as you are pleased to print,
particularly when you tell us, That the Court employed bloody, cutthroat
Papists to ruin the Country. You name the Earl of Airlie, and the Lord of
Meldrum; it is true, this may pass in a Coffee house at London where the Earl of
Airgile is not known; but there is not a Scots-man alive that ever heard that
either of these Gentlemen were Papists. Now this is very sad stuff Mr. Ridpath,
and any man that undergoes the toil of considering your Books, if he knew not
whence they came, must be guarded by extraordinary patience, when truth and
innocence are almost in every line so boldly invaded.

What you mean when you tell the Dr. that he has wounded Page 29.
his pretenses to Loyalty by defending Sir George Macknzie's Book, is to me a
Mystery; for I am confident that you are but very little acquainted with him or
his pretenses either. But you complain that he did not answer your argument
taken from the consequences Ibid.
of Passive Obedience, and that he turns his back and takes no notice of you.
Well, Mr. Ridpath, it is but just that a person of your valor should be met in
open Field; but you must not conclude that a man is pusillanimous when he
retires, unless you have him so much under your authority that he dare not move
a step without your order, nor answer any thing unless in the method that you
appoint him.

You impute all the direful effects of Arbitrary Power, to the Episcopal Party
and the Doctrine of Passive Obedience; yet I am apt to believe, that there is
no people in the World loves Arbitrary Power so much as the Presbyterians do,
and that they hate it only when it is not in their own keeping. If by Arbitrary
Power the Presbyterians mean some such power as is unaccountable to any earthly
Tribunal, such a power there must be in every Government, and if it be not
managed by a true Christian public Spirit, it may be as grievous and
intolerable in the hands of a Parliament, as in the hands of a King. To declaim
against arbitrary power, is to declaim against all Government; for there is no
Government upon Earth but exercises in its Supreme Judicatories arbitrary power
and jurisdiction. for which it is not accountable to any but to God alone,
where this finally decisive and Supreme power ought to be lodged, is a Question
that I leave to Lawyers and Statesmen; they know our municipal Laws and
Constitutions. When the sins of a Nation provoke God, then he punishes them by
foolish, extravagant; and cruel Magistrates; when it is otherwise, and that God
is pleased with them, they enjoy good Laws, peace and protection under wise
Governors; and this is all the remedy that is left in humane affairs, against
public calamities and disasters. There was no Meeting since the World began
that declaimed against arbitrary power so much as the long Parliament did, nor
was ever England so miserable as under their Tyranny and Oppressions; as long
as the administration of public affairs is left to the disposal of men, so
long we may be exposed to arbitrary power; and the former must be as long as
the World continues: a Parliament may be as tyrannical as any King; and when
they are thus packed together to serve a particular design, we must truckle
under them until those Laws are repealed by another; so that Passive Obedience
thus stated, is necessary under all Forms and Models of Government; it is all
one thing to me whether I am oppressed by the King, or by King and Parliament;
there is no Judicatory allows the remedy of a Rebellion, and what all Judges
determine in all Nations, and at all times, must be the Voice of God.

They who plead for the Supreme and decisive Authority of the General Assembly
in Ecclesiastical affairs, ought to be more friendly to Arbitrary power; for
though their sentence against any particular Clergyman were never so unjust and
oppressive, yet he must strike Sail and hold his peace, and practice Non
Resistance to a greater height, than ever the Episcopal Clergy preached it, if
he would not incur the highest Censures of the Kirk. And this Spiritual Tyranny
is more insupportable, than that which reaches only our temporal concerns; and
I am content without any blustering or foaming to reason this modestly with
your self, or any other that you can name, but still with this proviso, that
there be many more present than you and I, for I am afraid that we do not well
understand one another, and therefore, if ever we meet we must have a Moderator
to keep the peace.

You say that the Dr. contradicts himself, because he thought that page 30.
there was no injury done to the Presbyterians, in publishing a Book that
exposed their Fooleries; and yet he grants, that the Author of that Book was
perhaps unwary as to some instances. Good Mr. Ridpath, I see no contradiction
here at all, for a Book may serve the end for which it was published, though
perhaps the Author mistakes himself in some single instances. There is no
Author now adays sets up for an infallible Dictator; and you tell us in another
place of your last Pamphlet, that it is not possible to publish so many
particular stories without committing some faults; there is no doubt but you
have a very good opinion of your own Book that you last printed, yet I hope you
are convinced before now, that the Covenant was imposed upon Children when they
entered the University. Whether the Author of that Book mistook himself or not,
is not positively affirmed by the Dr. so your contradiction vanishes into air
and noise. You raise more dust than a Coach and six Horses, when you are about
to kill a Fly.

It is probable that the Author of the Postscript may be chastised for having
said that Mr. Rutherford's Writings, in some places were past all human
understanding. I have no commission from him or any of his Friends to return
your Language in Specie. You tell us, that if Mr. Ruhterford were alive, he
would have scorned to have fouled his Fingers with such an Episcopal Hawker;
but indeed, Mr. Ridpath, I do not think that Mr. Rutherford was so proud, but
that some time or other, he fouled his Fingers with meaner Creatures than the
Doctor. But what was it that he said of Mr. Rutherford's Writings? that, in
some places they were very dark and obscure; and was this any such
extraordinary Crime? Mr. Ridpath, I love to say very little of Men that are
dead, if you think that his Writings are so clear, pray give us your
Commentaries upon his second Chapter of his second Exercitation Pro divina
Gratia. 2. Resp. Distinguo vocem (verum) quod unusquisque tenetur credere, id
est, verum, metaphysice and fundamentaliter, in se and quoad eventum, concedo
majorem and tum minorem pernego. But still he left us to guess what the other
Member of the Distinction may be. Therefore take it thus, Quod unusquisque
tenetur credere, id est, verum, logice, formaliter, extra se, and quoad non
eventum; nego Majorem. And then both the one and the other are good strong
Nonsense in all its formalities. But he goes on, Christum enim pro unoquoque
mortuum esse in se fundamentaliter and metaphysice, non est verum sed falsum.
Christum pro unoquoque Mortuum esse metaphysice falsum, is a Phrase I am not
acquainted with; and if one durst speak it, the Author seems not,
(notwithstanding of all the Flights of his Metaphysics) to advert to the trite
distinction between the Veritas Metaphysica and the Veritas Logica. For Veritas
Metaphysica numeratur inter proprietates Entis, and consequenter non objectum
fidei sed simplicis apprehensionis; at propositionibus logice veris assentimur
vel propter testantis auctoritatem, vel propter rei evidentiam: And the
Question is not de Metaphysica veritate hujus propositionis, page 31.
sed de veritate Logica. This is not the only Instance that may be picked out
of this Paragraph to prove it obscure and unintelligible; that other Phrase in
se and quoad eventum concedo Majorem, is as dark as any thing can be; nor do I
remark here the Solecism of his Latin, quoad Eventum; but I name this
Exercitation as unintelligible from the beginning to the end. And because you
are a Man of honor, and cannot endure Contradiction with any Patience, it were
a more gallant Exercise for you to prove that this Exercitation of his, is
plain and solid Theology, than to blot so much Paper with your imaginary Libels
against the Clergy. You fight much at the rate that the Tartars do, when they
are driven before their Enemies; or rather like the Dutch, who are mounted on
Horseback that they may fly with greater Convenience: but if you have as much
Courage and Honor, as you have Bawling and Impudence, come to a close
Engagement, and prove that Mr. Rutherford's Answers to the forementioned
Argument are solid, plain and intelligible. What miraculous Feats other
Presbyterians can do, is nothing to your purpose. Add to the former Instance
Mr. Rutherford's Argument in his 22. Chapter of his Disputatio Scholastica de
divina Providentia, to prove that there is no opposition between Sin and the
Divine Nature, which I cannot now transcribe, and yet still I have the
Confidence to say that it is foolish, childish and frivolous, and of the most
pernicious consequence upon the Morals of Mankind. For if there is no
opposition between the Divine Nature and Sin, antecedenter ad liberum D E I
decretum, Men may be brought to think that Sin is not so odious in it self, nor
at so great a distance from true Perfection, as the Scriptures represent it.
But if you would see many more passages that are unintelligible, read his
Disquisitiones de Ente possibili, and the former Exercitation, and if any thing
can convince you, you may be then forced to acknowledge that his Writings are
obscure, and consequently the Doctor's Page 32.
saying so did not furnish you with the least umbrage of charging Sir George
Mackenzie with the grossest Immoralities of Life, for such I think the
subornation of Witnesses is.

The next Blow is for his Incivility to Mr. Rule, that he does not allow him
the Title of Doctor. Truly, Mr. Ridpath, if he wilfully made use of any other
Complement toward him, than what is just, there is no Man alive more ready to
retract his Error than he; he thought there was no rudeness in bestowing upon
him the Title by which he was ordinarily known; and if the Doctor knew not the
several steps of his Promotion, I see no reason why you can accuse him of
Incivility, and the thing being purely indifferent; if he had been better
informed, he would not deny any thing that he knew to be so easy and innocent.

Next you tell us that you do not believe the two instances that are cited in
that Postscript against Mr. Rule upon the Doctor's Authority. But why, Mr.
Ridpath, did the Author say so of him barely upon his own Authority, or are
they not to be seen both of them in his Printed Books; and are not you much
more uncivil to him, who revive Stories when perhaps they are entirely
forgotten by others? The decretum praedamnatum was not the Fiction of my
Friend, nor yet his new and unnaccountable Criticism of the word Ordinatio; and
now you may add another, which is decretum praeteritum. And you may see these
new Decrees (never mentioned before by any Class of Divines) in page 66 of his
Vindication of the Church of Scotland. And now I think one is sufficiently
provoked to call you impudent, that you bring above-board things that you
neither understand nor defend.

You complained, in your former Pamphlet of the Injuries done to Mr. Urqhuart
and Mr. Kirkton; because the first was said to have spoken contemptuously of
our Blessed Savior and the Lord's Prayer, and the other alleged, that Abraham
run out of the Land of Chaldea for debt. The Author of the Postscript told you
that both these Stories (which you your self thought unpardonable) could be
proved; and I am confident many more of that nature. But you tell us that you
are sufficiently satisfied, by those who have lately made enquiry into the
Affair, that the whole is a malicious Calumny. So we must take it upon your
Word and theirs, it might be reasonably expected from you, that, at least, you
would have procured under their own hands solemn Attestations that they never
said any such thing; and that was all that you could do to prove your Negative:
and this might have been easily had, especially from Mr. J. K. who lives at
Edinburgh; nor is there any of us so far exasperated against him as not to
believe his own Testimony solemnly and seriously delivered. And this is more
Civility on our part, than any of them will allow us at any time, or upon any
occasion. If I were at Edinburgh I could prove the Affirmative; and you must
excuse me to continue just where I was, notwithstanding of all the Informations
you have received.

The following Paragraph has in it more Impertinencies than there are Lines,
and yet it is probable that many of your Sect may think it seraphically witty.
The Author of the Postscript said, that the absurd and ludicrous Sect
metamorphos'd Religion and its solemn Excercises into Theatrical Scenes.
Another of the same Fraternity says, that your Preachers were whining Fellows
that drivelled at Mouth and Eyes. And thus you make them contradicct one
another, and then you run away with a loud holla'a, as if you were at the Head
of the Rabble pulling down a Cathedral, to see so many Curates slain with the
Jaw bone of an Ass. The word Theatrical Scenes does not determine whether your
Preachers acted Comedies or Tragedies, and a whining Scaramouchi may act his
part in either; and if so, the many Words, which you have gathered to no
purpose, discover your Ignorance, and not any Contradiction amongst them whom
you hate. But, Mr. Ridpath, are you not in a strange Career when you can never
hit upon the true nature of a Contradiction; I am not surpised that you do not
know the Nature of a Comedy and Tragedy, for you never read Aristotle (...),
nor none of the Commentators upon him, either ancient or modern; yet you might,
in two months time (for so long I am told you was at the University) have
learned what a strict and formal Contradiction is.

That the Presbyterians were better at Libelling than their Neighbors, is
evident from all Records; and therefore the Author of the Postscript had good
Reason to say, that Libelling was their Characteristick, as that which they
most practiced, and excelled all others in; that, in which they placed most of
their Strength and Confidence, and which they will never forbear, if they
happen to live where there is any to be accused. But you say that your Enemies
were the first Aggressors, and their bold Attempts against the Godly, justifies
all the rough Treatment that they have met with. Mr. Ridpath, there is one
thing that I would entreat you to condescend to, and it is, in itself, very
just and reasonable, and unless you yield to it, we may fight to our last
breath without satisfying one another or serving any good Design, the thing is
this, when you accuse Persons and Parties, you must be more express, definite
and particular in your Libels. I am of the Opinion that it is not possible for
Presbyterians to forbear Libelling, especially upon all public Turns and
Revolutions; their Libels against the Clergy both in England and in Scotland,
are still upon Record. Did you never see the Centuries of scandalous Ministers
accused before the Long-Parliament. The General Libel against the Bishops of
Scotland may be seen, when you please, in the King's Large Manifesto, and in
the first Volume of Nalson's Collections, and if you believe neither of these
Books, since they were both written by Malignants, read the Acts of the General
Assembly, 1638, and there you have the very same Libels mentioned; and there is
no Presbyterian but knows, that the Libels against the Bishops, in the Year
1638, were read from all the Pulpits of the Nation where the Assembly's
Authority was obeyed: and what is said, by the Author of the Postscript, of
their Behavior toward Archbishop Spotswood, is commonly attested by the
oldest Men in that corner of the Country, near St. Andrews. Particularly this
is more carefully preserved in the Family of Ballfour. And the Bishop of O. and
Mr. Sage of Glasgow, had this very Story from the Lord of Ballfour's own
mouth. It Is true that there is an Act of the General Assembly, mentioning the
Libels against the Bishops, but there are also among the unprinted Acts, Acts
of Excommunication and Deposition against some Prelates; and when those Acts
are produced, I offer to prove, from their own Authentic Records, many more
steps of their Fraud and Artifice. That there are such Acts as I last named
unprinted, vid. Index of the principal unprinted Acts of the Assembly at
Glasgow, 1638. And if they were not afraid of being discovered and exposed,
upon this very Head, those Acts had been printed as well as the other Principal
Acts; nay, the Act against Episcopacy it self was not printed, because it could
not but alarm all the Protestant Churches abroad against them, when the Order
of Episcopacy was condemned as simpliciter unlawful; a thing unheard in the
Christian Church, until the mungrel Conventicle at Glasgow sat: therefore the
Act against Episcopacy was left unprinted as well as the Acts of
Excommunication and Deposition against some Prelates. And this is either
altogether unknown to, or dissembled by Mr. Gilb. Rule, when he denies the
Truth of that Story, as related by the Author of the Five Letters. And you are
a Fool to think, that, in those days, when Rebellion and Hypocrisy were
triumphant, they would have stuck at such little Punctilio's, and not practice
all Arts to delude the Populace. I hope you do not deny what use they made of
Margaret Mitchelson's Visions, Raptures and Revelations, by which they
persuaded the People that the Covenant was authorized by immediate Revelations
from Heaven, as well as by the Popular Tumults at Edinburgh. The Knavery
against Archbishop Spotswood was an Injury done to him and the Church; but the
counterfeit Raptures of Margaret Mitchelson (countenanced by your Party) mocked
and defied God's Justice and Providence, no less than it ridiculed and
profaned all Religion. [Vid. King's large Declaration.] Nay, they procured
Libels against the Clergy from most Counties in England; and in those Counties
where they had none to work upon of their own Gang, they forged Libels, and
presented such counterfeit Petitions in the name of such Counties, and
dispersed their Forgeries for real Truths, to make their Party appear numerous,
and the Nals. Coll. 1. Vol. page 795.
Clergy odious. And Sir Thomas Aston petitioned the House of Lords against this
villainous Practice; but this was not welcome to those Lords who favored the
Faction, and therefore Sir Thomas Aston was reprehended, and the Forgerers
gently rebuked. And my Author truly observes, that this was like to prove
aglorious Reformation, which was built upon such Foundations, and advanced by
such Arts and Methods. So that if you mean the former Presbyterians, they were
the first Aggressors; and if you mean the modern, they practiced this Trade of
Libelling ever since the beginning of the Revolution, and long before the Book
appeared that provoked your displeasure, and they are much better at it than
their opposites; their curiosity reaches to the meanest concerns. There are no
people in the World can give such exact account of their Neighbors, when they
rise, and when they go to bed, what they eat, and what they drink, what they
say, and with whom they converse; and this is the reason why they so often blow
up the neighborhood into flames of Contention and Calumny. Name me but one Man
since the name of Presbyterians was known to the World, that ever gave them any
sensible provocation, whom they have not persecuted with their Tongues and
Libels to the utmost of their power.

They were not only the first Aggressors, but they continued their practices
under the Reign of Charles II. and since the Revolution the Libels against the
Clergy have employed their Presbyteries, Synods, and Assemblies, not to mention
the Libels against Masters of Universities, where there was no Accuser. I have
insisted the longer upon this, to let you see the vanity of a common topic
that runs through both your Pamphlets; Libelling is so peculiar to the
Presbyterians, that they cannot think of reforming it; in all their
conversations their discourse runs most upon them that are absent. It is an
idle thing to deny plain matter of Fact, especially when it is supported by
public Records, Practices, and the unanimous Suffrages of a whole Nation. I
think it enough to prove by the most undeniable evidence, that in this art of
Libelling you are the first aggressors, and the only experienced practitioners,
without putting my self to the pains of calling you Rogue, Villain, Rascal,
impudent Liar, and such like gentile names as you bestow upon your Adversaries.

You add, That it is natural for a Cadet of Dumbarton's Regiment, which used to
plunder people of their goods, to rob Men of their good Names, and therefore
ought not to be believed. This is a new Article Page 33.
which we have not heard of before, that he plundered people of their goods,
and it supplies the defects of the Original Libel in the Inquisition; and it is
very ordinary for the Presbyterians to represent such as they Libel, actually
guilty of the breach of the Ten Commandments: Now Your Woman amongst the Corn,
and the plundering people of their goods, added to the former Libel makes him
actually guilty of the breach of all. For in the first Libel, He is accused of
having no Religion, and of Swearing, so at one stroke he transgresses the first
four; and the two Articles added in your Continuation, together with his
Reflections against the Presbyterians make him guilty of the rest, either
expressly or by necessary consequence. But Mr. Ridpath, you do not know the
discipline of the French Army, and if he had inclinations to rob and plunder,
this is a more proper time to practice it; when He is turned out of all his
Possessions, and allowed no other employment under this Reformation than to
answer Libels. And indeed I think if you were a Soldier, you have no principle
to restrain you from plundering when you might venture with safety, especially
in a Popish Country, the true Israelites, and Covenanters might take the
Egyptian goods without scruple or remorse; as they formerly did at New Castle,
contrary to Articles and Capitulations.

Your Grammatical Lecture of the Literae Mutabiles, you may Ibid.
recommend to your Scholars, and whatever proficiency you have made in Grammar,
you seem to me to reason much like the Gentleman that I formerly named, who
thought himself of Ovid's Family.

You had better let fall the mention of Archbishop Sharp, than bring him so
often upon the Stage to the disgrace of your Party. Ibid.
He was certainly murdered, not by an accidental effort of fury and passion as
you allege; but in a most deliberate manner, after many Cabals and
consultations kept for that very end; and the Author of the Postscript did not
reason from Shields his authority so much as from the Principles he went upon,
his Book being an accurate Collection of several authentic Papers, and avowed
practices of his Party since the Reformation; nor was it ever said, that sober
Presbyterians did allow of his Murder: but how few of them are sober? and I can
tell you more, that the Presbyterian Ladies in Fife at that very time, did
industriously shun in all conversation to call this bloody Act, a Murder; but
gravely said, that indeed the Man was slain, but they could not think that any
thing that was performed by so great a Saint as Rathillat and his religious
Cutthroats, could be called a Murder. And when such practices are charged upon
the Presbyterians in general, it is not intended (as I told you once already)
to involve every individual; it is not possible to deprave the nature of some
particular men to that degree, though they seem to maintain principles that
yield pernicious Consequences.

But, Mr. Ridpath, by conversing with your self I am become a little more bold,
and I offer to prove from Presbyterian principles, that Archbishop Sharp ought
to have been murdered, are not all the Covenanters obliged to bring their
Enemies to condign punishment? and when the Magistrates are open and avowed
Enemies to the cause of God, is it not lawful for some to interpose? especially
when acted by Heroical impulse to stop the universal deluge of Impiety, that
was likely to drown the whole Nation, to recover the freedom of the Church that
was run down by Tyranny and Perjury, contrary to all National Obligations,
former Laws and Liberties. Did not King Charles II. himself know Continuat.
, that he had forfeited his Title to the Crown? and was it necessary according
to you to delay the execution of Justice in this calamitous posture of public
affairs, unless it could be procured in due form? when it was not possible for
honest men to be heard: especially since the Covenanters struck off the heads
of Montrose, Huntley, Haddo, Spotswood, for acting by a Commission from the
very King, by whose Commission they themselves pretended to hold their places.
What is there in the Murder of Archbishop Sharp that may not be justified by
your Principles? Did not He deserve death? No doubt you think he did; and if it
be only the Forms that you stand upon, must the seasonable execution of Justice
be delayed, because it cannot be had in all its regular steps and formalities,
when the Magistrates openly tyrannize and oppress our Liberties Civil and
Religious? At this rate you disown the most public acts of the Covenanters. By
what form of Law then in being, did the Tables of your Govenanters sit at
Edinburgh, when they were forbidden by open Proclamation to continue any longer
their Consultations and Cabals. If you pretend the necessity of their affairs,
was there ever any state of things more lamentable in it self, than you
represent the Reign of King Charles II. to be? and if so, why might not some
resolute and gallant Heroes, some true Sons of the Covenant, venture, without
the ordinary forms, to do justice speedily upon such an eminent opposer of
Religion as Archbishop Sharp was? The Laws of selfdefence and preservation, as
you explain them, dispense with Forms, when the thing is for the matter right
in itself, and the Magistrate not only neglects, but avowedly opposes Truth,
Justice, and Innocence; then it is time for men of Courage and Resolution to
step forth and assert their Religion and Liberties, not by the tedious method
of Law, Order and Process, when Covenants and Original Contracts are turned
topsie turvy, but speedily and by open Force pull Antichrist from the Throne.
Mr. Ridpath, be advised by me, do not stand so much upon Forms; else you must
part with your best beloved Principle and Covenanted Reformation.

And if the Murder of Archbishop Sharp be sincerely disowned by the
Presbyterians, since they are so often upbraided and reproached with it; why do
not they by some solemn Act of their Assembly declare, that the killing of
Cardinal Beaton and Archbishop Sharp were villainous Murders? tho the first was
usheredin by Prayer, and the other by singing of Psalms.

You oppose your own Authority to Mr. Shields, and this I am sure many of your
own party will laugh at; whether you have the Ascendent of the Doctor in the
point of Philosophy, I will give you my Thoughts of that before I end this
Letter.

The Doctrine of Passive Obedience comes again in your way, and nothing is more
odious to so brisk and daring a Spirit as the Page 34.
very thought of so tame and silly a Discipline; and you refer us to the
incomparable Argument lately published by Mr. Johnson. Mr. Ridpath, I agree
with you, that the Preface of Mr. Johnson's Book has in it very pleasant
Strokes of Wit and Fancy; but as to the argumentative part of his Book, it
proves the Doctrine of Passive Obedience to be Heterodox, by an Argument of
equal Strength with that of your own, by which you prove the Episcopal Clergy
to be Enthusiasts.

You tell us next, that his Defenses of Mr. Brown and Mr. Cant, are so like a
Pedantick Doctor, that they deserve no regard, and what you said of them you
can bring the Authors to avow it to their Faces. Now we fall upon the
Commonplace of Pedantry; and, Mr. Ridpath, you must understand that there are
Pedants in all Employments. If the vanity of appearing learned and knowing
where there is no solid Foundation to support the Character deserve that Name,
perhaps the citing so many Logical Axioms in your Pamphlet, which you do not at
all understand, may, in the Opinion of some, make you pass for a Pedant. But,
to let this go, tho the Doctor's being a Cadet in Dumbarton's Regiment, was
not, in your Opinion, an auspicious Omen of Piety and Humanity, yet one might
think it a good Presage of his Freedom from Pedantry, at least as good as any
of your most remarkable Adventures in my Lord Wh -- ton's Kitchen.

The Doctor said, that Mr. George Brown, Minister of Drysdale, processed Andrew
Johnston of Lockerby, vigorously before the Ecclesiastical Court for his Crime
of Adultery, and therefore his alleged connivance was a Presbyterian Fogery.
And here the Affiemative was his, which I prove by the following Certificate
under the hands of four Witnesses; two in the Parish of St. Margaret's
Westminster, another in Cornhill near the Exchange, and the fourth without
Aldersgate.

WE whose Names are underwritten, hereby testify and declare, upon Honor and
Conscience, that, to our certain knowledge, Mr. George Brown, Minister of
Drysdale in the Diocese of Glasgow, processed Andrew Johnston of Lockerby so
vigorously, for his Crime of Adultery with Sarah Brown, that he got him
formally excommunicated. Given under our Hands at London the Fourth of July,
1693.

Alex. Guthrie, Andr. Johnston. Tho. Mitchell. Alex. Johnston.



Now, Mr. Ridpath, where lies the Pedantry in saying so and so of Mr. Brown; is
not your Accusation against him proved to be a Lie. And as for your Charge
against Mr. Andrew Cant, that he was suspended, etc. it is purely a Fiction
from top to bottom we cannot prove a Negative otherwise than by informing the
World that we who are his most intimate Acquaintances never heard of any such
thing; he was never suspended, and consequently never used any mean Arts to
ingratiate himself with his Superiors, the first is a Romance, and therefore
the Superstructed must be a Forgery. And when you charge the Doctor with
Pedantry, read over your own learned Book of the Sufferings of Presbyterians
from the Episcopalians, especially your nasty and fulsome Epithets that you
bestow upon such as you bark at, viz. that they are Tyranno-Papa-Prelatical,
and then let any impartial Reader judge whether you do not deserve a place ante
omnem circulum amongst the Pedants. There is nothing in all the Athenian
Flexions and Compositions, like that High and Majestic Word,
Tyranno-Papa-Prelatical. It Is worthy of the noble Mr. Ridpath's high flown
Genius; and if you were on the top of a Hill in Galloway, preaching to a
Field-Meeting, this one single World would confound your Auditors into a belief
that you were a precious, gracious, convincing Man.

Who could stand before so much Eloquence and Acuteness, Bombabamachides,
Clunenstaridesarchides in Campis Gurgustidoniis.

The Author of the Postscript said, that you charged our Superiors Page 35.
with such as were deposed for their Immoralities, ad Dean Hamilton, and
Cockburn of St. Bothens. To this you say, that you charged them only with
having protected those Men from the Punishment due to their Impieties. But did
they protect them when they were deposed? And how can you say that ever they
were protected? If their Superiors waited for full and clear Evidences against
them before they pronounced Sentence, here was no protection of Criminals, but
Obedience to the Laws; and tho your Party be not tied to Forms, yet we think
our selves obliged to act as we are directed by the Laws.

You fall next upon Archbishop Paterson, and the Lies that you Page 36.
have published formerly of Archbishop Cairncross, which are plainly refuted in
his own printed Letter, to the Conviction of all men, shows what credit you
deserve when you accuse either of them.

Mr. Ridpath, you think it a palpable Blunder to say, that some who complied
with Episcopacy after the Restoration of King Charles II. Ibid.
were Presbyterians; and this is another sad Instance of your Ignorance; for
they were required to do nothing inconsistent with the Principles of moderate
Presbyterians; and all the Ringleaders of the Covenanters, had their Mission
from the Bishops of the Church of Scotland, and do you think that they did not
then conform to Episcopacy, or that they were not Presbyterians? I am afraid
that the little Club, whereof you are Moderator, does not thoroughly understand
the Principles of Presbytery. Had we no Presbyterian Ministers in Scotland, but
such as deserted their Churches in the West after the Restoration? was it ever
required of any of them that conformed to Episcopacy, to assert that
Episcopacy, was preferable to a Parity of Presbyters? No; they still enjoyed
their own liberty of thinking what they pleased, if they obeyed their
Superiors in licitis and honestis. Were not Mr. Meldrum and Mr. Wilkie, and
many others that I could name, Presbyterians, tho they conformed to Episcopacy?
They themselves think that they were so still; to my certain knowledge the last
was, and I know him to be so honest a Man, that he never endeavored to hide
his Principles, and he thought that he did nothing in conforming to Episcopacy,
inconsistent with his own Opinions, and he would have continued still in the
Communion of the Episcopal Church if a later Test had not removed him. You must
not think that all the Presbyterians are warmed to an equal degree of Heat:
there are some, tho very few, more calm and solid than their younger Brethren.
Read Mr. Rutherford's due right of Presbytery (and I cannot name a Book more
acceptable) perhaps you may meet with some Notions there that are not so
agreeable to the late Model of Presbytery; the last Edition of a Book is still
auctior and emendatior. And if it was a Blunder to say, that some who continued
Presbyterian in their Principles, conformed to the external Order of the Church
under Episcopacy, they who did so conform are obliged to defend him.

You still oblige your Adversaries to prove Negatives; when you libel Dr.
Canaries, you tell us, that tho the Ministers and Judicatories Ibid.
declared, that they could make nothing of the Accusation brought against him,
yet that will not amount to prove it false; and because a Negative in matter of
Fact is not demonstrated (a thing in it self absolutely impossible) you
therefore conclude, that still you may accuse him as guilty; but if nothing
could be made of it why should you propagate or continue the Slander? for not
only are you destitute of true and solid Proofs, but all your Evidences when
they are aggravated by Presbyterian Malice, could never be heightened into a
plausible Presumption of his Fault. If I should accuse you of having committed
Incest with your Mother, you could not prove it to be false otherwise than by
letting the World know, that nothing could be made of it; and if so, no honest
Man will defame you upon that head.

But you tell us, that there is unexceptionable Evidence of the Woman's Ibid.
having declared the thing her self. What thing her self declared I know not;
but for the unexceptionable Evidence, it is only upon Record in the World of the
Moon, else we had seen it in legible Characters long ever now. But you tell us,
that the reputation of your Informer is fairer than that of either of the two
Dr's. Mr Ridpath, I do not know who this Gentleman is, and therefore in modesty
I must forbear to make comparisons; but if he will preserve his Reputation, he
must smother his Evidence.

What you drive at toward the close of this Section, is past my skill to find
out; when you say, That we have a very pregnant instance of a Person of no mean
Note, whose accusation, most in England are satisfied is true, and yet we see
nothing can be made out, neither before the Judges nor the Lords. Mr. Ridpath,
You leave it uncertain whether the Person of no mean Note be the Accuser or the
Accused. But to demonstrate the impertinence of this Instance, and that you
understand Law as little as you do the Rules of Logic. I put the case, that
Titius accuses his wise Moevia of Adultery; the Judges may be persuaded that
the accusation of Titius is true, though the evidences be not so full as the
Law requires; yet being plain and positive in their nature, and but a degree
removed from full proof; such presumptions of guilt which the Civilians call
praesumptiones juris and de jure, leave deep impressions upon all, when duly
conveyed to our knowledge: because they are as near as can be to that which is
plena probatio in foro. But pray, have you any such presumptions against the
Dr? Is there any plain evidence against him? and if nothing can be made of it
as the Judicatories declare, then it is many degrees below a Presumption; much
less that higher presumption which is the ground of a reasonable Suspicion.

But you add, that, Suppose the accusation against the Dr. to be false, yet it
argues a great want of cleanly Men amongst the Episcopalians, Ibid.
that they should choose a Man for Agent who lay under a flagrant Scandal. The
Apostle's Rule is clear, that a Bishop ought to be blameless. A surmise
magnified by Presbyterian malice illustrates rather than darkens a man's
Reputation, and clears his innocence; not to be evil spoken of by such whose
Element is Calumny, is an argument of no great Spirit, and far less activity.
But you say, that the Apostle's Rule is clear; I say so too, but your Head is
not clear because the Apostle says, that a Bishop ought to be blameless;
therefore you conclude, that if Bishops at any time are evil spoken of and
traduced, they must be no longer Bishops. At this rate the most innocent and
deserving men must be disowned, and the greatest Luminaries of the Church must
expect to be cashiered. Athanasius was accused of abominable immoralities; and
St. John the Baptist was said to have a Devil; and the Great Bishop of our
Souls was accused of being a friend to Publicans and Sinners; he went to Feasts
and entertainments which the Puritanical Pharisee could not behold without
grumbling and censuring; they would quietly whisper in their Neighbors Ears,
that though he said many good things, and wrought many Miracles, yet he was
still a stranger to the power of Godliness; he kept ill Company, and the Modern
Phanaticks would add, that he was for forms of Prayer; and a great many other
things he did, that the Spirit of detraction took by the wrong handle. If your
Commentary upon these words, A Bishop ought to be blameless, had appeared
before the Scotch Eloquence came abroad, it ought to have had its own room in
that Book, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, raised many Scandals, and they were
Scandals of Prelacy and Priestcraft too, against Moses and Aaron; and by your
argument they ought both of them to have been deprived of their Honor and
Government.

The next mistake is as foolish and impertinent, though not Page 37.
so dangerous as your wresting the Holy Scriptures to serve the heats of your
deluded Fancy. You tell us, that Dr. M -- o was very angry that you said of
him, [commonly called Dr.] but I assure you, you mistook his meaning: he could
not but remark a Quaker expression [commonly called] and so much the rather,
that there are many Presbyterians who industriously shun the giving any such
Title; for those Academick distinctions look so near the Whore of Babylon, that
it is not safe for the Saints to use such words; and if the Dr. has any grains
of Pride (which perhaps might be allowed in a Cadet of Dumbarton's Regiment)
yet his ambition runs in another Channel than to affect empty sounds and big
words. I thought (and I think I know him better than you do) that a careless
easiness rather than reserve, distance or singularity, made up his Character;
the affectation of Titles at this time is very unsuitable to the Scotch Clergy,
yet it is not in the power of might or malice to make some of them fawn upon
the Presbyterians: and though we are obliged to forgive our Enemies heartily
and sincerely, we must not be so abject as to encourage them to continue their
Hostilities, but there is a greater impertinence in your Censure of the Dr; for
when you made him to ride in the Popes Guards with a -- ^o insinuate the many
Crimes that he was guilty of at Rome, you conclude thus, which methinks looks
somewhat strange that such kind of men should be the greatest sticklers for the
Party. If you represent the Party as odious and irreligious, and him of the
same temper with his Party; what is there strange in this, that an ill man
should defend an ill cause: but the most ordinary things appear to you in your
Dreams and Visions, Monsters, Miracles and Contradictions.

You are so sharpsighted in discovering Contradictions, that Ibid.
you see them almost in every line; and because the Author of the Postscript
said, that Dr. Canaries was treated with special Honor by a Presbyterians
Judicature; therefore this is made a contradiction to what others say of them,
that they are a proud, sour, unconversible Tribe. But this is your everlasting
mistake, that you do not understand what a Contradiction is. That they are a
proud, sour, unconversible Tribe, is true in the sense, that all such
propositions are understood; not in a Logical universal sense, but generally
speaking; the proudest Man upon Earth is not sour and unconversible in all the
intervals of his life; Mad men have their lucid intervals, and a wise Man may
sometimes act foolishly: Solomon says, that a wise Man's heart is at his right
hand; yet the presence of his mind may sometimes forsake him, and he himself
was a sad instance of this Truth; His Proverbs, that are livinely inspired,
many of them are true in no other sense than (...) and is it not sad that the
poor Curates should have no other employment now adays, than to dispute with
^uch as know not the nature of a Contradiction; yet for your ^ncouragement, I
believe George Stirling, and Harry Ferguson ^ay think you one of the learnedest
men this last age has produced, and perhaps there is none beyond you in their
Opinion already.

Your quarrel against the Dr. is never at an end, and he expects Ibid.
no fairer quarter at your hands. You are angry it seems that he denied that
ever be rode in the Pope's Guards; He denies ^t still, and he offers to prove
this Negative as far as any thing ^f that nature can be proved, and he is still
of the Opinion, that, none knew him to have ridden in the Pope's Guards: but
Presbyterians who discover plots in the World of the Moon. This ^^st expression
raises your indignation higher, because you say, it has in it an impudent hint
of denying the late Prelatical Plots against the Government. And must he be
impudent because he does not know the Plots against the Government? and how
came you to know that there are no Plots in the World of the Moon? are you so
well acquainted with the Inhabitants that you know exactly their times of Peace
and War, the several Revolutions and Designs in that Country? for my part I
know of no Plots against this or any other Government, and I never read your
News-Letters, and I think that the great and dangerous Plots of which no man is
found guilty, are all of them in the World in the Moon. Presbyterians are so
well acquainted with plotting, that some of them cannot forget it no more than
a Jew can forget his Religion; they speak of Plots and Designs, they dream of
them, they talk of them in all Companies; and if an innocent man steps aside to
ask his Neighbor what a clock it is, he is immediately found in a Plot by some
Presbyterian Informer.

But now, Mr. Ridpath, you fall into a fit of Devotion, and you wish that the
Falsehoods which have been mutually charged on one another, may oblige both to
be more tender of publishing Reports upon trust. Alas! Mr. Ridpath, is it come
to this, that you acknowledge that there have been Falsehoods charged upon the
Episcopal Party by the Presbyterians; no doubt a Man of your Tenderness and
Sincerity regrets this infamous Practice; yet in the next Breath you tell us,
that when the Doctor was Parson of -- he was accused of Ibid.
Villainy with a Woman amongst the Corn. Such Stories are the very things that
confirm me in the Opinion that your Tribe is so very well acquainted in the
World of the Moon. Where was he Parson when he was accused? by whom was he
accused? who heard of this Accusation before your scurrilous Pamphlet appeared?
You do not say positively that he was guilty. No; you let it sneakingly drop
through your Fingers: so that the Question now between you and me is not whether
he was guilty or not guilty; but whether accused or not accused. The
Affirmative part is yours, and if an honest Man had it by the end he would
either prove it or retract it; the Negative is mine that he was never accused,
and if none of them amongst whom he lived, in the most eminent places of the
Nation ever heard that he was thus accused, none but an impudent Liar will
affirm it.

But if you were to speak your last, you can freely declare, that you do not
know one Syllable of what you write to be false. At this rate, you may accuse
him of all the Crimes that the Presbyterians invented against the Bishops in
the Year 1638, as I have told you before when I mentioned the Archbishop of
Glasgow; and of all the Crimes which your own Major Wier actually committed
with Mares, Cows and Cats; not to name the Sisters that run with him from one
Communion to another, for his extraordinary Gift of extempore Prayer; for after
all, you may safely say, that you do not know them to be false; and if any
should accuse Mr. Ridpath to have committed Incest with his Mother at
Cockburnspeth, before he went to the College of Edinburgh; I may safely say,
that if I were to speak my last I do not know it to be false. And how should
one know such Negatives in matter of Fact without Omniscience? and because you
do not know such things to be false, you think you have liberty to spread and
propagate romantic Lies, pure and unmixt Calumnies against particular Persons.
Are these the Weapons by which you serve your Party? and do you think to impose
upon the World by such Bedlam Fooleries?

But tho the Dr. was not in the Pope's Guards, yet he was a Cadet Ibid.
in Dumbarton's Regiment in France, and there is no such odds, you think,
between being a Cadet in Dumbarton's Regiment, which guarded Popery and
contributed so much to enslave Europe, and riding in the Pope's Guards. Yes,
Mr. Ridpath, there is very great odds, tho you do not see it, as much as there
is between the Liberties of the Gallican Church, and the unlimited Supremacy of
the Pope: and do you think that the King of France was fighting for Popery,
when he wrested the ancient Rights of the Regale out of the possession of the
Roman Bishop? But Mr. Ridpath, the Dr. was certainly in Dumbarton's Regiment, I
assure you of it, and, which is much worse, he never thought shame of it. The
strict Alliance between the liberal Sciences and Arms is a Commonplace too
well known, and he is very sure, that neither Scholar nor Gentleman will ever
reproach him upon this head; and his passing some of his time in France (the
great Theater of Breeding and Civility) was a more auspicious Omen of Piety and
Humanity than the most remarkable Gallantries of your Life. Aelian. Var. Hist.
Plato had strong Inclinations to follow the Camp when he was young, until he
was diverted by the Advice of Socrates. I hear you sometimes teach Grammar (a
Study in it self very commendable) why then do not you read our Buchanan, Ad
Illustriss. Vir. Car. Coss. Franciae Maresch. in Jephth. Tragoed. Praef.
Absurdam fortasse; rem facere quibusdam videbor: qui ad te, hominem ab ineunte
aetate militaribus imbutum studiis and inter arma Tubasque semper versatum
munusculum hoc literarium mittam: sed ii fere hoc absurdum existimaturi sunt
qui aut harum rerum inter se consensionem non salts animadvertunt aut ingenium
tuum parum habent perspectum. Neque enim inter rei Militaris and literarum
studium ea est quam plerique falso purant discordia, sed summa potius concordia
and occulta quaedam naturae conspiratio; quanquam enim superioribus aliquot
saeculis sive hominum inertia sive falsa quadam persuasione divisae fuerunt hae
professiones, nunquam tamen perversa imperitorum opinio tantum potuit ut ipsae
inter se veterem illam and naturalem (ut it a loquar) cognationem
obliviscerentur.
not to name any of the Ancients; and if nothing else must please you but the
Example of a Presbyterian of the latest Edition, why may not I justify the
Dr's Practice, when he was very young, from the Example of your Mr. Williamson,
when he was old. I mean the celebrated Mr. Williamson whom all the Ladies
flocked to see from all the corners of the Court, when he delivered his
Harangue before Queen Mary; for he was a Captain of Horse in the Rebellion at
Hist. of the Consp. against K. Chapter II page 118.
Bothwel bridge. And I think any Cadet in Dumbarton's Regiment may, without
Vanity, be compared to a Captain of the Rebellion at Bothwell bridge.

And now that I mention Mr. David Williamson, I entreat him not to take it ill
if I recommend the Censure of one part of your Preface to the Parliament, to
himself; for amongst many other things with which you asperse the Clergy of
Scotland that sojourn in England, this is one, that they troop about the
Country with their Continuat. Pref. p. 10.
stolen Sermons. Truly Mr. Ridpath, I do not know any one of them that preaches,
except such as are provided with some Benefice in the Country, and I think that
is no small part of their Disaster and Infelicity, so you cannot tell whether
their Sermons are stolen or not. In some cases it is not only allow able to
borrow but expedient, and if your Curiosity would engage you to read St.
Cyprian de Idolorum vanitate, you would find that he has several Sentences,
nay the very turnings of Phrases from Minutius Faelix; and this argues his Love
to the Author and to the thing rather than any Indigence of his own. If the
Curates read good and solid Books and preach them to the People, why may not
they be allowed to bring out of their Treasure things new and old. If the
sparkish Daw in the Fable had only filled up the vacant places of her Wings
with Feathers of her own kind, she had never been ridiculous; for we all of us
acknowledge heartily that we borrow; but still it is from Birds of our own
color.

But Mr. Ridpath, I am to give an instance of an impudent Plagiary, who lately
before the Presbyterian Parliament, in a Sermon designed to abuse the whole
Order of Bishops, borrows from Bishop Brownr. Sermon. Lon. Printed, 1664. Ser. 1.
page 10 compared with Williamson's Sermon. Jun. 15. 1690. page 20.
Bishop Brownrig, no less than about 16. or 17. Lines. I do not at all find
fault with Mr. Williamson for reading Bishop Brownrig's Sermons, nor yet do I
blame him for preaching them to the People; would to God he would preach none
else, but to borrow so much from a superstitious Sermon preached at the
Inauguration of King Charles I, a Martyr for Prelacy, and before my Lord
Melvil, in a Discourse calculated to incense the Meeting against Prelacy, was
truly becoming Mr. Williamson's Genorisity: I do not declaim against his
Stealing, for I am as much obliged to Bishop Brownrig as to any Book of that
kind that ever I read. And this very Observation I have from another R. B.
Curate who read Mr. Williamson's Sermon, and compared it with the place in
Bishop Brownrig, whence he stole his most beautiful Feathers: and if the
Members of Parliament had known, when they groaned under Mr. Williamson's
powerful Preaching, that his smooth and nervous Conclusion, full of Laconick
Majesty and Solidity, had been borrowed from a Bishop, they might think that
such a Man as Brownrig was, was not altogether unworthy of Mr. Williamson's
Conversation; and the plain truth is, it was a very hard thing to treat a
Bishop as a Limb of Antichrist, when his own Jewels were borrowed to make such
a Figure before the Parliament.

Next comes your Compliment to the Memory of my Lord Dumbarton, as an Evidence
of your extraordinary Prudence and Caution. You knew, that when your Book
appeared my Lord Duke Hamilton was Commissioner to the Parliament, and then you
expected the thorough Settlement of Presbytery, which now you have in Folio, by
the late Act; and therefore it was not safe to reflect upon my Lord Dumbarton
or his Regiment. But good Mr. Ridpath, speak out plainly, do you truly think
that Persons of my Lord Duke Hamilton's Quality and Sense read such Pamphlets
as yours; certainly you cannot be so mad, your Books are calculated for a lower
order of Men, and tho you sent some of them beyond Seas, yet they are only
considered by such who never read any thing but nasty Pamphlets, and who now
and then dream of Plots, and reason about them with the same profound Sense
that you do when you cite your Logical Aocioms.

Now when you draw near to a Conclusion, you give the Dr. such a Blow, that he
is not able to recover: for the Author of the Postscript said, that you began
your Title page with a Lie, that your Book might be all of a piece. And this
again provokes your Heroic Passion, and you load your Antagonist with some of
the most odious Reproaches that your Dictionary could furnish you with. But,
Mr. Ridpath, what was it that he said? why, he said that your Book, was not
printed for Tho. Anderson near Charing Cross, and you charge him upon credit,
to prove that it was not printed for him. And must you never be cured of this
impertinence, that you oblige your Adversary to prove a Negative in a matter of
Fact? and then to make your ignorance the more conspicuous, you guard your
desire with a Logical Axiom, Affirmanti incumbit probatio. I am ashamed of you,
that you do not know the difference between an Affirmative and a Negative
Proposition; when he said that it was not printed for Tho. Anderson near
Charing Cross, he affirmed nothing; and if he called you a Liar, though such a
Proposition sounded like an Affirmative, yet it was no affirmative Proposition,
but finally resolved into a Negative, and can no otherwise be proved than as a
Negative may; and since he could meet with no Bookseller near Charing Cross,
who knew any such man of their Trade, might not he reasonably presume that your
Title Page had a Lie in the bosom of it; notwithstanding all this it may be
true that your Book was printed for him, and that he lives in some dark Vault
near Charing Cross. Such a thing is possible, though it be not very probable
that a Bookselseller should hide himself under ground; for that is not their
ordinary way of selling Books. I insist on this only to chastise your
ignorance, and vanity, when you darken the whole Hemisphere with Dust, out
comes your affirmanti incumbit probatio, as if your Adversary had the
Affirmative that ought to be proved.

You are so foolishly vain, that if all the particular Paragraphs of your first
Book have not been considered, you conclude that your Adversary was convinced
of their truth and solidity. The Error that I just now named brings to my mind
another piece of fulsome ignorance of the same nature with the former. You may
meet with it in the place cited on the Answ. to the Scotch Eloq. page 53
Margin. Your Antagonist loaded the Presbyterians with inconsistencies, and
particularly he exposed your dorage and fooleries concerning anniversary Days,
and he might do it with the greater safety, because you still retain something
in your practice which overthrows your Principles: for you celebrate the great
Charities of George Herriot by an Anniversary commemoration: Ergo (says he) you
are not against anniversary Solemnities. But you confute this argument very
learnedly, and you prove from clear Scripture that Anniversaries are unlawful,
because the fourth Commandment says positively, Six days shall thou work: Ergo,
you conclude, that all Anniversary Solemnities are unlawful. Now Mr. Ridpath,
let us calmly consider the strength of your argument. All men are obliged by
this Precept in the sense that you put upon it, or they are not; if all are
obliged (as no doubt they are) by what dispensation are they of Heriot's
foundation exempted? and if particular Societies be exempted, why may not the
whole Nation pretend an exemption? for one Society is no more privileged than
another, and if all Societies may equally pretend an exemption, why may it not
be granted to the whole Kingdom, which is but the political aggregate of so
many Societies? For, if they of Herriot's Hospital may celebrate an
Anniversary, why may not all the Inhabitants of Edinburgh do it? But you
fortify your Opinion by a Logical Axiom, Ex particulari non licet Syllogisare,
which you think signifies, that we must not draw precedents from the allowable
practice of particular Societies; and this is the Philosophy that you make such
a noise with, whereas every Boy in the second Class that does not deserve
whipping, can tell you that the meaning of that Logical Rule is, that either of
the premises at least must be an universal Proposition, whether affirmative or
negative: for two particular propositions cannot bear the weight of a
conclusion, no more than two Negatives. Now tell me sincerely, whether the
making such a noise with Logical Rules, when you do not understand what they
mean be not Nonsense and pedantry, in all their pomps and formalities. If the
practice of Herriot's Hospital were to be defended by argument, the patrons of
it would reason from the religious practice of all other Societies, the rules
of gratitude, and the constitutions of the place, and a conclusion regularly
deduced from such principles is not I hope ex particulari, as you ignorantly
fancy. But not to trifle with you any more, the answer to your argument is
contained in that short, but undeniable Axiom received by all Divines,
Praecepta affirmativa obligant semper, sed non ad semper; and we may work six
days, nisi interveniat feriationis causa legitima, auctoritate divina vel
humana stabilita. Pray Mr. Ridpath, forgive all this Latin; for I do not think
that the speaking of Latin is at all times pedantry, and many are apt to let
that pass for pedantick which they do not understand; but if the phrase, of
your infectious Breath, be the Word that provoked the Severity of your Censure,
the Dr. in all Humility retracts it; for tho your Breath be putrid, yet the
Contagion spreads no further than People of your own Complexion, Men
sufficiently infected before you breathed upon them.

Mr. Ridpath, I do not pretend that this Treatise is methodical, and therefore
I take no other Care to methodize my Animadversions on your Book, than as they
tumble into my Fancy, I lie open to the censure of your Histeron-Proteron as
often as you please. Your Dedication to the Scotch Parliament is as considerable
as the Book it self, for being the only Book that was dedicated to them, it
contains your own grave and serious Advice how to manage the public Affairs.
Next you fall upon the poor Dr. and he must be lashed and chastis'd for his
Rashness and Precipitancy, because he presumed to give such an account of your
first Book: but since you paint him as an Ass at the very beginning, why was
you at so much pains with him? so mean a Creature was below a Man of your
Elevation; and since you can defame and expose Crowned Heads, Dukes, Earls, and
Prelates, why all this Noise to run down a poor Hermit. Your very first Blow
has in it so much Life and Wit, that one of his cold and phlegmatic Temper
can never reach it, As Postscript in Answer to the First.

In the second Page of your Continuation there is a Catalogue of the most
tragical Stories, made up to justify all the Bitterness and Buffoonry of your
former Pamphlet. You justify the Severity of your Style by the Answer of a
Tinker. And truly if all the Parts of your Book had been equally pertinent, it
had been the best Presbyterian Farce that appeared since its late Erection: but
because I would let you understand that our Registers of Fanatic Cruelties,
Rebellions and Perjuries are as exact as the Legends of your imaginary
Grievances, I will set down eight Particulars in an opposite Column to your
eight, and then we have sixteen.

I. As long as we remember the Tumultuous Meetings, Rebellious Protestations,
and the bloody Consequences of the Presbyterian Covenants and Associations, the
Murder of our King, whom they tied Neck and Heels, until their Confederates
brought him to the Scaffold, the Miseries of an intestine War, the Taxes,
Contributions and Free Quarter imposed by the Arbitrary Power of rebellious
Subjects and mock Parliaments, the Multitude of Errors, Heresies and Dreams,
that were proclaimed from our Pulpits, so long we remember that their
Principles were inconsistent with the Royal Prerogative, our ancient
Constitution, as well as the Primitive Order of the Christian Church. Ridpath.

I. While the Memory of King Charles II. and King James VII. endures, and till
Time, the Consumer of all things has eat up their Parliament Rolls, it will
hold an undeniable Truth, that the Prelatical Party of Scotland are
Persecutors, and that in denying the same they have made themselves notorious
Liars.

II. As long as we remember that the first Covenanters had all sworn the Oaths
of Canonical Obedience to their respective Bishops in their several Dioceses,
and that they dispensed with the said Oath of Canonical Obedience in their
General Assembly (An. 163. Sess. 13. Dec. 5.) and forgot their Allegiance to
their natural Lord and Sovereign, and imposed their Babel Covenant on all in
the most tyrannical manner, and that to this day they continue to declaim
against the legal securities of our Religion and Constitution as contradictory
to it self; so long we must be excused to say that Presbyterians have no rule
of Faith, but the Covenant, nor no Standard of Morals but the Practices of
their rebellious Predecessors. Ridpath.

II. So long as it appears by the same Acts, that they imposed a contradictory
Test, so long will it hold that they are perjured themselves, and chargeable
with the Perjury of others.

III. So long as we can remember that the Western Bigots and Incendiaries blew
up the People into such mad Fancies, that they laid the whole stress of their
Salvation upon their Zeal to promote the Covenant, and taught them to resist
their lawful Sovereign, and to proclaim War against him, and printed Books to
justify the most barbarous Assassinations; so long we may conclude that the
People who are led by such Guides are in a most miserable Condition; and as
long as we retain the exercise of Reason, and the Sense of Self-preservation,
so long our Governors must be commended, who guarded against the Dangers that
threatened us under their Administrations; and so long as Men love their Peace,
Constitution and Comfort, so long they must endeavor by the supereminent Law
and first Principle of all Societies, to teach Sanguinary Rebels to feel the
Effects of their open Villainies and Conspiracies. Ridpath.

III. So long as it remains in the Records of Council, that they ordered Men to
be killed without any Trial or color of Law, or so much as with an Exception,
whether they resisted or not resisted, so long will it bold that they are
bloody Murderers.

IV. As long as there are any Records of that Mock-Assembly preserved, the
World may be easily satisfied, by their Impertinent Queries and Disobedience to
the King's Order, of their Tyranny and Ambition, and their Lording it over
others, who, by their Confession are their Equals in Power and Jurisdiction,
and that by divine right, and yet they suspend the Exercise of that Power which
is conferred by divine Right, by virtue of an Act of Parliament, which I hope
they do not think to be of any thing more than Human Authority. Ridpath.

IV. So long as the Records of the last General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland remain, it it will appear by their Evasions, Answers, and disingenuous
refusals to declare their Abhorrence of Arminianism, Socinianism, and Popery,
that they are Firebrands in the Church, and Incendiaries in the State.

V. As long as such blasphemous Nonsense as the Decretum praedamnatum, and the
Decretum praeteritum, are to be seen and read in the Writings of their greatest
Champions; so long they are justly charged with Nonsense and Blasphemy. Vid.
Second Vindication of the Church of Scotland. page 66. Ridpath.

V. So long as any of their villainous Libels, called the Scotch Presbyterian
Eloquence, exist, wherein they charge Holiness with Deformity, God with horrid
Decrees, and mock at Seriousness and Piety; so long will it be evident that
they are Blasphemers.

VI. The Address of the Bishops of Scotland, before the Revolution, to the
King, contained nothing but what was agreeable to the public Prayers used in
behalf of the King in both Nations; and Mr. Ridpath knows that the other Branch
of this Particular must not be touched: yet as long as the Act of the West
Kirk, and the Remonstrance in the Year 1650, (not to name preceding Papers of
the same Nature, and Acts of the General Assembly in the year 1648) are
preserved; so long the Presbyterian Principles are known to be subversive of
all Kingly Power, and destructive to all Allegiance, and the Rights of
Sovereignty. Ridpath.VI.

So long as that scurrilous Address of their Bishops against the Prince of
Orange, their opposing him in Parliament, their refusing to pray for him, or
swear to him now he is King, and the legal procedure against them on the said
accounts are on record; so long it will appear that they are Rebels.

VII. So long as the Acts of your Rebellious Parliaments from 1639 to 1649, and
the Acts of your Assemblies in 1648 and 1649 continue upon record, and your
zealous Guth. MSS.
Preachers importuning the Committee of Estates in person, to execute the
King's most faithful Servants, so long the World may be informed of
Presbyterian Spite and Malice. Ridpath.

VII. So long as their bloody Acts of Parliament, and barbarous Execution of
those Acts against us, and our gentle Acts of Parliament, and moderate
Execution of those Acts against them, are upon record, so long it will appear
that they are infamous Liars in asserting that we treat them more barbarously
than they treated us.

VIII. As long as the West of Scotland continues unreformed from barbarous
Principles, so long they are a Plague to the Nation, and a Reproach to the
Protestant Religion. This is only understood of such of them as deserve this
Character. Ridpath.

VIII. So long as the West of Scotland (which was the principal Scene of these
bloody Tragedies) has a being, so long will it appear that they were barbarous.

Before I take leave of you, I must put the Reader in mind of one Argument by
which you endeavor to fully the Reputation of such of the Bishops as voted in
the late Convention, before the King's Letter to them was opened, that They
were a free and lawful Meeting, notwithstanding of any Order that might be
contained in that Letter to dissolve them; from this you conclude, that they
were inconsistent with their own Principles and after Practices. And the truth
is, if they intended by that Vote nothing less than what the Presbyterian Party
advanced, they were inconsistent with their Principles; but tho they concurred
in that Vote, they took the Words a free and lawful meeting, not to signify
any Meeting of the People contrary to the King's Prerogative, Authority, and
standing Laws; but rather a Meeting to support all the three, and they were to
sit notwithstanding of a Prohibition, until such time as they could duly inform
the King of the Straits and Difficulties that they were involved in: Necessity
made them bow under the Weight of that Opposition that they wrestled with; and
they hoped that a Vote might be forgiven, which their Practices would have
vindicated from any suspicion of lessening the Royal Authority. But Mr.
Ridpath, did you never hear of a Merchant throwing overboard his Goods in a
Storm, his Principle is (no doubt) to preserve, and improve his Stock, yet when
Life, and Ship, and all is in hazard, Silver and Gold, and the best Cargo that
he is Master of, must be flung over. Men sometimes, in the Simplicity of their
Hearts, may yield to some public Acts in a time of Danger and Confusion,
which, in their own Nature and Tendency are inconsistent with their Principles:
the wisest Men may sometimes mistake their measures, and the presence of ones
Mind does not perpetually attend him. A great many of the Presbyterians of
Scotland took the Covenant as it was enjoined by King Charles I. in the sense
intended by King and Parliament, in the Reign of King James VI. yet this act of
their duty and obedience was by the Leading-Covenanters thought inconsistent
with their principles and practices, and therefore they were forced to disown
it afterward, and to adhere to the Covenant it its true and genuine sense of
Sedition and Rebellion. All the Presbyterians of Scotland after the Restoration
of King Charles II. both Ministers and People came to Church without scruple or
hesitation, yet afterward they began to think that this practice could not be
reconciled to their mutinous Associations and Covenants; and therefore for the
most part all of them left the Church and public Worship of the Episcopalians.
There is a Protestation upon record in the Year 1641. in the journal of the
House of Commons, May 3. which in its nature was but a Prologue to the Solemn
League and Covenant, and very derogatory to the King's prerogative, and the
ancient settlement of the Nation; and yet I find that several of the Loyal
Nobility, and six Bishops, signed this Protestation. Things may appear Vid.
Nals. Coll. 1 Vol. from page 811, to 817.
very plausible in the beginning, that are introductiory to the saddest
consequences. The Nobility and Bishops that signed the Protestation that I just
now named, had reason to repent of their precipitancy, when the Faction owned
above board, that no Reformation woul satisfy but the extirpation of Root and
Branch, according to the phrase that then was in vogue. We are to take an
estimate of men's principles, not from their indeliberate and casual stumblings
in time of darkness, uncertainty and danger; but rather from their constant
Doctrine, their habitual Bias, their more calm and sedate reasonings, their
Books, Homilies, and Sermons. I could name later instances than any that I have
touched, which might reasonably be presumed to be inconsistent with their
Principles who were actors, and yet I am so far from thinking them
disingenuous, or treacherous, that I know them to be men of the greatest Candor
upon Earth. All this I have said upon the supposition that the Bishops who
concurred with that Vote of the Convention intended it in its full extent and
latitude; but I know that they intended no more by the words, free and lawful
meeting, than what they are capable of in the lowest sense that they can be
taken in, and as Privy Councillors some of the Bishops might suspend the
execution of the King's Orders contained in his Letters, until he should be
better informed of the state of affairs, and until he should reiterate his
Commands: in that case I am apt to think that all who own his authority would
leave the Convention.

Mr. Ridpath, I would gladly know whether you think that a Libel against Dr.
Monro was a Book worthy to be dedicated to the Parliament of Scotland? and
whether your returning to Scotland was such an extraordinary advantage to the
Nation, that you thought they would upon this consideration go forward to the
through settlement of Presbytery? for no doubt you are among the first of those
Students who promise to return, if your Model be established in its height. The
Books that you have written against our Kings, Dukes, and Parliaments, may make
atonement for the former Gallantries of your Life. I despise the knowledge of
your particular History, and unless you are as stupid as you are petulant, you
may guess by some dark hints in this Letter, (which I took care that no other
should understand but your self) that I am not altogether a stranger to your
Adventures. I had your Life sent me, written by one of your Acquaintances, but
though I may have many faults, yet I never loved personal Reproaches and
altercations. When you are in the height of your humor and passion, I think
you still below Revenge: It may be that the Lay-Gentleman who is next to take
you to task, may handle you more briskly; notwithstanding that Presbytery is
now triumphant, and settled by an Act of Exclusion of the Episcopal Clergy: Mr.
Ridpath, I sincerely wish you more sense and modesty, and I enter my
Protestation before all reasonable men, that I am not obliged to answer
indefinite Libels. If you think that you are so extraordinarily qualified to
manage the Debates that are on foot: choose one of the Questions that are tossed
between both the parties, eithe the divine Right of Presbytery, or the
unlawfulness of Anniversary Days, or significant Ceremonies in the worship of
God: I name these, because you offer to vindicate your own Opinions concerning
them in your Books; and since you cite the Epistles of S. Augustine to S.
Jerome, from which you say, the antiquity of Presbytery may be demonstrated,
pray do not forget to name that Epistle; but I am afraid you will be forced to
go to the Booksellers in the World of the Moon, before you can meet with it;
and to make you amends, I offer to prove positively that there is not one of
your party in Scotland, that truly and sincerely represents the Opinions of St.
Jerome: nay more expressly I offer to make evident from the writings of St.
Jerome, that Eiscopacy was established by the Apostles, and that he never
dreamed of any such period of the Church wherein the parity of Presbyters
prevailed after the death of the Apostles. And if you must write Books, you
ought to come out from behind the Curtains, and let us know where your
Bookseller may be found, and by whom they are Licensed, and take the assistance
of all your Fraternity, read all the Books that you think defend your Cause to
the best advantage, and let us plainly hear what grounds you have to assert,
that your new and upstart Discipline is founded upon devine Right; and why the
Ministers of the Episcopal persuasion are turned out, if they do not solemnly
promise never directly nor indirectly Vid. Act of Parl. for settling the peace
of the Church, Edinbugh, June 12. 1693.
to alter an Ecclesiastical Government, which can no more be reconciled to the
former constitution of Presbytery, than to the Word of God, the Canons of the
Universal Church, and the practice of the first Ages of Christianity. And let
us know if ever Clergymen were turned out of their Livings upon their denying
to make any such promise, since the name of Christian was heard in the World:
and do not run up and down, and make a noise as if I opposed and Act of
Parliament, I only dispute against the Opinions of blind Zealots, who have no
more regard to the peace of the Nation, than they have to the Order of
Episcopacy.

Mr. Ridpath, If you are as resolute as you are clamorous, you cannot but think
it reasonable to appear, for no man is obliged to consider fulsome Lampoons, no
accusations ought to be heard against any man (far less against Kings, Dukes,
and Prelates) unless the accuser openly pawn his reputation to prove the Crimes
fairly before a competent Judicature. There are many things in both your Books
that I have not mentioned, yet I am ready to prove that they are less material
and more ridiculous than those I have named; for I know no man so pusillanimous
as to turn his back upon you for fear of any harm that you can do him, and
therefore I set down the initial Letters of name and surname, and that in Mr.
Rule's Latin, makes up Totum Nomen: and there are a great many here who know
me, though at present I neither wear the Doctoral Scarf or Canonical Habit. I
have hitherto treated you with all Civility, though there be none alive has
fewer Engagements or Obligations to continue,

Mr. Ridpath, Your humble Servant. S. W.

POSTSCRIPT.
Mr. Ridpath,
THE following Certificates and Letter came to my hands from Scotland, not
until the former Sheets were wrought off, else they had been set down in their
proper places, to which they are more immediately related. The first is under
the Hands of so many honest Inhabitants of Leith, in favors of Mr. Andrew Cant
sometime their Minister; and it fully and plainly disproves and overthrows the
Original and Fundamental Libel propagated by your self, and your Informers,
against him, viz. That he was suspended from the exercise of his Ministry: and
therefore the other Fabulous accounts that you raise upon this Calumny, must
necessarily fall to the Ground. It is not possible to prove Negatives in a
Matter of Fact otherwise, than when they who ought to know the thing in
Controversy, declare upon Honor and Conscience, that there never was any such
things; and if the Course of his Ministry had been interrupted by any Sentence,
how easily might this be proved; nay how impossible had it been to have denied
it, since in so numerous a Parish, so near the Center of the Nation, their
would have been so many Witnesses of so recent a Transaction.

We whose Names are underwritten, (Inhabitants of Leith) do by these presents
declare upon Honor and Conscience, that Mr. Andrew Cant, (sometime our
Minister) was never discharged the Exercise of his Office (by any Sentence,
Ecclesiastical or otherwise) amongst us, but on the contrair, continued very
diligent and painful therein, for the space of eight years or thereby, after
which time he was preferred to be one of the chief Ministers of the City of
Edinburgh.

Sic Subscribitur. Jo. Broune, [Skipper. Ja. Hutcheson, [Notar Public. John
Burton, [Baker. Alex. Robertson, [Wine-Cooper. James Cuningham. [Wine-Cooper.
Patrick Smith, [Wine-Cooper. John Wilson, [Wine-Cooper. Thomas Riddell,
[Skipper. Ja. Balfour, [Merchant. T. Fenwick, [Maltman. Jo. Muchmutie,
[Skipper. James Johnston, [Wright (or Joyner.) Rob. Herdman, [Maltman. Robert
Bowy, [Wine Cooper. G. Farquhar, [Maltman. Andrew Fairservice, [Carter. Geo.
Davidson, [Maltman. George Albercromby, [Maltman. J. D. [James Dow, Tailor. J.
W. [James Walker (as I took it) Mason.


The two last could subscribe no otherwise being illiterate but very Honest.

I have subjoined to this Certificate a Letter to one of his Friends in London,
occasioned by your fulsome and unchristian Libels against him.

Worthy Sir,
EVer since I came to man's years, I have been very sensible that we live here
in the Neighborhood of a Sullen set of People, that can never think
themselves secure of any measure of Reputation, unless they raise it upon the
Ruins of the good Name of innocent Men that are not of their Opinion in every
thing, and am farther confirmed in this Thought by a late instance in what
concerns me personally, in a slanderous Pamphlet inscribed, An Answer to the
Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence, It was some months in this place before I could
procure a sight of it; but when I had seen it, the thoughts I had concerning
what I am wickedly Libelled of, were not so full of Anger as Disdain, to find
an obscure sorry Jack* anapes (for so he must be) attacquing me with so much
Malice and arrant Calumny, though I was living very peaceably as I hay always
done without being the Aggressor of any Person or Party. At first I was
resolved to slight it, as a thing that can never do me harm with any one that
knows me; yet upon second thoughts, and to satisfy a worthy Friend of mine, I
give you the trouble of this line, which bears such short answers to the
ill-natured and cursed accusations of that infamous Libeller, as I think
sufficient.

First, Then he endeavors to vilify and belie me, by saving I was an
Underling at Leith. What he means by this I know not, the true matter is, that
the first appearance I made in my Sacred Office was as second Minister of
Leith, to which I came regularly by a Presentation from the Patrons, and
Collation thereupon from the Diocesan, I cannot apprehend any disparagement in
the thing, and I am sure I have yet a very great kindness from all that People,
excepting a few Bigots, and of very little interest. Next I remember he will
needs have the World believe, that I Preached very odd things to the People,
but has not so much as given one instance, not for want of Malice, but (it
seems) invention, in that particular. My poor gift of Preaching the Holy Gospel
was but small, yet I bless God I am not ashamed of it, and I hope I have
something of the power of those Divine Truths I declared to the World on my own
Heart, and Seals of them upon the Hearts of others, but if this Railing Fellow
doubt I be competently qualified, let him procure me Liberty and Safety I will
not decline to Preach before the General Assembly.

In another passage of that Pamphlet, this Silly Fellow charges me with being a
notable Brawler, and for proof says, I was Suspended for sometime from the
Exercise of my Office for beating of a Highlander. To lot you see what
Impudence is in this Contrivance, I send you herewith enclosed a Copy of a
Declaration, under the Hands of some of the honest Neighbors in Lies,
bearing, that I was never Suspended the Exercise of my Office during my abode
with them, and if it were necessary, I doubt not but I can easily obtain the
attestation of all that are yet alive of them I left in the place. Its hard
that I should be obliged after fifteen years time to give them the trouble of
attesting my innocence against the snarlings of a rankmouth'd Curr: but I have
done it very easily. Now this being made appear a manifest lie, with a witness,
there is no place left to suppose I made use of any method for returning to my
Office which I never left, far less such impious and silly ones, as he says,
and would have believed I did, and are not worth the mentioning, being such as
I fancy no man on Earth, (though of less height of Natural Temper than I, and
almost of equal Villainy with the scurrilous Author) could be guilty of; but was
it not a Lucky thing that this mettled Spark charged me not with the Criminous
Sins of Bestiality, Incest and Sorceries? Certainly he had not failed of it, if
they had not been Virtues peculiar to the Saintship of one of his Friends, who
was publicly burnt betwixt Edinburgh and Leith, upon consession of the
foresaid Crimes, in my sight and some thousands besides.

In some other part, he charges me with Robbing of a thousand Marks Scots money,
from William Carfrey who came to pay me my Stipend due by the Town of
Edinburgh. I shall never think it worth my Pains to offer a Justification of my
self from so ridiculous a Story; the young man lives still in the City, and is
so Just and Honest to declare to some of my acquaintance that it is a most
notorious Lie; but Innocence it self cannot be secure against hellish
Impudence. There is one thing more in his Paper, (not worth the minding indeed)
which I had almost forgot, viz. That I was, at the time of his Writing, a
Vagabond at London; if a Man must be branded with this Character for going from
one place to another, he has been much longer a Vagabond than I, as I am told,
and I am sure for his bloody uncharitableness, deserves the mark of a second
Cain, and the Character of another Accuser of the Brethren, having been made
very skilful in the Art of Lying, by his Father, who has used it since the
beginning. I leave this Letter entirely to your disposal: I ask your pardon for
this trouble, and am with all respect,

Sir, Your affectionate faithful, humble Servant, Andrew Cant.
Edinburgh, July 29. 1693.

THE next Certificate is in favors of Dr. Alexander Monro, and it serves the
end for which it is published. You say that when he was in Scotland, he was so
and so accused as is narrated in the following Certificate. If this had been
true, there is no doubt to be made but that Persons of Honor, Sense, and
Interest, in the Cities of Edinburgh and St. Andrews would have heard of it,
especially since he was preferred to such places as would provoke Rivals and
Competitors. And is it to be believed, that the least surmise of that Nature
could have escaped the Industry of the Presbyterians, who scrupled not to
pretend to the knowledge of his very Thoughts without any external Evidence? I
have often told you that Negatives in a Matter of Fact are not otherwise to be
proved? It Is no wonder that so malicious an Accuser should mistake Truth for
Falshhood, and Falsehood for Truth, when you have not yet attained to so much
Sense, as to distinguish between an Affirmative and a Negative Proposition. You
are firmly resolved to defame and disparage the Episcopal Clergy at any rate,
and that has occasioned the following Evidence of your Candor and Veracity.

Whereas Dr. Alexander Monro (late Principal of Edinburgh College) is said in
an impertinent Libel, Entitled, A Continuation of the Answer to the
Scotch-Presbyterian-Eloquence, to have been accused when he was in Scotland of
being found with a Woman among the Corn, We whose names are under written,
(living in and near to the City of Edinburgh) do by these presents declare upon
Honor and Conscience that we never heard that he was so accused, and that if
any such Accusation had ever been invented against him, We think it very
probable that we would have heard of it, especially since so narrow an
inquisition has been made into his Life and Actions in the beginning of the
Late Revolution, when for Non-Complyance he was turned out of the College of
Edinburgh,

Sic Subscribitur. W. Binning. Sir William Binning of Wallinford, late Lord
Provost of Edinburgh. J. Dick. Sir James Dick of Priest-field, late Lord
Provost of Edinburgh. Tho. Kennedy, Sir Thomas Kennedie of Kirk-Hill, late Lord
Provost of Edinburgh. John Marjoribanks, [Late Bailiff of Edinburgh. Ja.
Henryson, [Writer to the Signet there. John Baillie, [Apothecary and Surgeon
there. Robert Clerk, [Apothecary and Surgeon there. A. Skene, Alexander
Skene, D. D. Late Provost of the old College in the University of St. Andrews.
Ri. Waddell, Richard Waddell, D. D. Late Archdeacon of St. Andrews. A.
Macleod, [Mr. Alexander Macleod, Advocate. James Flemyeng, Sir James Flemyeng
of Ratho-byres, late Lord Provost of Edinburgh. A. Balfour, Sir Andrew Balfour,
Doctor of Medicine. Ar. Stevenson, Sir Archibald Stevensone, Doctor of
Medicine. Will. Monipenny, [Mr. William Monipenny, Advocate. T. Skene, [Mr.
Thomas Skene, Advocate. C. Gray, [Mr. Charles Gray, Advocate. Al. Craufurd,
[Mr. Alexander Craufurd, Advocate. Jo. Mackenzie, Mr. John Mackenzie, one of
the Clerks of Session. Du. Mackintoshe, [Late Bailiff in Edinburgh. Aen.
Macleod, [Town-Clerk. J. Wedderburn, Mr. John Wedderburn, Clerk of the Bills.
Al. Gibson, [One of the Clerks of the Session.



Mr. Ridpath,

I Would have gladly taken leave of you long before now, but that I am not left
at liberty as to the following Letter. It is occasioned by your own Civilities
to the Archbishop of Glasgow and others. We oppose the Public Records of the
Nation to your Clamorous and Obscene Libels; and if there were nothing else to
prove the madness of your Temper than that one Story of Margaret Paterson, we
need no other proof to convince the World of your desperate Impudence.

A Letter from a Gentleman in Scotland to his Friend in London. Edinburgh, July
22. 1693.
Sir,
I Had not yours till last Night, which lets you see that it has been a month
by the way, and this is the true Reason your return is so late.

As to that silly Varlet Ridpath, all I can say of him more than yours to me
contains, which I know to be most exact Truth, is, that being apprehended and
made Prisoner here about Christmas 1680, for contriving and writing a Bond of
Combination, or kind of Association, for burning the Pope in Effigy, which you
know was a folly never before that time attempted here, and was designed then
by the Rogues of this City, particularly the Presbyterians, as an indignity to
his (then) Royal Highness. This Bond being found in the custody of this
Villain, by the diligence of the Learned and Reverend Dr. Cant (then) Principal
of King James his University of Edinburg, (who, though he was a Celebrated
Champion for the Protestant Church, yet had he a just indignation against all
Rabbling and Tumults.) This Bond, I say, is now in the Council Office, and I
have often seen and read it. It Is indeed a young League and Covenant,
containing a Clause of Mutual Defense, not excepting the King, or any in
Authority under him; and an invitation to Prentices, and all others to join in
this their Association. Now a Bond of this Nature is by many Laws and Acts of
Parliament declared Treason; and that, not only since the dreadful effects of
the Infamous League and Covenant, but even by very old Acts in the Reigns of
King James the First, and Second, So much for this. This Scoundrel was
committed, who was not then a Boy, but a Fellow come to Years, and then a
Servant to two Sons of one Gray, a person living on the English Border, and of
the same Gang with his Man Ridpath.

The Fellow confessed before the Committee of Council, that he had drawn this
Bond, but would not own that he had been prompted to it, or assisted in it by
others, though the Council well knew, that many of the Ringleaders of the Party
were the promoters of this Trick, which was designed as a Prologue to a
Rebellion against the (then) Government. For this Villainy the Law here might
have justly sent him to the Gibbet, and perhaps the Council had put him in the
hands of the Judges Criminal, had he not been preserved by the unparalled
Clemency of the Prince that (then) sat at the Helm here, which you know is so
natural to that Sacred Race. I remember the Duke of Rothes the Chancellor, and
several other great Lords having examined him, and finding him very false and
obstinate in his Answers, ordered him to be committed Close Prisoner till he
were further examined. And as he was going to Prison, seeing a Crowd about him,
and considering them as a Rabble, he cried out aloud, that he was suffering for
the Protestant Religion, the ordinary, but false pretense of all Seditions and
Rebellions here. For which he was for some days put in Irons, and a little
after by the Goodness of his (then) Royal Highness, who was always too
compassionate to that Generation of Vipers, he was dismissed. This is all I can
remember or learn of this Creature.

I hear in his late Pamphlet, which I have not yet seen, he has the Impudence
to say, that one Margaret Paterson (a Prostitute sufficiently infamous) should
have confessed somewhat before the Criminal Court relating to the Archbishop of
Glasgow and me; I am satisfied that all that that Villain has scribled of the
Bishop be believed, if ever she named either the Bishop or me in her
Confessions, either before that Court, or any Confessions else, whether public
or private. Nor did the Bishop hear of such a Creature, till the noise was made
at her being taken naked in the Bed with the late Presbyterian Moderator
Kennedy his two Sons, for which they stand declared Fugitives in the Justice
Court Books, for the horrid Crime of Incest.

As to what relates to the C -- ks, I make you this distinct Return. In the
year 1684, Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbels of C -- k, with Baylie of
Jerviswood, Commissar Monro, Mr. William Spence, Mr. William Carstairs, and
some others were sent down Prisoners here by Sea, and were kept close for some
Weeks; during which time I had occasion to be often with them, for the Council
ordered any of their Friends to converse with them, and see them, in presence
of any of the Clerks of Council; and such of them as are yet alive, and their
Relations will bear me witness, that I was as easy to them that way as they
could desire. For, the truth is, they all professed so much Innocence in the
matter they were accused of, (which was for being in a Conspiracy with the late
Monmouth and Argyle for raising a Rebellion in both Nations at the same time,
and which fell out the next year accordingly) and that with all the
circumstantiated Imprecations to them and their Families, that I began to
believe the Government had been imposed upon in this matter, and contracted
such a compassion for them, as made some of our then Statesmen angry with me:
and yet Carstairs upon the first application of the Thumb-Screw, even the first
touch of it, confessed all, as may be seen in his Printed Confession in the
Trial of Jerviswood; and then Monro, and afterward the two C -- ks themselves;
which two Campbels were upon their Judicial Confession forefaulted in plain
Parliament 1685, and their Estates annexed to the Crown: tho the King gave them
not only both Remissions for their Lives, but even ordered their Estates to be
returned to them, upon their paying a very inconsiderable Composition to some
of the then Statesmen. That which the Rascal Ridpath aims at, I suppose, is a
Process which was commenced some time before that, against old C -- k: the
undisguised matter of Fact was truly this, which you may rely upon for certain
and recorded Truth.

There was one Wallace a Collector or Surveyor in Airshire* This Man gives
Information to the Secret Committee, that there were three Men in that Country
who had assured him that old C -- k had encouraged several Country People to
the Rebellion at Both well Bridge, 1679; and that particularly he had said to
themselves whom he rencountred with upon a place, called the Bridge of Gastoun,
near his own House, What meant such young lusty Fellows to stay at home, when
the People of God were in Arms for their Covenanted Cause; and bid them go on
to the rest (the Whig-Army being then at Hamiltoun, within ten Miles or thereby
to that place) for he and the rest of the Country would quickly be with them
Upon which Information the three Fellows are brought in, and kept some time in
the Cannon gate Prison. I heard them examined before the Secret Committee, and
all of them both jointly and separately were very positive, clear, and distinct
in their Depositions. Upon this an Indictment is raised against C -- k, and the
same Witnesses are again examined upon Oath before the Justices, which is
called by our Law a Precognition, and there they were again very firm, and
seemed altogether clear and sincere. But the Day of the Trial being come, and a
disaffected Crowd getting in about these Witnesses, when they came to depone
they began to waver much, and upon the matter deny much of what they had twice
clearly made oath of before; so that the Jury brought in C -- k not guilty; and
so he was acquitted from that Indictment. And the next day the same three
Rogues begged to be heard before the Council, where I heard them again upon
their Knees, and with all the Solemnities of Truth and Sincerity, Protest and
Swear, that what they had first Sworn was simple Truth, and that their Carriage
the day before in the Court, was occasioned by their being terrified to swear
against C -- k, so great a Man in that Corner of the Country. But upon the
whole Matter, the worthy Sir George Mackenzie had no more hand in all this
Affair, but merely to pursue as the King's Advocate. And in general I can
affirm, as in the sight of the God of Justice and Truth, I do believe, after
all the Enquiry I have made, that never a person suffered in Scotland by
Subornation or false Witnesses employed by the Government since the Restoration
of the Royal Family. Tho many of the Rebels have been brought off, and
assolzied by the scandalous and barefaced Perjuries of their own Party: for in
the Trials of those Rebels, the Witnesses for the King being formerly engaged
in the said Rebellions, made use of such strange and uncouth Fetches and
Strains of Words, that no Jury could fix any Verdict or Doom upon; for being
interrogated, if they saw the person at the Bar in Arms with the Rebels (as
particularly in the case of one Sprewel, an eminent Ringleader and Captain,
several of his own Kinsmen as well as Acquaintances, and who had ridden under
his Command) they were brought with great difficulty to confess, that they
thought they had seen a Man there which seemed to be somewhat like the Prisoner
at the Bar, but for a World they could not swear, that this Prisoner was the
person they saw there. Being asked, if he had a Sword; they answered, they saw
that person have something like the end of a Scabbard, hanging from under his
Cloak, but whether there were a Blade there or not they could not tell; and
being questioned on oath all the while if that person had Pistols; they
confessed they had seen something like Hulster-Cases at his Saddle, but whether
there were Pistols in them or not, they could not swear for a World. And by
such Presbyterian Canting Prejuries as these, this Sprewet, and many others
were brought off.

Dear Sir,I am afraid I have been too tedious in this Return, but since it
contains nothing but simple Truth, it will be the wellcomer to you, and
therefore is subscribed by Your Humble and Faithful Servant, W. P.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Following Propositions are taken out of such Books as are most in Vogue
amongst the Scotch Presbyterians. They contain a short Account of their Moral
Theology with regard to Obedience, Subjection, and Government. I desire the
impartial Reader to let me know, wherein the Sentiments of the Kirk differ from
the Doctrines propagated by the Jesuits. You have many of them gathered
together in one view, not at all as an Answer to any of Mr. Ridpath 's
Scriblings, but as a sufficient Confutation of the impertinent Clamours against
the Government of King Charles the Second. For since they were taught by their
Religion to rebel against their King and Parliament, our Governors could not
but secure the Peace of the Nation against such barbarous Practices as were
indeed the natural Consequences of their Principles.

1. A Man ought no more to suffer when the Sentence is unjust, than he ought to
do that which is unjust and sinful at the command of Authority. Jus Pop.
throughout.

2. No Authority can command or can oblige until he himself that is commanded
be convinced and persuaded that the thing is just, reasonable and expedient.
Gillesp. Ingl. pop. Cerem.

3. To oppose the persons invested with Authority, is not to oppose the
Ordinance of God, for the Ordinance of God is Magistracy in abstracto, that is
it that we are commanded Romans 13. not to resist, but the person of the King
ought to be resisted. Lex Rex page 265. and when De Jure Regnipag. 46, 47.
the Parliaments of both Kingdoms fought against the King's Person, they fought
for his Royal Interest, and as he was a King, and tho the person I of the King
was absent, and denied his consent as a Man, yet they were as valid Parliaments
as if he were personally present with them. Lex Rex 270.

4. Patient Suffering fall under no Law of God. Lex Rex page 314. Vide Napht.
page 157.

5. The Presbytery has the power of making peace and war, neither ought the
Parliament enter into war without them no more than Joshua did offer battle
without Eleasar the High Priest. Acts Genesis Ass. 48. Agust. 3.

6. Since Religion is the highest Interest of Mankind, it is not only lawful
but necessary for private Subjects to rise in Arms against the King to reform
the Abuses crept into it, and when the supreme Powers serve not the great Ends
of Religion, we are ipso facto loosed from all Ties of O bedience to them.
Naph. page 154. Vide Jus Populi throughout.

7. The Presbytery may excommunicate the King, and when he is excommunicated,
none of his Subjects owe him Obedience, neither may they converse with him.
Jesuits and Presbyterians.

8. There is nothing to be allowed of in the Worship of God as to its Order and
Circumstance that is not founded on the express Letter of the Scripture; the
unscriptural symbolical Ceremonies are the Badge of Antichrist. All the
Sectarians.

9. It is a good Argument against any part of the Worship of God to have it
abolished, that it was or is still to be found in the Mass Book. Bailies
Parallel of the Liturgy.

10. It is lawful and necessary to enter into Covenants and Leagues without the
King, and formally to protest against the King's most legal Methods to the
contrary. Prot. at the Cross Ed. 37. p. 38.

11. The King having now for many years usurped the power of Christ, and most
palpably tyrannized in Civil Matters, he is to be deposed and brought to
punishment, and all the Covenanted People of the Lord are to fight against him
and his Adherents, under the Standard of Christ Jesus. Sanchor. Declar. 22.
June 1680. and Cargill's Cov. broughtout.

12. It is downright Idolatry, and prejudicial to the Honor of Christ and the
Interest of Reformation to appoint anniversary Days for Benefits bestowed on
the King and Kingdom. Apol. Narrat. Naph. p. 87.

13. The minor part of a Kingdom that is for God and his Cause against the
King, if they be in a probable capacity to bring their Design to pass, ought by
the Call of God to endeavor the Reformation of their Nation by Force of Arms.
Naph. and Jus Populi throughout.

14. Tho our Savior told his Disciples, John 18. 36. That his Kingdom was not
of this World, and that they ought not to fight for him, yet it obliges not the
Christians now, they may fight without and against the Consent of the supreme
Magistrate. Jus Pop. Proef. to the Reader. and Naph. page 159.

15. The greatest reproach that the People of God could be exposed to, was to
own the King's Proceedings, without Satisfaction to the covenanted People of
God in both Kingdoms. Vide Act of the West-Kirk.

16. None have right to the Creature but the People of God, or Dominion is
founded in Grace. Enthus. and Sect.

17. The Scots Covenant is the Magna Charta of all Religion and Righteousness,
and not only obliges those who personally swore it, but the whole Nation to all
succeeding Generations in all its Tendences and natural Consequences. Naph.
page 83. and 185.

18. The Success that the Presbyterians had in the late Troubles against the
King and his Adherents, were undeniable Signs of God's Favor to that Party,
and to follow and promove their Success, was to follow Providence. Act. of Genesis
Assem. frequently. And those who fought for Vide Seasonable Warning. An. 45.
the King fought against the Lord Jesus Christ. Ibidem An. 45.

19. It is the Duty of the meanest Subject in his most private capacity (nay,
they are indispensibly obliged to it) to admonish and reprove the King when
they observe any thing that they think contrary or disadvantageous to the
Presbyterian Interest and Reformation. Naph. page 86.

20. The covenanted People of God adhering to the faithful Ministers of Christ
that owned the Cause and Covenant, and forsaking the Apostate Hirelings, the
many Conversions wrought upon them were infallible Marks that God did approve
them in their Proceedings against wicked Rulers. Cup of Cold Water.

21. The Change made in the Church of Scotland at the King's Return, from
Presbytery to Episcopacy did naturally, and in its just Consequence and
Tendency, overthrow the very Foundation of Religion, and the change is no less
than from the pure Worship of God, to down right Idolatry. Naph, Pref. to the
Reader, page 4, and 5, Ibidem 84.

22. Whoever is a sincere Seeker of God, and truly Regenerate, will immediately
discern upon his seeking of God, ipso facto, the profanity and wickedness of
all that adhere to the Episcopal Church. Naph. page 11.

23. It was the peculiar Lot of the Church of Scotland, more eminently than any
other Church upon Earth, to contend against the Powers of this World, for the
Scepter and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, by their Protestations, Petitions,
Remonstrances, Declinators and all other Methods to advance Presbyterian
Interest. Naph. Pref. to the Reader, page 16.

24. Papacy and Prelacy have one and the same Original, and their adherents are
the Synagogue of Antichrist. Naph. Pref. to the Reader, page 20. and page 154:
and page 184. and page 53.

25. The People of God in these Nations ought to rest assured that their
Enemies shall be ruined and destroyed, for the Lord has said that the false
Prophets shall pass out of the Land, and all that Countenance them shall be
ashamed, and ought we not to believe what God himself has said. Naph. Pref.
and page 153.

26. No Ecclesiastic is obliged to give the King or his Council an account of
any Doctrine Preached by him immediately, and Prima instantia, he is obliged to
the Presbyterian Classis; and if the King meddle with him, or call him to an
account immediately, he invades the Scepter of Jesus Christ, and if he arrogate
unto himself the power of Convocating National or Provincial Synods, he
confounds the Government of Jesus Christ with the Civil, and invades his
Authority; therefore it is not safe, nor Scriptural Dialect, to say the King is
Supreme Governor over all Persons, and in all Causes. Naph. frequently, and
page 38, and 40.

The Royal Prerogative in cognoscing upon the Doctrine of Ministers, is the
Devil's great design to endear the Powers on Earth to the Prelates. Ibidem.

27. The Presbytry can Counter Act the Acts and Statutes of the Supreme Court
of Parliament, and can forbid all the Subjects to obey those Laws, if imposed
without their Consent. July 28. Anno 1648. Act and Declaration against the Act
of Parliament.

28. No Man can enter lawfully to the Ministry, but by the Call of the People,
but when the People are Malignant, then the Presbytery may give them a
Minister. Act. Genesis Assem. August 4. 1649.

29. When the Presbytry appointed a Fast, upon King James his appointing of a
Feast, they did nothing but what they were obliged in Conscience to do. Lex Rex
Pref. to the Reader.

30. If the King will not Reform Religion, the Assembly of godly Pastors and
People ought to Reform it, and they may swear a covenant without the King; and
if he refuse to build the Lords House, they may relieve and defend one another,
when they are oppressed and hindered in the Work and Cause of God. Lex Rex Pref.
to the Reader.

31. Inferior Judges are no less essentially Judges and God's Vicegerents on
Earth than the King himself. Lex Rex, page 159.

32. The King is under the Law as to its Coercive limitation, and ought to be
resisted by force of Arms. Lex Rex, page 231. Duglas Coron. Ser. page 22. and
elsewhere frequently.

33. The King is not the final and supreme Interpreter of the Law. Lex Rex,
page 252.

34. The King's Pretogative Royal, and the Oath of Supremacy are directly
contrary to the Word of God, and the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. Naph.
page 86.

35. To allow that the present graceless Hirelings and Curates, had so much as
an external Call to the Ministry, were as much as to make the God of Order, the
Author of Confusion. Naph. page 104, 105.

And the true Zeal of God would inspire us to eradicate those Plants that our
Heavenly Father never planted. Ibidem page 108.

And to bid the Covenanted People of God come to the Church, is the height of
Oppression and Rigor. Ibidem page 109.

36. A King that transgresses the Law is degenerate into a Tyrant, and ought to
be ranked amongst such as destroy the Peace and Advantages of Human Societies,
because they transgress the limits and bounds of their Constitution, therefore
are they hateful to God and men, and to be looked upon as no better than
Wolves, Tigers, and Lions, and the death of such ought to be rewarded by the
whole People, and every one of them. De Jure Regni, page 36.

37. The Oaths given by Intrants to their Bishops, at their Ordination, do not
oblige at all, because they bind us to those Constitutions that were not
allowed by the Presbytery. Act. Genesis Assem. December. 5. 1638.

38. The call of a clear and necessary Providence is, enough for Christ's
Witnesses to resist and stand up against earthly Powers, and to this they are
indispensably obliged, when they are in a probable capacity to act
successfully, although the Motive of Self-defence were not conjoined; and all
such Combinations for Just and Necessary ends, are warranted before God and
men, notwithstanding of any pretended Law to the contrary: and to affirm that
the first and last Covenanters were acted by a Spirit of Rebellion, is a sin
the next degree to the sin against the Holy Ghost. Naph. page 7, 8. 12. 16.

39. The great Law of Self-Preservation, in its immediate and most natural
Effects, teach us, and indispensably oblige us to resist Kings, and all
Superior Powers when they command things contrary to the Word of God; nay when
the great ends of Government are perverted, then the Bond thereof is dissolved,
and the People thus liberated therefrom do relaps into their Primeve Liberty,
and may upon the very same Principles Combine and Associate for their better
defense, that they first entered upon unto Society. Naph. page 147, 148. 150.

40. When the faithful of the Land are destitute of the best and surest means
to overthrow the present Government and wicked Governors, they are still
obliged to use their utmost endeavors. Naph. page 155.

41. We ought not to believe that the Primitive Christians were so numerous as
the first Apologists for Christianity did give out, they were deceived in a
Matter of Fact, for the Sufferings of the Martyrs do not at all militate
against the lawfulness of Defensive Arms. Lex Rex, page 2. 71.

42. The very power to Extirpate the present Government is God's Call to do so.
Cargil's New Cov. Art. 1.

43. We are no more bound by any tie of Allegiance to the present Governors,
than we are bound in Allegiance to the Devils. Cargil's New Cov. Art. 9.

If the Scotch Presbyterians under the former Reigns had satisfied themselves
with the Theory of Rebellion, and if they had not actually practiced according
to the full extent and tendency of their Principles; then, their Writings and
Seditious Sermons might have been tolerated with the greater Ease: but since
those active Gentlemen ventured upon the Natural Conclusions that their
Principles yielded, so that none of the Kings Loyal Subjects knew but that they
were to be murdered as soon as they stepped out of Doors. I hope modest Men will
allow that severe Laws were very necessary when the Holy Scriptures were
perverted to destroy the General Peace of Mankind; and fiery Enthusiasts were
made believe, that they might make bold with the Life of any Man, whom they
took to oppose their own Dreams, if they fancyed that their Neighbors were
Canaanites and Moabites. Most of them that bawled against the Government of
Charles II. are such as never understood the Temper of our Religious
Incendiaries, or were themselves deeply engaged in the Rebellion; and therefore
I have added to the former Papers, the following Letter, to undeceive such as
are misinformed, and to let the World see that it was impossible for our Kings
and Parliaments to forbear the making of such Laws as our Enemies complain of;
when the Holy Scriptures were wrested contrary to their True Meaning, and made
to truckle under the hellish designs of incorrigible Hypocrites. The following
Paper is a very Authentic one, written by the famous Assassin Mr. James
Mitchel, who attempted the Life of the Archbishop of St. Andrews upon the
Streets of Edinburgh, and in doing so, wounded the Bishop of Orkney. This
Sacrilegious Effort he endeavors to justify from the Holy Scriptures. The
Presbyterians cannot take it ill that the Monuments of their Martyrs are
preserved; if they say that all Presbyterians have not such Principles, I say
so too: but then, they must remember, that such were the Presbyterians against
whom the Laws were made under the former Reigns; and it is difficult to know
whether all of them have not the same Principles, if once they are provoked to
anger, and if they are consequential to the Doctrine of the first Puritans: for
See dangerous Positions by Bishop Bancroft, p. 35.
Goodman says expressly, That, If the Magistrates shall refuse to put
Mass-mongers and false Preachers to death, the people in seeing it performed do
show that zeal of God which was commended in Phineas, destroying the
Adulterers, and in the Israelites against the Benjamites. Let any sober Man
consider what Improvemnnts the Principles of the following Letter are capable
of; and then let him tell me, whether he can name any Crimes punished by any
Magistrates in any Corner of the World, more dangerous to human Society, than
the Doctrines that he may read with his own Eyes in this Letter. I have copied
it from that Collection of Mr. Mitchel's Papers, which his own Consederates
took great care to Print and preserve in the latter Editions of Naphtali.

THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM Edinburg Tolbooth, February -- 1674.
ME who may justly call my self less than the least of all Saints, and the
chiefest of all Sinners: yet Christ Jesus calls to be a Witness for his
despised Truth, and trampled on Interests and Cause, by the wicked, blasphemous
and God contemning Generation, and against all their perfidious wickedness.
Sir, I say, the Confidence I have in your real Friendship, and Love to Christ's
Truth, People, Interest and Cause, has encouraged me to write to you at this
time, hoping you will not misconstruct me, nor take advantage of my Infirmity
and weakness. You have heard of my Indictment, which I take up in these two
particulars; First, As they term it Rebellion and Treason, anent which I
answered to My Lord Chancellor in Committee, that it was no Rebellion, but a
Duty which every one was bound to have performed in joining with that party,
and I in the Year 1656, Mr. R. L. being then Primar in the College of
Edinburg, before our Laureation, tendered to us the National Covenant and
Solemn League and Covenant, upon mature Deliberation, I found nothing in them,
but a short compend of the Moral Law, only binding us to our Duty, toward God
and toward Men in their several Stations, and I finding, that our banished
King's Interest lay wholly included therein, and both Coronation and Allegiance
Oaths, etc. and they being the Substance of all Loyalty, and my Lord, it was
well known, that many were taking the Tender, and forswearing Charles Stuart,
Parliament, and House of Lords, I then subscribed both, the doing of which, My
Lord Chancellor would have stood at no less rate, if as well known, than this
my present adhering and prosecuting the Ends thereof does now, and when I was
questioned what then I called Rebellion, I answered, it is in Ezra vii. Verse
26. And whosoever will not do the Law of God and of the King, etc. but being
questioned before the Commissioner and the Council therea nent, I answered, as
I said to my Lord Chancellor before, in the Year 1656. Mr. R. L. being then
Primar in the College of Edinburg, before our Laureation, he tendered to us
the National and Solemn League and Covenant: He Stopped me, Saying, I Will wad ye
are come here to give a Testimony: And then being demanded what I called
Rebellion, if it was not Rebellion to oppose his Majesty's Forces in the Face:
To the which I answered, viz. My Lord Chancellor, if it please your Grace, I
humbly conceive they should have been with us, according to the National and
Solemn League and Covenant, at which Answer I perceived him to storm. But,
says he, I heard ye have been over Seas, with whom did ye converse there?
Answer, with my Merchant: But, says he, with whom in particular? Answer with
one John Mitchel a Cousin of mine own. Says he, I have heard of him, he is a
Factor in Rotterdam, to which I conceded. But, says he, did ye not converse
with Mr. Livingston, and such as he, to which I answered, I conversed with all
all our banished Ministers. To which he replied, banished Traitors, ye will
speak Treason at the Bar. Then he answered himself, saying, But they would call
the shooting at the Bishop an Heroic Act. To which I answered, that I never
told them any such thing, but where did you see James Wallace last? Answer,
Toward the Borders of Germany some years ago. But what alled you at My Lord
St. Andrews? (pointing at him with his Finger) Answer, My Lord Commissioner,
the grievous Oppression, and horrid Bloodshed of my Brethren, and the eager
pursuit after my own, as appears this day to your Grace, and to all his
Majesty's Honorable Privy Council. After which he commanded to take me away,
that they might see what to do next with me.

The Second is, the shooting of the Shot intended against the Bishop of St.
Andrews, whereby the Bishop of Orknay was hurt, to which I answered My Lord
Chancellor in private, viz. that I looked on him to be the main Instigater of
all the Oppression and Bloodshed of my Brethren that followed thereupon, and
the continual pursuing after my own, and, my Lord, as it was credibly reported
to us (the Truth of which your Lordship knows better than we) that he kept up
his Majesty's Letter inhibiting any more Blood upon that Account, until the
last Six was execute: And I being a Soldier, not having Laid down Arms, but
being still upon my own Defense, and having no other End nor Quarrel at any Man
(but according to my apprehension of him) that as I hope in Sincerity with
fixing either my Sense or Action upon the Covenant it self, as it may be
understood by the many thousands of the Faithful, besides the Prosecution of
the Ends of the same Covenant, which was, and in that point the Overthrow of
Prelates and Prelacy, and I being a declared Enemy to him on that account, and
he to me in like manner. So I never found my self obliged, either by the Law of
God, or Nature, to set a Centry at his Door for his Safety, but as he was
always to take his Advantage, as it appears, so I of him, to take any
Opportunity offered. Moreover, we being in no Terms of Capitulation, but on the
contrait, I by his Instigation being excluded from all Grace and Favor,
thought it my Duty to pursue him at all occasions: Also My Lord, Sir William
Sharp making his Apology, anent his unhandsome and cheating way taken, He took
me, under pretense to have spoken with me about some other Matters. I not
knowing him until five or six of his Brothers and his Servants were laying fast
hold on me, they being armed of purpose, desired I would excuse him, seeing
what he had done was upon his Brothers account, which excuse I easily admitted,
seeing that he thought himself obliged to do what he did to me, without Law or
Order in behalf of his Brother, much more was I obliged to do what I did in
behalf of many Brethren, whose Oppression was so great, and whose Blood he
caused to be shed in such abundance. Moreover, he persisting in his Bloody
Murders, as witnesses the wounding of Mr. Bruce at his taking, by his
Emissaries some few days before that fell out concerning himself. Now if by any
means in taking him away, I could have put a stop to the then current
Persecution. Thus far I have truly resumed what passed.

But this Answer to the second part of the Indictment may be thought by some to
be a step out of my ordinary way; wherefore I shall offer to your Consideration
that passage Deuteronomy. 23. 9. wherein it is manifest, that the Seducer, or Inticer
to worship a false God, is to be put to death, by the Hand of those whom he
seeks to turn away from the Lord, especially by the Hand of the Witnesses,
whereof I am one, as it appears Deuteronomy. 13. which Precept I humbly take to be
Moral, and not merely Judicial, and that it is not at all Ceremonial, or
Levitical; And as every moral Precept is universal, as to the extent of Place,
so also as to the extent of Time, and Persons. Upon which Command, Sir, I think
that Phinehas acted in taking away the Midianitish Whore, and killed him whom
she had seduced, Number. 25. 8. Also Elijah by virtue of that Precept gave
Commandment to the People to destroy Baals Priests, contrary to the Command of
the seducing Magistrate, who was not only remiss and negligent in executing
Justice, but became a Protector and Defender of the Seducers. Then, and in that
Case, I suppose it is the Christians Duty not to be very dark. Moreover, we see
that the People of Israel 2 Chronicles. 31. 1. destroyed Idolatry not only in Judah,
wherein the King concurred, but in Israel and in Manasseh, where the King
himself was an Idolater. And surely what all the People was bound to do by the
Law of God, every one was bound to do it, to the uttermost of their power and
capacity: And as it was in Zach. 13. 3. There the Seducer's Father and Mother
shall put them to death: I take this to be meant of the Christian Magistrate;
but when he is withdrawn by the Seducer from the Exercise of Office and Duty,
and is become utterly remiss and negligent in putting the Seducer to death,
according to God's express Law, which is not to be expected of him, for then he
should do Justice upon himself, but is become a Protector and Defender of the
Idolater; then I doubt not, but that it does become the Duty of every
Christian, to the uttermost of his power and capacity, to destroy and cut off
both Idolatry and Idolaters. Yea, these presumptuously murdering Prelates
ought to be called so by the Avenger of Blood, when he meets them, by the
express Commandment of God, seeing the thing is manifestly true, and not to
have liberty to flee to such Cities of Refuge, as the vain Pretext of Lawful
Authority: But they should be taken from the Horns of such Altars, and be put
to death. Moreover, was it spoken concerning Amalek, upon the account he
designed and resolved the Extirpation of the Lords People and Truth, which are
his Throne, upon which he put forth his Hand, and because he took occasion
against them, Exodus 17. 14. Number. 24. 20. he endeavored God should not have a
People to serve him according to his Revealed Will upon Earth: And if he could
have effectuate his Design, there should none have lived, who would not have
worshipped and served him, and his Idol Gods: And for the better effectuating
his Design, he took occasion against them, when they were wearied coming out of
Egypt, Deuteronomy. 25. 17, 18. and the Reason there annexed is, he feared not God.
And because I know that the Bishops both will and do say, that what they did
against the Lords People, whom they murdered, they did it by Law and
Authority, but what I did was contrary to both. I answer, the King himself and
all the Estates of the Land, and every individual person of the Land, both
were, and are obliged by the Oath of God upon them, to have by Force of Arms
extirpated the perjured Prelates and Prelacy, and in doing thereof to have
defended their Lives and Fortunes, the Covenants being engaged to on these
Terms, viz. after Supplications, Remonstrances, Protestations and all other
Lawful Means have been used now for that Effect: As the last Remedy we took up
Arms, upon which condition, our Nobility, and all the Representatives of the
Nation, according to the National Covenant, and Solemn League and Covenant,
gave to the King both the Sword and the Scepter, and set the Crown upon his
Head; and he accordingly received them, and promised and swear by the ever
living God, to use and approve them for the use aforesaid: And especially in
order to the performing this Article, viz. the Extirpation and Overthrow of
Prelates and Prelacy, and now they vaunt of Authority; of what Authority do
they mean or speak of, truly I know not, except it be the Authority of their
aggregated Gods, new Gods, Gods of whom they have their Gain, Life and
Standing, Chemosh or Bacchus, which drunken Moab delighted to dwell within dark
Cells, Ash^aroth, or Venus, whom they worship of the female kind, because of
their Adulteries and Whoredoms, as also Malcome, or Molock, which signifies
Tyrannical King, or a Devil, if they will have it so, in whose Arms and Power
they put their poor Infants and Posterity to be burnt according to his lust and
pleasure, Amos 5. verse. 26. Psalm. 106. 37. and their Mammon, which they delight
to worship daily, together with their own Bellies, whose glory is their shame,
who mind earthly things, whose end will be destruction, except they repent,
which there is little probability of, Ph. 3. verse. 19. to which we may add
their abominable Pride, and blasphemous Perjuries, then their Gods will be
equal in number to the Whore their Mothers Sacraments, from whom they have
their Being, Strength and Standing, and from the Devil their Father, who was a
Deceiver and Murderer from the Beginning. And now seeing the Prelates possess
whatever their God Chemosh gives them to possess: Then should we not possess
what the Lord our God gives us to possess, viz. the eternal Truths manifested
to us in his Revealed Will, and keep and defend the same from all Innovations
and Traditions of his and our Adversaries, defend our Lives and Liberties out
of the Hands of our usurping Enemies, Judge. 11. 29. for sure I am, that God
once dispossessed the Prelates and Malignants of all these; and should they
again possess them through our Defect? God for bid, but the like of this Work
our murdering Prelates like not, who plead like the Whore their Mother for
Passive Obedience, and that all the Lord's People, who may not comply with
their Idolatries and Persidies, should lay down their Bloody Axe, with whom too
many of our hypocritical, time-serving and perfidious Professors do agree, who
had rather abide with Reuben among the Sheepfolds, than jeopard Life or Fortune
in the Help of the Lord against the Mighty; do not consider the bitter Curse
pronounced by the Angel of the Lord against Meroz, to which immediately he
subjoins a Blessing on Jael the Wife of Heber the Kenite. Others excuse
themselves thus, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, but so the Throne of
Judgment is the Lords, and by this they will take away the Use and Office of
Magistracy, which erroneous Principles I detest: For God even in the working of
Miracles in dividing the Red Sea, Exodus 14. 16. commanded Moses to stretch
forth his Rod: And Christ when he opened the Blind Man's Eyes, makes use of
Clay and Spittle, tho indeed I mean not of any who were willing to have helped,
but wanted Opportunity, yet there are many peevish time serving Professors, who
shall never suffer, so long as they have either Soul or Conscience to mortgage,
providing that they may keep them from suffering. And if it will not do their
Business, it seems before they suffer, they resolve to sell all out at the
Ground.

Now, Sir, I have neither misinterpret Scripture, nor misapplyed it, in regard
of the persons here hinted at, nor been wrong in the end, which ought to be the
Glory of God, the Good of his Church and People. Then I think that some persons
ought to forbear to scourge me so sore with their Tongues, while I am not yet
condemned by the common Enemy. And my hearing of some things reported by some
behind my Back, has occasioned my writing to you at this time. O, Sir, be
entreated to pray to the Lord in my behalf, that he would be pleased out of his
Mercy and Goodness, to save me from sinning under Suffering in this Hour and
Power of Darkness: For my Soul is pressed within me in the Search betwixt Sin and
Duty, viz. lest I should be niggard and too sparing of my life, when God
calls for it: And on the other hand, too prodigal and lavish of it, in not
using all legal Defenses in preserving of it, and in any of the like nature; I
am in a strait, O Lord, undertake for me. Sir, I hope ye will excuse me in
sending you these indistinct and irregular Lines, when you consider my present
condition. Sir, believe me, I would many times, when I am before them, think a
Scaffold a sweet Retirement, lest they should cheat and deceive me, in making
me either to stain the declarative Glory of God, my own Conscience, or his
People and Interests, and wronging of them, either by opening the Enemies Mouth
against them, or letting loose their Hands upon them; henceforth let the
Adversaries both say and do what they can, yet the righteous shall hold on in
his way, and he who has clean hands will be stronger and stronger, Job 7. v.
9. But he that says unto the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people
curse, Nations shall abhor him, Prove. 24. v. 24. Farewell in the Lord.

Sic subscribitur Mr. JAMES MITCHEL:

FINIS.

