THE DELIGHTS OF Holland: OR, A Three Months Travel about that and the other
PROVINCES.

WITH Observations and Reflections on their Trade, Wealth, Strength, Beauty,
Policy, etc.

Together with A Catalogue of the Rarities in the Anatomical School at LEYDEN.

By William Mountague, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for John Sturton, near Serjeant's-Inn Gate, in Chancery Lane;
and A. Bosvile, at the Dial over against St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet Street,
1696.

THE PREFACE.
I Here present You (Reader) with a more Exact and Particular Account of
Holland, and the other Provinces about which We Traveled, than was ever yet in
Print.

Nothing of Moment escaped our Remark, the most Minute (if worthy our Sight and
Observation) was collected, and digested.

We were Three English Gentlemen, all of a Piece, when We set out, We spared no
Cost of Time, or Money; We were not Sneaking, or Extravagant, but thriftily
Liberal, rather than Profuse; We stood in the best and clearest Light; that is,
We kept the best Company, dined at the principal Ordinaries, (where the
greatest Men of those Countries think it no Diminution to be present,) avoided
(as much as with Decency We could) the Conversation of our own Countrymen,
Tippling, and Gaming; being wholly Intent upon the Business We came about, viz.
the Viewing and nicely Prying into the Wealth, Strength, Beauty, and Policy of
these Provinces; never thoroughly known, or narrowly examined into by any of
their Neighbour-Nations; at least by what has appeared in Public of them.

I have not observed any great Order or Method, in the Marshalling our Remarks;
nor do I pretend to Style, or Flourish, having contented my self with setting
down our Observations as We made them; I have been Faithful and Just in the
Account and Description of Places and Things, and have omitted nothing
Material; I rather chose a Plain, Intelligent, Familiar, and Manly way of
Expressing my self than otherwise; and, discoursing of a Country that boasts
much of her Liberty, I have even taken a pretty deal my self.

I have made some few Reflections, (and those only to open the Eyes of my
Countrymen, to see and pursue their own true Interest,) matter of Fact being
what chiefly I aimed at, and what most obliges the Sensible and Ingenious.

The Consideration of Obliging my Native Country, has prevailed upon me to let
these Papers peep abroad; there needs no Apology for them, they will speak for
themselves: They are New, Choice, and very Curious Observations; if they
please, so; if not, it is all one to the Collector, for he values neither Frowns
or Smiles, Censures or Praises of this ill-natured and ungrateful Age.

THE DELIGHTS OF Holland, etc.
THE fourteenth of August we took Post for Harwich, Anno 1695.
where we arrived in the Evening; it rained from seven till two next Morning,
so that we could not get on board the Pacquet-Boat that Night, but at four the
next Morning we embarked, and were immediately under Sail, the Wind very fair,
being West-Nor-West, it blew a fresh Gale, and continued with little variation
till the next Day when we arrived at Helovet slyice about eight in the Morning,
having had a very good Passage, being but twenty eight hours on the Water. We
staid here that whole day, which we spent in walking up and down and viewing
the Fortifications of that Place, which are pretty strong, toward the River,
though there is a very small Guard kept here; the Water is deep here, and hither
they bring their biggest Men of War, which are built at Rotterdam, and lay them
up, having a very good Harbor, amongst others was a Ship of 112 Guns, called
the Prince of Orange which was never at Sea, being Crank-sided, as the
Tarpaulins call it; that is, would not bear Sail well. This is a lousy, sorry
Village, and a very cutthroat Place, for they make us pay what they please;
but, indeed, it is no other than all the Seaports ever did and will do, as well
in England and France, as Holland, though here all Places are alike; it is a
pretty, neat, wellbuilt Place, Houses of Brick, and uniform; here they have
Magazines of Naval Stores. Our Pacquet-Boats formerly went to the Briel, but
now being bigger, of greater force, because of the War, and drawing more Water,
they come to this Place, as do the Men of War that convoy his Majesty to and
from Holland. We had little to remarque here More than what is mentioned, only
a pleasant Adventure, of a parcel of English Gentlemen that had never been
abroad before, when they first came on shore here, they went to the best House
for Accommodation, and immediately fell to kissing and feeling the Maids, which
is not so customary here, as at home, the Servants would not come near 'em, but
sputter'd in Dutch, which they understood not, the Mistress did so too, the mad
English Sparks they swore, and huft, they would be gone out of the House, which
they did, but they would not receive them at any other, so they came back
again, and gave us opportunity to laugh at 'em; we told them their Frolicks
would not go down in this Country. Hence we went by Land to the Briel in a
Wagon, which is very uneasy, and noisie too, for our Heads were hardly
settled after the tossing we had at Sea, where most of us cleaned our Stomachs
very well, but these Wagons rattle and make such a noise, that almost made our
Heads ache; they drive with a pair of Horses a-brest, without Harness, but in
ordinary Geers, and travel constantly three mile an hour, not more, nor less,
which makes them reckon the Distances of Places by the Hour, and not by the
League, or Mile. This Town lies about half a League from the mouth of the
Maese, (a famous River, like our Thames) it is well fortified, pretty well
peopled, about three thousand Families, Houses indifferently well built,
Streets well paved, cleanly and broad; Canals run through part of it, with rows
of Trees on each side, pleasant Meadows lie about it, but the Air is not
healthful, being thick and foggy, and too near the Sea. Here was the Foundation
of this famous Commonwealth laid, for this was the first Place that revolted
against Spain, her ancient Lord, in the Year 1572. It is of great Consequence,
having the command of all Ships and Vessels, in their Passage to Rotterdam,
etc. It was one of the Cautionary Towns put in the Possession of Queen
Elizabeth, and restored to the Hollanders by King James the First, her
Successor. We staid two Days here, walking about and viewing the
Fortifications, and the whole City, which is but small; the Walls are part
Brick, part Earth, two English Miles in Circumference; there are several Pieces
of Brass Cannon mounted upon Carriages upon all the Points; four Gates, with
two Draw-Bridges to each, and Bulwarks to plant Cannon upon; there has been
four Ravelins, and some Outworks, but we could see but one standing, which by
the Form we guessed to be so, for it is out of repair, and so is the whole Wall,
which, in a War with England, is put into a better Condition, with a good
Garrison, but they apprehend no Danger from the French; the Land about it
produces good Corn, but not much: The People here are less Courteous than those
that live in the great Trading-Towns, (though you are not to expect great
Civility from the Dutch, who pretend not to much breeding,) some say, the
grosness of the Air influences them in their Manners, and that the Moon, who
governs them, ( Cancer being their Ascendent) makes them Clownish; but of this
there is no certainty; though the Seamen of all Nations are observed to be as
rough, surly, and ill-natured as the Element they live upon: And if the Water
has Influence, why not the Air? Here is a pretty little Stadt-House, or
Guild Hall, as we call it in London, and a good Church founded Anno 1372, by
the Countess Matilda for them, and another Church for the English, an Hospital
for Orphans, a good Marketplace, and an old and new Haven. Rotterdam has got
away all the Trade from the Briel. About ten in the Forenoon we took Scout
(which is a little Boat with a Sail, and goes every hour, the Bell ringing to
give Notice to Passengers, as it does in other Places,) for Maezlandsluyce, a
little Fisher-Town, a League from the Briel, half an Hours sail with the Wind,
an hour and half against it; it is a pleasant Place; they have within these few
Years built a very good Church there; before this Place lie a great many
Busses, or Fishing-Vessels, which is their chief Trade, and by which they don't
only live, but grow rich, as we in England might do, if we were not infatuated;
most of their Busses were gone out to Sea, to catch Herrings on the English
Coast, because the English are so lazy they will not catch 'em themselves. About
half Seas over we were met by some Friends of ours, Dutch Merchants, who came
from Amsterdam on purpose to receive us, which they did with all the
demonstrations of Love and Joy; we went ashore together, and got to the best
House, and fell abord the pickled Herring, which was extraordinary good; we
made 'em swim in Rhenish Wine, of which we let down a good quantity. Here we
hired a Wagon to carry us to Rotterdam, which in our way we past through.

VLAERDINGEN, Ulaerdingen.
a League off, a small Village, a Fisher-Place, 'twas anciently a City, and
well fortified, but ruined by lying so near the River Maese, which broke in
upon it. A League further lies Schedam, a small City, which has a Vote amongst
the States, and is called the Oldest, Boldest, Wisest, and was the Richest in
ancient Times, wonderfully Courageous were the Inhabitants against the
Spaniards; now famous for the Fishery, and making of Nets to catch Fish. Three
or four English Miles further along the same River lies Delphs-howen, a small
Town, nothing but Fishermen and Mariners live here: This Place, with small
Charge, might be made impregnable, (as may many others in this Country) by
reason of its situation near so much Water.

Half a League from hence is Rotterdam, a great, strong, fine, Rotterdam.
and very rich City, one of the most celebrated Ports of Europe, the Second for
Trade in this Province, lying very commodiously upon the River Maese, has great
Commerce with England, Scotland, France, (when in Peace) and Ireland, and is
much concerned in great and small Fishery, a very flourishing Place: Here are
diverse Canals cut, which are so well contrived and kept, that the greatest
Ships can enter, and there lie securely; and some Ships of two and three
hundred Tuns are brought up into the middle of the Town, where the Goods are
delivered at the Merchants Doors, which is a very great convenience. Erasmus,
the greatest Restorer of Learning, was born in this City Anno Dom. 1467, he
died in Friburg in Alsatia: Remarkable was the Gratitude of this People, who to
preserve his Name and Memory, have at their Charge set up his Effigies in
Brass, well done, with a great Book in his Hand (the Leaves of which he turns
over as often as he hears the Clock strike, which forsooth is a Piece of Dutch
Wit.) This Statue was erected, as they told us, in 1564, and roughly handled by
the Spaniards in 1572. it is now railed in with Iron. This City is now wholly at
the Devotion of the Prince of Orange, (now our King) the People being
passionate and zealous Lovers of his Person and Interest, which they express to
the highest upon all Occasions. Here they brew good Beer, which is sent to the
Cities and Villages all round about; they also serve the States Armies and
Navies with it. Turf and Wood is their firing, the first is cheap, the second
dear, and is burnt by the better sort only. As we came near any of their Towns
we distinguished an odd smell, which comes from the Turf, and is unpleasant,
and we believe unwholsom; it is stronger than that of New Castle Coal in London.
These People are generally more obliging to the English than in any other
Place, which is to be wholly attributed to their frequent Conversation, and
Dealing with them. Here they build very great Ships of War, of a hundred Guns,
and downward. We went on board some of the biggest, and viewed them well within,
and without; they are not so cleaverly and neatly built as the English, nor so
fit for Accommodation, but more clumsie, but then very strong, and sit for
Service, plain Paint, and without any Guilding, and very little Carving, which
is a superfluous and unnecessary Expense; and which the English and French were
once very vain in, though it is now almost worn out of Practice, especially the
Guilding, which may be proper for Yachts and Pleasure-Boats, but not for Men of
War. We saw their Stadt-House or Guild Hall, which is a very good Building, and
Saint Lawrence's Church, which is a great one, in it a very large old Organ,
the Dutch Presbyterians being not so nice and squeemish as the English, who
inveigh against the Use of that Music in Churches: In this Church are the
Monuments of several great Sea-Commanders. The English, Scotch, and French,
have also each a Church here. Here is an open Place for the Merchants to meet
in, which they call the Exchange, but no noble Piazza's to secure 'em from the
Weather, as at London. We staid here several Days, and sometimes dined at the
English, sometimes at the Dutch, and French Houses. The Ordinaries are the best
and cheapest Places to eat at, for then you know your Expense, which otherwise
is at the Will and Pleasure of your Landlord, who Arbitrarily imposes upon
you; and this without redress, for if you complain to the Magistrate, he will
give it against you, and you must pay it; they know you are led by Curiosity to
pass through, to view their Country, not to live in it, and you must contribute
to the Support of it. The Dutch are ill Cooks, and verify the Proverb, That
God sends Meat, and the Devil the Dresser. They have abundance of Soupes and
Slops, very insipid, they roast and boil all to Rags, so that you don't know
what sort of Flesh it is when it comes to the Table. The French err a little on
that side, but then they make some amends with their Sawces, which are
toothsome, though hardly wholesome; that being the best Diet, which is the
simplest and most agreeable to Nature; so that we all agreed in this, That the
English way of Boiling, Roasting, and Broiling, with preserving the Gravy,
(which is the best Sauce) is the best in the World.

To DELFT we went next, Delft.
betwixt which Place and Rotterdam is a great Magazine of Gunpowder for the
States Service, it is a well built Brick House with a Drawbridge, and a Moat
all round it, which is wisely contrived, that if it should by any Accident
(which sometimes happens) blow up, it cannot do any other Damage; for it is
dangerous to lodge great Magazines (as in the Tower of London) near great and
populous Cities. This very City of Delft was grievously shattered by the
blowing up of the great Magazine of Powder kept there Anno 1654, which
occasioned the building the aforesaid House.

Delft is a fair and populous City, very clean, well built, and very pleasant;
well seated in a Plain of Meadows, which may be laid all round under Water, if
they open their Sluices, when the Wind is East-North-East. At the Entrance of it
stands a general Magazine of Warlike Stores (but no Powder) for the Public
Service. This City was burnt to Ashes Anno 1536, but soon rebuilt, and now in
greater Glory than ever. The East India Company of this Place have here a very
good House and large Warehouses; as also an eighth part of the Great or
General Stock, this being the Third Town of Holland, having the Third Voice in
the States, whither it sends Deputies, as also to all the other Colleges. Here
are very fine Buildings, and amongst them the Townhouse, with these two Verses
on the Front.

Haec domus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Nequitiam, Pacem, Crimina, Jura, Probos.
Here is a spacious Marketplace between this House and the great Church, in
which stands William the First Prince of Orange (Great Grandfather to his
Sacred Majesty King William) at full length, in Armor, in Copper Effigy; at
each corner of this Monument stands Justice, Prudence, Temperance, and Valor,
all in Copper, and very large; and besides this, the Prince lies at length in
Marble, with a Dog (having had his Life once saved by a Dog) at his Feet, all
under Marble Pyramids: It Is the most Magnificent Tomb in all the Seventeen
Provinces. Here that Prince kept his Court, and here was that brave Prince
assassinated in the 51st Year of his Age, being shot by a Pistol with three
Bullets, as he rose from the Table, by one Balthazar Gerrard, a Burgundian, so
that he died without having time to say any more than, Lord have Mercy on my
Soul and this poor People. The Murderer pretended to be a Protestant, and Son
of one who had suffered for his Religion; by which he insinuated himself into
the Prince's Favor, who employed and entrusted him in Business of Importance:
The Villain never offered to get off, but was taken and pinched to death with
hot Irons, his Flesh being first slashed with a Knife, and so Piece by Piece
torn off with hot Pincers; he died obstinate, and said, If it were to do again,
he would do it.

In the the other Church is a Monument of Admiral Trump's, enriched with
Miniature, and a fine Inscription: It Is a stately one, with the Arms of his
Family hanging in Frames over it: 'Twas erected at the States Charge, in
acknowledgment, for the good Service he did his Country.

In the same Church is Mine Here Pithin's Tomb, a very handsome one: He was a
Dutch Admiral, and took the Plate-Fleet from the Spaniards. The Churches here,
and in all the Seven United Provinces, are generally bigger than ours in
England, but fewer in Number.

Here is a large and neat Market, or Flesh-Hall (as they call it) for all sorts
of Butchers Meat, which they have very good, and in great plenty, and not dear
truly; which I the rather mention, because they who have not traveled, upbraid
the Dutch with living upon Onions, Roots, Herb, Milk, and pickled Herrings, and
say, they have no Flesh, and rarely eat any; it is true, they aae sparing, and I
believe it is the better for their Health; for the devouring abundance of Flesh
must needs fill our Bodies with many hot and gross Humors, and consequently
impair our Health. They have also a good Fish-Market here, and another of
Fruits, Roots, and Herbs.

The People in this City are rich, trade much to Sea, and make much Porcelain,
or fine Earthen Wares, to a great Perfection, though far short of China, which
they pretend to resemble, and brew good Beer here; but the Remark we made in
general of their Beer (of which they have many sorts, as Rotterdam Beer, Dort,
English Beer, white Beer, sweet Beer, Breda Beer, etc.) is, That though they have
an Art of refining it, so that it looks (some of it) very clear, yet it tastes
insipid, and indeed is but weak, compared to the English, having little or no
relish of the Malt.

From hence we went to the Hague, which is three Miles, or an Hour farther, a
Village, as it is generally called, but a very beautiful one, the finest in the
World, agreed by all Travelers: The very Italians themselves confess it, who
may justly boast of the best Buildings in the World, though there are some of
that Nation that choose to live here rather than at home, saying, this is the
pleasantest Place in the World; though we must own we are not altogether of their
Opinion. It is certainly the finest Village in Europe, and much exceeding many
Cities in Bigness, and Beauty. In this Place it was that the States by their
Edict Anno 1586, abrogated the Authority of Philip the Second King of Spain,
and held a Conference upon the Five Articles of the Remonstrants, An. 1610,
which brought about the calling of the Synod of Dort, so famed in Story. The
Princes of Orange used to keep their Courts here, till the present Prince
William ascended the English Throne. The Earls of Holland had their Residence
here, and founded the Prince's House, which is a good old Brick-Building, with
a Court before it, for the Foot-Guards to draw up in, and lodge or ground their
Arms in. Here the States General, the States Provincial, the Court of Holland,
the High-Council Court of Brabrant, and the Council of State assemble; but that
Chamber which deserves most Notice, and a particular Description, is where the
States of Holland meet, which is indeed a very fine, spacious, lofty Room, with
very fine Hangings round, which touch the very Cieling, with their Arms
curiously wove in them, made on purpose for them; some People of most Nations
are also wove in these Hangings, as if looking over Galleries; which, when the
Room is a little darkened, which is done by the Servant that shows it, the
better to represent it, appears as if they were all alive, nodding of their
Heads and talking to one another. The Cieling it self is painted very finely,
by an Italian Master; as also the Two Chimney-Pieces, in which are represented
Peace and War, very curiously; the first is Venus, a very beautiful Woman, with
a pure white Dove on her Lap, with other Emblems of Peace about her; the second
is Mars, or a Soldier completely armed, with a Plume of Feathers on his
Headpiece, trampling on a great open Book, all bloody, on which is writ in
large Letter, PRIVELEGIA. The Seats are all railed in; that of the Princes, is
an Elbow-chair at the upper-end of the Table; about which (on Chairs with
Backs) sits the Knighthood of Holland, who have but one Vote, which each City
that sends Deputies has; and at the lowerend sits the Pensioner, who is Keeper
of the Great Seal and Secretary, as they told us, before whom lies a small
wooden Hammer, which when he knocks with, is that their Debates cease, and they
be silent. The Seats of the Deputies of the several Cities are on Benches, or
Forms; every Seat has a Cushion of green Cloth, (with which the Seats and Table
is covered) with the Arms of that City or Town on it, for which they serve, or
which they represent: At the upper-end of this noble Room, on each side of that
Chimney, is a distinct Place for the two Secretaries, on which lie great Books,
to take the Minutes.

The United Provinces are so called, from their Union at Vtrecht, Anno 1579.
They are commonly (but confusedly and improperly) all called Holland, that
being the richest and most populous Province of them all, and indeed worth them
all, and therefore for its Excellency it swallows up in its Name the the other
six; and, indeed, it contributes to the charge of the War, and the support of
the State, and the preservation of their Lands from the Sea, by vast and
expensive Dykes, or Banks, far beyond what all the other do, put together; of a
Hundred Livers, it pays Fifty nine and a half, which is very considerable; but
then it is the great Trading Province. These Provinces, which before owned
Subjection to the King of Spain, and were wonderfully Loyal to their Prince,
Lovers of his Person, and Zealous for his Interest, till he fell in upon their
Establishments, their Religious and Civil Rights, have since been Independent
of one another, or to speak strictly and more properly, are Seven
Commonwealths, which altogether now make but one, under the Name of, The States
General of the United-Provinces of the Low Countries: The Dignity of this
Republic residing in the States General, but the absolute Authority in and
over all Things reserved, by reason of the Alliance, has remained in the States
of each Province; and this is that which they call the Sovereignty. The Seal of
this formidable Commonwealth is a Lion, holding a bundle of seven bound Arrows,
alluding to as many confederated Provinces. There is no State in being, of so
small an extent, which has so great a Number of Fortresses, and which seems
better defended by the Nature of the Places than this. It has the Sea, and
several Rivers to secure it: The Rhine, the Maese, the Waal, and the Issell. Of
these seven United Provinces there are four toward the West, Holland, Zealand,
Vtrecht, and Guelderland; three toward the East, Over-Yssel, Friesland, and
Groninghen. In their Assemblies, the Provinces thus give their Votes,
Guelderland first of all, then Holland, Zealand, Vtrecht, Friesland,
Over-Yssel, last Groninghen. Each of 'em sends its Deputies to this Place, (
viz. the Hague) where are formed three Colleges, or Assemblies of them; the
States General, the Council of State, and the Chamber of Accounts. In the
Assemblies of the States General, all the Provinces abovementioned must
consent, in general, and in particular, to the Resolutions that are taken
therein, and do not follow the Plurality of Voices. Each Province may send
thither one, two, three, four, or five Deputies, but all these Deputies have
together but one Voice, and have right to preside therein but one Week: That of
Guelderland begins, because it is the most ancient, and its Plenipotentiaries
were the first who proposed the Union. This Province, Anno 1674, offered the
Sovereignty to the Prince of Orange (now King of England,) it being the time
the French King invaded them with mighty Armies, which like a Torrent overrun
all, and made such surprising Conquests, that in a very short time they reduced
three Provinces, and between fifty and sixty considerable Towns; but their
Progress was stopped, and they repelled by the Bravery and Conduct of the Prince
of Orange, who new modeled the States Armies, and from raw, inexpert, and
undisciplined Soldiers, and bad Officers, (raised by the Favor and Interest of
the Burgo-Masters and Principal Magistrates) made them very formidable to their
Enemies, and snatched the Laurels from the greatest Generals of the Age, at the
Head of the best Troops, and recovered part of their Losses, and had the rest
resigned by the Peace Anno 1678.

The Admiralty has five Sessions, (and as many Magazines,) which are those of
Rotterdam, Amsterdam, Enkuysen, Midleburg, and Harlingen: The three first in
Holland, the fourth in Zealand, and the fifth in Friesland. The whole Care and
Management of these several Admiralties is committed to Men of great Ability
and Integrity, conversant in Maritime Affairs, and of great Experience in
Matters relating to their Office, viz. building of Ships, buying of Stores and
Naval Provisions, equipping single Ships, Squadrons, or Fleets appointing
Convoys, etc. These Officers, as indeed all others, throughout their whole
Government, have but small Pensions or Salaries, the States being very sparing
of the Public Moneys; but however, the Servants and Ministers of this
Commonwealth live accordingly, that is, are prudent and thrifty in the
Management of their private Fortune, modest and plain in their Habit, without
the Pomp of Coaches, or great Trains, or large Houses, or costly feeding, or
high drinking, complying with the custom of their Country, and contenting
themselves with simple Diet; no Fricassee's, Ragou's, or Grilliades, but a good
Dish of Cabilliau, Cod-Fish, of which the Dutch in general are great Admirers.
There seems to be a natural and habitual Probity amongst the Officers of this
State.

Here are some Remains of their ancient Nobility, some Branches of the
Bredreodes, the Wassenaers, and the Egmonts; this Nobility has ever voted there
the first, though (as I said before) it has but one Voice together, whereas the
Eighteen Cities of the same Provinces, have there each one, with the
Sovereignty bound by Alliance.

Most of the Towns in this Province are beautiful and pleasant, having been
built in the last Age.

Fronting the Prince's House stands a great Hall, resembling (though not so big
as) Westminster Hall, full (like that) of Booksellers, and Toy-Shops. Here is
kept (in a Chamber at the further end) the High Court of Justice, from which no
Appeals are granted, and to which all are made. The Civil or Roman Law is in
practice all over these Countries. This Village has no Vote among the States,
not because it is a Village, for there are several Cities have no Votes, but
because they did not send Deputies to Vtrecht, when the Union was upon the
Anvil.

The Hague paies more Excise for Wine and other Liquors, than Amsterdam,
Rotterdam, and Dort, three great Cities, put together, as they told us; and it
has the face of Truth, for here is the great concourse of Travelers, Nobility,
Gentry, Foreign Ambassadors, Envoys, Residents, etc. And now, (and for some
Years past) of the Congress, these are the Wine-Bibbers, for the common Dutch
are satisfied with a sopie of Brandy-Wine, a Dram of that Liquor does their
Business better, it keeps out the Cold and the Fogs, quickens them, and makes
them fitter for Action; and, indeed, they seem to have some occasion for it,
for they are naturally slow and heavy, but then very diligent and constant,
else 'twould have been impossible to have finished such great Works as they to
their Honor, and the Safety of their Country have happily achieved. And
indeed strong and spirituous Liquors seem to me to be more necessary for, as
well as natural to this Nation, conducing mightily to the conservation of their
Health, which must needs be fluctuating, where the Air is so foul: Their
Country is a Bog, a Marsh, full of Vapors and Fogs, which are Earthy, and
Sulphurous, and send forth unpleasant and unwholsom Scents; and therefore
their frequent Tippling ought not to be charged on them as a Crime, especially
by a Neighbour-Nation (the English) who have a better Country, and a better
Air, and are in their own Natures more lively, brisk, and pert, having more
Heat, more Fire within, are as Choleric as the the other Phlegmatic, drudge not
like them, therefore want not the like Supports, being lazy and idle People,
choosing rather (some of 'em) to starve than work. Besides, they Bumper it but
seldom, and at set, and upon solemn Occasions, and then forbear a good while,
or at least some time, but my Countrymen, to their shame, are always Sotting
and Drunkening, toiling at it, and valuing themselves upon making one another
Drunk; indeed, it is a noble Achievement to Fuddle the whole Company: It Is a
glorious Conquest to leave 'em all slain upon the Floor, (as they call it.) Now
the bearing of much strong Liquor is an argument of a thick Skull rather than
otherwise, which I find few very fond of, at least none would have it if they
could help it.

In the Afternoon we hired a Coach, a very genteel one, and the Coachman in a
good Habit, of gray, resembling a Livery, with a pair of handsome, fat,
well-kept Horses; we agreed with him to wait upon us the whole Afternoon, which
he did, for about Eight Shillings Sterling; and first carried us to the
Prince's House in the Bosch or Wood, about two Miles from the Hague; it is a
very pretty well built (though old) Box, (as we call small Seats in England) with
good Gardens, though not now very well kept; at the Entrance of this House stand
Four whole Marble Effigies of William the First, Maurice his Brother, Henry,
and William the Second, (the present King of Great Britain's Father,) all
Princes of Orange, very curiously done. Directly forwards is a lofty,
well-painted, well-guilt, well-floor'd small Hall, with a Gallery for Music
all round the top of it, and three or four small lodging Rooms below, and
several very good ones above, one Closet of all true Indian Japan, made of
Cabinets or Chests taken in pieces; it is three Yards long, and one and a half
broad. The Wall and Cielings all round beautified with curious Paintings,
representing the Actions of Frederick Henry, Prince of Orange. The Wood in
which this little House (fit only for Banqueting, or a Supper in the cool of a
Summer's Evening, or, indeed, a retreat with a Mistress) stands is very
pleasant, and with cost might be made much more delightful. There is a pretty
deal of Ground about it, and well wooded, but has no Deer, or any other Game.

As we came back we rid by the Mall or Mell, much like that in St. James's
Park, but not so neat, or well kept, being not so much frequented. Then we were
drove back through part of the Hague to Schevelin, (upon a fine smooth way,
paved all with Bricks, and planted on each side with Trees, to make it
pleasant, which was done at vast Expense, being before all sandy Hills,) a
little Village about two Miles from thence, famed in Story for the Embarkation
of Charles the Second King of England, when he went to take Possession of his
Three Crowns, from which he had been long kept by the Usurper Oliver Cromwell.
It Is a little Fisher-Place; we rid along the shore two or three Hours, in view
of the Ocean or Main-Sea, where we observed some Wrecks on that Coast.

Between Schevelin and the Hague is a House of Mine Here Bentink's, (now Earl of
Portland) it is but an ordinary old Piece of Building, though his Lordship has
lately added some new Lodgings to it, but the Gardens are new and very
extraordinary; there is a very fine Orangerie, and a new well built Room or
Green-house to preserve them in Winter, and in the middle and at each end a
great Stove, in which great Fires are kept during the extreme cold Weather. In
the middle of the new Garden is a fine Oval Fountain. The Garden is made up
like a Half Moon, full of fine Flower-Pots: In the old Garden is a neat Aviary,
and a small Moat with Fowl in it, fine Walks and Figures, and a Summer House
built upon an Artificial Rock.

Amongst the Principal Buildings in the Hague, the House built by Prince
Maurice claims the first Rank, for it is a stately One, of Modern Structure.
Here Charles the Second, King of Great Britain, was lodged and treated by the
States when his Majesty came from Breda to embark for England, Anno 1660. The
Dukes of Brandenburg, Saxony, and others of the Illustrious German Princes,
when they come to the Hague on Visit, or Business, are conducted hither, and
remain here during their stay. In this House are the Pictures of most of the
European Kings, and a great many American Rarities. In the Years 1672 and 1673,
the Inhabitants were in great Pain lest the French, who were then very near
them, should have made 'em a Visit, because there is no Fortifications, only a
Ditch of Water: The Trees round about it were ordered to be cut down, to impede
the French in their march, who, like very civil Gentlemen, came not to give
them the least Disturbance; young Trees are since planted in the room of the
old. The Confusion then was such, that they sent several Wagons laden with
Money, and the Public Accounts, to be secured in the Stadt-House of Amsterdam.

And much about this time was the fatal and sudden Tragedy acted on the two
unhappy Brothers, John and Cornelis de Wit; the one said to be the greatest
Statesman in the World; the other an Admiral, who had also served in an
eminent Post in the Civil Government. The Populace rose and cut them both in
Pieces, without suffering them to speak one Word for themselves; they always
opposed the Interest of the House of Orange, which was the true Interest of
their State, to which they were believed to be Enemies: And thus fell John de
Wit, who was allowed by all to have been a very extraordinary Man, after a long
Administration of the great and principal Affairs of this Republic.

Here are a great many English, French, Scots, Germans, and some of most
Nations in Europe, but more Germans and French than any.

Near the Town stands an Iron Cage (seldom used) in which are put notorious
Criminals, to be exposed to the Scorn and Contempt of the Rabble.

We went to the new Church, built not many Years since upon the very Spot where
the common Bawdy-Houses stood, which were pulled down to make way for this
noble Structure: A happy Conversion! Houses of Filth and Uncleanness turned
into a House of Prayer! It Is adorned with Officers Arms, and Escutcheons of the
Nobility and Gentry. They call it an Oval Building, but I think it almost
round; it has no Pillars within, so that all the People may see as well as hear
the Minister: It Is a large Church, and as they told us, there is not so fine a
one in all the Seventeen Pronvinces; behind it is the Rag-street, where there
is kept a great Rag-Market; abundance of Money is got by buying and selling
that sort of mean Merchandise.

We went hence to view the great Church, which is a good old Piece of Building,
with a very high square Brick Steeple, seen afar off; here is Admiral Opdam's
Monument, it is very Magnificent; he commanded the Dutch Fleet in an Engagement
with the English, he was blown up, Ship and all; he had the Folly and Vanity to
carry a Broom in his Main-top; as much as to say, he would sweep the Sea of the
English, but they made a shift to send him and his Broom to take the Air; he
was a bold fighting Fellow, but a Man of no great Conduct.

Then we were showed the Cloister-Church, which is a large Pile, built Anno
1399. And so to the French Church, which was formerly the Chapel of the Earls
of Holland; they say, it is bigger than the French Church in London, but we
thought not so.

Here is an English Church, or Chapel rather, for it is a small one, very plain
and ordinary. The Germans preach there early in the Morning, then the English,
who have the English Liturgy read to 'em; the Auditors are but few, we counted
about Seventy. Here are a great many fine Buildings, fit for Petty Princes,
they are filled with Ambassadors, Envoys, Residents, etc.

We hired a Coach to carry us to Honslayerdyke, one of King William's Houses;
in our way thither we past through Ryswick, a little Village, with a good
Church, a Mile from the Hague; and a little farther another Village, called
Watringe; as also the Seats of many Country Gentlemen, pleasantly situated,
with long Rows of Trees on each side the Walk which leads to the House.

Honslaerdyke is about eight or nine Miles from the Hague, almost the same
Distance as Hampton Court from London; it is a very neat Piece of Building,
Founded by Henry Prince of Orange, the King's Grandfather, about sixty or
seventy Years ago; it is a pretty Square, with a Bass-Court, and very handsome
Moat all round it: King William has lately added some new Lodgings to it. Here
was always a Guard of Horse and Foot Soldiers without, and Switzers within
Doors, who are lusty swinging Fellows, with black frizzing Hair and great
Whiskers, they wear flat Caps and Cloaks, and look big and handsomely for a
Guard, when the King was here.

The Gardens that belong to this House are not extraordinary, they are well
made up and neatly kept; in the middle stands a Fountain, eight Leaden gilt
Statues, and three or four Stone Images about it. Here are many and long Walks,
adorned with Trees, which front the House, and make it very pleasant: Two small
Parks with low Pails, and shallow Ditches about them; a few Deer; we observed
no difference between them and the English; here are above ten or twelve Couple
of Hounds, and a very large Aviary with great variety of Birds.

It was our fortune to converse but seldom with the Dutch, though many of
themspeak prompt French, however we engaged in Discourse with three or four
Gentlemen, led by Curiosity to see this House, who amongst other things, told
us, as their Observation, That we had in England (where they said they had
been) three sorts of Vermin; (we were glad to hear we had no more,) but
demanding what they were, they answered, Parsons, Physicians, and Lawyers, who
devour all the good Things of this World; they told us, they kept their
Ministers in due Bounds, and upon the Level, there were none rich, but none
poor, they had no Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, Deanaries, Prebendaries, and
fat Livings; the States paid their Parsons their Stipend, usually about One
hundred and fifty, or two hundred Pounds Sterling per Annum; they kept to their
Texts, and never meddled with their Affairs of State, or any Secular Matters,
but contented themselves with Admonishing the People from their Pulpits to lead
good Lives, which they themselves were good Examples of; no saucy Priests
there, to thrust their Noses into, and intermeddle with other Men's Business; if
any of their Preachers happened at any time to make any Sallies of Zeal, and
touch the States never so tenderly, they had a Staff and a clean pair of Shoes
sent, and were told they must troop off.

These Gentlemen also gave us their Sentiments of the English and Scotch
Soldiers, they owned they were both Brave; that the Scots would, and the
English would not work; that the first could fare hard, but not the the other;
the English Man must be well fed, good powdered Beef and Pudding, and good Ale
was his fare, and if he had that nothing could wrong him.

We went to the Place where they cast Cannon and Mortars; it is a handsome
well built House; there were several Pieces in the Mold, and a great many newly
cast; as also Mortars, all fit for the Field: thence to the Magazine, where
they lay up their Cannon, Mortars, etc. with the Harness and other Tackle
belonging to Carriages and Wagons.

The Streets of the Hague are very broad and clean, Houses large, and spruce
without, and very neat within, even to a nicety, which is often troublesome;
which chiefly arises from the Pride of being thought to be, and admired for a
good Housewife: This Place is populous, abounding with Gentry and rich
Citizens, many of which keep Coaches; in a word, the Hague is really a very
pleasant and delightful Place.

Here are a great many Markets, some of all sorts of fine Flowers, Fruits,
Herbs, and Roots, in great Quantity; all which are generally larger than ours,
except Colliflowers, and Artichokes, in which we really excel them; and though
our common Cherries, red and white Curran's are not so large and beautiful as
theirs, yet they are much pleasanter in their taste, sweeter, to be eat without
Sugar, and theirs not; they have abundance of black Curran's (which we have
not, here and there only in a noble Man's Garden that is curious) they have an
unpleasant, Physical taste, and therefore they put them into Brandy, as we do
black Cherries, and, they say, it is a great Cordial.

Their Fish-Markets is well provided, and abounds with live and dead, but most
of the first, for even the common People will hardly purchase the last; here is
great store of Salmon, which they slice alive, for then it shrivels up, which
they esteem the best; though we did not agree with them, for we chose a great
entire Piece, and had it boiled, and with English Sauce brought up to the
Table: Perch, Soals, and Flounders in great abundance, which they fell by the
Pound, four Pence, five Pence, six Pence, seven Pence, and eight Pence, which
is a high Price, and rarely happens, but after very hard and long Winters, and
a succeeding cold Spring, and wet Summer, which destroys the Spawn, and hinders
the growth and increase of Fish in general. Here are also Markets of Cheese,
Butter, Baskets, Stockings, Silk, Thread, Lace, and a great many Baubles.

Nor is the Flesh-Market here to be past by, for there is choice of all sorts
of Butchers Meat, and very good in the Kinds; their Veal is altogether as
white, and rathe larger than ours; the Mutton short and tender, (seeding much
upon Turnips) is sweet, but not so much in esteem (nor indeed so good) as our
Bansted and Tunbridge Mutton; their Beef good, but small and thin, brought from
Denmark, and not very fat, not stalled as ours; in that they fall short of us;
for it is agreed by all Travelers, that the English is the best Beef in the
World, far exceeding all, even the Irish, who have good Land, and breed good
Cattle; but the difference appears in the salting more than the sight, for no
Beef endures that like ours, and that for the longest Voiages; however, to this
Market at the Hague is the best in all these Provinces brought, because 'twill
yield the best Price here. These People are very neat and cleanly about their
Flesh, Butter, Cheese, and other Things; nay, the meanest among 'em have not
only good but clean Linen. Here are two Butter-Markets, one Wholesale, the other
Retail, a great deal in each; the Dutch are not called Butter-Boxes in jest,
for they eat abundance, and carry it in Pewter-Boxes, and keep it in such on
board their Ships, which might give occasion to the English to call them so; in
return of which, they nickname the English Starts; that is, Tails; though, as we
told them, they had little reason, for we used to see theirs oftener than they
ours, having oftener beat them in Sea-Engagements than they us.

To divert our selves we went to see their Spin-Houses, or Bridewell, where old
Women are confined for Drunkenness, and young ones for Whoredom; here is not an
idle Body in this Place, some Spinning, others making Lace, others Plain-work;
they come to the Bars and hold out a Plate to beg our Charity, and there
entertain us with some Liquorish Discourse. They are kept here for Weeks,
Months, and Years; all according to the greatness, or smalness of their Crimes.
It Is also a Prison for Debtors, which are not exposed to view. Here we were
told a pleasant Story, the Fact thus; A young Gentleman of Amsterdam, coming by
Water hither in one of their common Passage-Boats, drawn by Horses, was
extremely Amorous upon a young Lady that was among the Company, and was so
Importunate in his Addresses, that he was very troublesome, which obliged that
Lady to give him some hopes of obtaining his desire when they came ashore,
which made him quiet and easy; as soon as ever they landed, he attacked her
afresh by himself; she told him, that she had business to do for her Mother,
which would employ two or three Hours of her time, but that she would meet him
exactly at Four at such a House, telling him the Master's Name, (which he took
care not to forget) so they parted, he about his, she about her Affairs; she
goes directly to this Place, and tells the Master that her Brother would be
there by and by and ask for her, that he was a very Debauchee, and so very
lewd, and extravagant, that her Father could not tell what to do with him, but
sent her to desire him to receive him into his Care, and give him the
Discipline of the House, (this was a private Bridewell, or House of
Correction,) which he thought might reduce him. The amorous Youth arrived at
the limited Minute, and asking for such a Lady, he was admitted, but presently
confined to a Chamber, and (according to the laudable Custom) disciplined, and
told that was all the Sport he must expect here; they kept him a Fortnight or
three Weeks, and cooled him, and so let him out.

In the Hague is a very good Almshouse, given by a private Gentleman; it is a
handsome wellbuilt Square, pretty Appartments, and Gardens to each, with all
manner of Conveniences; here are Threescore Women, half Protestants, half
Papists: The reason of this mixture is, The Founder, who was of the Reformed
Religion, died before they were finished, and left the Perfecting of the Work,
and Management of the Revenues, to a Roman Catholic, who put in half of his
own Religion.

The old Buildings here are all of Brick; of which they have three sorts,
whitish, palish red, and deep red, better workt up and burnt than ours. Their
new Buildings are of Stone, and Stone and Brick; magnificent, noble, and great,
lofty Cielings, large Windows, very good French Glass, but they have not Sashes
yet, being not so great Apes of Imitation as their Neighbors the French and
English. One would think Marble grew here; that is, that there were great and
vast Quarries of it in this Country, for rich and poor, old and new Houses,
have all their first Floors paved with black and white Marble; not course and
ordinary, but very good of the Kind, with great Variety in the manner of laying
it: Nay, though Italy, whence it comes, be nearer France, yet the present French
King bought most of his Marble, for the famed Building at Versailles, at
Amsterdam. Much Guilding, and Carving; the first, upon Leather, with which they
hang many of their Rooms, both above and below Stairs, and cover Chairs; and
also guild their Window-Shutters: Their Carving is in Stone at the Front of
their Houses. And so much for the Hague, where we staid a great while, and
where we could hardly ever be tired or cloyed with abiding.

I have been the more Particular in giving an Account of this Place, and of
every Thing that is remarkable in it, because it is so very much talked of by
all Travelers in general. I had like to have omitted a House (belonging to the
Illustrious House of Nassaw, built by Prince Frederick, Henry, King William's
Grandfather,) called Ryswick, not far from the Hague, which we were so curious
to take a view of; it is a very good Piece of Building, all Front, with a
spacious Court before it, the Cieling richly Guilt, and the Chimney-Pieces,
except two or three, which are Marble, with Pillars of the same; Floors of
black and white Marble; good Gardens, but neglected.

And now having resolved to take our leave of the Hague, we went on board the
Trecht Schuyt, or Passage-Boat, which is very large, and will contain between
thirty and forty People, covered with a Tarpaulin, (a Piece of Canvas dipped in
Tar, or Oil,) which in wet Weather keeps out the Rain, and in hot the Sun;
which is to be thrown up, to let in the Air when they please; a single Horse
draws this Vessel, rid by a Boy, who has a long slender Rope fastened to his
Geers, and runs, or rather trots along upon the Dykes or Banks, three Miles, or
a League an Hour constantly, stays for no Body, but puts off every Hour, just
as the Clock has done striking; the Fare is very reasonable; this way of
Traveling from Town to Town is very convenient, and tends mightily to the
advancement of Commerce, and dispatch of Business, or Visits. When you are upon
these Canals on which these Boats float, you cast your Eyes from the Water as
from a Precipiece down to the Land, for so much higher is the Water in these
Countries than the Land, which chiefly consists of Marshes, full of Mills, of
several sorts, the most that we ever saw flying in our lives; the Prospect is
pleasant: The Dutch are great Improvers of Land, and Planters of Trees, of
Ornament as well as Profit.

In our Way to Leyden we past Voorbroock, and Woorsconack, two small Villages;
and several Country-Houses, belonging to Gentlemen, or rich Citizens, made
pleasant with Rows of Trees, and fine Walks before them.

About seven in the Afternoon we came to LEYDEN, Leyden.
about nine Miles from the Hague, it is a very fair, large and rich City, in the
Province of Holland; it stands on the River Rhine, (which divides it into
thirty one Islands, joined by one hundred and forty five Bridges, whereof one
hundred and four are of Stone,) and loses it self in the Sand, where endeavors
have been, to no purpose, used to make a Seaport; it is but seven Miles from
Rotterdam, and twenty one from Amsterdam; Leyden is said, by some, to be the
Eye, by others, the Garden of Holland, by reason of the cleanness of its
Streets, and the beauty of its Buildings; it is celebrated for its Antiquity,
for its fine Impressions, and famed University, which was founded Anno 1575,
adorned with a very good Library, a Physick-Garden, abounding with great
variety of choice and excellent Simples, brought with great care, and much
trouble, from Foreign Parts, very remore: Here is also an Anatomical Gallery,
which contains a great many Rarities, the Gifts of several Princes, and eminent
Men; the Particulars of which are as follow, viz. The Head of an Elephant; the
Gift of Dr. Sopii. The Head of an Elk; the Gift of Dr. Job Paludarii. The Skin
and Horn of the Head of a Rhinoceros. The Skin and Horns of a White-Heart. A
Crocodile, the four Feet of an Elephant; the Gift of Justus Heurnius. Some
Indian Darts. A Trumpet made of the Rinds of Trees in Moscovy. A Muscovian Bow.
The Skin of an Animal inhabiting Brazil, called Tamandua Popo; the Gift of
Prince Maurice. The Snout of an unknown Fish from Brazil; the Gift of Dr.
George Pison. A Pair of Polonian Boots. A Leopard's Skin. A Pair of Laplander's
Breeches. The bristly Skin of a Brazilian Beast; the Gift of Prince Maurice.
The Skin of a Piger; a very slow Animal, mentioned by Pliny. The Horn of an
Ondland Ox. A Muscovian Monk's Hood. A Cithern, which the Cossack's, lightly
armed, make use of. A Pair of Moscovian Breeches, and a Coat. A Pair of Stilts
or Skates, with which the Norwegians, Laplanders, and Frieslanders run down
high snowy Mountains, with almost an incredible switness; the Gift of Arnold
Williams. The Head of an Elephant; the Gift of Adrian Pauwe. The Sceleton of a
Dog. An Heron, a Bird whose Dung burns what it touches. A Leathern Boot,
brought from the Streights, of St. David's. The Sceleton of a Bird, called a
Shoveler. The Bone of the hinder part of a large old Whale; the Gift of Adrian
Pauwe. The Bone of a Whale's Snout. The Sceleton of a young Whale, taken out of
the old One's belly. The Hide of a Seahorse. The Skin of an Alce, a wild Beast
like a Deer. The Teeth of a Whale. The Snout of a Fish, having Teeth in the
form of a Saw, and is therefore called a Saw-Fish. The Sceleton of a Bear. The
Sceleton of a Cow. The Sceleton of a Wolf. The Sceleton of a Baboon. The
Sceleton of an Ass; upon which sits a Woman that killed her Daughter. The
Sceleton of an Ape. The Sceleton of a Cat. The Sceleton of a Buck Goat. The
Sceleton of a Woman of seventeen Years of Age, who murdered her Son. The
Sceleton of a large Bear. The Sceleton of a Hog; the Gift of Dr. Bills. The
Sceleton of a Heart. The Sceleton of a Horse. The Sceleton of a large Piger; the
Gift of Piso. The Lepor Marinus, a Fish inhabiting the muddiest part of the
Sea, and casts Snot out of his Mouth. The Sceleton of a Sheep-stealer of
Haerlem, hanged. The Sceleton of a Pirat. The Sceleton of a Ferret. The
Sceleton of a Sheep; the Gift of Dr. Bills. The Sceleton of a gelded Buck Goat.
The Sceleton of a Woman, called Catherine of Hamburg, strangled for Theft. The
Sceleton of an Ape. The Sceleton of a Man (sitting upon an Ox) executed for
stealing of Cattle; the Gift of Dr. Bills. The Sceleton of a Greyhound. The
Sceleton of a Dog. The Sceleton of a Man that hanged himself. The Sceleton of
an Otter, and of a large Greyhound. The Covering of a great Mumie, upon which
is engraven the Effigies of Ceres. A young Elephant's Head. A Ferret; an
unknown Seafish. A Sea Hedgehog. The Head of a Wild Boar. The Sceleton of a
Lapwing. A Beast called Tatou; the Gift of Prince Maurice. The Sceleton of a
Squirrel. The Head of a Sea-Calf. The Snout of a large Saw-Fish. A Whale's
Yard. The Skin of a Man tanned. The Entrails of a Man. An East-Indian Tiger;
the Gift of Prince Carpenter, Governor in the East Indies, a Surgeon. The
Effigies of a Prussian Peasant, who swallowed a Knife of ten Inches in length,
which was cut out of his Stomach, and he lived eight Years afterward; the Gift
of Dan. Becker. A Piger; the Gift of Prince Maurice. Two Bones grown to the
Backbone. A Norway House, built of Balcks, or Beams, without Mortar, Brick, or
Stone. The Sceleton of an Eagle. The Beard of a young Whale. A Panther. The
Snout of a Fish called Piscis Serratus. A Chair of a Root of a Tree naturally
grown so, from Amboyna; the Gift of Peter de Carpentier. The Skin of a Ray, or
Skate, from Angola, a Kingdom of Ethiopia. The Sceleton of a Badger. The
Bladder of a Man containing four stoop, (which is something above two English
Gallons) of Water. A Formica Vorans, or Pismire Eater; the Gift of Pr. Maurice.
A Crocodile; the Gift of Prince Maurice. The Entrails of a Man, of which is
made a shirt; the Gift of Mr. John Leeuven. A Sea Dog. Some Tyger's Skins; the
Gift of Prince Maurice. The Skin of a Man dressed as Parchment. A Surgeon's
Instrument, called Glosso Comion; that is, an Instrument in which broken Pieces
are set, and bound up. A large Indian Crab. A Sea Calf. A Civet Cat; the Gift
of Dr. Theod. Gool. The Skin of an East-Indian Dog. A Sea Starling. The skin of
a large Serpent. The skin of a Woman. The Intestines and stomach of a Man. A
Tiger from the East Indies. A Beast called Tatou. A huge Serpent, upon which
hang a Man's and a Hog's stomach; the Gift of Prince Maurice. Warlike Arms used
in China. A Whale's Operator. A great Faulchion, or hooked Sword of the
Chinese. Certain human Bones grown together. The Head of a Sword-Fish, a known
Enemy to the Whale; the Gift of Dr. Sam. Bloemaert. The Sceleton of a Coney. A
Sea Hedgehog. A Fish, called Orbis Piscis, which is Libra Can. with a great
Belly of a Chesnut-colour, and is unsavory Meat. The Sceleton of a large
Coney. The Head of a wild Boar. The Sceleton of a Swan. The Sceleton of a Cock.
The Sceleton of a Pigeon. A Shield made of a large Sea Tortoise-shell; the Gift
of John ab Ilpendam. A kind of Baboon, called by the Dutch a Bosh Manneken.
Four or five Chinese Songs; the Gift of P. de Carpentier. Two Horses Hides of
the same Nation. The Bone of a Whale's Tail. A strange Seafish. The Skin of a
Child, when first born. A Bear; the Gift of Daniel Beckher. Galcus Levis, a
hurtful sort of Fish, we call it a Hound-Fish. The Skin of a huge Serpent. The
Intestines and Stomach of a large Man. A City of China, printed by the same
Nation; the Gift of Peter de Carpentier. The Sceleton of a Man on Horseback;
the Gift of Dr. de Bills. The Head of a Seahorse. A French Nobleman, who
ravished his Sister, and also murdered her, was beheaded at Paris, and bestowed
on the Anatomy by Dr. Bills. The Bill of a strange Bird. The Mummy of an
Egyptian Prince, above eighteen hundred Years old; the Gift of David de Willem.
The Beak of the Bird Rhinoceros, or Topau; the Gift of Adrian de Paevis. An
Indian Sable. Unbleach'd Egyptian Linen. The Head of a Rhinoceros. A Roll of
white China Paper; the Gift of Dr. Mic. Pauwe. A Stone of a considerable
bigness, taken out of a Maids Kidney; the Gift of Don. Otto. Heurnius. A
Coral-Tree, taken out of the East-Indian Sea; the Gift of Dr. John de Laet. Six
Stones taken out of the Bladder of an old Professor, John Heurnius. A Pot in
which is China Beer. Two Vertebrae out of the Neck of a Rhinoceros. A great
Jasper-Stone, or Boodstone from Arabia. A Roman Lamp which burns always under
ground. Some Roman Arms a thousand Years old; the Gift of Dan. Gisius. The
Wings of a flying Fish. An Indian Crab-fish; the gift of Dr. Jo. Dam. Bossu. An
Hand of a Mermaid; the Gift of Prince Maurice. A Toad-stool, above a hundred
and ten Years old, which grew in the Haerlem Mere; the gift of Pet. Scriverius,
A Foot of a Sea Monster; the Gift of Prince Maurice. A Lizard's Skin from
Brazil; the gift of Prince Maurice. A Gold-Ring from China; the gift of Dr.
John Hoogkamer. The Skin of an Indian Squerril. The Sceleton of a Mole. The
Claw of an East-Indian Crab-Fish. A Glass containg the Substance with which
they are wont to preserve Mummies. All the Arteries of the Liver. A Tyger's
Head; the Gift of Prince Maurice. The Head of a Beast from the East Indies,
called Barbirousa, is half Heart, half Hog, and is bred in the Island Celebes. A
Petrefied Toad-stool. The Head of a Sea-Hog from Brazil; the gift of W. Piso.
The Hand and Foot of a Mummy; the gift of Fred. Westphalinek. A precious Stone
in Ethiopia, called Heliotropium. Three Claws, with the Horn of a young
Rhinoceros. An Egyptian Bean. A dried black Arm. A Book printed with China
Characters; the gift of Francis Porsiin. The Sceleton of a Mouse. A
Thunderbolt; given by Melchier de Moucheron. The Arm of an Egyptian Hero. An
Egyptian Fly. The Sceleton of a newborn Child. A Flying-Hart; given by Francis
Schurmans. An Egyptian Urn, in which is an Abortus embalmed, above a Thousand
Years old. A Viper, or Flying-Adder. The Cheek-bone of a Mummy. The Arteries of
a Man's Liver. A Sea-Spider from New York; given by Dr. Herman Bloen. Capricus
Rondeletii. An Egytian Night-Owl. The Blood of a Crocodile. The Bladder of a
Dog. A Piece of Bread of new and unhnown Meal. A Mallet, or Hammer, that the
Savages in New York kill with; the gift of Herman Bloen. The Arm of an Egyptian
Mummy; given by David de Willem. A little Bone taken out of the Pizzel of a
Wolf. A little Stone found in Eagles Nests, called Lapillus Aetites. A Stone
taken out of the Stomach of a Goose, brought from the Streights of Magellan.
The Bladder of a Man. Lapis Nephriticus, or the Gravel-Stone. A Stone found in
the Head of a Sea-Calf. A Bone of the Hearing Organ of a Whale; the gift of Dr.
Jacob. Cuculo, commonly called a Sea-Cock. The Sceleton of a Fitcher. A small
Bone taken out of the Penis of a Beaver. The double Bladder of a Fish. The
Sceleton of a Frog. The Arteries of the Liver. The Sceleton of a Hedgehog. A
Drinking-Cup of the Scull of a Moor, killed in the beleaguring of Haerlem. The
Sceleton of a Water-Rat. A young Crocodile from Egypt; given by Prince Maurice.
A Shepherd's Pipe from the Island of Maltha; given by Dr. John Van Horn. The
Sceleton of a Chaffinch. A wooden Effigies of Osiris, whom the Egyptians
worshipped as a God, now almost consumed with Age. An Image of Isis, giving
suck to her Son Orus. An Egyptian Coffer, in which are Aromatical Spices, for
preserving of Bodies for Mummies. Three Egyptian Idols, made of Stone. A
Drinking-Cup, made of a Tortoise-Shell. An Indian Serpent's Eggs. The Sceleton
of a Mole. The Arteries of the Lungs. A Water-Serpent. A brazen Effigies of
Osiris, the Egyptian God. The Arm of an Egyptian Hero, embalmed. A Bone
embalmed. A Fish called Schincus. A little Egyptian Coffer, upon which is
engraven the Effigies of Isis, and in which is the Heart of an Egyptian Prince
embalmed; given by D. de Willem. The Hip-bone of a Giant; given by Sam.
Mussenbrook. The Arteries of the Lungs of a Pig. Two strong Idols; given by
David de Willem. A Cruse wrought in pollish'd Marble. A Triangular Fish; given
by Mr. Husenbrook. The Mummy of an Egyptian Prince, above thirteen hundred
Years old; given by Dr. Jo. Baptist. Bartoliti. A Pair of Sandals or Slippers
from the Kingdom of Siam in the East Indies. The Skin of an Indian Lizard. A
Pair of Russian Shoes. The Skin of a Molucca Woman, above one hundred and
fifty Years old; by Richard Snock. A Lion's Head. Two Images of the Japaneses;
given by Adrian Pauwe. A Cheeck-bone of a Dog-Fish. A Flying Dragon. An Urn,
called Vrna Ferulis Romana, wherein the Romans preserved the Ashes of burnt
Bodies; the gift of Dr. Daniel Gyffus. A Woman's Pudenda, with Hair of a great
length. An Indian Lamprey. A Roman Earthen Vessel; given by Dr. Dan. Gyfius. A
gilded Copper Idol from Siam. A Roman Bean. A China Pot; the Gift of Dr. Ja.
Speck. A Box of white Powder, with which the Indians and Italians use to make
the Hair fall off. The Bough of a Tree fenced with Stone; given by Dr.
Harrewiin. A Pair of Shoes made of Man's Leather. A Pair of Egyptian Sandals;
the Gift of Dr. Ja. Leuven. A Seahorse out of the East Indies. Some strange
Indian Fish, and a flying Fish. A Roman Lamp which burns eternally; given by
Dr. Dan. Ghisis. An Indian Sea-Spider. A piece of Rhubarb grown in the shape of
a Dog's Head. A Basket wherein are Crocadile's Eggs; the Gift of Pr. Maurice. A
Lizard. The Liver of a Man, in which is grown a Stone like a Ball. The Rib of a
Sheep, with three Branches sprouting out. The Hearing-Organ of a Man. China
Figgs. A Basket in which is Moscovian and other Country Money. The Arteria
Magna of a Man. Some Egyptian Glassing, or Cupping Vessels. The Sceleton of a
Serpent; the Gift of Adam Bornius. A Dish of Lapis Ossifragus, or fine
Bone-stone; the Gift of John Boumanno. An Indian Knife. A Stone which was found
in the Os Sacrum, or the great Bone upon which the Ridge-bone rests. A Ball
called Mansa, found in a Cows Stomach. A great Cassia Fistula from Brazil;
given by Prince Maurice. A great deal of very large Amber; the Gift of Daniel
Beckler. An American Bean. An Indian gilded Wooden Cup; the Gift of Dr. Jam.
Stellingworf. A black Fly, called a Beetle, brought from the Cape of good Hope.
Some grown Coral. A Cup made of a double Brainpan; given by Dr. de Bills. The
Brain-pan of an Ostrich. A Puff, or Mushroom, of a vast greatness. A Sceleton
of a Child newly born. A Sceleton of a Child, but four Months old in the Womb.
The Image of the Goddess Fortune; the Gift of D. Gyfius. A great Bone found in
the Body of a Woman of Vlarding, being ninety Years old. A Sword-Fish. All the
Muscles of a Man, very curiously done, by Professor Stulpent Vander Wiel. All
the Muscles of a Child. A young Hangman, married under the Gallows. Two
newborn Children, very curiously anatomis'd.


The Physic Garden is a square but small piece of ground, very well stocked
with almost all sorts of Medicinal Herbs, Roots, Plants, etc. and other
Curiosities; the choicest Things are kept in Glass-Cases; on the left hand is a
Room full of Foreign Rarities, both of Sea and Land, very neatly kept.

Then we saw the Printing-Press in the University Yard, famous for the fine
Characters of Monsieur Jean Elseviers; then the University, which is a neat
oldish Building; it has three Halls for Public Lectures, several Chambers,
where they take their Degrees; upon the Table of one of 'em we saw Aristotle's
Works, and some Civil Law Books; the Professor's Closets are full of
extraordinrry Curiosities. The Students have no Colleges or Halls to lodge and
diet in, (as in Oxford and Cambridge,) but board in the Citizens Houses; their
Tutors are very careful of them, and diligent in keeping them close to their
Exercises, both at Public Lectures, and in their Private Examinations, for
which they have appointed Hours, and at which they are very punctual: It Is a
celebrated Accademy, having continually in it about two Thousand, half Natives,
and the rest Hungarians, Grecians, Germans, Polanders, French, English, Scots,
and Irish; of which three last are computed about one hundred. Here they take
their Degrees easier, and cheaper, and without that Pomp and extravagant
Expense in practice in England.

Here are but two Colleges, and those very small, not to be mentioned at the
same time with the meanest in Oxford, or Cambridge; nor are they endowed, they
receive their Maintenance from the Charity-Collections of the Dutch Ministers;
nor can any Students remain longer here than till they attain the Degree of
Batchelors of Art.

Here is a high very Tower, where they keep their Astronomical Instruments, and
whence they make their Observations, and Calculations of the Motions of the
Celestial Bodies: This Place was built for the Use and Service of the
Astronomers an Astrologers; of the first they have some pretty Eminent, though of
the latter none, that we could hear of, that Learning is not in much esteem
with them; though if it were divided into proper Parts, viz. into Mundane, or
General Affairs of the World; Genitures, or Particular Nativities, with their
Revolutions, Directions, Profections, Transits, etc. Horary Questions with
their Solutions; and, lastly, into the Weather, with its great variety and
sudden alterations: I say, if these four Parts, or Divisions, were to be
studied, and improved by as many several Professors, with a College, and
Endowment, for that very Purpose set apart, it might prove of vast benefit and
advantage to Mankind, there being many excellent Things in Astrology, and very
great Truths to be found out by a due application. But Priestcraft is every
where so prevalent, that it is opposed by those Gentlemen, who think their
Interest would hereby be lessened.

Here is an old Burgh, built by the Romans, or Saxons, formerly a Castle
belonging to the Prince of Liege, some Years since repaired, and made a good
Fortification, of great Use and Service against the Spaniards in the renowned
Defense the City of Leyden made against them who besieged it Anno 1544, or
rather Anno 1573, presently after Easter; which by a Stratagem was raised the
third of October following, by the Prince of Orange, who letting loose the
Waters, which were before restrained by great Dykes, relieved the City, and
ruined the Spanish Army, who by this means suffered an entire Defeat; but now
this Burgh is converted into a Garden, with a very pretty Labyrinth in it,
newly made up, and neatly kept: It belongs to a Tavern, and has drinking Arbors
in it; we went up by a very steep ascent of near a hundred Steps, whence we
took a view of the Country round about.

The English have part of a Church here.

Their Stadthouse is a good old Building, and stands in a handsome broad Street.

This City is very Populous, abounding with Strangers, led by Curiosity to see
this Place, and its Rarities; as also by the residence of many to study, (as I
said before) having had the Fame of breeding up many excellent and learned Men
in all Faculties.

Here are also great Manufactures of Woollen, and Linen Cloth, Perpetuana's,
Says, Serges, Stuffs, and Camlets; of the first they send abundance to Turkey,
whence they bring Mohair to make their Camlets; also they import fine Wool from
Spain, and course from England and Poland: Abundance of Walloons live here, as
also of many other Nations, concerned in their Woollen and Linen Trades.

This City has under its Jurisdiction seventy two Towns in the Country of
Rhinelandt, and has very great Privileges, because it appeared very Courageous
against the Spaniards upon all Occasions. Anno 1616 it was burnt by Misfortune,
but soon rebuilt, more stately than ever; it is a very pretty, neat, and
pleasant Place, fine Houses, large and clean Streets, many Canals, adorned with
Rows of Trees on each side; situated upon the Rhine, the Center of Holland.
Here are several great Libraries, as indeed there are in many Towns in this
Province, several belonging to private Men. Here was Heinsius the famous Poet
born; and here lies buried the great Scaliger in our Lady's Church, built Anno
1370, which now belongs to the French and Walloons.

In this Place are famous Masters of the French, Italian, and Spanish Tongues,
for Arms, Dancing, Music, Mathematics, in the Whole, or Parts, and Astrology.
We went to St. Peter's Church, built Anno 1121, indeed their Churches are
generally good ones: The Walks round this City are pleasant, and the
Fortifications very agreeable to behold. A Native of this Town, was the Tailor,
who, to his ruin, made himself King of the Anabaptists in Munster.

From hence we went by Water to HAERLEM, Haerlem.
twelve Miles farther, a large and fine City in this Province; it is seated near
a Lake of that Name, a League off the Sea, and four from Leyden, with which it
has Communication by a Canal made Anno 1656. There are near it delicate
Meadows, a delightful Forest, and a great number of fair and wealthy Villages,
which make it very pleasant. Within it is beautified with fine Piazza's, a good
(though old) Townhouse, (the worst in all this Province) and many other Public
Edifices. Pope Paul the Fifth, at the Request of Philip the Second King of
Spain, made it a Bishop's See, suffragan to the Archbishop of Vtrecht. Anno
1347 it was almost reduced to Ashes, but soon after rebuilt much more stately
than ever. In the Year 1572 the Inhabitants shoke off the Spanish Yoke and
Religion together, and embraced the Reformed. They were besieged not long after
by Frederick Toledo, the Duke of Alva's Son, and after a stout and bloody
resistance, for the space of eight Months, were forced to surrender themselves
at Discretion, whereby they became a Prey to the Spaniard's Cruelty; but this
Town was since re-taken by the United States. This Place glories in the
Invention of Printing, said to be found out here first, Anno 1420, by one
Lawrence Coster, one of the Burghers, whose Stock of Letters was stolen away
by a Servant of his, and carried into Germany, whither he went himself, and
recoverd them at Cologn, and soon after perfected his Invention at that Place,
having in Haerlem only found out the way of printing on one side of the Paper;
the first Book he ever printed is kept in the Stadthouse, for those that are
Curious to see it, and is Tully's Offices. Germany would fain rob Haerlem of
the Honor of this Useful Invention; and Mayence, a considerable and ancient
City in the Circle of the Lower Rhine, puts in her Claim first: Printing was
long before this in Use amongst the Chinese.

Here they brew good Beer, which is sent to Friesland by Sea, which puts it
into a new ferment, and by that means makes it much better, and more palatable;
as our Hull Ale is when brought to London by Shipping. It Is a neat, well built,
pleasant Place, having Rows of Trees on each side of their Burgh-wall, or
Canal, of which they have not so many here as in other Cities: Their Gates are
removed, and their City enlarged, for their Inhabitants increase, and grow
rich, being renowned for making the finest Linen Cloth, Tiffanies, Damask, and
flowered Silks, Stuffs, Ribands, and Tapes; they have Mills by which they can
weave forty or fifty Pieces at a time; they make the finest Thread and Tapes for
Lace in the whole World; their Bleacheries surpass all other whatsoever; their
Water whitening Cloth better than any other in the Seventeen Provinces; they
use Butter-Milk frequently to make their Linen look so delicately; they are
very Skilful and Curious in Washing, for hither is sent from Amsterdam, Leyden,
and all round about, the fine Linen, and choice Laces to be washed, which the
principal People of those Places wear the whole Year about, but usually have
enough washed in the Summer to last them all the Winter, having by them always
a great Stock of wearing Linen. The French Court, some Years since, sent for
some of the chief Laundresses, and were mightily pleased with their Skill and
Neatness; rewarded them well, and sent them back big bellied.

Here they have a most pleasant Grove, like a little Wood, divided into Walks,
where on Sundays and Holy Days, the Citizens of Amsterdam, and other Places,
resort to divert themselves.

Here is one of the fairest and largest Churches in all these Provinces; in the
Walls whereof remain to this day Cannon Bullets sticking, which were shot by
the Spaniards during the Siege thereof, beforementioned; in this Church are
three Organs, two old, one new, all kept very neatly; as also the Models of the
three Ships that sailed from Haerlem to Damiater, seizing the Castle in which
the Earl of Holland was kept Prisoner, and brought him away home. In the Tower
of this Church hang two Silver Bells, which they also brought from thence, and
now ring them every Night at Nine a Clock.

Haerlem is the Second City of Holland, and sends its Deputies unto all the
Colleges of the Government.

After having seen all that was Rare and Curious, and diverted our selves as
long as we thought fit, to which End we spared neither Money nor Time, we
resolved to leave this Place, and advance toward Amsterdam, which we did, and
so for six Stivers apiece we took the Passage Boat, and when we were come half
way, we stepped out of that, to go into another, and then we saw a stately House,
where the Lords, called Dykgraves, meet, and sit, to take Care of, and Repair
the Sea and Land Dykes, or Banks; each has his Appartment provided for him.
Here are two very large Sluices, having Gates to let Water in or out from the
Haerlem mere. Near this Place, about the Year 1672, a part of the Seabank was
broken by a strong North-West Wind, overflowing all the Land betwixt Haerlem
and Amsterdam, which cost a vast and prodigious Sum to repair. They sunk in
this Breach four hundred small Vessels, filled with Earth and Stones, for a
Foundation to re-build the Wall upon, and by unspeakable Industry, and immense
Charges, at last completed the Work. Here we met with a very pleasant and
remarkable Story, from an elderly Dutch Man, who entertained us with it, till
we almost got to our Journey's end for that Night. 'Twas thus; An eminent
Farrier that lived near this Place, having an Apprentice that was so very dull
and stupid, that he could not, after some Years teaching, do any manner of
Thing relating to his Profession; the Master being uneasy, and unwilling to
keep a Servant, that eat up his Bread, but did him no Service, one day brought
him before the Burgo-Masters, or chief Magistrates of Haerlem, and desired that
he might be discharged from him, urging that he was so great a Blockhead, that
he could not make a Horse-Shooe Nail, much less a Horse-Shooe, or set it on
either: The Magistrates asked the Fellow what he could say for himself against
what his Master alleged; he replied, That he was above that Trade; upon which,
his Master being asked by the Magistrates concerning the Youth's Birth and
Parentage, declared, that he was a mere Scoundrel, and that he took him in pure
Charity, his Father and Mother were Laboring People, and but a little better
than Beggars: Then the Magistrates asked the Fellow what he meant; he answered,
That he could drain Haerlem-meer easier than make a Horse-Shooe; at which the
Burgo-Masters (thinking it next to Impossible) laughed; however, they discharged
his Master, and took the Youngster in private, and examined him closely, and
finding he had a Mathematical Head, they told him, they would advance a good
Sum of Money, and set him at work; which they did, and when he had completed
his Engines, he fixed them, and in a short time recovered a great deal of dry
Land; the Fame of which brought great Numbers of People of all Qualities, and
Professions, to see this mighty Engineer; and being told the former part of the
Story, they were surprised: The Money being expended, the Operator attended the
Magistrates, and gave them an Account of it, and told them, he could not go on,
except they would advance him more Money; which they (being mere Mamonists)
refused to do; upon which he cunningly drew off the Workmen, and in the Night
destroyed the best Engine, (in which the great Secret lay, and which was made
in Private by his Hand alone) and pulled out some Pins out of others, and in a
very short space of Time laid the whole Land under Water as it was before; away
he fled to Antwerp, getting far enough out of the reach of his Employers, who
now (though too late) began to be sensible of their Stinginess, and would have
given double the Sum to have had their Engineer again; however, to obtain
their End, having heard where he was (by a Letter he sent to a Friend at
Haerlem,) they made fresh Application to him, and new Offers, which he
slighted; then they made use of Stratagems and Slights to get him away
privately and by force; which failing, they addressed the Governor (a Spaniard,
then in open War against the States) to send him back; who, calling him before
him, examined the Lad about the Affair, and finding how basely the Magistrates
had dealt with him, and what an ingenious Fellow he was, refused to gratify
them; then they attempted by new, large, and more generous Offers, to gain him
to come voluntarily to them; to which at last he consented, and being upon his
Journey to Haerlem, fell sick of a Fever, and so died by the way, and with him
died also that mighty and matchless Project; since which they have not been
able to do any thing in that Matter, the Water of that Mere being vast in its
extent, and very deep, even to be Navigable, for we saw several Vessels of
Burden then upon it under sail.

About half an Hour past seven that Evening we arrived at AMSTERDAM, Amsterdam.
a vast, rich, populous, and beautiful City, equal to most in Christendom, the
Metropolis of all the Low Countries, in North Holland, in the Territory of
Amsterdam; once Imperial, now subject to the Sates-General of the
United Provinces: It stands on the River Amstel, by an excellent Haven, (though
the Coasts of Holland abound with Sands, which render their Harbors more
difficult and dangerous to enter,) nigh the Zuider-Zee, 80 Miles North of
Antwerp, 210 almost East of London, 250 almost North of Paris, 380 South-West
of Copenbagen, and 560 almost West of Vienna. Longitude 24 degrees. 00 min.
Latitude 52 degrees. 29 min.

This vast City was at first but a small Castle, and called Amstel, taking its
Name from the River upon which it was built, and gave Title to the Lords the
Founders. Soon after the Inhabitants increased, and applied themselves to
Fishing, and were contented to live in thatched Cottages; this Employment begat
a Trade amongst their Neighbors, and mightily enriched themselves; so that the
Happiness and Commodiousness of their Situation invited a greater Number of
People to come thither, to reside there; which, from a small and contemptible
Village, soon made it a very considerable Town. Anno 1235 they had certain
Immunities granted them by Florentius the Fourth; after this they began to
build 'em Bridges and Towers; the Inhabitants also built new Houses in the
Neighborhood, and then the Borough began to take upon it the Name of the City
of Amsterdam, which was then united to the Country of Holland, and having
received new and greater Privileges, which were confirmed by succeeding
Princes, they by their Trade and Industry became very Potent; though as yet this
City had no Walls but only a Palisado until Anno 1482. It surrendered to
William of Nassaw, after a tedious and obstinate Siege. Thus in length of Time,
is this inconsiderable Place become the most celebrated Emporium of the
Universe, vying with the greatest Cities in the World, in the great number of
its Ships, and the convenience it has of fitting them out; it now drives the
greatest part of the Commerce which was formerly carried on by those ancient
and renowned Cities, Antwerp, Sevil, and Lisbon: It Is the Second City in the
World for Trade, and the First, we are of Opinion, for Wealth. It Is not so
large (by much) as Paris, or London, though it has swelled prodigiously of late
Years in Bigness, Beauty, and Magnitude; these noble Streets, called by them
Grafts or Canals, distinguished by the Names of Carsars, Lords, and Cingel,
etc. are wondrous fine; the Fronts great, and lofty; good French Glass, though no
Sashes; the Rooms large, and stately; Pavements of fine Black and White Marble;
good Painting, but not much extraordinary Carving; Silvered and guilt Leather
of great variety, much in Vogue to hang their Chambers with; every Thing and
Place very neat and nicely kept, (sometimes even to excess) and pretty well
contrived, though (we speak without partiality) not so well as the new Houses
building in and about London. The late Wars with England put a check to the
Buildings in, and Enlargements of this Place, but as soon as they were over,
they went on, and even now, during this present War, (the worst they ever were
engaged in) they are building in several Places, at the ends of the great
Streets; but then the Houses are but small, and ordinary, compared to those
abovementioned, being only fit for the middling People, whereas the the other
are for the wealthiest Merchants, and greatest Men among them.

The first thing we took notice of in this mighty and vast City, that was
remarkable, was the manner of their laying their Foundations, on which they
build all their Houses, both great and small, private and public, which is
thus; Above fifty or sixty lusty Fellows, with a ponderous Engine of Brass or
Iron, force into the Ground a great many Masts, (which occasions a Saying among
them, That their City stands upon Masts, and lives by Masts, meaning their
Shipping,) upon which they build; the Earth is Boggy, Muddy at top, and a
pretty way, but Sandy lower, and their Houses are firm, and secure, and stand
as long as any other, though reckoned better founded. This we saw in our way to
the Stadthouse or Guild Hall, which is so renowned all over the World, and
which called for our Curiosity first, and with which we entertained and
diverted our selves a great while, as we hope we shall do the Reader, who (if
he never saw it) will passionately desire to go thither for the sake of this
noble Pile, and many other great Rarities, and Curiosities, no where else to be
found.

This Stadthouse, or Guild Hall, is a most noble and magnificent Pile of
Building, all after the modern Italian Architecture; it is the stateliest Piece
we ever saw, it is the Wonder and Discourse of all the World, the Pride of
Amsterdam, and the Glory of the Seven Provinces: The Entrance is mean, and
contemptible, under seven small Piazza's, or Arches, which wondefully abate its
Beauty, which we told the Dutch, and which they owned, for there is nothing
gives a great and noble Piece of Building more Advantage, than a large Portico,
or Entrance, which makes the approach Magnificent; and a large Cupolo to
diffuse the Light; which last this has, though in many places it is too dark,
which is a great defect in Architecture; it is all of Freestone of the
Corinthian Order, beautified with Brass-Statues, and Marble Carvings, done by
the greatest Masters of the Age. it is 282 Feet wide, 232 Feet deep, and 116
Feet high, besides the Cupolo 50 Feet high, which is a very handsome one, and a
great Ornament; in it is a good set of Bells, which ring not out like ours,
but are made to chime.

This Foundation is laid as those I mentioned before, and accounted to stand on
13657 Piles of Masts driven (after the manner I spoke of, Page 122.) into the
Ground; the front is adorned with a fine Piece of Carving in Marble, 82 Feet
long, and 18 Feet high, representing this City in the Person of a Woman with
Neptune, Lord high Admiral of the Seas, and two Salt Water Goddesses, his
Mistresses, laden with the Fruits of the Earth, all on the Right Hand, bringing
them as Presents to this mighty Lady: And on her Left are two Naides, offering
her Laurels and Palms; and before her two Triton's dance, and sound their
Horns. On the top stands a Statue of Brass, representing Peace; and on each
side one showing Providence and Justice, each Figure twelve Feet in length. And
on the Back of this noble Pile is such another Piece of Carving, representing
the Trade and Greatness of the City. In the Center sits a Woman with the Hat
and Wings of Mercury, with the Masts and Sails, and other Rigging of a Ship
behind her, and all sorts of Navigating Instruments around her; at her Feet lie
the two Rivers of Vk and Amstel, the Inhabitants of Europe, Asia, Africa, and
America, presenting her their Products. Here are three Brazen Statues, as large
as those in the Front beforementioned; one is an Atlas, with a very large
Copper Plate; on his right hand Temperance, and on his left Justice. On the
four Corners of this Great House stand four Brazen Eagles, but Guilt very
neatly, supporting an Imperial Crown.

Upon our right hand as we entered this stately Fabric, is their Hall of
Justice, finely adorned with Carved Works in Marble, with Solomon on the
Judgment Seat, deciding the Controversy between the sham and real Mother of
the Child; and several other such Phansies, too many to be particular in: In
this Place is the famous Bank of the World kept, supported more by Credit than
Cash, though they want not the last, yet are not Masters of so much as they
vapor, of Millions of Tuns of Gold, each Tun valued at ten thousand Pounds
Sterling, (as we were informed by one who knew the Secret;) but thus much may
be said for it, That it is a mighty Establishment, the Support as well as the
Glory of their State; they write off more Money here in one Day than at the
Banks of Venice, Genoa, Paris, or Hamburgh, all together in two, and have more
real Coin and Bullion than those Three. They are very jealous of the new
established Bank in England, and oppose its Interests as much as they can, for
it draws abundance of their Profits away from thence; they have visibly
declined, since that was set up, the Great Interest, viz. Eight per Cent. the
English give, encouraged the Foreigners to send Commissions for Subscriptions;
and it being a Parliamentary Security, they esteem it Sacred, Sound, and
Secure; no People in the World pay such a Veneration to that August Assembly as
these, for they are in Pain when ever there is the least Convulsion in the
Senate, upon whose Conduct, the Good of the Kingdom, and almost all Europe,
especially of the Reformed Religion, they know, so much depends.

The States and Magistrates of Amsterdam are the Security for this Bank; the
Integrity of the Commissioners and other Officers, the Safety of the Money here
deposited, the Promptness of the Payment, the Goodness of the Species, the
Easiness of Transferring it, the Reputation of the State, are the great
Inducements of the People of all Nations in Europe, as well as their own, to
lodge their Cash here.

In this House is the City Prisons for Debtors and Criminals. Here is the City
Guard kept, by the Citizens only, where the Keys of the greatest Gates are
locked up every Night.

Up a pair of good Stairs, though not large, but darkish, is the Common Hall for
the Citizens to meet, it is 120 Feet long, 57 broad, and 98 high. Here is the
famous Mosaique or Brass inlaid Globes, both Celestial and Terrestial, in the
Floor, wherein may be found all the known World, and all the Zodiacal Signs,
Constellations, and Planets in the Heavens; the fixed Stars are most curiously
done, plain and very easy to be found; we often came hither in wet Weather to
divert our selves with running over these Globes, each 22 Feet Diameter; this
is a noble Piece. At the End of this Hall the Judges sit, in a particular
Chamber, to try all Civil Causes. Here are abundance of other Offices, or
Chambers, as the Council Chamger, where the Common Council meet to make Laws,
elect Burgo-Masters, or Lord-Mayors, Sheriffs, Judges, Deputies to serve in the
great Assemblies at the Hague. Here are Treasury-Chambers, Chambers of
Accounts, an Office for the Commissioners for Bankrupts, who meet not to
destroy (as in England) but to preserve the Estates of those unfortunate Men,
who are commiserated by their Laws, and Constitutions, and not ruined with
their Families for ever. These Commissioners compound for the Debtors, and
oblige their Creditors to be satisfied with what can be done, and suffer them
not to hurry them away to Prison, to lie and rot, (as some Barbarians let their
Debtors in other places,) but receive part of their Debts, and remain contented
till the Man be able to pay the rest, who has a part of his Estate left to
begin the World again, that is, to go to Trade again, who often by his
Industry, and good Fortune, gets a great Estate, and paies every Body to a
Farthing. This is Conduct, this is Management, this is Prudence to be praised:
But when will the English Nation be so happy to imitate them in this? Truly, I
fear, never. There need be no Mint, White-Friers, Savoy, or other Sanctuaries,
if they were put in practice; there need not, I say, be so many starving in all
the Holes and Corners of the Town, who are capable of employing their Time
well, and getting of Money, and have as good Heads, and as able Bodies, and are
as fit for all sorts of Business, as any People in the World: The English are
more Mercurial than the Dutch, but their National Constitutions are not so
adapted for the Good of each Individual.

Here the chief Officers for Government of the Hospitals meet, and manage all
Affairs relating to them very prudently. Here are Chambers belonging to the
Secretaries, and others, too many and too long to describe; with a proper Motto
or Devize over each; as particularly that over the Chamber of the Commissions
of Bankrupts, is cut in Marble, Fortune flying away with Wings, Money-Chests
turned up-side down, Mice and Rats eating Bags, Pens, and Paper-Books.

Here is a great Magizine of Arms kept for the City's Safety and Service, all
neatly kept, and preserved in Presses; they told us they could arm, in four
Hours time, twenty thousand Men completely for Action At the top of this great
House are eight great Cisterns, always kept full of Water, to be ready on all
Occasions, with Pipes of Leather to communicate them to all Parts of this
Building, if any Fire should happen; and the Chimneys we saw were all secured
by Copper within, to prevent even the Sut taking fire; and these great
Precautions are used, not only because of the vast Treasure, and Accounts
lodged here, but because their old Stadthouse, which was but an ordinary Piece
to this, was by accident suddenly reduced to Ashes.

This is one of the most populous and beautiful Cities in the World; their
Buildings are noble, large, and magnificent; their Streets broad, (no crouding
there for the Wall, as at London,) clean, (even to the wearing of Slippers in
Winter,) and neatly paved with French Peble, in Sand, which drinks up, and laid
high, which throws off the Water into their Canals, which are very large, and
numerous here, cleans'd by the daily ebbing and flowing of the Tide, and deep
enough to bear Lighters of Burden, which unlade their Ships, and bring up the
Merchandise to their very Doors; between their Houses are most pleasant Rows of
Trees, and Lamps between them, and very thick, (one to two Dwellings,) which in
Night give a delightful Prospect, and burn late, to answer the Ends of
Business, or Conversation: These, as well as the Trees, are preserved with
great Care, and he is a hardy Fellow that dares break the Glass of one, or the
Boughs of the other, and is sure of severe Punishment, which they never fail to
admister; and, to terrify the Youth, and the Mob, they have in several Places
set up on a Board painted neatly; The Executioner whipping some, and cutting
off the Hands of others for those Crimes; which, by this means, are rarely
heard of.

Here is neither Court, nor University, yet wonderfully abounds with People, of
most Nations; a great many Travelers always, passing and re-passing; it is a
mighty Thorowfair.

We walked round the Walls of this City, which are strong with Bastions, of
modern Fortification of Earth, faced with Brick, built Anno 1660, forty or
fifty Whole and Half-Cannon mounted on Carriages; the Points flank one another,
with a very large deep Ditch or Canal round three parts of it; the fourth being
secured by an Arm of the Sea, seven strong beautiful Gates, and several
Guard-Houses, sixteen hundred Soldiers in constant pay, clothed and maintained
by the City, whose Livery they wear, which is Gray Cloth lined, and faced with
Green; four hundred do Duty every Night. It Is rare to hear of any Disorders
committed here in the Nitht-time, notwithstanding the great number and variety
of Inhabitants and Strangers, and their continual Fiddling, all Night long, and
Gaming, which they do very much here; no Quarrels, no Heads broke, no Watchmen
scoured, or Assailants knocked down; no Swords drawn, no sending to the
Counter, to lodge there all Night; no breaking of Windows, pulling down of
Signs, and Barber's Poles, (manly Acts indeed!) no, not the least Mischief done
(at least seldom;) if Drunk, they reel quietly home, and hasten to Bed to sleep
it away; Robberies Nocturnal are rare, the Clapper-Men (as they call them) go
about every half Hour, and make a Noise with their Rattles, and tell the Time
of the Night, and trouble no Body with a Whither go ye? or, a Come before the
Constable, and be asked twenty silly impertinent Questions. Indeed the Houses
here are made very strong, abundance of Iron-work for Ornament and Safety,
Shutters within and without, very thick, and with strong Bolts, all neatly
painted, to the very Garrets, with Green, Red and White, which look very pretty.

We went into the new great Church, built by the Reformed; here is the biggest
Organ we ever saw, and plays so very fine, that you would almost swear there
were human Voices; nor did we ever see such a Pulpit in the World as there is
in another great Church, built broad at the lower part, and so up like a
Pyramid, all very curiously carved; then the Brass Skreen of mighty Bars, and
de Rutter's (their Renowned Admirals) Monument, erected at the States Charge,
which cost two thousand Pounds Sterling; never was the Life of so great a Man
so tamely and weakly thrown away, for he was sent to assist the Spaniards
against the French, who (upon the Revolt of the Messineses) made themselves
Masters of that noble Island; a little before the Engagement, in which he was
slain, an English Gentleman went on board his Ship, and welcomed him into those
Parts, and told him the French Squadron of Men of War was very strong, and that
he was troubled to see his so weak, and wondered the States would so expose
Him, his Life, and Honor; to which he answered, That where ever his Master
thought fit to venture their Flag, he would venture his Life; which he did, and
lost it, to his Masters shame, to send him at the Head of a poor Squadron, ill
manned and provided, that had commanded their whole Navy.

Here are but thirteen Churches in this vast City, but then they are very large
ones, much bigger than ours in England, but no where so numerous; these all
belong to the Calvinists, or Reformed Dutch Presbyterians; some of which we
were in Company with, and found them very honest, moderate, good Men, not so
hot and fiery as our own; they laughed at us for being so very zealous for, and
speaking so high of the Church of England; but we told them they had no reason,
for we understood they were as zealous for the Church of Holland, and would
suffer none but the Members of that to come into the Civil Government, which
was a good way to preserve it; which they owned: And we added, that if the
English were as wise in that very Particular, they would be a happy Nation;
but, as the Interests and Factions swayed at Court, so were the Churchmen
either valued or slighted, taken into, or thrown out of Place, and that this
shifting and changing of Persons, and fluctuating of Councils, was very
pernicious to the true Interest of the Nation, and that the only means to keep
the Government steady, and unshaken, was to fill all the Civil Employments of
Trust, Profit, and Honor, with sound Members of the established Church of
England, who were the only Men that could and would support Monarchy and
Episcopacy, the best Church and Government in the World.

Here are two French Churches, one of 'em has been lately enlarged above a
third part, it is well Wainscoted, and has a small plain Wainscot Organ.

Here is one English Church, to which we went the first Sunday after our
arrival, it was formerly a Popish Chapel; it has yet a Nunnery adjoining to it,
we saw some of the neat Nuns: Here is sorry Preaching, a long, dull, tedious
Sermon, an hour and three quarters, about two hundred Auditors, and sometimes
four or five hundred, all Presbyterians.

The King of England has a Consul here, who makes some small Figure, and sits
in an eminent Pew in the Church, and has some Respect paid him.

Here is also one High Dutch Church, or German; these are all allowed the Use
of Bells, and their Ministers are paid by the Magistrates, as are their own,
about 200 Pounds Sterling per Annum; some more, some less, besides Presents of
Spices, and other Things, they receive once a Year, viz. at Christmas.

The Roman Catholics are very numerous here, as also in the Towns and Villages
in this and other Provinces; they have in this City alone fourscore and five
Chapels or Mass-Rooms, have no Bells allowed 'em, are obliged to have their
Doors always open, and are tolerated, as all others are here; they have a large
Square of Houses for their Religious to live, but not to be cloistered up in,
who have a Liberty to go, or stay at Pleasure; and to live singly, or to be
married, which they like best.

Great Numbers of Lutherans are here, and have a very fine Church; and Jews in
abundance, who have many Streets here, and two Synagogues; one a very fine one,
and the largest in Europe (if not in the World) being much Superior to those we
our selves saw in many other Parts, where the Jews are most numerous; in the
Yards they have large Schools to educate their Children, and instruct them in
the Principles of their Religion, and to learn the Holy Language, as the Hebrew
is called.

Here are Armenians, Brownists, or English Independents, Anabaptists, and
Quakers, but not very many of the last: We were at all their Conventicles, and
heard 'em mouth out their Noise and Nonsense, much against our Humor, but when
we were once in, we thought 'twould be indecent to go out till all was over;
they are very Zealous and Furious, and thunder out strange sort of rattling
incoherent Stuff; we pitied their Ignorance, but found they retain the same
Heat abroad as at home. All these Dissenters from the established Church of
Holland, must be first married by the Magistrates, and afterward, if they
will, among themselves after their own Mode: But, as I said before, they take
care to exclude all these Puritan Pretenders out of their Civil Government, but
they may go into their Military, by Sea, or by Land, and be knocked on the
Head, if they please.

Here are three great Sluices, and Bridges almost without number, which were
formerly of Wood, but are now of good Stone, with very strong, and neat
Iron-work, not only of great Convenience for Communication betwixt Street and
Street, but also of great Beauty and Ornament. They are apt in Laziness (which
is not commmon) to throw their Filth into their Burghals, or Canals, which
causes ill Scents and Fumes, and which is a nasty thing, but it is prohibited,
and punished when discovered.

Amsterdam is the World's Warehouse, for here are vast Magazines of all sorts
of Merchandise; hither are brought Goods from all Parts of the discovered
Globe, and here they are laid up for a Market, and when ever they are in
demand, hence they are sent forth: Here is the great and general Storehouse
for Corn, of which, though they have but little grows in their own Country, yet
they serve their Neighbors with it, and are great Dealers, some of their
Merchants trading only in this Commodity are said to be worth above a hundred
thousand Pounds Sterling; they supply the Armies when in Campaign, and make
great Advantage thereby, as also by the Exchange of Moneys: Here are also
always vast Stores of Provisions of War, for the Sea and Land Service, Arms,
Powder, Ball, Buff-Coats, Belts, Match, Ship-Timber, Iron-Works, Masts, Pitch,
Tar, Hemp, Canvas, etc.

Then for Spices, with which they serve all Europe, and part of Asia, which
formerly was done by the Venetians, but now by the Dutch East India Company;
surely it is not the Fate of Commonwealths only to be Masters of such mighty
Commerce!

We hired a Yacht, and sailed up and down the River before the City, to view
that and their Shipping, which lie before it in the Form of a Half Moon, and
look like a Wood; they have abundance of small Vessels continually sailing to
and fro; we went to Sardam, a great Village about a League off, where we saw on
the Stocks almost a hundred Sail of Ships, all for the Merchants Service; they
underwork and under-sell all their Neighbour-Nations, who used to come hither
to buy Ships, which they could considerably cheaper than at home; they are very
slight, ill-built Ships, like other things for sale.

Here are Mills of many sorts, almost without number, chiefly to saw Timber for
Ships; some to make Paper; the People are subtle and very rich, live sparingly
on Butter-Milk, Whey, with Herbs and pickled Herrings, and Rye-Bread; some
great Merchants live here; others Insurers, but most Ship-Builders and
Ship-Carpenters: Their Houses are very ordinary, and built of Wood; two or
three Churches, one ordinary, one new built of Brick; the other lately enlarged,
for the Inhabitants increase. Here they build Ships of War upon occasion,
having abundance of Hands, and can run 'em up presently: Here we saw some few
Beggars, and except some Foreigners (most French) at Amsterdam, we met with no
Beggars in all our Travels in these Provinces: The Natives choose to be
Out-liers, rather than come to Amsterdam, where they shall have Bread, but they
must work for it. In our return we took notice of the vast number of their
Shipping, their Greenland Fleet makes a great show, being about six or seven
hundred Sail, which breeds abundance of Seamen, and employs abundance of
Shipping, but is not very gainful to the Adventurer, for they often make bad
Voiages, killing but a few Whales; the very Ships stinks of their Oil, so we
easily found them out. When we came ashore, we walked along their Keys or
Wharfs, and viewed the Shipping that way, they were numerous indeed, that part
of their Fleet which lies here consists of about fifty Sail, great and small,
several new ones on the Stocks; they are now hard at work to get them ready,
and to rig the rest, to be early at Sea next Spring: The States have here a
great Magazine for the Navy, and all things in great order, and well preserved.

We saw the East India Companies Magazine, consisting of Warehouses, and
Cellars, where are vast Quantities of Spices of all sorts, (the worst and
oldest of which they sell first, and send to their Neighbors, Callico's,
Silks, etc. It Is a large, new, well built House, with a Moat round about it,
and Draw-Bridges; before it, on the River, is their Ship-Yard, a very large
one, several new Ships on the Stocks, some of a thousand Tuns, all their own;
whereas the English East India Company hire Ships for their Service: The Dutch
Company is vastly rich here, and strong in the Indies, where, they say, they
are not only Lords of Land of great extent, and of many considerable Islands,
but are able to bring to Sea in those Parts a Fleet of forty good Ships of War;
and on Land, an Army of as many thousand Men: They are really very great and
formidable in those Parts, having got all to themselves; they have rook'd and
worm'd out the Portuguese (the ancient Discoverers of, and Traders to these
Parts) and the English, who have little or nothing now to do in the
East Indies, and are like to have less, as they manage Matters. The Dutch
East India Company has a Sovereign Power and great Privileges granted them by
the States General, are very Politic in their Conduct, and Diligent in their
Application, and aim not at the making themselves and Families, but the Company
Great; look to Futurity, and consider the Consequences of Things; they have
translated the Bible and Testament in the Indian Language, and pretend to be
good Christians, by endeavoring to plant and cultivate the Gospel among the
Indians, (their conquered Vassals,) but prove themselves very indifferent
(indeed not good Moralists) in their Negotiations with the English East India
Company, and in their Treatises with the Indian Princes, which they keep, or
break, (French-King like,) (complained of, though copied after) as suits most
with their Interest and Advantage.

They have a mighty Country in extent in India, and have built a great and
beautiful City, and called it Batavia, have fortified it like Amsterdam. At
that Place resides the General of the Indies, their chief Officer, who has
Guards of Horse and Foot, Court and State-Officers, Privy-Councellors, etc.
Power to conclude Peace, or denounce War, and looks much like (though he be not)
a Sovereign Prince. They are possessed of Bantam, and other Parts of the Island
of Java, are considerable in the Molucca Islands, and those of Banda, Sumatra,
and have Factories on the Coasts of Bengal, Malabar, and Cormandel, and in the
Dominions of the Mogul, and Galcanda, have great Commerce in Persia, China, and
Japan, and have routed the King from the Island of Zeylan, and are absolute
Masters of that rich Country, while he, poor Gentleman, grazes it on the
Mountains: Thus they usually treat the Indian Princes, who first permit them to
Trade with them (which indeed is their own Interest) then they establish
Factories, build Forts, (which is weakly done of those Princes to let them,)
and then bring Ships of War, and a good Army, and drive away the right Owners,
and take Possession for themselves, though they would be loath the most Christian
King should serve them (not much better Christians than his Majesty) so here in
Europe, though he might and would have done it, if the English had not stuck
close to them; for which surely they will be very Civil to them in the Indies,
though I don't know when, yet I hope no more Amboyna Businesses, which, I know,
the Dutch don't love to hear of; though it is an old Story, yet it is a very true
one, and, I think, one of the Cruelest that was ever heard of.

We took a view of both the Houses belonging to the Dutch East India Company in
Amsterdam; one is the old, the other the new Part of the City: Here they keep
their General Courts of Sales, and Committees meet to dispatch their Affairs;
there are abundance of Chambers and Offices, in one are the Trophies which they
have gained from the Indian Princes whom they have vanquished. We were led into
a Room, and gratified with the sight of abundance of Amber greece, Musk, Tea,
and other rich Drugs; and into another where were great quantities of Cinnamon,
Mace, Cloves, and Nutmegs, brought from their Magazines, and making here fit
for Sale, by sorting, as also mincing of them: Abundance of other Rooms and
Appartments we saw, too many and too long to particularize. It shall suffice
that we present you with a very fine and remarkable Story, told us just as we
were taking leave, and standing under the Gate. A Private Sentinel that carried
a Musket, and went hence in the Companies Service to Battavia, having
signalized himself by his Bravery in many Actions, was advanced to the Second
Command in those Parts, had Guards, a large Retinue, and lived wondrous Great,
flourished for a time, but in the space of a few Years was reduced to extreme
Poverty, and became a very Sot; being uneasy in India, he returned to
Amsterdam, and having spun out some time, and could get no Employment, once
more took a Musket on his Shoulder, and went away for Battavia to try his
Fortune a second time, (which seldom favors the Aged, but usually is lavish of
her Graces to the Youthful and the Gay;) but what became of this Gentleman in
this Second Adventure, we were not informed; but by this Story we took notice
of the great Incertainty and Mutability of all Sublunary Things.

We were several times on the Amsterdam Exchange, which is much crowded, and
which abounds with Business, and great Merchants, (many of which, by great
Losses, have gone off this War,) who correspond to and with all Parts of the
discovered World: This Building is oblong, of Brick and Stone, far short in
Beauty and Magnificence of the Royal Exchange at London, (though as capacious,)
being an old Pile; has no Shops round about it above, as ours, nor about it
below, only some few inconsiderable Toy-shops at one end above Stairs. The
Merchants here take great freedom of talking of and censuring all the Actions
of all the Sovereign Princes in the World, and observe no decorum in their
Expressions, for which they are much to blame, as we told some of our
Acquaintance, who thereupon furnished us with an agreeable and remarkable Story
of a Dutch Merchant, who on this Exchange talked very freely of one of the
lesser (though Sovereign) Princes of Germany, and speaking meanly and
contemptible of him, (his Envoy incognito being present, took notice of it,
asked his Name privately, and set it down in his Pocketbook,) it happened not
long after, this very Negotiator had Business in that very Prince's Country,
and being curious to see the Court, was met there by the Envoy who heard his
foul Language against his Master on the Amsterdam-Exchange, and who knew him
again, who demanding his Name, found 'twas the same Man, and asked him if he
remembered such Words; which he endeavored to evade, but the Time, Place and
Company being told, he was mute; the Envoy told him 'twas now in his Power to
ruin him, but he would not do it, but dismissed him with this Advice;
Henceforth Commonwealths Man (said he) have a Care how you treat Sovereign
Princes, for the unmannerly Freedom you take at home, might have cost you your
Life abroad. Nay, to our knowledge, upon that Exchange, a saucy Rascal (a
Broker) had the Impudence to wish all the Princes in the World in their
Rasphouse, or Bridewell; such Liberty of Speech do these wanton Republicans
take, and are fond of their Chains, viz. their heavy Taxes and Impositions,
their Servitude being prodigious, having nothing but the name of Freedom. The
same irreverent and indecent Discourse they have in their Coffee-Houses, which
is for want of good Sense and good Manners; for in all the Conversation which
we had (and which was a great deal, and with the principal Magistrates and
States, and Top Traders, who are mere Merchants) both in Private and Public
Houses, and in our Passages from Place to Place, we met with very few refined
Heads, (except amongst the States, who are for the most part very prudent,
sober, and civil Men, of stanch Reputation and great Integrity, of good
Families, and not raised from Pickled Herrings and Butter-Boxes, as reported by
some untravell'd Sparks,) but two at Amsterdam, viz. a Poet and a Civilian, who
were indeed very witty Men and extraordinary Company, we were often with them,
they spoke French fluently, which is very common here, and, we think, more
universal than Latin. Milk-Coffee with Nutmeg, and Coffee with Liquorish
infused, are much drank by the Dutch in those Houses.

The Government of this Renowned City is excellent, the Magistrates wholly
attend their Office, and look carefully after the due execution of their Laws,
which are the Life and Soul of the Commonwealth: The Excise, which is here
general, would be an insupportable Grievance, and cause daily Complaints, but
that it is fairly established, and faithfully collected. Here is a Senate of
thirty six States men, who continue in that Employment during life, by a
Privilege the Citizens have quitted, who in former Times elected them annually;
but when their City grew vast, the number of Electors increased and often fell
into Tumult; which to prevent they have established that great Council, who
fill up their own Vacancies themselves, and choose the Burgo-Masters, and
Eschevins, (Lord-Mayors and Aldermen) who are the Chief Magistrates; of the
first there are four, one presides, and serves two Years, the other three are
annually elected: These great Officers represent the Sovereignty of the City,
and dispose of all the Offices in the Civil Government, keep the Bank, and the
Keys of that and the City Gates, make all Issues and Payments, have the whole
Power, and are the sole Judges of what is for the Honor, Safety, and Interest
of this Body Politic; they receive and entertain Foreign Princes and
Ambassadors, and perform all the Public Ceremonies.

There are nine Eschevins; of which seven are annually elected, the Senate
chooses fourteen, and the Stadtholder (King William) approves of and confirms
seven. They are Judges in all Causes Civil and Criminal, and are Men of great
Integrity, of a clear and unspotted Reputation; their Pensions are small, and
their Port, Equipage and Retinue accordingly; they think it a sufficient Honor
(as well as their Duty) to serve their Country: The Burgo-Masters and Eschevins
have it in their Power to make their Families, by getting their Sons, Nephews
and Friends into Honorable and Profitable Employments. The Schout is a great
Officer, like our Sheriff, seizes Criminals, and secures them, and preserves
the Peace of the City. The Pensioner is like our Recorder, being Learned in the
Civil Law, who informs the Senate, Burgo-Masters, and Eschevins what are the
Laws and Customs of the Country, and makes all the Publich Speeches. Treasurers
and Underofficers there are in great number, too tedious to mention. The
Government of the several Cities of the Seven Provinces is (in a manner) the
same.

Then we went to Visit their Almshouses, which are numerous, and well filled,
giving Lodging and Diet to above twenty thousand Poor: Thus much may be said,
in pure justice, That the Dutch Charity is very great and extensive, they are
very liberal, they give often, though it be but a little at a time; their
Collections in their Churches are frequent, and handsomely managed to prevent
Reflections, so gathering the Alms, that one knows not what the the other gives;
the Velvet Purse or Bag which is handed about being deep and not wide; and to
put them in mind to prepare their Coin, a little Bell is fixed to the Stick, to
which the Purse is fastened, and which they send from one to another, through
every Pew; Children and Servants always give something. These Charity-Houses
are spacious, noble, large, and well contrived; we praised their Building and
Conveniences, and told them, it was our Opinion, Houses of that kind should be
rather Commodious (as theirs) than Magnificent, which was fittest for the
Palaces of Princes, and not the Hospitals of the Poor. They have made Provision
for the old Men and Women together, and separately and for Widows by
themselves, then for Children of both Sexes, who are numerous, and neatly
dressed, in party-colored Cloth, their upper Garment half red, half sadcolour;
more especial Care is taken of Citizens Children; though Foundlings, or the Issue
of Strangers, are not excluded this Benefit of their Charity.

We saw their Bedlam, a very neat old Building, though far short of that in
Moorfields, but rich in Stock, and indeed not so full of mad Folks, as the
English.

Here they have a Fool-House, no where else to be found in the World, not but
that there may be as many of that sort of tame Creatures in other Countries;
and this may be said, That how many soever there are without, there are very
few within these Doors: It Is a small old Building, where there is good Lodging
and Diet provided for these unhappy People; amongst them there was a Woman that
had the least Head we ever saw, being much less than the natural Proportion.

Hence we went to the Hospital for Boys and Girls, whose Fathers were Members
of the Established or National Church: it is a good well built square Piece,
where the Children (while little) are kept close to School, then put out
Apprentices to Handicraft-Trades: Here is an Apothecaries, and Shoe-makers
Shop, wholly for the Service of this House.

Hence to the Spin-House, the Prison for Whores and Thieves, all were at work,
some making Lace, others Plain-work, some Spinning, others mending Linen; some
in for Weeks, others Months, and Years, according to their Demerits.

Then to the Rasp-House, which is a Bridewell, where are secured those who have
been near hanging, and have escaped with burning between the Shoulders with
three Crosses, the Arms of Amsterdam; sometimes with a redhot Sword on their
Back, to show how narrowly they said their Heads, and to caution 'em to beware
of the next Punishment; here, after a severe Whipping, they are doomed to a
temporary Imprisonment, from three to five, seven, nine, eleven, and thirty
Years, some to perpetual; all to bodily Labor, to Rasp (which is to cut with a
double-teeth'd Saw) fifty Pounds of Brazil (a hard Wood for the Dyers use)
every Day, or be drubb'd lustily with a Bulls Pissel, and if that will not do,
they are put into a Dungeon, and fed with Bread and Water; or else into a close
dark Vault, into which Water is let, which if they don't empty by pumping, will
soon drown 'em, which soon brings 'em to work. The Profits of their Labor are
for their Maintenance, and the Overplus to the Stock of the House, or to be
disposed of by the States for the Public Good.

Here are also Houses for Vagabonds, or wandering Beggars, common Gamesters,
Sharpers, Sots and idle Folks, who are kept in this Place at hard work.

Then to the Gaasthouse, where Entertainment is given (at the Public Charge)
to all needy Foreigners, of any Nation, four Days, and as many Nights; in which
time they must find out their Friends, or get Work to maintain themselves, or
else they shall have Work provided for them by the Officers, which few like,
but had rather choose their own.

Upon the Justice-day (as they call the Execution here, which is usually
Saturday) we saw a Man strangled, which differs but little, and that in the
Word only, from Hanging; it is upon a Scaffold fixed against the Stadthouse;
the Criminal is brought through Solomon's Hall, where his Sentence is read, as
also on the Stage, then the Parson prays with him, and he by himself, then
mounts a little Cricket, and claps his Back to a Post set up on purpose,
through which there is a Hole, into which the latter is put, and so twisted hard
about his Neck, the Stool kicked down, and the Hangman all the while holding
his Nose, and stopping his Breath, the sooner to put him out of Pain.

Another was beheaded with a broad Sword, which the Executioner keeps under his
Cloak till the Criminal is ready on his Knees, and the Cap over his Eyes, then
off goes the Cloak, the Headsman approaches, pretending to pull the Cap a
little more over his Eyes, in half a Minute whips off his Head, and very
cleaverly. Haerlem furnishes Amsterdam with the Executioner; which though the
biggest and richest City in all the Seven (as well as this) Provinces, yet has
not the Privilege to have a Hangman of her own. He is a spruce Fellow, and goes
well in Habit, and has Servants to attend him, and is usually by Profession a
Surgeon, and Bone-setter, as well as Bone-Cutter, has a good Sallary from the
Towns where he serves, and lives comfortably, though very few are found of his
Company, it being thought the worst in the World, especially if he has a Parson
with him.

At the same time was a lusty sturdy Fellow whipped for some lesser Roguery, or
Cheating, which was done while the the other Fellow was hanging; and after this
manner, he was brought on the Scaffold with his Crime on his Breast in Capital
Letters, and led about, then stripped to the Waist, his Hands tied, and drawn up
tight with a Cord to a Post, then the Hangman took up a good handful of large
Birch (like that of Ostlers Brooms) from a great Bundle which lay close by, and
slashed him as fast as he could, backwards and forwards, then took up a fresh
handful, and so on for six or seven Minutes; at which time the Magistrates (who
look on out of the Stadthouse Windows) nodded to him to give over. Vast was the
number of Spectators, (as always is both there and every where else at such
unpleasant Sights) beyond what we ever saw, and most Mob; or Jean Hagel, as
they call 'em; or John Hail, or Canalia, or Canals, Sinks of Filth, etc.

Here are also proper Houses to receive, detain, and chastise Extravagants,
Deboshees, and reprobate, wicked, and lewd Children; of which having spoken
pretty largely in the Account of the Hague, we shall say no more here, but
refer our Reader thither for full Satisfaction.

All these Charity Houses, as also those of Correction and Reformation, are
neat and spruce, furnished with Pictures (which are so common in this Country,
that Butchers, Cobblers, and the meanest People, have a great many, and of the
sort pretty good) and well set out.

In some of these Almshouses there are fourteen or fifteen hundred, in others
eight or nine hundred, and in the rest four or five hundred Boys and Girls:
Here also may any Body, Man or Woman, Native or Stranger, have a handsome
Maintenance for their Lives, in a House provided on purpose, called the
Brother's House, paying only a small Sum of Money at first. The Charity of
this renowned City is very great, even beyond Example, and above Comparison,
they are continually giving to the Poor, hardly a Bargain made here, but they
come in for a Snack, the Gods Penny is theirs.

We took a walk in the Afternoon out of the City-Gates, to observe the
Situation and the Country round about. We saw Mills innumerable, all in motion,
some Water, some Wind, some Thatch, some Wood, (few Brick) to grind Colors for
the Pot-Houses, Corn for this City, sawing Timber, draining Marsh-Grounds, etc.
Here the Land lies low, and the Water high, damned up for the Public Service,
and convenience of Travel. The Air is thick, foul, and unwholsom; we fortified
our selves with a good Dose of old Hock every Day we lived, as the better sort
of Dutch do, and the common with a Cup of Nantz.

We arrived to the Dooly-House, a noted Tavern, where many of the Train'd-Band
Officers are very well drawn in good Paint, in a great drinking Rome, the Wine
is generally good at their Public Houses, but the best was at the
Heer-Logiment, but then the Price is higher: This is a noble House, fit to
receive and lodge a Prince, as it often does the lesser Potentates of Germany,
who frequently travel thither, especially in their Minority, when they never
fail to make the Tour of these Provinces; which well merit their Time and
Expense, informing their Judgments, as well as gratifying their Curiosities:
The Accounts and Descriptions of Places and Things, well made, being indeed
very delightful to read, but much more to view; the Eye being in matters of
that kind, much to be preferred to the Ear: The mighty Figure this Republic
has, and still does make in the World, her Wealth, Power, and Reputation, both
at home and abroad; her Numerous Armies, Formidable Navies, and Foreign
Alliances, are all well worth seeing and knowing.

It Is very observable here, more Women are found in the Shops and Business in
general than Men; they have the Conduct of the Purse and Commerce, and manage
it rarely well, they are Careful and Diligent, capable of Affairs, (besides
Domestic) having an Education suitable, and a Genius wholly adapted to it. The
Men take all the Pleasure, they go to Coffee-Houses, Taverns and Treats, walk
or ride in Chases abroad, play much at Cards, sit up Gaming and Fudling
greatest part of Night; and all is well, the good Wife gets and the Husband
spends the Money; but this Compensation the Woman has for all her Toil and
Care, That at her Death (if she drops before her Husband) she can give away
half the Estate. The Women of these Parts are all for making their Daughters
and Nieces, or Grandchildren great Fortunes; they let the Boys shift for
themselves, they say they can best do it.

We met abundance of French in this Place, both Ministers and others, (most of
the Reformed Religion) the Dutch are very generous to them in their Alms for
their Support; here are many Thousands, ten for one in England or Ireland. This
Remark we made (not once but often,) when we or any others, occasionally spoke
against the French King, they seemed concerned, though he has so bitterly
persecuted them; and, as we were informed by those who knew it well, they used
to rejoice at his former Successes in Flanders, Piedmont, and Catalina, and say
upon all Occasions, Notre Grand Monarque est invincible, which Note now is
changed; the Dutch were offended at their Vanity and Weakness, because from
them they received their Bread.

We went to the Butter, Cheese, Poultry, and Dog-Market; the three first were
well-stor'd, but the last (which is every Monday Morning) had but about twenty
Curs in it, and those very ugly, but every Woman must have one, the ordinary as
well as extraordinary, and good round Prizes they, for these hairy Companions.

Thence to the Market for green and dried Herbs, Seeds of all sorts, and Roots
for Apothecaries; another of very fine Flowers in Pots, in great quantities.
Here is a Rag-market, and another for Tobacco, Pipes, of which they have very
fine ones, curiously glazed and wrought, and great variety of Sorts and Prizes,
for Sea and Land, short ones with large Bowls for the Skippers and Tarpaulins,
who keep them on board their Vessels, and sell them to the Passengers. Markets
of Baskets, Chairs, Tubs, and Pails, all very pretty; Grain, Biscuit, Cakes,
Eggs, etc. Two large Flesh-Markets or Halls, being in handsome Houses, great
store of Flesh in both, and very good, indifferently cheap, and would be very
reasonable but for the great and lasting Excise; the Butchers and their Wives
are neatly dressed, and cleanlier than ours: Here is also a Sawcidge, Hogsface
and Tripe-Market; they sell in their Cheesemongers Shops Bologna Sawcidges, and
dried Salmon, both which they dress well, boiling in part, then frying the
first, and eating it with Spinach, over which they scrape Nutmeg.

We hired a Yacht again, and sailed for several Hours up and down the River to
divert our selves: Upon a small Island overagainst the City is their standing
Gallows, (the Scaffold I mentioned before being set up only at particular
times,) all of Freestone, Triangular Pillars, with Iron cross them, with
carved Work (a Lion) at the top of each; they first hang or strangle the
Criminals on the foresaid Scaffold erected close to the Stadthouse, and those
sentenced to hang in Iron are brought hither. The Wheel, or Cross is seldom
used here, (though often in France.) The Scotch Man that many Years ago attempted
to burn their Fleet of Men of War, is here laid upon a Wheel set upon a high
Post. Also a French Man that killed a Whore, who being bid by the Parson to
pray for the City and Magistrates, said, The Devil take 'em all; and one or two
more hanging in Chains, (as we in England call it.)

We had the Curiosity to go to see the Navy or Admiralty Office, which is a
well built House, with good large Rooms, well painted, and fitly accommodated
to the Business; they have a Court of Justice within themselves, from which is
no Appeal; they hang or shoot their Sea-Officers, or Men for Cowardice, or
neglect of Duty, and reward them roundly if they burn, sink, or take a
Flag-Ship, or any Ship of War, great, or small, or do any considerable Service;
they give them ready Money and Pensions when disabled; great Care is taken of
their Seamen, their Wages punctually and justly paid, and their Widows and
Children considered, and themselves largely provided for in Hospitals, etc. In
this House are several Trophies hung up, taken from the several Enemies of this
State.

We hired each a Chaise (which is a small Chariot on two Wheels drawn by one
Horse, which runs very swift, the Roads being sandy and generally good, can
travel sixty Miles a day,) and each got a Companion, and went to NAERDEN,
Naerden.
the Frontier of the Province of Holland, about ten Miles from Amsterdam; in
our way we past through Muyden, a small City, which has no Vote among the
States, because neither they, nor Wesep, another small City, nor Naerden sent
any Deputies to the Hague, when the Foundation of the Union was laid. This Town
of Naerden was almost destroyed by Fire in the Fourteenth Century, and the
remainder of it drowned by the Sea soon after; but Anno 1455 it was rebuilt by
William the Third of Bavaia, then Earl of Holland. The Citizens of Vtrecht made
themselves Masters of it in the Year 1481, by a pretty Stratagem, putting their
Soldiers in the Habit of Country Women; who entering the Place on the
Market Day, easily took it; but the Inhabitants soon recovered it, and put them
all to the Sword. Anno 1486 this Place was reduced to Ashes, and soon rebuilt;
but it met with a severer Fate (at least in the Persons of the Burghers) from
Frederick de Toledo, Duke D'Alva, who came before it with a Body of an Army;
upon which some of the Citizens opened their Gates to let him in;
notwithstanding which, he fell upon the Inhabitants and barbarously murdered
them.

It is now a modern Regular Fortification, and made prodigiously strong,
capable of receiving a Garrison of eight or ten thousand Men; it was begun Anno
1677, and perfected since the beginning of this War; it cost above three (or
rather six) hundred thousand Pounds Sterling. Here are six Bulwarks, four
Ravelins, two Half-Moons, two Gates, and double Ditches, deep, with strong
Counterscarps.

The Town is but small and ordinary; but this is the Frontier and principal
Security of the whole Province, which is not the richest only of the Seven, but
of the Seventeen. In the Year 1672 the French with Ease and by Treachery took
it; but the Prince of Orange (now King of England) re-took it in eight Days
time, there being then no Fortification, but what the French had thrown up
while they possessed it. The States depending upon their Armies in the Field,
took the less Care of this Place, now they have made it very formidable.

Here is a small Woollen Manufacture; good Beer brewed, fine, and but little
inferior to the English in pleasantness of taste.

We rid round about the Country, which is Downy, almost like Epsom, the Air
pretty wholesome, and pleasant: We were at a Country House of the late Admiral
Trump's, a pretty Box, fine Gardens, Walks, and Rows of Trees, with a good Moat
about it. We past by another of his Houses, which the French burnt in the
former War, Anno 1673 or 1674, much bigger than the other.

In our return we past through Wesep, a small and inconsiderable City, where
they brew good Beer.

The Weather being pleasant we made another Sally from Amsterdam, and visited
Vtrecht, twenty seven Miles off; we past by Overkirk, a small Village, which
gives Title to a Lord, a Favorite, and possessed of the Revenues hereof. We
went through Opcow, another small Village, four Miles further; near which Place
are the Ruins of an old Castle. Then we came to Liona, a great Town, seven
Miles off: Thence to New Sluice, where we dined upon roasted Eels, which is
very good Victuals, and well dressed here, and is always ready at set times for
Travelers. A Mile and half further is Brutil, a small Village, where young De
Rutter has a House. We past Maersem and Soulandt, two small Places; and about
three in the Afternoon we arrived at Vtrecht, a great, populous, but weak City,
Capital of the Province of that Name, one of the Seven United, formerly and
Archbishopric, in the Circle of Westphalia, and Imperial, but now subject to
the States: It is seated on a Branch of the Rhine, in a very convenient and
fruitful Place.

We walked about the Walls, which are pretty high, and of Brick, but weak, and
out of repair, surrounded with a deep, and broad Ditch; we past one of the
Gates, and were ferried over to see the Pall Mall, which is kept very neatly,
shaded with several Rows of Trees on each side, preserved by the present French
King's immediate Command, who was there with his Army An. 1673, when he took
this City without any Resistance. Here is an University (erected by the States,
Anno 1636,) but not so full as that at Leyden; though this, in our Opinion, is a
pleasanter Place, having better Air, and a finer Country about it, for we
almost phansied our selves in England, this being like some of our old Cities:
Here many of the Nobility and Gentry live, because of the pleasantness of the
Place, being as it were a Retirement from the noise and hurry of Business and
Bustle, constant in great, trading, populous Places. The better sort of People
here affect the French Mode, and, in some measure, their way of living; whereas
the Dutch, in most other Parts, are fixed to their Fashion, as the Spaniards,
never changing it.

We had the Curiosity to turn over the Manuscripts lately found out, and now
deposited in the Clerks House, (adjoining to the English Church) where, besides
many very ancient Bibles, and other curious Books fairly written, flourished,
and adorned with Golden Letters, we saw five Unicorn's Horns, (as they called
'em,) three long and thick, two small and slender, like those we have elsewhere
seen (said to be such too.) Here are two small brazen Images, supposed to be
Heathen Gods, and by them worshipped.

On Sunday (in most decent manner) we went to the English Church, which is a
good old Piece of Building; the Chancel is let for a Joyners Shop, so little do
they value what was once consecrated (because after the Popish manner) to God;
the Congregation was small, between one and two hundred, zealous Parson and
People, no English Liturgy read here, all Presbyterians; we viewed the Dutch
Cathedral Church, it was once so, though not now; it is very capacious, built Abbey
manner, and after the old Fashion, half of it fell in some years since, is not
repaired, because the People are poor; here is a very lofty old Steeple, which
we ascended, and whence we took a view of this good, great, old City, and of
several Churches and old Buildings, formerly Monasteries and Nunneries. In the
chief is Van Ghent's Monument, not so splendid as elsewhere; he was De Rutter's
Vice Admiral, and slain by the English in the Naval Engagement Anno 1672; he
was of a noble Family of the Province of Guelderland (which is contiguous to
this,) and Colonel of a Marine Regiment, trained up to the Sea Service, and
ready at all times for that, as also the Land Service, and in a scarcity of
Seamen, of great Use to supply that Defect, being Amphibious.

The Streets are broad and clean, and the Stadthouse a small neat old Building,
with a fair Piazza, or Marketplace. They take great Liberty here on Sundays,
playing at Tables, Dice, and other Games with Cowries (or Blackmoors Teeth, as
the Children call 'em) at the Coffee-Houses and Taverns, and have Music in the
Publick-Houses; the same is indeed practiced at the Hague and Amsterdam; though
in other Places they are a little more strict, particularly in Zealand; but
they live very loosly in the Provinces of Holland and Vtrecht, buy and sell
frequently on this Day, and especially Provisions; which is the more
reasonable, because of Travelers passing and re-passing, and they must not
starve on this, though the Lord's Day.

The next Day we hired a Wagon to carry us to Soestdike, nine Miles from
Vtrecht; it is oue of King William's Hunting-Houses, formerly much frequented by
him, there being abundance of Game about it, especially Pheasant and Partridge;
it is a very pretty Box, and lately (that is some Years since) built, excellent
Painting of Game, of all kinds, on the Walls and Cielings; the Lodgings are
small, but neat; good Gardens, curiously planted and made up; a Park of six
English Miles about, five hundred Head of Deer; a pretty Engine or Mill, about
three hundred Yards from the House, which conveys Water through leaden Pipes
under Ground to serve all the Offices in the House; very fine Walks, and rows
of Trees about it, which renders it indeed very pleasant. Having sufficiently
diverted our selves here with the Pleasures suitable to the Season, we went
back to Amsterdam, whence the next day we took a Boat with Sails and crossed the
Riyer Y to Buyck sloot, a village about a League off, and went thence by Water
in another Boat drawn with a Horse, to Promerent, a small old City, two Leagues
further, which has a Vote amongst the States, and is very rich in her Finances.
Here we hired two Chaises for two Days, and gave two Rix-dollers for each; we
past through the Beemster, Land so called, which the Sea formerly broke into,
but was soon milled out: It Is very fat Pasture, feeding yearly abundance of
Cattle of several sorts, which are brought from Friesland, Norway, Denmark, and
other Places lean, and here fatten'd. Many Country Gentlemen have fine Country
Houses, all round about, adorned with pleasant rows of Trees, and beautified
with Paintings. We dined at Schermerhoorn (a small Village) on Fish, because we
could have nothing else, nor indeed can we in any of the small Towns through
which we traveled; but this amends they make us, they are very new, because
always alive; nay, the common People (love their Bellies so well) they'ell not
buy any Fish if they but only languish, much less be dead: At this Place we had
a mind to have a little Butter melted thick for Sauce, after the English
manner, which with much entreaty, and many good words, (the only way to work
upon those rough, clownish People) we were promised, and in part had, for it
was thick enough indeed, almost like hasty Pudding, for they had put abundance
of Flower in, without which they cannot (that is, they will not) melt but boil
Butter to Oil; they say, it is then best, being thinnest, and goes farthest;
they are, as I said before, generally choice Cooks, but then it is only for
their own Country Folks.

Five or six Miles from this Place lies ALKMAER, Alkmaer.
which is one of the neatest, and pleasantest, (though) oldest Cities in all the
Low Countries, being built in the Year 1550; it is very clean, and handsomely
paved; we rid through part of it, without stopping longer than to take a Glass
of old Hock, and away we went to Egmont aside Hoef, three Miles off, a sweet
little Village; there stands an old ruined Castle: Thence to Egmont by the
Seaside, about a Mile further, a small Village of Fishermen, whose Wives and
Children were making Nets for their Husbands Service, who were then at the Salt
Water getting Bread for them; so nothing is idle here: Thence through another
Village called by the same Name, a Mile distant, it lies along the Sand Downs;
here is a pretty Church, two Steeples, and the Ruins of an old Fort or Castle;
the Counts of Egmont (famed in Story) are Lords of the Lands and Revenues all
round about; we diverted our selves with driving to and fro, and viewing the
main Sea, and then returned, and supped, and lay that Night at Alkmaer, and the
next Day took an exact and particular view of this flourishing City. It was
formerly burnt and plundered by the Frieslanders, and Guelderlanders, but soon
re built by the Inhabitants, and fortified after the manner of that Age, but
better by William the First, Prince of Orange, who commanded some new and
strong Works to be added to it, which proved of manifest Advantage to them in
the Sige which the Spaniards laid to it, Anno 1573, under the Duke D'Alva,
after he had taken Haerlem, but they were forced to rise from before Alkmaer
with Shame and Loss. It is the Capital City of the North Parts of Holland, and
sends Deputies to the Hague, and has a Session in the Admiralty, and a Stock in
the East India Company, and a great Manufactory in Linen Cloth; the Country
round about is very Fruitful, and yields abundance of good Corn, Butter, and
Cheese; of which last they have here a very fine Market, and the greatest
variety of sorts we ever saw, some made with Anni-Seeds, some of Commin-Seeds,
other of Sheeps-Milk discolored with green, all very indifferently tasted; and
(in our Opinion) the very best was far short of our Chedder, or Cheshire; we
had also Parmesan-Cheese about fourteen Pence English Money per Pound, which
indeed is firm and well tasted, but not so mellow and delicious as ours, (at
least in our Thoughts, nor are we partial.)

We viewed their great Church, which is of curious Architecture, and one of the
finest in these Provinces; it is neatly Wainscotted, and well kept; has a very
fine, large, well-painted Organ, which plays every Day from eleven till
twelve, and makes excellent Music. And we saw their Stadthouse, which is a
neat old plain Building, and stands in a fine, broad, cleanly, and well-pav'd
Street. Their Fish-Market is well stored with great plenty of Perch, Carp,
Eeels, Popes, Bleaks very large, and Jacks, (but a few) all alive, and very
cheap.

So having seen all that was Rare and Curious, we mounted, and returned to
Amsterdam, where we spent two or three Days in finishing our Observations, and
in buying some Toies, and fine Things (of which they have abundance) to present
our Friends at our Return, we left this renowned City, and passed through
Haerlem and the Hague once more, and so to Rotterdam, where we staid two or
three Days more; and thence went by Water to Dort, a beautiful, strong and rich
City in this Province, famed for the Synod held here about Religious Matters,
Anno 1618. to determine the Controversies between the Gomarists or
Contra-Remonstrants, and the Remonstrants or Arminians, about Predestination,
which then made a mighty Noise in the World. It stands on an Island, at the
Mouth of the River Maese, and between three others, viz. Merwe, Rhine, and
Linghe, ten Miles South-East of Rotterdam; is the first that Votes in the
States of Holland; it is well built, and very neat; had once the sole Right of
Coinage, but now other Places in these Provinces have got the like Privilege;
the Sea frequently breaks in upon it, but more formerly, and drowned above ten
thousand Persons, and laid twelve Villages under Water, and once seventy
Villages and one hundred thousand People.

The Earls of Holland in ancient Times kept their Courts there; it was also
formerly the Staple Town for Merchandises Exported, but has now only the Staple
of Rhenish Wines, with which they drive a great Trade, and brew abominably,
mixing French White Wine, and other cheap, and ordinary, thin, lean, and hungry
Wines with that noble Juice, that it has in a manner lost the very natural
taste, and is indeed poor insipid stuff; however, we met with good old Hock
here, because we were willing to pay the highest Price. Formerly the English
bought abundance of this sorry Wine, but they are grown wiser, they now buy but
little; the English Ladies for the most part now drinking Red Wines, whereas
formerly they fansied that brewed Dort Rhenish Wine most; however, there is yet
a pretty good Trade with England for those Wines, which the Wine-Coopers put
into rich Canary, which makes it pleasanter, and to them the cheaper, so they
get the more Money by brewing it.

And here we embarked for Zealand, being resolved to make the Tour of that
Province, more particularly for the sake of those two Renowned Cities,
Midleburg and Flushing: But before we leave the Province of Holland (where we
yet are) it will be fit to recollect something (and very material) which we
omitted, and had like to have forgot. Before we left Amsterdam we went to their
Theater or Playhouse, which is but ordinary, the Stage Music, Actors and
Actresses, in their Persons, and Habits so, and indeed there was but one Thing
well personated, and that was admirably well done, and was this; An old Fellow,
who often appeared on the Stage in the Person and Habit of a Serving-Man, and
who was well known by both, and also by his Voice, for he answered to many
Questions, was by ill Fate, or bad Conduct (call it which you please) led into
a Capital Crime, and having forfeited his Life to the State; he was brought out
to die, (a Gallows of the Country form, with a small Brickwork almost
Breast-high, to receive the dead Body when cut down, was set upon the Stage)
and being told, that he should have his Life, if he would marry one of the
Three Women (no contemprible ones) present on the Stage, he viewed 'em well,
and said, he was obliged to them for their Love, and to the States for their
Kindness; but Marriage being (in his Opinion) worse than Hanging, he would
rather undergo that Sentence. He made a short Prayer, went up the Ladder, and
was turned off; the young Women all the while on the Stage, seeing what past,
and finding themselves neglected, were moved with Pity rather than Revenge,
approached the hanging Man, and said, Though he was a sour, ill-natured Fellow,
and would not ease us, of what has been troublesome to us many Years, (our
Maiden-Heads,) yet we will put him out of Pain, as soon as we can; upon which
they plucked his Legs hard, which dropped down, and his Hands and Arms which did
so, as also did all the rest of the Man, his very Head and all falling through
the Rope; which in less than a Minute was all put together again without a
touch, and he appeared on the Stage, and spoke to us all; nor could any Body
discover how this Thing was done, which was the Rarity. The Comedy was called,
Crispin the Physician, (which we always reckoned rather a Cobbler, but any thing
will make a Doctor there, their Prices are accordingly, for we have seen a top
Doctor take from an eminent Merchant a Half-Crown Fee,) with a silly Farce, of
Hatred and Envy, which pleased them better than the Play, (because they knew no
better.) The Pit is about two Shillings English Money; the Gallery sixteen
Pence; behind the Pit Sixpence; but there the Mob will stand, breaking in by
force sometimes.

The Players are kept poor by the States, to whom they (and all the
Rope-Dancers, Puppet-Players, Lotteries, and all other Shows and Games
whatever) pay, (toward the Maintenance of indigent old People) a great part of
their Profit; some said, these do pay Two thousand Pound per Annum; then no
wonder they are so indifferenly clothed themselves.

We were carried to their nasty common Bawdy House, called the Long-Cellar, (we
bid 'em put Sodom to it) presently appeared half a Dozen of plump Punks, ready
to be employed, desirous to go into a Box by themselves; but we did not like
this Kitchen-stuff, so we called for a Pint of White Wine, and gave it them,
(not drinking a Drop our selves; for the Wine, and other Liquors in those
filthy Houses, is always (like their Women) good for nothing. We had a little
Liquorish Chat; they knew us to be English, and said they liked our Countrymen
best of any in the World; but we paid six Stivers for our Wine, and so took our
Leaves of these Ladies.

We were immediately conducted by a Friend to a House of Pleasure, something
like; the Sign is, the Hoff van Holland, or the Court of Holland, and there
were, in a Front-Room below stairs, a Knot of a dozen Women, to be hired, but
all employed, some working, some playing at Cards, etc. We called for some Ale,
which being brought in Bottles, was something like (though not so good as) our
Cock-Ale; we paid six Stivers, (which is about a Penny more than an English
Sixpence,) and treated the Ladies, who were handsomer, and better dressed than
the other; however we had nothing more to say to 'em, than a little merry Tattle,
so we paid, and moved off: These Women attend the Service of the Public, and,
when agreed with, will go where you please, and do with you what you please.
These Things are connived at by the Magistrates, who say, it is unavoidably
necessary, to prevent worse Things, Violations, Rapes, etc. they abounding with
Strangers, Travelers, and Mariners, long absent from Women. They have many of
these Houses (as we were informed) between forty and fifty, they generally go
under the Name and Shadow of Musick-Houses, but we were content with seeing but
two, taking their Words for the rest; nor did we hear any Music there. This
State makes an Advantage of these light Ladies, for each for her Admission must
pay three Pence; by laying out of which she hopes to get more.

In Summer the principal Diversion here is, to keep (as some) or to hire (as
most do) a Chaise, and take their Mistresses (often) or Wives (sometimes)
abroad into the Country, and give them the Air, and a handsome Treat, returning
home for the most part in the Evening. We have seen three or fourscore of these
Chaises, or small Chariots abroad at one time, and together, though almost all of
different Company.

In Winter the Ladies or better sort of Women are, when the Frost is hard, and
the Streets slippery with hardened Snow, (which is often) taken abroad by their
Gallants (often) or Husbands, (seldom except when first married) in Polish
Sleads or Sledges, richly Guilt and Carved, covered with Embroidery of Gold, or
Silver, or rich Silk, or Tapestry, drawn by a fine Horse, richly Harnessed,
with which they are very swiftly driven from Street to Street, from one Burgal
to another, for about two Hours, and then brought home; whence after a little
Rest, and a dish of Tea, they are attended to the Playhouse, and so home, and
to Tea (not cold) again, and then to Cards, which they use much, and hold long,
both before and after Supper, which they rarely fail of loving their Bellies as
well as any People in the World, though they would be thought to do the contrary.

The ordinary sort of People divert themselves but little in the Summer, except
in Walking, (chiefly out of the City in Sunday's Afternoon,) and in Winter in
Skating, which they do very much, and promiscuously, Boys and Girls, young Men
and Maidens, and some few of the better Sort are sometimes seen on the Ice at
that Sport.

The Merchandise in this City, even the heaviest, viz. huge Fats of Rhenish
Wine, is drawn on Sledges, very low, and consisting of two Pieces of Wood in
length about ten ot twelve Feet, held together by two Pieces across, and
covered with Iron at top; and on this they lay the Goods, having no great heavy
lumbring Carrs, like ours; the Brewers also carry their Drink abroad thus; all
having a little Tub of Water upon the Sledge, which they often spill on the
Ground, to make it go the glibber: The Drivers of these, as also of their
traveling Wagons, are (like our Carmen and Coach-men) often rude, and affront
Folks; but then upon Complaint to the Burgo-Masters, they shall be punished by
Suspension, or otherwise, very severely.

They have no Coaches like our Hackneys, that ply in the Streets, but you may
hire a Sledge, which is the Body of a Coach upon a Sledge without Wheels, and
drawn by a Horse, the Coach is a handsome one, and the Horse a good one, and the
Fellow in very good Habit; and thus the better Sort are carried to Church, and
to the Playhouse, and to Visits; the Price reasonable: But then at the Hague,
Amsterdam, and other Places, you may hire (as we did often) a handsome Coach on
Wheels, and a Pair of good Horses, to carry you any where out of Town.

The Dutch every where observe a great Decency in their Funerals, all the Men
following the Corpse (two by two, in handsome black Cloaks,) which are brought
to the Church (upon a forfeit of twenty-five Guilders the first, and fifty the
second half Hour, to be given to the Poor) at two, or thereabouts, the Doors
being locked up at three. The dead Body must lie three Days in open view, to
satisfy the Relations that it was a natural Death; and in some Places (in
these Provinces) when any Body dies, there is a Truss, or Bundle of Straw laid
at the Door, where it continues till the Day of the Burial, and is great or
small according to the Age, and Sex, there being a very large Bundle for a Man,
less for a Woman, and much less for a Child.

The Dutch are the worst Nurses in the World, they cannot make a little good
common Broth, Gruel, or Caudle, are hardhearted too, and careless of the Sick;
if you can recover by strength of Nature, and a small help from your Doctor,
so; if not, you may die, they are very indifferent in the matter.

In the Public Houses we pay for Pipes, Candles, and every thing; the Excise
is very high, and heavy, so that it cannot be avoided; but then you are served
with very fine Pipes (which you may break if you please) and large, white, tall
Candles, made of pure Tallow, but bad Wick, and so don't burn extraordinarily.

Amsterdam is in no fear of Foreign or External Force, they can, when they
please, cut their Dykes, their Banks, and lay the Country under Water, and so
prevent the Enemies approach.

And now for the Province of ZEALAD, Zealand.
to which we are under sail, and very near; landing about eight in the Morning
at Middleburg, the Capital Town in the Island of Walcheren; it was formerly a
very sorry Village, but now a noble, well built, rich, and very strong City;
it is but twenty five Miles North-East of Bruges in Flanders; it has a very
great Trade in Times of Peace, especially with France for Wines, (chiefly
White, of which here is the Staple) but now fits out almost a hundred Sail of
Privaties, (by them called Capers) which extremely annoy the French
Coast-Trade, having done them more Harm than all their Enemies besides; they
have some of forty and thirty Guns, which are sent into the West Indies, and
where they meet with rich Booty, having abundance of French Ships (some of
their Cargo's very valuable, especially those from Martinico) in their Harbor,
taken this War: While we were there, they brought in several good Prizes.

This Town has a good share in the East India Company's Stock, and have a
Chamber here, and Sales of Goods that come from thence; the Merchants coming
from other Provinces to buy them. Here were formerly some considerable English
Merchants, but now none, there being but little Trade between them and us:
There is an English Church, about an hundred Auditors, all Presbyterians, and
Dutch, from English and Scotch Parents.

Here is an Exchange, and but an indifferent one, and thin of Merchants. The
Churches here are large, and handsomely built, the Houses also, but not so new
and modish as at Amsterdam; the Place is moderately populous, Markets well
stored with Fish, and Flesh, both reasonable: The People, both at Land and Sea,
are not at all like the Hollanders, who are fat, swinging, swagbellied Fellows,
but these small, neat, tight, smart Lads, and the best Seamen for Fighting and
Privateering of all the Seven Provinces; they are indeed true bred Sea-Rats;
the Hollanders sail more in the Merchant Service, these in the States, and in
Capers.

Here is a good handsome Stadthouse, an old Piece; the People here are more
reserved, or rather more melancholic than in other Provinces; and the
Magistrates are very severe in punishing lewd Women, and Men, especially the
first, which makes them very close and private in their Amorous Affairs: They
are more loose, and greater Libertines in the Places whence we came, and drink
more to excess, as well as dally with Women.

We hired a Yacht and went on board some of their East India Ships, a League
below the Town, where we were very civilly received and entertained, (though
Strangers) for all the Dutch are not such very Boors as reported; but they are
a slow, heavy People (in Understanding, but not in Industry) and must not be
hectored and thundered at, but mildly and gently handled; we won upon 'em
wonderfully, giving them obliging Words, and using civil Actions, we melted
them into Complaisance (which is not very natural to them) and by some happy
and engaging Healths which we invented, and began, ( viz. Prosperity to the
State, to the Province, to the Company Trading to India, Union to the Allies,
Victory to the Confederates, Downfall of France, Continuation of Friendship in
our own Private Society, etc.) together with the Wine, (of which they were
liberal, even to an excess) we were soon all of a Piece, the best Friends in
the World, nothing like us, happy mixture of English and Dutch. We took leave
in time, and had Light enough just to observe the Ramekins, so famed in Annals,
and so much and so frequently talked of, being put into the Possession of our
Renowned and Glorious Queen Elizabeth, as a Mortgage for Money lent the States,
(when Poor and Distressed:) It Is an old fashioned Fort, and guards the Mouth or
Entrance of the River which leads to Middleburgh, and is but a sorry feeble
Thing.

But thence we went to FLVSHING, Flushing.
where we lay all Night, and next Morning early walked round all their
Fortifications, which are modern, strong, in good repair, and command the
River, and a pretty way to Sea.

Here is a large old, and a very great new Dock to build in, and to lay up
their biggest Ships of War, which this Province furnishes to their Quota; there
were several new Frigates, and Ships of great Force on the Stocks, which will be
ready early the next Spring: Here they build, and hence they send out a great
many Capers, that Plague the French, and return rich, (as they used to do from
Us when in War with England,) they have always forty or fifty abroad; they
chiefly live by that Trade, and by re-taking their own Countrymens, and Allies
Ships, having Salvage for the same, if within the Benefit of the Law Marine, or
else all to themselves.

Flushing is a fine City and noble Port, one of the Cautionary Places delivered
to the English. It stands at the Mouth of the River Scheld, where is a very
convenient Haven, but a League from Middleburg, which is bigger than this, but
not so populous: Here are a great many Fisher-Boats and small Craft belong to
both Places, but most to this: Hence is the Passage to Flanders, whose Banks
are in sight, and Bruges is but twenty-two Miles off.

This is the Key of the Sea of the Low Countries, and is a handsome, cleanly,
well built Place, but not very modern: It was (in vain) attempted by the Dukes
of Alva and Palma, but now thought almost impregnable: This poor Province has
been mightily exposed to Inundations, and been almost ruined by those
prodigious ones, An. 1304, and 1509.

TERVEER is the next considerable Town, Yerveer.
to which we went, and where we made but a short stay, it being far inferior to
the the other two, though this is the Third in the Province, the rest being but
inconsiderable, and rather Villages.

Here is a good Stadthouse, and and a good Church or two; the Houses are older,
and nothing near so Magnificent as in the the other two Towns; nor is their
Commerce to be compared, though they have a Snack in the East India Company's
Stock, and have some other small Trade, and some Fishermen.

King William, as Prince of Orange, possesses most of the Lordships and
Baronies in this Province, and my Lord Odyke some of the rest, who keeps a kind
of a Court, and makes some small Figure when at Middleburg; we visited his
Palace, which stands pleasantly, but affords no extraordinary Remarks. The
Weather began to be cold, some Snow fell, and Ice was feared, which would have
pent us in this famous Island, (which has fifteen or sixteen little ones within
it) so we resolved to take our Leaves of it; and accordingly took Boat for
Hevoet sluice, where we arrived in a lucky Minute, the English Packet-Boat
being within two Hours after to sail, and had a very fair Gail presented; so we
went ashore, refreshed our selves, bought Provisions good store, (there being
no Halfway-House at Sea,) and laid in some good old Hock and Brandy, and so
embarked about nine that Morning, and next Morning early landed at Harwich,
(being glad we were once more got on English Ground, in our Opinion, the best
in the World,) where we rested a few Hours, took Coach, and came to Colchester,
where we lay that Night, and furnished our selves with Eringo, or Sea Holy-Root
canded, (and the best done in England,) at four Shillings the Pound, and filled
our Bellies with large, fat, white, firm Oysters, and bought some to bring
home; and next Day in the Evening, being the 19th of November 1695, arrived
safe and sound in London, whence we had been absent three Months and five Days.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THE Reports of diverse Special Cases in the Courts of Common Pleas and
King's Bench, in the Reign of King Charles the Second. By Sir Thomas Jones,
Knight, late Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

Printed for Sam. Keble, and Sold by A. Bosvile, at the Dial over against St.
Dunstan 's Church in Fleet Street.

AN Help and Exhortation to Worthy Communicating: Or, a Treatise describing the
Meaning, Worthy Reception, Duty, and Benefits of the Holy Sacrament. And
Answering the Doubts of Conscience, and other Reasons, which most generally
detain Men from it. Together with suitable Devotions added. By John Kettlewell,
late Vicar of Coles-Hill in Warwickshire.

Sold by Alexander Bosvile, at the Dial, over against St. Dunstan 's Church in
Fleet Street.


