A Cure for the Cankering Error OF THE New Eutychians: Who (concerning the
Truth) have erred; SAYING, That our blessed Mediator did not take his Flesh of
the Virgin Mary, neither was he made of the Seed of David according to the
Flesh; and thereby have overthrown the Faith of some.

By Thomas Monck.

Joh. 17.3. This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

2 Pet. 3.17. Beware, lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked,
fall from your own stedfastness, etc.

London, Printed for the Author, Anno 1673.

The Author to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THE matters contended for in this Treatise, are on all hands confessed to be
very weighty, and necessary to our Salvation, which in short are these, viz.
The true knowledge of God, and his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which to know is
life Eternal. Now these new Eutychians, which here in this Treatise I oppose,
say, That the Divine Nature of Christ which was in the beginning with God, and
was God, Joh. 1.1, 2. compared with the 14 verse, was made flesh, viz. by
turning his Divine Nature or Godhead into flesh, even at the Water was turned
into Wine at Cana, Joh. 2.9. which ceased. to be Water and became Wine; so the
Eternal Word, viz. God the Creator of Heaven and Earth, ceased from being a
Creator, to become a Creature, viz. Man, and died for our sins, as these men
say, as you may see in this ensuing Discourse. Nov this Opinion I call
Erroneous and Heretical, and endeavor to prove it so, as also impossible; since
God is Immortal, and Immutable, yea, Perfection it self, and therefore cannot
die, nor yet be changed, as I have proved in this Treatise.

Secondly, They say in plain words, That our blessed Mediator did not take his
flesh of the Virgin Mary, nor of David; and so by Consequence he was not the
true Son of David: and if so, how can we be saved? since all the Promises are
Yea and Amen, in him that was the true Son of David, as the Reader may see in
the ensuing Discourse, which is a consequence of the former Opinion. Now albeit
some of them that be more subtle, begin to bogle and will not speak plainly to
this question, What the Word was before it was flesh? but say they cannot tell.

We say, he was either a Creator, or a Creature, since we know no other thing
that could die for us: and (as was said before) God the Creator of all things
could not die, as we believe: Therefore if they deny him to be a Creator, then
we think they must be Arrians or Socinians, which two Opinions, they say, they
abhor as false and erroneous; but the other part of them say still, as they all
use to say heretofore, That he was of the uncreated substance of his Father,
their Essence being one: but yet they all agree in this, That he that was the
Eternal Word did, not take his Flesh of the blessed Virgin Mary, as we say he
did.

Now I can assure thee, Christian Reader, I have had no mind to Dispute, much
less to Write about these great Mysteries; which I humbly believe and adore:
but the Opposition that these men of late have made against the Truth, and the
great danger that I know some poor Souls have been and yet are in concerning
these things about God and Christ; as also the exhortation of the Apostle Jude,
which bids us earnestly contend for that Faith which was once delivered to the
Saints, has engaged me in this great Work; which I confess I am not sufficient
for, but hope by this to open a door to some abler Pen to enlarge upon, and
further explain these great Mysteries, that so the little children that John
bids keep themselves from Idols, may know them better than yet I doubt they do.

Now the principal things I treat of in this Book, are these Four: First, Of
the Essence of God. Secondly, Of the Holy Trinity. Thirdly, About the Person of
Christ. Fourthly, Of the union of Natures in that one sacred Person: As you may
see, if the Lord open your eyes, as he did the two Disciples that were a going
to Emmaus, and that he may so do, is and shall be the Prayer of the Author of
this Book to God for thee.

And because I would be an instrument in the hand of God to keep thee from
Heresy, or pluck thee out if thou art in it, I have thought good to open to
thee in some measure the nature of that d^^^nable sin of Heresy, from the
words of the Apostle Peter, which I will use as a Preface to this Book; to the
which I refer thee, as also to the Book it self, for thy satisfaction: and
shall pray that God would be pleased to make it effectual for the end intended;
which is Gods Glory, and the Salvation of poor Souls, and remain,

Thine To serve in what I may for the Truths sake, T. M.
October 19. 1672
The Preface.
2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. But there were false Prophets amongst the People, even as
there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction: And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of
whom the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of: And through covetousness, shall
they with fained words, make merchandise of you.


1. IN these words the holy Apostle shows us, That as the Church and People of
God in old time, had their enemies, the false Prophets; so the Church of
Christ, in these last days, shall have their Adversaries, the false Teachers.

2. That the work of the false Teachers will be, privily to bring in damnable
Heresies.

3. That the Heresies will be of so destructive and damnable a nature, that
they which adhere to them, will even in so doing, deny the Lord that bought
them.

4. That the false Teachers in bringing in the said damnable Heresies, will
bring upon themselves swift destruction.

5. Such shall be the success of false Teachers, That many shall follow their
pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of.

6. That which shall be the moving Cause to set false Teachers a work, shall be
Covetousness.

7. The Engine or Instrument which they shall use to carry on their work, shall
be feigned words.

8. And lastly, The condition that those will be brought into, which follow
them, is no better than slavery, they shall make Merchandise of you: that you
shall, as it were, be bought and sold into slavery.

I hope, through the good assistance of Jesus Christ, to treat of these Eight
Particulars briefly, as an Introduction to this Treatise.

First, It being the main design of Satan to subvert the Kingdom of God; he
has in all Ages used his utmost endeavor so to do. He assaulted our first
Parents, even when they were in innocence; and having prevailed so far, that
the first Covenant has been broken, and thereby the Will of Man depraved;
though God has provided by the new Covenant of his Grace and Mercy to save
through his Son Jesus Christ all those that do believe in him, yet Satan and
his instruments, have not ceased in all Ages since the first discovery thereof,
to make opposition against it. When God was pleased to take his People by the
hand to bring them out of Egypt, and by his Servant Moses to direct them in the
way of his Covenant; there wanted not a Balaam to cast a stumbling block before
the Children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit
fornication. See Rev. 2.14. Numb. 25.1, 2. When Elijah the Prophet of the Lord,
taught Israel the knowledge of the true God, the Prophets of Baal sought to
teach them the Idolatry of Baal, 1 King. 18. When Jeremiah the Prophet of the
Lord, taught the People obedience, according to the Word of the Lord, then
Hananiah spoke in opposition to it, in the presence of all the People, Jer.
28.11. It would be too long to recite every particular mentioned in the holy
Scriptures, wherein the opposition is recorded which false Prophets have made
against the Truth of God, and against those that God has been pleased to send
to declare it: If we consider the work that false Prophets, and false Teachers
do, and the way they take to effect it, we shall find it is a most desperate
design they are engaged in, it is no less than bringing in of damnable
Heresies; such, as being retained, do overthrow the Faith, and even make
shipwreck of a good Conscience; See 2 Timothy 2.18. and 1 Timothy 1.19. What can be
worse than to set up for a God, that which is not God, and for Divine Worship
that which the true God never commanded. See Jer. 10. Matthew. 15.9. And if also
we take notice of the way that false Teachers take to effect their purpose,
viz. to bring in Heresies into the Church, it will be found to be carried on
with much subtilty, the Text tells us, they do it privily. We must not think
that false Teachers do teach no truth at all, but rather together with the
Truth, which in part they deliver, they mix with it certain Errors, of so
destructive a nature to it, that the Truth is overthrown by the Error. The
false Teachers mentiomed, Acts 15.1. would not say that the Disciples ought not
to believe in Christ for Salvation, yet what they taught amounted to the same,
which was, That except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be
saved: See Gal. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. All the false Teachers are not said to deny the
Resurrection, but some denied it, others said it is past already; See 1 Cor.
15.12. 2 Timothy 2.18.

Therefore, Secondly, When we do consider seriously to what danger Heresy does
expose us, we had need to pray to God that he will keep us, that we be not led
away with the Error of the Wicked, and so fall from our steadfastness, but
rather that we may grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ; See 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. For there be many Errors which are not so
dangerous as Heresy; there may be error in Knowledge and also in Practice,
which yet are far short of Heresy: Alas, we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9.
Luke 17.10. And for Practice, when we have done all, we are unprofitable
Servants, we have done but what was our duty to do. But Heresy is a work of
the flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20. it is reckoned up with Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness; with Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance,
Wrath, Strife, Sedition; with Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, and suchlike.
Can this be good that is martialled in the midst of these? For, when the holy
Spirit by the Word of God sets forth the nature of Heresy, he compares it to
Leaven, 1 Cor. 5.6, 7. Gal. 5.9. Because Leaven is of such a nature, that it
makes all the lump to savor of it: So Heresy, if it be not truly removed, it
gives all that embrace it participation of its sour relish. Likewise it is
compared to a Gangreen, 2 Timothy 2.17. which is a Venom* of such an eating
nature, that except a member be cut off, the whole will be destroyed, unless it
be speedily stopped, before it has taken too much root in the part infected
with it. So it is with Heresy, if it be not speedily stopped, it will grow to
such a head, that the Heretic, though he be condemned of himself, yet he will
not be turned, but must be cut off; see Tit. 3.10, 11.

For, Thirdly, The nature of Heresy is such, that it opposes the Doctrine of
God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ. See that famous place in the Epistle of
Jude, verse. 3. Beloved, says the Apostle, when I gave all diligence to write
unto you of the common Salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and
exhort you that you should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once
delivered unto the Saints, verse. 4. For there are certain men crept in
unawares, which were before of old ordained to this concondemnation, ungodly
men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only
Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Here we see the damnable nature of
Heresy, it denies God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and so takes away the object
of saving Faith: for saving Faith has for its object God and Christ; yet so as
we first believe in Jesus Christ, God-Man, a Savior unto all them that do
believe in him, and by Christ we believe in God, see 1 Pet. 1.21. the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost; a God and Father unto all them that believe.

Now because things are best seen by their contraries, I will lay down four
Propositions, which every true Christian owns (or ought to own) and every
Heretic denies in part or in whole; whereby you may clearly discern the
destructive nature of Heresy to all true Religion and Piety.

Prop. 1. God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost is the object of saving Faith. No
man was ever saved without this Faith: no man ever called upon God, but by the
help of the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. As no man can say that Jesus is the
Christ, so neither can any man say that God is God, but by the holy Ghost:
neither did God ever hear any man that called upon him for Salvation, but for
his Sons sake.

Prop. 2. Jesus Christ God-Man is the object of Faith, and therefore he is to
be believed in; Ye believe in God, believe also in me, Joh. 14.1. So likewise
his Apostles taught, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved
and thine house, Acts 16.31. testifying both to the Jews and also to the
Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; yea,
we are commanded of God to believe in Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.23. And this is
his Commandment, That we should believe on his Son Jesus Christ; and love one
another, as he gave us Commandment: and we receive remission of sins by this
Faith; See Acts 26.15, 16, 17, 18. where Christ says to St. Paul, I send thee
to the Gentiles to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan unto God; that they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and an inheritance among them which are sanctified by Faith that is in
me. So that Jesus Christ is God and Man in one Person: for none can forgive
sins but God, none can be the primary and proper object of Faith but God; Faith
being a part of divine moral Worship: for we give honor to him in whom we
believe. None can be a Mediator between God and Man, but he that is God and Man
in one Person; none can offer a Sacrifice to God for the sin of man, so as to
procure peace and purity of Conscience, but Jesus Christ who is God and Man in
one Person; God, of the substance of his Father, begotten before the World: and
Man, of the substance of his Mother, born in the World; perfect God, and
perfect Man, of a reasonable Soul and humane Flesh subsisting, See the Creed of
Athanasius.
Joh. 1.1, 2, 3. Romans 1.3. Gal. 4.4.

Prop. 3. Jesus Christ, as God-Man, is our Savior, he united our Nature to his
Divine Nature; he was born of the Virgin Mary, he kept the Law, and fulfilled
all Righteousness, and then suffered Death for us; as Man he died, and by the
power of his Godhead he was raised again, that we might be justified by faith
in him: see Romans 4.24, 25. so that we have redemption through his blood, the
forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his Grace, Ephesians. 1.7. Hence St.
Paul desires to know nothing among the Corinthians, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified, 1 Cor. 2.1, 2. Our Communion with God is by faith in the Son of God,
see Phil. 2.1. 1 John 1.3. The life which I now live in the Flesh, says St.
Paul, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for
me, Gal. 2.20. So that Christ is the object of divine Worship, Acts 7.59. Rev.
5.12. Of that hope which is saving, and makes not ashamed, Col. 1.27. Romans
5.5. of our sincere and greatest love, 1 Cor. 16.22. of our absolute service,
and divine faith, Romans 14.9, 18. Joh. 14.1. Oh the excellency of Jesus Christ
to a believing Soul! Mr. Calvin reprehends those as highly injurious to
miserable Souls, who by calling of God the object of Faith simply, in the mean
while omit Christ, without whom there can be no Faith nor Access to God, etc.
See Calv. Institut. lib. 2. sect. 4.

Prop. 4. We, in order of nature, not of time, believe first in Christ; and by
Christ in God. As the Apostle Peter teaches, speaking of Christ, who verily,
says he, was foreordained, before the foundation of the World; but was
manifested in these last times for you, who by him do believe in God, that
raised him from the dead, and gave him glory, that your Faith and hope might be
in God, 1 Pet. 1.20, 21. So that Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; No
man comes unto the Father, but by him, Joh. 14.6. He is the Mediator, as the
Apostle teaches his Son Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.5. For, says he, there is one God,
and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus. Extremes come not
together but by their midst, from the nature of a just God unto a Sinner. God
in Christ is a tender Father, out of Christ a consuming fire. Man's way to God
is by the Man-God, for Christ as the Redeemer is the Mediator, not the ultimate
object of Faith; for by Christ we believe in God.

Beloved in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I beseech you to consider the
destructive and damnable nature of Heresy, which is contrary to these
Propositions which I have laid down, and proved from the Holy Scriptures.
Heresy, it denies God, it denies his Essence, it denies the Trinity of
Persons, it denies the Lord Jesus Christ; it denies his two Natures; the Divine
Nature, whereby he is God; the Humane Nature, whereby he is Man: it denies his
Personality, whereby the two Natures (subsist in one Person; it denies the
object of saving Faith, of Divine Worship; it denies satisfaction made by
Christ unto the Father; it denies Remission of Sin, Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification, and the hope of Glorification; in a word, what truth does it
not deny? O the destructive and damnable nature of Heresy! The Apostle charges
the Corinthians but with one Heresy in the 15th Chapter. How say some among
you (says he) that there is no resurrection of the dead. But behold, what are
the natural consequences thereof! how many Heresies does that one Heresy let
in, or is the root of? First, If there be no resurrection of the dead, then is
not Christ risen. 2. If Christ is not risen, then is your preaching vain; 3.
and your faith is also vain: 4. yea, and we are found false witnesses of God,
because we have testified of God that he raised up Christ, whom he raised not
up if so be that the dead rise not. 5. For if the dead rise not, then is not
Christ risen. 6. And if Christ be not risen, your faith is vain, and you are
yet in your sins. 7. Then they which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished.
8. If in this life we have only hope, we are of all men most miserable.

Therefore, 4thly, Miserable will be the end of those that bring into the
Church of Christ damnable Heresies, they will bring upon themselves in so doing
swift destruction; the Apostle Jude pronounces a Woe upon them, and tells us
v. 11, 12, 13. that they have gone in the way of Cain, and in the error of
Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Kore; that they are spots
in their Feasts of Charity, Clouds without Water, Trees whose fruit withers,
without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots; raging waves of the Sea,
foaming out their own shame, wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the blackness
of darkness for ever. So likewise the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 2.9, 17. shows that
the false Teachers shall be reserved unto the day of Judgment to be punished.
And the Apostle Paul also sets forth the punishment of Antichrist and all his
Adherents, because (says he) they received not the love of the Truth that they
might be saved; for this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe a lie: that they all might be damned, that loved not the Truth,
but had pleasure in Unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. It will be good
for us therefore to take heed: for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hand
of the living God: for our God is a consuming fire. See Heb. 10.31. and l2.29.

Yet, Fifthly, it is lamentable to think that Heresy should have such success
in the World: for is it not a wonder that many should follow those ways that
are so pernicious. But it is, as St. Paul says, when men receive not the love
of the Truth, that they might be saved; then God in his just Judgment sends
them, or gives them over to strong delusions, that they should believe a Lie. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. The Apostle tells Titus, that there were many unruly, and vain
talk s, and deceivers; which it seems had such success, that they subverted
whole houses, ( viz., turned them from the Faith) teaching things, which they
ought not, for filthy lucre sake, Tit. 1.9, 10. insomuch that all they that
were in Asia were turned away from him. See 2 Timothy 1.14 15. Yea, the Spirit
speaks expressly, that in the latter days some shall depart from the Faith,
giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1. So, all
the World wondered after the Beast, Rev. 13.3. and worshipped the Beast, and
the image of the Beast; and was so inamoured with their Idolaty, that they say,
Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to make War with him? verse. 4.

For, Sixthly, That which is the moving Cause which sets false Teachers on
work, is Covetousness; that which made Balaam so desire to curse the People of
God, was Covetousness: The Apostle tells us, he loved the wages of
unrighteousness, Jude 16.
2 Pet. 2.15. For the love of Money (says St. Paul) is the root of all evil,
which whilst some coveted after, they have erred from the Faith, and pierced
themselves through with many sorrows, l Tim. 6.10.

But, Seventhly, When the heart is corrupt, it is no wonder if the tongue be
false; therefore our Apostle tells us, That the Engine, or Instrument, which
the false Teachers shall use to carry on their design of beguiling unstable
Souls, shall be feigned words, words of deceit, swelling words of vanity; see 2
Pet. 2.18, 19. So the Apostle Paul tells Titus, There are, says he, many
unruly and vain talkers, and deceivers, whose mouths must be stopped, who
subvert whole houses, Tit. 1.10. they subvert or turn away the minds of their
Hearers from the Truth, by false and deceitful words; For evil men, and
seducers, shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13.

Therefore, Eighthly, and lastly, Let us behold with horror and compassion, the
sad condition of those miserable Souls that are carried away with the Error of
the wicked; The false Teachers (says the Text) shall make Merchandise of you.
Is it not a cruel thing to sell a man into slavery? How much more cruel is it
to sell the Souls of Men and Women into worse slavery and bondage, than the
Egyptian bondage? Better that man had never been born, than to be an instrument
to bring any Persons into Heresy; As those that convert Sinners from the Error
of their way, shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. Jam. 5.
ult. So for those that lead them in the way of Heresy, is reserved the mist of
darkness for ever, 2 Pet. 2.17. If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall
into the ditch, See Matthew. 15.14. False Teachers are unmerciful. For as the
true Servants of God labor to have the Church of Christ established in the
true Faith; so the Children of Belial do sell them into Perdition, making them
as Christ says, twofold more the Child of Hell than themselves, see Matthew.
23.15.

Beloved, I will now conclude this Preface by declaring unto you what Heresies
I principally oppose in this ensuing Treatise, viz. All that oppose the Essence
of God, the Trinity of Persons, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Union of
Natures, etc. For this is life eternal, that they may know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17.3.

CHAP. I. Of the Divine Essence.
Exodus 3.14. And God said unto Moses, I am that I am: and he said, Thus shall
thou say unto the Children of Israel, I am has sent me unto you.


I AM] viz. I am the only true God, truly subsisting, and not only through the
opinion of men, as Idols are; I am he that have an everlasting being,
unchangeable, subsisting of it self, not depending from others, infinite, most
simple, the Author and Cause of the being of all things: not a borrowed,
changeable, finite, dependent, and compound being, etc. as all the Creatures
have. Of this mine Essence will I give thee the highest, most express, and
general name of all; [He that is] Which has remained in use amongst the
Hebrews, and was then first revealed by God: Exodus 6.3. The French Annot. He
that is; which is the Name that we translate, (for want of another more proper)
the Lord God; which Name God then newly revealed to Moses, Exodus 6.3. See
Diodat's Annotations upon the Text. The Essence of God absolutely considered,
is that one pure and mere act, by which God is God. Because through the
weakness of our understanding we cannot apprehend it in any measure by one act,
it has pleased God to give unto himself many Names and Attributes, by the help
of which we may the better conceive thereof. The Divine Attributes are certain
essential Properties, which God is pleased in Scripture to ascribe or attribute
unto himself; they are also called the Perfections of God, or divine
Predications, or Titles. They are not distinguished from the Essence really,
but notionally; that is, They are not distinguished at all in God, but only to
usward, according to our manner of conceiving. The Perfection of his Nature,
is either simpleness, or the infiniteness thereof. The simpleness of his
Nature, is that by which he is void of all Logical Relation. He has not in
him, subject or adjunct. Joh. 5.26. As the Father has life in himself, so has
he given to the Son to have life in himself: compared with Joh. 14.6. I am the
Way, the Truth, and the Life. 1 John 1.7. But if we walk in his light, as he is
light; compared with verse. 5. God is light, and in him is no darkness. Hence,
it is manifested, that to have life, and to be life: to be in light, and to be
light, in God are all one. Neither is God subject to generality, or speciality:
whole, or parts: matter, or that which is made of matter: for so there should
be in God diverse things, and one more perfect than another. Therefore,
whatsoever is in God, is his Essence, and all that he is, he is by Essence. The
saying of Augustine in his 6th Book and 4th Chap. of the Trinity, is fit to
prove this; In God (says he) to be, and to be just, or mighty, are all one:
but in the mind of man, it is not all one to be, and to be mighty, or just: for
the mind may be destitute of these virtues, and yet a mind.

Hence it is manifest, That the Nature of God is Immutable, and Spiritual.
God's immutability of Nature, is that by which he is void of all composition,
division, and change. Jam. 1.17. With God there is no variableness, nor shadow
of changing. Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, and am not changed. Where it is said,
Genesis 6.6.
That God repents, etc. the meaning is, That God changes the action, as men
do that repent: therefore repentance, it signifies not any mutation in God,
but in his actions, and such things as are made and changed by him. God's
Nature is Spiritual, in that it is incorporeal, and therefore invisible. Joh.
4.24. God is a Spirit. 1 Timothy 1.17. To the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible,
the only Wise God, be glory and honor for ever and ever. Col. 1.15. Who is the
image of the invisible God. The infiniteness of God, is twofold; his Eternity
and exceeding Greatness. God's Eternity is that by which he is without
beginning and ending. Psalm. 90.2. Before the Mountains were made, and before
thou had formed the Earth and the World, even from everlasting to
everlasting, thou art our God. Rev. 1.8. I am Alpha and Omega, that is, The
beginning and ending, says the Lord; which is, which was, and which is to
come. God's exceeding Greatness, is that by which his incomprehensible Nature
is every where present, both within and without the World, Psalm. 145.3. Great
is the Lord, and worthy to be praised, and his greatness is incomprehensible. 1
King. 8.27. Is it true indeed that God will dwell on the Earth? Behold, the
Heavens, and the Heaven of Heavens are not able to contain thee: how much less
is this House that I have built? Jer. 23.24. Do not I fill the Heaven and
Earth, says the Lord? Hence it is plain,

First, That He is only One, and that indivisible, not many. Ephesians. 4.5. One
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all. Deuteronomy. 4.35. Unto thee
it was showed, that thou might know that the Lord he is God, and that there
is none but [He alone.] 1 Cor. 8.4. We know that an Idol is nothing in the
World, and that there is none other God but [Oxe.] And there can be but one
thing infinite in Nature.

Secondly, That God is the knower of the Heart. For nothing is hidden from that
Nature, which is within all things, and without all things, which is included
in nothing, nor excluded from any thing. Because, (1 King. 8.39.) the Lord
searches all hearts, and understands every work of the mind. Psalm. 139.1, 2.
Thou know my sitting down, and my rising up, thou understandest my
cogitation afar off. All the Attributes in God are one and the same perfection.
It is better said of God that he is his Attributes, than that he has
Attributes: the Attributes are not distinguished in God, but in our manner of
understanding, who being unable to comprehend that mere act at once, do
conceive thereof after the manner of many acts. The Sun when he is
perpendicular, had it an Eye, would behold all that at once, which we, by
reason of the inadequateness and and unproportionableness of our sight, are
necessiated to view by parts. In God all things are one and the same, according
to the nature of God; though out of God many and diverse, according to their own
proper and created nature. The same heat in the Sun produces diverse effects,
according to the various disposition of the objects: hardness in Clay, softness
in Wax, etc. The Divine Attributes, though they can neither exactly be numbered
or distributed, yet for our better understanding we may consider of them, as
Negative, Relative, Positive.


Negative Attributes are such as remove from God all imperfection: Negative.
by these we help our understanding in our meditation of God by way of
Negation. The more principal of them are in number five, viz. Simplicity,
Eternity, Immensity, Immutability, Infiniteness: to which, or some of which,
any other of like nature may conveniently be referred. Simplicity is God's one
mere and perfect act without all compositions. God calls his Name, I am,
Exodus 3.14. as I said before, etc. that is, his mere Essence, wherein these
five Properties or Attributes, as aforesaid, are eminently included, called by
some Incommunicable properties.

The more principal Relative Attributes are in number, Relative.
seven. 1. Creation. 2. Providence. 3 Lordship. 4. Benignity. 5. Mercy. 6.
Redemption. 7. Justice. To which, or some of which, the rest of like nature may
conveniently be referred. But of these I shall say more hereafter.

Positive Attributes, Positive.
are such which so ascribe some perfection to God, as not inferring any respect
unto the Creatures existing, or in present being; by these, our understanding
is helped in our meditation of God, by way of eminency; the more principal of
them, are in number six: 1. Holiness, 2. Wisdom, 3. Will, 4. Liberty, 5.
Omnipotency. 6. Perfection. To which, or some of which, the rest of like nature
may conveniently be referred. But I shall speak but to one of these in this
place, viz. Perfection, which I think comprehends all the rest, etc.

Perfection is God all-sufficient, and all-excellent: not having need of any
thing, giving sufficient unto, and having in him the perfection of all things,
Genesis 17.1, 2. Exodus 6.3. This Attribute renders God as that infinite Sea of all
Happiness. Perfection is increated Glory: that is, all the Attributes in one
word; as happiness is the sum of man's good, so glory is the sum of all God's
Attributes. The Perfection of God is essential, independent, unlimited, without
increase, or decrease: as the power of subordinate causes is contained in the
first cause virtually; And as the Authority of under Officers is in the Prince
after a more excellent manner; so the virtue of all second causes is contained
in the first cause eminently. The word eminently taken in its strict and proper
sense, seems to intend the effect to be in the cause, not only in a more
excellent manner than in it self, but also in a super created manner. Things
are in God agreeable to the nature of God: in themselves according to their
proper natures. Eminential continency, and virtual continency, (that is; for
one thing to be contained in another eminently, as the excellency of the
Creature is in the Creator: or virtually, as all things saleable are in money,
Eccles. 10.9.) are not the same: the first is proper to the Creator, the second
is found in the Creature. The Essential perfection of God is increated Glory,
Eternal, always the same, from which nothing can be taken, to which nothing
can be added. The acknowledgment of the manifested perfections of God, is
Glorification: viz. The act of the Creature done in time, admitting more or
less according as God is known, or acknowledged.

Secondly, If God in his Nature, or Essence, be simply, absolutely, and
infinitely perfect, then must he needs be a most pure and simple act, without
any Potentiality at all: i. e. he must needs be actually, and so have been from
Eternity, whatsoever he is capable of being, or whatsoever it is possible for
him ever to be. The reason of this, is, because all Potentiality; of
Possibility of being any thing more, or any thing besides, what a person, or
thing is, for the present, argues imperfection; which is clearly proved thus:
Whatsoever it is possible for a person (or thing) to be, which at present he is
not, must needs be something, which will either add unto his being, and make it
better; or else take away from his being, and so make it worse: or else be a
thing merely indifferent, and so of no concernment unto him at all. So then, if
a man be capable of being any thing, which yet he is not, for the bettering of
his condition, it is a clear case that his present condition, or being, is
imperfect: for he is as yet destitute of that, which should add perfection unto
him. If he be capable of any thing, or of being any thing, which yet he is not,
to the making of his present condition worse, here the case is yet more clear,
that such a man's condition is not perfect. For to be obnoxious to the
deprivation or losing of any good, which a man enjoys for the present,
manifestly argues weakness and imperfection.

Thirdly and lastly, If a man be capable of being any thing which yet he is
not, suppose it be without any relation at all to his condition either for the
better or the worse, yet this also plainly argues imperfection. For it
supposes, that a man has something, has a capacity, which is a mere
superfluity to him, and does him no good, yea which he knows not how to
improve for his good; and this, as apparently as either of the former, argues
imperfection. So that certain it is, that if the nature and being of God be
absolutely, and infinitely perfect, he must needs be a pure and mere act, all
in present and actual being, whatsoever it is possible for him ever to be. This
most entire and complete actuality of the Divine Nature and being is (I
presume, says Mr. John Goodwyn in his Book entitled, Redemption Redeemed,
page 48.) generally subscribed by all Reformed Divines. God (says Zanchy) is a
most pure, and most simple act, and no ways capable, or in any possibility, of
being any thing more or less than what he is. And from this actuality of God,
he infers both his absolute immutability, and infinity of his perfection. It is
affirmed (says Peter Martyr) as with one mouth, of all that are godly, that
God is not changed; in as much as this would be a certain sign as well of
imperfection, as inconstancy, in him. The reason why God is not changed, nor
capable of any change whatsoever, is, because he is a most pure, absolute and
complete act, i. e. he is for the present whatsoever it is possible in any
respect for him to be: So that, notwithstanding his ownipotency it self, he
has no power to make the least alteration or change in himself, either in
nature, will, or action. Upon the account of this Authors credit, who
interesteth all the godly in the assertion and belief of God's
unchangeableness, (and consequently of that perfect actuality, which we assert)
I judge it needless to make any further levy of testimonies in this behalf.

CHAP. II. Of the Holy Trinity.
First, the proof of it from the Scriptures. Secondly, the use of it.

AMongst the multitude of Scriptures holding forth the Doctrine of the Trinity
of Persons in the Divine Essence, let it at present suffice to transcribe these
Texts, because I shall speak more about the Trinity hereafter in the Questions
and Answers. And God said, Let us make man in our own Image, after our
likeness, Genesis 1.26. And the Lord God said, Behold the man is become as one of
us, to know good and evil, Genesis 3.22. Go to, let us go down, and there confound
their language, that they may not understand one another speech, Genesis 11.7.
But none says, Where is God my Maker? (so they say it is in the Hebrew) who
gives songs in the night? Job 35.10. And one cried unto another, and said,
Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth it full of his Glory,
Isa. 6.3. And the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God
descending like a Dove, and lighting upon him; and lo a voice from heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Mat. 3.16, 17. Go
therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19. But when the Comforter is
come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, he shall testify of me, Joh.
15.26. The Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all Amen. 2 Cor. 13.13. For there are
three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Spirit;
and these three are one, 1 John 5.7.

Hence appears first the in being of one Person in another, Joh. 14.10, 11. 1 John 1. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me. Because a
Person signifying both the essence and its relative property, all the persons
having one and the same Essence: it follows, that in respect of the Essence,
one Person is in another. Thus John says, there are three; that is, three
distinct Persons, in respect of their relative opposition: adding withal, that
these three are one; namely, in respect of the sameness of the Essence. And
here we may see the reason of those words of Christ, Joh. 8.19. If you had
known me, ye should have known my Father also: He that has seen me, has seen
the Father.

Secondly, That all the Persons are equal: Who being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6. Joh. 5.18. Either the
Persons are equal, or else because every Person is God, there would follow an
inequality, and consequently an inferiority in God, which is inconsistent with
his Perfection, as I said before.

Thirdly, That all the Attributes, in that they flow from the Essence, are true
of every Person, because every Person has the whole Essence.

Fourthly, That all the Attributes, whether Relative, Negative, or Positive, or
if any other, in that they proceed from the Essence, are true of every Person;
because the whole Essence is in every Person. The Father is Eternal, the Son is
Eternal, the Holy Ghost is Eternal, because the whole Essence is in every one
of them: yet there are not three Eternals, but one Eternal; because the Essence
which is in them all, is but one. In like manner, the Father is infinite, the
Son is infinite, the Holy Ghost is infinite; yet, etc. And so of all the rest.

Fifthly, That all the works of God which concern the Creature, i. e.
whatsoever is besides God, are wrought by all the Persons jointly: because the
efficacy whereby they are what they are, proceeds likewise from the Essence it
self, not from the manner of the Essence. Moreover, the knowledge of the
Trinity is necessary to Salvation; because saving Faith has for its object,
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and Jesus Christ God-Man. Note this.
No man is saved without the knowledge of the Father: No man has seen God at
any time; the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him, Joh. 1.18. No man is saved without the knowledge of the Son:
Whosoever denies the Son the same has not the Father, 1 John 2.23. He that
honors not the Son, honors not the Father which has sent him, Joh. 5.23.
No man is saved without the knowledge of the Holy Ghost: Now if any man has
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. Even the Spirit of
Truth, whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows
him: but ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you, Joh.
14.17. God hears none but such as call upon him in the Name of Christ. None
can call upon God in Christ, but such as are taught and assisted by his Spirit.
We cannot Worship God aright, without the knowledge of the Trinity. As God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is of the object of Faith; so is he of the object
of Divine Worship, Baptism is an act of Worship, and sign of the Covenant; but
we are baptized into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, Matthew. 28.19. God has committed all Judgment to the Son; that all men
should honor the Son, as they honor the Father. He that honors not the
Son, honors not the Father which has sent him, Joh. 5.23.

Believers are the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.16. and 6.19. The Lord
of the Temple is worshipped in the Temple. We worship the Trinity in Unity, and
the Unity in Trinity.

All Obedience is to be performed unto God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. To
him that elected us, that gave Christ to redeem us, that created us, that
brought Israel out of Egypt, that, in a word, does all for us, is all obedience
to be performed. But God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and that as God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, elected us, gave Christ to redeem us, created us,
etc. Therefore unto God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is all obedience to be
performed.

The plurality of Persons in the Trinity, is of great use for the confirmation
of the truth unto us. John asserts that great Truth of Jesus Christ being the
Son of God, and Savior of all them that believe; not only from the testimony
of one God, but from the testimony of that one God, who is three Witnesses; for
there are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, and these three are one, 1 John 5.7. To the same purpose is the Argument
Christ uses, disputing against the Scribes and Pharisees; proving the truth of
what he had spoken concerning himself, being the Light of the World, because it
was averred by the Father, and him, as two Witnesses: It is also written in
your Law, that the testimony of two men is true: I am one that bear witness of
my self, and the Father that sent ^e, bears witness of me, Joh. 8.17, 18.

The knowledge of the Trinity, tends unto the Consolation of Believers. Paul
affectionately desirous that the hearts of the Colossians might be comforted,
shows two special means thereof, viz. The acknowledgment of the Mystery of
God, and of the Father, See Mr. Norton's Orthodox Evangelist. p. 33, 34.
and of Christ, with the full assurance of understanding, and Brotherly-love.
Of God; i. e. of God, and of his Attributes: of the Father, i. e. of the
Persons, the first of which is the Father: of Christ, i. e. of his Person, and
Office: so some, without repugnancy to the Analogy of Faith, or the words of
the Text.

Lastly, The knowledge of the Doctrine of the Trinity, is requisite to our
Communion, which (as our Union) is with God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
And truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all, Amen, 2 Cor. 13.13. Matthew. 28.19.

Though the perfect manner how one Person is of another, is incomprehensible,
and unutterable in this life, (the perfect knowledge thereof being reserved
unto glory) yet so far has God revealed himself unto us in his Word in this
life, as that we may and ought to attain unto some distinctness; yea, unto such
distinctness, as is held forth in the Scriptures of Truth; which is the measure
of Faith; and not to rest in an implicit Faith concerning this Mystery of
Mysteries. Secret things belong to the Lord our God: but these things which are
revealed belong unto us, and to our Children for ever, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Upon which
last words, viz. To us, and to our Children; they say the Hebrew has
extraordinary Pricks to stir up our attention to the matter here spoken of. To
be wise above what is written, is not wisdom: but perilous sin and folly. To be
wise according to what is written, is sobriety. To be wise up to what is
written, (though alas we have all great cause to cry, God be merciful to us all
herein) is our Duty.

No where (says Augustine) throughout the revealed. Will of God, is the truth
sought out with greater labor: no where is our finding out of the truth
fruitfuller; no where do we err with greater danger: 1 Cor. 15.34. Some have
not the knowkedge of God, I speak this to your shame, says St. Paul.

To this agrees the saying of Dr. Hall in his Collections, page 407, 408. How
to conceive of the Deity in our Prayers, in our Meditations, is both the
deepest Point of all Christianity, and the most necessary: so deep, that if we
wade into it, we may easily drown, never find the bottom: so necessary, that
without it, our selves, our services are profane, irreligious: We are all born
Idolaters, naturally prone to fashion God to some form of our own, whether of
an humane body, or of admirable light; or if our mind have any other more
likely, and pleasing Image. First then, away with all these wicked Thoughts,
these gross Devotions; and with Jacob burn all your strange Godds under the Oak
of Shechem, ere you offer to set up God's Altar at Bethel: and without all
mental representations, conceive of your God purely, simply, spiritually; as of
an absolute being, without form, without matter, without composition; yea, an
infinite, without all limit of thoughts. Let your heart adore a spiritual
Majesty, which it cannot comprehend, yet knows to be; and as it were, lose it
self in his infiniteness. Think of him, as not to be thought of; as one, whose
Wisdom is his Justice, whose Justice is his Power, whose Power is his Mercy;
and whose Wisdom, Justice, Power, Mercy, is himself; as without quality good,
great without quantity, everlasting without time, present everywhere without
place, containing all things without extent: And when your thoughts are come to
the highest, stay there, and be content to wonder in silence: and if you cannot
reach to conceive of him as he is, yet take heed you conceive not of him as he
is not. Neither will it suffice your Christian mind, to have this awful and
confused apprehension of the Deity, without a more special and inward conceit
of three in this one: Three Persons in this one Essence, not divided, but
distinguished; and not more mingled, than divided. There is nothing, wherein
the want of words can wrong and grieve us, but in this: Here alone, as we can
adore, and not conceive, so we can conceive, and not utter; yea, utter your
selves, and not be conceived; yet as we may, think here of one substance in
three subsistences; one Essence in three Relations; one Jehovah begetting,
begotten, proceeding; Father, Son, Spirit: yet so, as the Son, is no other
thing from the Father, but another Person; or the Spirit, from the Son. Let
your thoughts here walk warily, the path is narrow: the conceit either of three
substances, or but one subsistence, is damnable. Let me lead you yet higher,
and further, in this intricate way, toward the Throne of Grace: All this will
not avail you, if you take not your Mediator with you; if you apprehend not a
true Manhood, gloriously united to the Godhead, without change of either
Nature, without mixture of both; whose Presence, whose Merits must give
passage, acceptance, vigor to your Prayers. Here must be therefore (as you
see) thoughts holily mixed: of a Godhead and Humanity: one Person in two
Natures: of the same Deity, in diverse Persons, and one Nature: wherein (if
ever) Heavenly Wisdom must bestir it self, in directing us, so to sever these
apprehensions, that none be neglected; so to conjoyn them, that they be not
confounded. O the depth of Divine Mysteries, more than can be wondered at! O
the necessity of this high Knowledge, which who attains not, may babble, but
prays not! Still you doubt, and ask if you may not direct your Prayers to one
Person of three? Why not? safely, and with comfort. What need we fear, while we
have our Savior for our pattern? O my Father (if possible) let this Cup pass:
and Paul everywhere, both in thanks and requests; but with due care in
Worshipping all in one. Exclude the other, while you fix your heart upon one,
your Prayer is sin; retain all, and mention one, you offend not: None of them
does ought for us, without all. It is a true rule of Divines: All their
external works are common: To solicit one therefore, and not all, were
injurious. And if you stay your thoughts upon the sacred Humanity of Christ,
with inseparable adoration of the Godhead united, and thence climb up to the
holy conceit of that blessed and dreadful Trinity, I dare not censure, I dare
not but commend your divine method. Thus should Christians ascend from Earth to
Heaven, from one Heaven to another. If I have given your Devotions any light,
it is well: the least glimpse of this knowledge, is worth all the full gleames
of Humane and Earthly skill. But I mistake, if your own heart, wrought upon
with serious Meditations, (under that Spirit of Illumination) will not prove
your best master. After this weak direction, study to conceive aright, that you
may pray aright; and pray that you may conceive; and meditate, that you may do
both: and the God of Heaven direct you, enable you, that you may do all.

CHAP. III. Concerning Christ our Mediator.
I Will now by God's help prove, by the holy Scriptures, that the Eternal Word,
viz. the second Person in the Trinity, took flesh of the Virgin Mary, and so
was made like unto his brethren in all things, sin only excepted, Heb. 2.17.
and 4.15. For neither the Father, nor holy Spirit, took our nature upon them;
but Christ only. For as by the first Adam came sin, and death by sin, even so
comes grace and life by Jesus Christ, Romans 5. But here we must note how Christ
took Man's Nature upon him. Not by turning his Godhead into his Manhood, but by
assuming of his Manhood into his Godhead; not by confusion or mixture of
substance, but by unity of Person^. For as the reasonable Soul and fleshly body
is one Man, even so the Deity and Humanity is one Christ. When, I say, Christ
took our Nature upon him, I mean not that he took our flesh only, (as some
Heretics have thought) but the Soul of man also. Forasmuch as he is no
half-Saviour, but a Redeemer both of Body and Soul; for St. John says, The
Word was made Flesh, viz. by taking Man's flesh or Nature in union with the
Word, which is Christ. And why he is called the Word, I have already showed,
and shall (God willing) do it again in the Questions and Answers about Christ,
in a place set for it; therefore I pass it over here.

Quest. But the Eutychians ask us, Of what matter the flesh of Christ was made?
Or, Did he not bring it out of Heaven?

Answ. No truly; for as the first Adams flesh was made of the Earth, as it is
written, Genesis 2.7. Even so it is written, Christ was made of a Woman, Gal. 4.4.
for he did not pass through her as Water through a Pipe, but took part of her
substance; therefore the Prophet Isaiah says, There shall come forth a Rod out
of the Stem of Jesse, and a branch or blossom shall grow out of his roots,
Isa. 9. Acts 13.23. And Solomon calls him a Lilly and Rose, Cant. 2.1. Now
you know the Flower and the Rose takes its nature of the root; For, as St.
Paul says, As is the root, such are the branches, Romans 11.16, 17. Besides, it
was the Will of God that the same flesh that sinned should be punished; as we
may see an instance in David's Child; although David sinned in killing of Vriah,
yet it pleased God to spare David's person from death, and punish him in his
flesh, viz. his Child with death. See 2 Samuel 12.14. Howbeit, because by this
deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme,
the Child also that it born unto thee shall surely die. Even so, it was Adam
that sinned, but it pleased God to spare his person, and punish him in his
flesh, viz. Christ: For, as St. Paul says, He was made a Curse for us, Gal.
3.13. And, as St. Peter says, The just suffered for the unjust, 1 Pet. 1.18.
and 3.18. See the comparison also betwixt the two Adams in Romans 5.18.
Therefore, as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men to justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. And thus, as
St. Paul says, He is flesh of our flesh; Forasmuch as the Children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the same, Heb. 2.14.
For the Apostle says, Verily he took not on him the Nature of Angels, but
he-took on him the Seed of Abraham: Wherefore in all things it behoved him to
be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful, and faithful High
Priest, in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the
People. By all which it does appear, that he took flesh of the Virgin Mary. I
touch this matter the more, because not long since I communed with some men,
who very confidently did affirm, that the eternal Word did not take any flesh
of the Virgin Mary. And they also boasted that there were many Men and Women in
England of their opinion concerning this matter. For although they do grant
that Christ as Man was really flesh, yet they deny the matter of which it was
made, to be of or from the Virgin Mary, but say that it was Heavenly matter,
viz. the Divine Nature was turned into Flesh in the Virgins Womb; even as the
Water at Cana was turned into Wine, Joh. 2.7. Now I will, by God's help, in
this ensuing Discourse, demonstrate the falsehood of this their Opinion: for it
denies Christ to be the true Son of David according to the flesh, contrary to
all these Texts, Genesis 26.4. and 22.18. 2 Samuel 7.12. Psalm. 132.11. Acts 2.30.
all which prove him to be the true Son of David according to the flesh. As also
St. Matthew and St. Luke reckon his kindred and generation from Adam, Abraham,
and David, etc. Moreover, Christ came not only to die for our sins, but also to
be an example unto us, and a perfect pattern of good living; as shall be
declared afterward more fully. For how could he more set forth his exceeding
love to us, than in dying for us. For greater love than this has no man, than
to bestow his life, says Christ, speaking of his own death. Now the Deity
suffered no infirmity, or change, which is impossible; wherefore it was
necessary that he should take our Nature upon him, who came to heal our
infirmities, and to teach us to cure them through Faith in well-doing: If he
had taken them in any other nature, then the example of his life would not have
been teachable unto us; for if he had been tempted in any other nature, or
died, how could we learn to withstand the Devil, and to overcome his
temptations by Christ's example, wherefore there was no way like this to redeem
man. He is Wisdom, therefore he took the wisest way, etc.

Now, that you may the better understand these great Mysteries concerning God,
and of the Father, and of Christ, Col. 2.2. I will put that which I have said
into Questions and Answers, that so through God's blessing you may see this
great Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.15. and believe it: As also add more to
this that I have here said for your comfort by way of Use and Application, and
so leave the Work to ^he blessing of God, and your serious consideration.

CHAP. IV. Questions and Answers about God.
Quest. WHat things are we to know concerning God?

Answ. 1. What God is. 2. What a God he is, or how he is affected toward us.

Quest. What is God?

A. God is an Essence, Spiritual, Incomprehensible, Almighty, Immortal,
Infinite, Love it self. Mercy it self, Justice it self, Holiness it self,
Purity it self, Goodness it self, Wisdom it self, Long-suffering it self,
Bountifulness it self; which is the Father who from all Eternity begat the Son,
Coeternal with himself, and of the same substance with the Father: and the Son
not made nor created, but begotten of the Father from all Eternity: Joh 4.24. 1 Timothy 1 17 Jam. 1.17. Acts 1.8. Jer. 23.24. 1 John 4.8, 16. Exodus 34.6, 7. Mat.
5* 44.
and the Holy Ghost proceeding from them both, the Father and the Son, the
Creator and Conserver of all things, the Redeemer and Sanctifier of the Elect.
Which is no definition, (for he that is super-substantial, and
incomprehensible, cannot be defined) but such a description as sufficiently
contains all such things as in this life are necessary for us to know, for
the service of God and our Salvation.

Q. Is there one God only, or whether be there more?

A. One only, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is One Lord. 1 Samuel 2
2 Isa. 41.4. and 44.6. Mat. 12.32
And so, 1 Cor. 8.4. We know that an Idol is nothing in the World, and that
there is no other God but One. And seeing the true God is most high, Ephesians. 4.6.
1 Timothy ^ 5.
and most infinite actually, therefore there can be no more but One God;
because there can be no more but one that is above all, neither any more but
one infinite. And this one God is manifested to us by such testimonies as
cannot deceive, to wit, by Miracles, Prophesies, and other things which by his
Omnipotence may be done.

Q. How is God said to be One?

A. Neither by a genus nor species, but in Essence and in Number, or in regard
of his Nature: because there is one only Essence of God, and that indivisible.

Q. Why does the Scripture make mention of Elohim (or) Gods, joining that word
as well with the plural as singular number?

A. Not to the end that it should make a multitude of Gods, or divide the
Essence, but to distinguish the Persons: because, though there be one Person of
the Father, another Person of the Son, and another of the holy Ghost: yet the
Father is not another thing, or another God distinct from the Son and the holy
Ghost; the Son is not another thing, or another God distinct from the Father
and the holy Ghosh: neither is the holy Ghost another thing, or another God
distinct from the Father and the Son: because the Nature of God is but one and
indivisible, although the Father be one, the Son another, and the holy Ghost
another. And therefore they are not of diverse Natures, of another and diverse
Substance, not conjoined or knit together in one Substance, (as men which have
one common essence); not only of the like substance, but of one and the same
substance, have the same Essence, the same Eternity, the same Will, the same
Operation, the same Power, and the same Glory, Phil. 2.6.

Q. How many ways is the Name of God taken in Scriptures?

A. Two ways; properly for the Substance, Essence, and Nature: and improperly.
Now it is taken properly, or for the Essence, when it is taken without the
distinction of any one of the Persons, as Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit; where God
is taken for the whole Essence of the Deity, as is also the Name Jehovah. Or
else personally, when there is joined unto the Name of God the name of the
Person: as God the Father, God the Son, God the holy Ghost. Or, when the Father
is opposed to the Son, who is very God, and the second Person in the Trinity,
as Romans 7.25. I thank God by Jesus Christ. So Romans 8.3. the Father is called
God; the word Father being used personally, because the Person sending, is
opposed to the Person sent. Exodus 22.28. Psalm. 82.6.
Improperly, when it is attributed to Angels or Men: and truly, either in
regard of their Office, or else in respect of the revealing of the Will of God,
and of their Reverence: Falsely, either by Error, or else by Usurpation and
Custom, as 1 Cor. 8.5. Or else by worshipping them, 2 Cor. 4.4. Phil. 3.19.
Exodus 7.20.

Q. Be there any parts or kinds of God?

A. None at all, because he is a most simple Essence, which does admit no
composition or division; and simply, and in every respect of unity, one, and in
act most infinite.

Q. Are there any Causes of God?

A. Not any, for he is the Cause of all Causes.

Q. Is there any accident in God?

A. No, in regard of God himself; for whatsoever is in God is his Essence.

Q. Seeing the Essence of God is most simple, in what respect does Power,
Goodness, Justice, Wisdom, and Mercy differ in God?

A. Not in Essence; for all these Attributes in Essence, are but one very thing
indeed, but in our weak capacity and manner of knowing* in regard of us; and by
the effects, in respect of the Creatures.

Q. How many sorts are there of God's Attributes?

A. Two: the first whereof is incommunicable, so that there appears not the
least impression thereof in any of his Creatures. This kind we may call
absolute, such is his Simplicity, and, which depend upon it, his Immutability,
Eternity, and Immensity. The second sort is some way communicable, which you
may call fitly a Relative Property, in that it has relation to the Creatures;
such are his Power, Wisdom, Will, Goodness, Justice, and Mercy.

Q. Be there any effects of God?

A. There be infinite effects of his Grace, Justice, Power, and Mercy.

Q. How are the Gentiles said to be without God, (Ephesians. 2.12.) seeing they adore
so many Gods?

A. Because none of their Gods was the true God.

Q. But yet they acknowledged God the Creator of Heaven and Earth.

Answ. Nor the Name of God, but even God himself was altogether unknown unto
them: because no man knows God, but such as confess the Father and the Son. 1 John 2.23. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father: but he that
acknowledges the Son, has the Father also.

Q. What use make you of the knowledge of God?

A. Surely this, that he alone may be rightly worshipped, to which purpose man
was created: and that we being guided by this knowledge, may pray to him, and
acknowledge that from him we have every good thing.

Q. What things are repugnant to the Doctrine concerning God?

A. Atheism, Epicurism, the mad worshipping of Idols, the Gentiles making of
many Gods: the Heresy of Manicheus, making two beginnings, one good, another
evil: blasphemies against God: false Opinions concerning God, as that of the
Anthropomorphites, who make God like unto a man; all doubting of God, etc.

CHAP. V. Questions and Answers about the Trinity.
Quest. HOw many Persons be there in that one Essence of God?

A. Three, and those both in number, and in very deed distinguished, the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost: which have their subsisting in one Divine Essence:
whereupon it comes to pass, that there be not many Gods, but one God, and the
same Eternal, Infinite, and Omnipotent, who is named JEHOVAH in the Scriptures:
and said to be most simple by reason of Essence, and three by reason of Persons.

Q. By what testimonies of the Scripture do you prove the Trinity?

A. Genesis 1.1. God, or Elohim, created the Heavens and the Earth. In which place
(the Learned say) the Verb being of the singular Number, does signify the most
simple Essence of God: and the substantive Elohim being the plural Number, does
note out the three Persons. Also in the creation of Man, God, as it were,
taking counsel with his Eternal Wisdom, that is, the Son and the Holy Ghost,
says thus, verse. 26. Let us make Man after our Image. Where he says, Let us
make, because of the number of the Persons, and after our Image, because of the
unity of the Essence. Genesis 19.24. The Lord rained from the Lord brimstone and
fire upon Sodom and Gomorrha: in which place the Person sending the rain, and
the Person from whom it was sent, (that is the Son) is distinguished from the
Father.

Q. Have you any more pregnant proofs out of the New Testament?

Answ. 1. In the Baptism of Christ, Matthew. 3.16. and Joh. 1.32. the voice of
the Father is heard from heaven, This is my beloved Son: In the same place
there stands the Son, by the River Jordan, the holy Ghost descends in the form
of a Dove and sits on Christ.

2. Again, in the Transfiguration, there is the Son, and the voice of God the
Father is heard from Heaven, and Christ is shadowed with a Cloud, which does
signify the Holy Ghost. And further, Matthew. 28.19. Baptize all Nations in the
Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: He says not Names, but
in the [Name] to show the unity of the three Persons. 2 Cor. 13.13. The Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy
Ghost be with you all.

Q. Seeing the Scripture does not use the Name of the Trinity, does the Church
well to retain the same?

A. Yea no doubt: for the thing it self is found in Scripture two manner of
ways: first, according to the letter: secondly, according to the sense. Now
fith that the sense of it, and the very thing it self is found in the
Scriptures, the Church has liberty to use such words as may familiarly express
the thing it self. Moreover, we call the three Persons in God, the Trinity,
from this word Three, whereof the word Trinity is derived, and is expressly set
down, 1 John 5.7. There be three that bear Witness in Heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these Three are One. Whence we argue, That as
from One comes Unity, so from Three comes Trinity.

Q. How does this word Essence differ from the word Person in God?

A. Essence is the Nature which is not more belonging to one, and less to
another of the three Persons, but common to them all; yea, one and the same,
and cannot be divided, and is all in each one of them, not without them,
subsisting by it self, to wit, the very Deity it self. And therefore the
Essential Properties which be in them, are one in Number, and of one Nature.
Now a Person is the subsisting in the Divine Nature, or the Nature of God,
which having relation to others, is distinguished by some incommunicatable
Property: for indeed the Persons are only distinguished, and not servered; as
three men are indeed separated, though they be but one in kind. The reason is
because the Essence of God is infinite and impartible, and therefore it is all
in every Person, which are not severed each from other, but only distinguished
amongst themselves. (But as for the Essence of Angels and Men, it is finite and
partible, so that it is not all in every singular Person, but part in one and
part in another.)

Q. How many-fold is the difference of Persons?

A. Twofold: inward, and outward. The inward difference is that which is caused
by the internal Properties, or the works from within: concerning which we say,
the works of the Trinity from within are divided: that is the works which God
does within himself, without any Creature are not common to the three Persons,
but are proper to one Person alone. Now the Property of the Father is this,
Psalm. 2.5. Heb. 1.3, 5 Prove. 8.24.
that he was not made not begotten, but has begotten his Eternal Son of the
same substance with himself. The Property of the Son is this, that he being
neither made nor created, but was from all Eternity begotten of his Father
without any Mother; who is of himself as he is God; Heb. 7.3. Col. 1.15.
but of his Father as he is the Son. For as Light comes from the Sun, even so
the Son proceeds from the Father; one distinct from the Father, and therefore
the second in order, Psalm 110.3 Mic. 5.2.
so far forth as he is begotten: one and the self-same with the Father as he is
God. And here let us call to mind the saying of Nazianzene; The begetting of
God, let it be honored with silence: it is no small matter for thee to learn
that he was begotten. The Property of the Holy Ghost is to proceed from them
both inseparably.

Q. But did the Son take his Deity from the Father?

A. When we speak simply of the Son without the Father, we avouch truly and
properly that he is of himself, and call him God, because of himself he has
his being, and all that he has; Joh. 14 25 and 15.26. and 16.13, 14. Romans 8.9.
and therefore we call him one alone beginning. But when we point at that
relation which he has with his Father, we justly make the Father the beginning
of the Son, and say that the Son received all from the Father, Joh. 3.23. For
the Essence is one thing, and the manner of Subsisting is another. Hence it is
that the Schoolmen say, That the Son is by himself, not of himself. So the
Essence of the Son is without beginning, but the Father is the beginning of his
Person. This made Hilary to say; The gifts of the Father do not infirm but
affirm the Divinity of the Son. And Augustine, Christ in regard of himself, is
called God; and of the Father, is called the Son:

Object. 1. The Son and Holy Ghost are not without beginning, therefore they
are not Eternal.

A. This is not a beginning of time or continuance, but only of order and
offspring.

Object. 2. But the Sabellians here cavil, and say Christ says, He that sees
me, sees the Father: and believe thou not that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me? Joh. 14.9, 10. Therefore the Father and the Son are one Person.

A. Indeed he that sees the Son sees the Father, because the Son has the
same Essence with the Father, and being manifested in the flesh, has delivered
to us the whole Will of God, Joh. 1.18.

Object. 3. That which is one in Number, cannot without contradiction be said
to be Three in Persons: but God is One in Number, (Deuteronomy. 6.4.) Ergo.

A. That Unity does signify God's simple Essence, not the manner by which that
simple Essence subsisteth. Therefore God absolutely according to his Essence is
One, because he is indivisible: And only in respect of inward relation, I mean
the reason of subsisting, is three.

Obj. 4. If there be one being of the Father, another of the Son, and another
of the Holy Ghost: it follows, that in God there are three diverse Beings, and
consequently three diverse Persons.

A. The being of the Father does not signify that Essence by which he is
absolutely God, but by which he is Father, that is, in that he otherwise
subsisteth than does the Son: therefore the being of the Father is one thing,
and the being of the Son is another, and yet both of them have the same Essence.

Obj. 5. If there be three Persons truly distinguished, and one only Essence,
then is there a quaternity in God.

A. Not so: for the Essence differs from Person only in reason: but the
Persons differ each from other both in reason and in being.

Obj. 6. The Father begot his Son either existing or not existing; to say
either of these is absurd.

A. We may well say, That the Father begat his Son already existing, because
the Father was never without the Son, even as the Sun was never without its
Light. Again, it may be as well said, That he begat him not existing, in that
his generation, although it be Eternal, yet in order goes before Existence, as
the Sun is before its Light.

Quest. Is this difference Rational, Essential, or Real?

Answ. It is not Essential, as in the Creatures, where every one has his
proper Essence or Being, defined and circumscribed: for the Essence of the
Father is not one, and the Essence of the Son another, and of the Holy Ghost
another, but one and the same, which the Father does wholly communicate to the
Son, the Father and the Son to the holy Ghost. Not only in reason, because not
in notion, or mind, or only in word is he called Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
neither respectively or by relation; as one man may both be, and be called a
Father and a Son: But it is real, or modal, yet altogether incomprehensible,
because each Person has his own peculiar definition, or his essential and
incommunicable property, and differs from another not in essence, but in the
manner of subsisting.

Q. What is the outward difference?

A. It is taken from the works of God that be without, as that the Father sends
the Son, the Son is sent as the Redeemer; the Holy Ghost is the Sanctifier. As
in the Creed, the Father is distinguished from the Son by the work of Creation,
the Son by his Incarnation, the Holy Ghost from them both, by the work of
Sanctification and Regeneration; as where he appeared like as a Dove, ( Matthew.
3.) and in cloven Tongues, Acts 2. Although all these things be effected by one
and the self-same God. As we use to say, The works of the Trinity without are
indivisible: therefore here let us remember the saying of Gregory Nazianzene: I
cannot imagine one, but presently I am compassed about on every side with the
brightness of three: neither can I distinguish three, but forthwith I am
brought again to one. Further, in the Persons of the Deity there is an order,
but there is none inequality: there is a distinction, but no diversity.

Q. What things are contrary to this Doctrine?

A. 1. The Heresy of Sabellias, who taught there was only one Person of the
Godhead, but sometimes in one respect, sometimes in another, one while called
the Father, another while called the Son.

2. Of Samosatenus, who taught, That the Son did no more subsist in God, than
Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness.

3. Of Arrius, who denied that the Son was begotten of the Essence of the
Father, that he was coeternal, coequal, and according to his Person of the
same substance with the Father.

4. Of Servetus, who affirmed that the word Person is no otherwise to be taken,
then as in Comedies the name of a Person is used for the habit and the
distinction of the office.

5. Of the Tritheitarites, who do transform the three Persons into three
distinct and several Essences: They deny the Son of God according to his
Essence, to be of the same substance with the Father, and the Son to be God of
himself.

6. The blindness of the Jews, who do affirm an Essence altogether without
distinction. And here I will Answer to some Objections made by diverse Heretics.

Object. 1. If there be diverse Jehovahs, there must be diverse Essences: but
(Genesis 19.24.) the first is true: for Jehovah did rain fire from Jehovah: that
is, the Son from the Father: therefore the Son is a distinct Essence from the
Father.

A. The Learned say, it is an Hebrew phrase, signifying that God did
miraculously rain fire of himself, from Heaven. Again, the word Jehovah is
taken sometimes personally, it is therefore a distinction in the Persons, not
in Essence.

Obj. 2. There is one life of the Father, and another of the Son, Joh. 5.26.
therefore another Essence.

A. First, that place is to be understood of a power communicated to Christ as
he was Mediator. Secondly, Although the Son be from the Father, in respect of
the origination of his Person, yet is he of himself, if he be absolutely
considered, and therefore has the same life with the Father.

Obj. 3. They who have distinct Operations, have distinct Essences: but the
Actions of the Trinity are distinct; Ergo.

A. The Proposition is true, if it be understood of natural and external
action: but if of internal and personal actions it is not true; for these do
not take away the unity of Essence; since that the same Essence in number is
wholly in every Person.

Obj. 4. Each Person has not one and the same power, for the Father can beget
the Son, the Son cannot beget; ergo they have not the same Essence.

A. They have all one natural power, but not personally; as there is one
Nature, but not one Person.

Obj. 5. The Essence of the Father is communicated to the Son by Generation;
therefore there is one Essence in the Father, another in the Son, because there
is one Essence begetting, and another begotten.

A. We must distinguish betwixt Generation and Communication; for the Person
begets and is begotten, but the Essence neither begets nor is begotten, but
communicated.

Obj. 6. If the Father and Son have one Essence, it must follow, that the
Father was incarnate, which is absurd; Ergo.

A. The Essence of God absolutely considered was not incarnate, but the second
Person: and although the Person of the Son include the whole Essence of God,
yet for the proper manner of subsisting, it is distinguished from the Father.

Obj. 7. If the Father and Son have one Essence, the Son should be Mediator to
himself.

A. The Son is properly Mediator betwixt us and his Father, not absolutely
betwixt us and the Divine Essence. And the office of Mediator depends upon
the most free Ordination of God. Note.


CHAP. VI. Questions and Answers about Christ.
Quest. 1. WHat does this word Christ signify?

A. It signifies Anointed, because he was anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows, Joh. 1.14. Psalm. 2.6. and 110.4. Isa. 61.1.
as we read in Psalm. 45.8. And indeed he is that King, that only Priest and
Prophet which was promised unto mankind.

Q. 2. Does his name Christ signify his Nature, or his Person?

A. His Person subsisting in both his Natures, and not this or that Nature
alone: for it is a name concrete, as the Grammarians speak, and not abstract.

Q. 3. What do you call a word concrete, and what an abstract?

A. This word concrete, in the discourse of Christ, is said to be that which
signifies the nature together with the subject, and does comprehend in his
signification both the thing, and the subject wherein the thing is, (that is to
say), it does define the Person of Christ, as he is the Son of God; because the
Son of God does not simply signify the Nature of God, but the Person of the
Son of God; So the Son of Man, See Bucan. Institut. Theolog. loc. 2. or page 14.
when it is spoken of Christ, signifies the Person, and not his Humanity
simply. But this name abstract, is a word that signifies the Nature simply: as
the Divinity of Christ, the Humanity of Christ.

Q. 4. How many things are especially necessary to know Christ, and which be
they?

A. Two: his Person, and his Office.

Q. 5. What is Christ?

A. He is the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 1.14. Tit. 3.4, 5. Heb. 2.16. Luke
1.31. Luke 1.35. Heb. 2.16 Heb. 2.14. Mat. 26.29 and 27.50. Heb. 2.17. and 4.15.
who of his mere love toward mankind, did create unto himself, of the Seed of
the Virgin Mary, being Sanctified by the Holy Ghost, and by creating assumed,
and did personally and inseparably for ever unite a true humane Body endued
with a reasonable Soul. And so being true God, became true Man, like to us in
all things, sin only excepted.

Q. 6. What things are we especially to consider in the Person of Christ?

A. Four: 1. That Christ is God. 2. That the same Christ is Man. 3. That he is
God and Man in one Person. 4. The Phrases and the usual Speeches which are
affirmed of Christ in the Scriptures.

Q. 7. By how many, and by what kind of testimonies do you prove that Christ is
God?

A. By three: 1. By apparent and manifest sentences of Scripture, wherein the
Divinity of Christ is averred. 2. By his Works, which were altogether Divine.
3. By the worship and honor which was yielded unto Christ, both of the Saints
that believed, and of the Angels.

Q. 8. Show some pregnant testimonies whereby you can prove that Christ is God.

A. I shall, Isa. 9.6. This is the Name whereby they shall call him (speaking
of the Messiah) to wit, the Mighty God, the Father of Eternity. Jer. 23.6. The
Name whereby the Branch of David shall be called, shall be the Lord our
Righteousness. Judge. 6.11. etc. That Angel which appeared to the Holy
Patriarchs, call himself Jehovah. In the New Testament, Matthew. 16.16. Thou art
Christ the Son of the living God. Joh. 20.28. My Lord and my God. Romans 9.5.
Christ being God, was of the fathers according to the flesh of his Mother, who
is God for ever. 1 John 5.20. And we are in his Son Jesus Christ, who is very
God, and life Eternal. 1 Timothy 3.16. God is manifested in the flesh. In which
places Christ is absolutely called God, and the name Jehovah, so given him, not
by a Trope, or Symbolically, by reason of the presence of God, as Exodus 17.15.
It is given to the Altar. Psalm. 24.8. It is given to the Ark. Jer. 33.16. It is
given to Jerusalem.

Q. 9. Which be the testimonies of the second sort?

A. The works which none can do but God alone, which are ascribed to him, to
wit, to create and preserve, to redeem, to blot out iniquities, to search the
heart, to hear our prayers, to quicken, to judge; moreover, the Miracles which
he wrought by his own power, according to that Prophecy, Isa. 53.5, 6. unto
which also even Christ himself sends us, and for the working whereof he gave
power to his Apostles; moreover, those Attributes which do agree only to the
Nature of God, and ascribed unto him; as Eternal, Almighty, Infinite, King of
Kings, Savior, and the rest, testify him to be God by Nature. See these
Scriptures following, Joh. 1.3. and 5.17. Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.23. 1 Cor. 1.30. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Matthew. 9.6. and 9.4. Mar. 2.8. and 14.13. Joh. 14.14. and 5.27.
and 5.22. and 10.25. Matthew. 11.45. and 10.8. Mic. 5.2. Joh. 1.1. and 17.5. and
3.31. Phil. 3.21. Matthew. 18.20. and 28.20. Rev. 19.26. Matthew. 1.21. Acts 4.12.

Q. What is the third kind of testimonies?

A. The worship and honor which is performed unto Christ, namely, Invocation,
Adoration, Faith, Hope. Psalm. 72.11. All the Kings of the Earth shall worship
him, and all People shall serve him, Isa. 11.10. and Romans 15.11, 12. All
Nations shall call upon him, and trust in him. Rom 14.11. Phil. 2.10.
Psalm. 2.12. Blessed are they that put their trust in him: every knee shall bow
unto him. And Joh. 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Acts 7.39. Lord
Jesus receive my Spirit. All which do prove that he is true God.

Q. Why is it necessary that Christ the Redeemer should be God?

A. For two causes especially, whereof of former is the greatness of the evil
wherewith all mankind was overwhelmed, which could be taken away by no
creature: The later is the greatness of the good, Mat. 19.17.
which could be restored by none to man again, but by God, who alone is truly
good.

Q. What is the greatness of the evil?

A. It stands in Four things, which be these; The greatness of man's sin, the
infinite and unsupportable weight of God's anger; the power of Death; the
tyranny of the Devil; which to take away, to abolish, to appease, to overcome,
none was able but God alone.

Q. What is the greatness of the good, which could be restored by no creature?

A. The restoring again of the Image of God: therefore Christ (1 Cor. 1.31.) is
made to us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; Col 3.10.
not only by revealing and teaching of them, but by performing and restoring of
them.

Q. Why is he called the Word?

A. Because it is he that spoke the Word, and all things were made.

Q. According to which Nature is he called the Image of God? Col. 1.15.

A. Not according to his Humane Nature alone, as man is said to be made after
the Image of God; but especially according to his Divine Nature, but manifested
in the flesh, 2 Timothy 3.16.
or so far forth as God has truly manifested himself in Christ: whereupon he
is called, The brightness of the Glory of the Father, Heb. 1.3. and the
Character or engraven form of his Person; because he is not some vanishing
representation, but engraven and durable.

Q. Prove that Christ is very Man.

A. I will; Genesis 3.15. The Seed of the Woman is promised, which shall break the
Serpents head. Genesis 22.17. God promised Abraham, that in his Seed all the
Nations of the Earth should be blessed. 3 Sam. 7.12. It is promised to David,
that his Son must sit upon his Throne and Reign for ever. Isa. 7.14. Behold, a
Virgin shall Conceive and bring forth a Son. Besides all this, the History of
the Gospel does plainly prove that Christ was conceived, Luke 1.31. and 2.7. --
21. and 22.20. Heb. 2.4. Mat. 26.38. and 4.2. Joh. 19.29. and 19.34. Mat.
27.50. and 9.36. Joh. 2.17. and 11.33, 35. Mat. 26.37, 38. Acts 1.9, 11.
born, circumcised, had a true Body and Soul, was hungry, thirsty, shed his
blood, that he died, and that he had all the Properties and Affections of man's
Nature, yet without sin, that he ascended visibly and locally into Heaven, and
thence that he shall come again to Judgment.

Q. Why must Christ needs become Man?

A. 1. The Justice of God required it should be so, that the disobedience
committed in our flesh, might in the same be repaired, Romans 5.17, 18, 19. Heb.
2.14.

2. The reason of our Adoption: for it pleased the Son of God to take the
Nature of Man upon him, and to become our brother, and so by that means to
become our nearest kinsman, and most near allied unto us, that we being made
his members, might be made the Sons of God, Gal. 3.16. and that he might have
right to redeem and ransom us. Hence is matter of comfort in every kind of
temptation. Therefore the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 2. 17. and 4.5. says,
He took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham; and in all
things became like to his brethren, that he might have compassion of his
brethren.

3. For the confirmation of our Resurrection: for in that Christ took on him
our Nature, and has raised it up, and given unto it immortality, and has
exalted it in Heaven: by virtue of that Communion (which we have with him)
shall we be raised up at the last day, and this our vile body shall be made
conformable to the glorious Body of Christ, Phil. 3.21. and 1 Cor. 15.22. As in
Adam all are dead, so in Christ shall all be made alive.

Q. Why was neither the Father nor the Holy Ghost incarnate, but the Son?

A. 1. Because it was meet that the World should be redeemed, and all things
restored by him, by whom all things were created; or, that man should be
redeemed from death by him, by whom he was first created, and should have been
brought unto life eternal if he had not sinned.

2. It would have been unconvenient, that there should be two Sons; one in the
Divine Nature, another in the Humane Nature.

3. It was the Eternal Decree of the Father, whereby he purposed to save
mankind by his Son. Heb. 2.10.

Q. Whether is Christ God and Man, divided or joined together?

A. Joined and uniced, but not divided.

Q. By what kind of Union?

A. Not by inhabitation only, as God dwells in the Saints; Joh. 17.21.
not by consent only, as the Faithful are one in the Father and the Son: not by
Mixture, as when Water is mingled with Wine; not by Combination, as two boards
be joined together: lastly, not by Composition, whereby of the mixture of two
things, there arises a third: but by Personal Union, which (as it is said) the
Greeks call Incorporation, because neither the whole Deity, nor any part of it,
is subjectively communicated to the Humanity of Christ, but only the Humane
Nature was assumed of the Son of God into the same Person, Heb. 2.16.

Q. What is the Personal Union in Christ?

A. It is that whereby the Person of the Son of God, being a Person from all
Eternity existing, did assume the most pure Nature of Man, wanting all personal
existing of its own, into the unity of his Person, and made it his own, the
properties of each Nature being preserved. Or, as Paul defines it, Col. 2.9.
whereby in Christ does dwell all the fullness of the Godhead bodily; whereof we
have a manifest resemblance in the union of the Soul and the body; And
therefore the Apostle does well call it a great Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy
3.16.

Q. How is this Union made?

A. Without all confusion, Without all conversion of one Nature into another,
indivisibly, inseparably. The difference of the Natures by no means being taken
away by the union: but rather the propriety of either Nature being saved, and
joined together, or concurring into one Person, and one subsisting, as the
Calcedon Synod speak in the History of Evagrius, lin. 2. cap. 4. And from that
time that the Word did assume our Humane Nature, he never left it, no not in
his death. And to this purpose make these Verses; I am that I was, not I was
that I am, now both am I called; Thou know me not, except thou know me
subsisting of both Natures. -- See Mr. John Tombs his Exposition upon the
Calcedon-Council concerning the two Natures in Christ asserted, in his Book,
entitled Emmanuel, or, God-man. Sect. 15.

Q. By what testimonies will you prove, that the Divine and Humant Nature in
Christ, did join together in one and the same Person?

A. Isa. 7.14. and 9.6. Luke 1.35. That which shall be born of thee, shall be
called the Son of God. Joh. 1.14. And the Word was made Flesh: not by
Sacramental-union, in which respect Christ was said to be a Rock: not by
confusion of the Natures: nor by commutation, as Water is turned into Wine,
Joh. 2.14. but by assuming the flesh into the unity of this Person. The Voice
of God speaks thus of Jesus Christ the Son of Mary: This is my beloved Son,
Matthew. 3.17. He that descended is even the self-same that ascended above all
Heavens, that he might fill all things, Ephesians. 4.10. God sent his Son, born of a
Woman, Gal. 4.4.

Q. Why is it necessary that Christ should be both God and Man in one and the
same Person?

A. 1. To die end he might reconcile God and Man, or that he might make God and
Man one.

2. That he might be a fit Mediator between God and Men, 2 Timothy 2.5 Heb. 8 6
by reason of his Participation and Affinity with them both.

3. That he might reconcile God unto us by his death, which if he had been God
alone, he could never have suffered; if only Man, he could never have overcome.

4. That the work of Redemption performed in the flesh of the Son, might become
of sufficient price for sin, whereby God, that infinite good, was offended.
For, although certain actions do properly proceed from the Divine Nature, and
some are done by the Humane Nature, yet all of them do equally receive their
price and worthiness from the Divine Nature. So the flesh of Christ has power
to quicken, because it is the flesh of that Person who is God: the obedience of
the Man Christ does Justify, because it is the obedience of that Person who is
God: the blood of Christ redeems the Church, because it is the blood of God,
Acts 20.28.

Q. What is the Communication of Properties?

A. It is such a manner of Predication, whereby those things which be proper to
Natures are indifferently attributed to the Person of Christ which is but one:
and that because Christ in his two Natures is both, to wit, perfect God, and
perfect Man; to whom therefore these things are truly and indeed attributed, as
well those which are proper to God, as those which be proper to Man. Therefore
it is well and truly said; God, or else the Son of God, was born of the Virgin
Mary, suffered, was crucified; and God purchased unto himself the Church with
his own blood, 1 Cor. 2.8. Acts. 20.28. Not simply, principally, and by
himself, as he is God, but by accident, and in another respect, or in regard of
another thing: because that which is proproper to one Nature, namely, to be
conceived born, crucified, to die, is not attributed to his Divinity, but to
the Person taking the name of one, namely, of the Divine Nature. For this word,
the Son of God, or God (which is the subject of the Proposition) is the
concrete and not the abstract, and signifies not the Divine Nature, but the
Person, who is God and Man. Therefore it is well said; The Son of Man, or
Christ-Man is Eternal, Almighty, All-present; saves, raises the dead, gives
Eternal Life. And, Joh. 3.13. No man has ascended into Heaven, but he that
came down from Heaven: both in respect of the Union, seeing that the self-same
Person is both Man and God: for as God, by reason of the unity, does account
those things which belong to the Humane Nature proper to himself; so as he is
Man, by reason of the union, does account those things which belong to the
Divine Nature to be proper to it self: and also because the Son of Man is a
word concrete, which signifies the Person of Christ, being but one, consisting
of the Divine and Humane Nature; and therefore whole Christ is every where
present, but not all that is in Christ. On the contrary, it is wickedly said,
That the Divinity of Christ was born of the Virgin, suffered death, and that
the Humanity of Christ is Eternal, every where present, Almighty; for the
Divinty is a word abstract, which simply signifies the Divine Nature in
Christ, which is most free from all manner of sufferings. Now the Predication
of diverse Natures by reason of the Hypostatical (or Personal) Union, is of no
force, but in those things which are signified as whole and perfect: for as we
do not use to say, the Body is the Soul, or the Man is the Soul: so neither do
we say, this God (Christ) is the Body of Christ, or the Soul of Christ, but
only God is Man.

Q. Is the communication of Properties verbal only, or real?

A. It is a true and real speech, because the Person of whom, by the trope
Synechdoche, as well the Divine as the Humane, either names of Proprieties, or
Effects, are indifferent and equally affirmed, contains all those things in
it self truly and indeed, which do agree to very God, and very Man: those
things which be Divine; as he is God: those also which be Humane as the same is
Man, but not in respect of both Natures, but according to the one and the
other. For then should be brought in the Eutychian Heresy of the confounding
of the Natures or Properties, and it should cease to be a speech by
Synechdoche, ( viz. wherein a part is taken for the whole, or the whole for a
part.)

Q. But those Titles which belong to the Office of Redemption, are they to be
attributed to the Natures severally asunder, or to the Person?

A. To the Person: as Christ is a Mediator, Pastor, Priest according to both
Natures, although each of them in that work retaining his own proper efficacy
or operation.

Q What is the Effect of that Personal Union?

A. The bestowing of gifts, whereby the Humane Nature in the Person of Christ
is adorned, and whereby it excels all other Creatures in Wisdom, Goodness,
Holiness, Power, Majesty, and Glory; which the old Fathers call the Deifying of
the Flesh: the Schoolmen, Habitual Grace, of the Communion of Properties (which
is mutual one of another, and the reciprocation of the Names) altogether
distinct.

Q How manifold is the state of Christ?

A. Twofold: one of Humiliation, whereby he willingly undergoing the burdens,
reproaches and punishments of our Nature, did humble himself to the death of
the Cross; the Divinity in the mean while (according to Irenaeus) resting or
hiding it self, that he might be crucified, and die. The other, of Exhaltation,
whereby after his death, his Humane Nature did lay aside all the infirmities of
it, (but not the Essential Properties) and was wonderfully exalted above all
Creatures unto the greatest honor, yet not in any case matched, and equalled
to the Divine Nature of Christ, Phil. 2.7, 9.

Q. What are the Doctrines contrary to this?

A. The first Heresy of Macedonius and Valentinus, who affirmed, That Christ
brought with him a Celestial body from Heaven: As also of Apelles, who said,
His Body was aerie, his Flesh star-like, and that he passed from the Virgin as
Water from a Pipe.

2. Of the Marcionites, who feigned unto him an imaginary Body.

3. Of Apollinaris, who denied that Christ did assume a reasonable Soul, but
that his Divinity was unto him instead of his mind.

4. Of Eunomius, who affirmed Christ to be mere man, and that he was called the
Son of God by Adoption: And of Eb^oni, who said, that Christ was born by Humane
generation.

5. Of Nestorius, who taught, That as there be two Natures in Christ, so there
are two Persons; and that the Divinity is present with the Humanity by
circumstance and combination, but not by Personal union. Therefore he denied
that Mary was the Mother of God, or brought forth God; and affirmed, that Man,
not God, was crucified of the Jews.

6. Eutyches Heresy, contrary to the former: for he taught that the Humane
Nature after the Union, was endued with the properties of the Divinity, ( viz.
the Divine Nature was turned into flesh.)

7. Of the Manichees, who avouched that Christ had but one only Will; and not
two, a Divine, and a Humane Will.

8. Of the Vbiquitaries, who attribute to the Humanity of Christ the Essential
properties of the Divinity, altogether forgetting that saying, He that takes
away the Properties, takes away the Nature: and on the contrary, He that
attributes the Proprieties, attributes the Nature: and of whatsoever the
Essence cannot be affirmed, no more can the Essential Proprieties thereof be
affirmed of the same.

Now I have here briefly given you an account of these Eight Opinions about
Christ as aforesaid. And by these you see St. Peter's words fulfilled, 2 Pet.
2.1. But there were false Prophets also among the People, even as there shall
be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable HERESIES, even
denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.
And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of
Truth shall be evil spoken of. Acts 20.28. For St. Paul says, Take head
therefore unto your selves, and unto all the Flock, over which the Holy Ghost
has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased
with his own blood: for I know this, that after my departing, shall grievous
Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock; also of your own selves shall
men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. So Isa.
9.21. says, That Manasses against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasses, and
both against Judah. Also Herod against Pilat, and Pilat against Herod, and both
against Christ: even so, here is the Eunomians, (or Socinians, or Bidelians)
against the Eutychians, and both against Christ; for the one denies his Divine
Nature, and the other his Humane, contrary to Matthew. 22.45. and Rev. 22.16. I
am the root and offspring of David; and so by consequence both deny the true
Christ. For the Devil knows there is no Salvation for us without Faith in him
who is David's Lord, and David's Son. Acts 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in
any other, for there is none other Name under heaven given among men, whereby
we must be saved, Acts 4.12. And now, Brethren, that I may, as the Apostle Paul
says, Acts. 20.26. be clear from the blood of you all: for I have and will
declare unto you all the counsel of God (that I know) touching this matter; but
as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.9. So say I, for we know in part, and we
prophecy in part; for now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to
face; now I know in part, but then shall I know even as also I am known. 2 Pet.
3.17. Ye therefore beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye
also being led away with the Error of the wicked, fall from your own
stedfastness. For some of you have been as brands plucked out of the fire, Jude
23. (I mean out of the Eutychian Heresy,) which does not only deny Christ to
be truly David's Son, but says, That he that was truly David's Lord and
Creator was mortal and died, contrary to 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King
Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise God be honor and glory for ever
and ever, Amen.

And now because the right knowledge of Christ, and union of his Natures, is so
absolutely necessary to Salvation, I will add some Questions, and propound them
for the Eutychians consideration.

CHAP. VII. Containing Questions and Answers about the Union of Natures in
Christ.
Quest. 1. WHy must Christ become Man and take our Nature, viz. the flesh of
the Virgin Mary?

Answ. Because the Justice of God required, that seeing in that Nature God was
offended, in that Nature should a satisfaction be made to God for the offense.
Now sin was committed in Man's Nature, Adam sinned first, and in him all his
Posterity; therefore Christ took Man's Nature that so he might suffer death,
and so make satisfaction to his Father for Men's sins.

Q. 2. Is there no way appointed of God to remit our sins, but by shedding of
blood?

A. No, so says the Holy Ghost, Heb. 9.22. Without shedding of blood, there is
no remission.

Q. 3. Can Christ, considered as he is the Eternal Word (Joh. 1.1.) and very
God (1 John 5.20.) die?

A. No: for God is immortal and cannot die, 1 Timothy 1.17. for he only is without
beginning and without end.

Q. 4. But although God as God cannot die, yet cannot he change himself from a
Creator to a Creature, and so die.

A. No: for says the Holy Ghost, Mat. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. Jam.
1.17. Neither is there any shadow of it.

Q. 5. Did Christ take our flesh, and not our sin?

A. Yes: for the Holy Ghost says, He was made like unto his brethren in all
things, sin only excepted, Heb. 2.17. and 4.15.

Q. 6. How could he take our flesh, and not our sin also, since all other men
partake of both?

A. All other men came from Adam, and by Adam as a procreant cause, Romans 5.12.
but Christ came from Adam, but not by Adam, viz. being made of a Woman, Gal.
4.4. (even as Eve was made of a Man, Genesis 2.) but not begotten as Cain, and all
other men are, Matthew. 1.18.

Q. 7. How could Christ properly be the Son of Man, and so the Son of David,
and of Abraham, and Adam, if he did not take the very flesh and blood of the
Virgin Mary, the Daughter of David, as St. Luke, in his third Chapter, says
she was?

A. He could not: for God had sworn with an oath to him, That of the fruit of
this Loins according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his
Throne, Acts 2.30.

Q. 8. If so; whether then is not that Opinion heretical and damnable that
denies Christ to be the true Son of David?

A. It is; because there is no Eternal Salvation to be had in any other, Acts
13.38, 39.

Q. 9. Whether if Christ had been a Creature only, although an Angel or Man,
could he have overcome death?

A. No: for, as he was Man, the Jews did destroy the temple of his body, Joh.
2.19. but, as God, he raised it up again the third day, as he told the Jews he
would do, Joh. 10.18.

Q. 10. Whether if Death and the Grave had kept Christ Prisoner for ever; could
any have been saved?

A. No; so St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 15. For then they which are asleep in Christ
are perished.

Q. 11. Whether does not this absurdity follow the Eutychian Opinion, that if
Christ be only God, then he could not die, as aforesaid; if only Man, then he
cannot raise himself from the dead?

A. It does unavoidably follow upon their Opinion.

Q 12. Whether such a Doctrine, which by its natural consequences makes the
death and resurrection of Christ impossible or else in vain, ought not to be
abandoned by all Christians?

A. Yes, doubtless it ought; for it destroys the Faith of Gods Elect utterly,
if believed.

Q. 13. What must we do with those Brethren that are ignorant of these bad
consequences as aforesaid?

A. Instruct them in the true Faith concerning Christ's death and resurrection.

Q. 14. But what must we do if they be obstinate, and will not repent?

A. Then after the first and second admonition, reject them, Tit. 3.10.

Q. 15. If Christ before he came from Heaven, was of the uncreated substance of
the Father, their Essence being One; then will it not follow that the Father
was made flesh at well as the Sou, since you say it was the Essence that was
made flesh, not the Person of the Son took it into Personal Union, as we with
the Scriptures say he did, Heb. 2.14, 16.

Q. 16. If it were possible for the uncreated substance to make it self into
Flesh, which by nature is a Spirit, and spiritual substance, Joh. 4.24. Then
how could he receive nourishment from the Virgin, as you say he did, and grow
in her womb?

Q. 17. If he be of the uncreated substance, how could he grow in Wisdom as he
did, since the uncreated substance is wisdom it self, Prove. 8.

Q. 18. If Christ be only of the uncreated substance, then how could he be
ignorant of the day of Judgment? Mark 13.32.

Q 19. If he was only of the uncreated substance; then how could he be anointed
by the Holy Ghost? Luke 4.18. Acts 4.27.

Q. 20. If he be only of the uncreated substance, then whose Will did he obey,
when he said, Not my Will, but thy Will be done? Luke 22.42. For the Essence is
one in the Father, and the Son, Joh. 14.9, 11.

Q. 21. Why did Christ die, as you say he did, if he was only of the uncreated
substance? Did he die to satisfy himself, viz. as God?

Answer fairly, and do not now (when you see all these gross absurdities follow
your Opinion (as the natural consequences of it) say; you cannot tell what he
was before he was made flesh in the Virgins womb; for then you worship you know
not what, Joh. 4.22. with the Samaritans, and so you are Idolaters as they and
the Athenians were, Acts 17.22, 23, etc.

Some Objections.
Object. 1. Peradventure some may say, These absurdities will follow upon your
own Opinion as well as ours, for you say he was God by Nature as well as we;
and there is but one God by Nature, Gal. 4.8.

Answ. 1. Not so; for we always distinguish betwixt the Essence of the Son,
and the Person, saying, The Essence is one with his Father, but not his Person;
therefore we say his Person was begotten, not his Essence: and we also say,
that his Person took Flesh of the Virgin Mary, not the Essence: and therefore
it was the Person of the Son that was born of her, not the Father, nor the
Spirit: for although the Essence of the three be one, yet the Persons be
distinct, as 1 John 5.7. So that the Eternal Word, the Son of God, did never
pray to his Father (as I remember) till he became our Mediator, no more than
the Holy Ghost does pray to the Father, which for himself you know he does not:
but Christ did pray for himself, which could not be for his Godhead, but for
his Manhood, which is a Creature, and therefore ought to perform homage to God
the Creator. For we always distinguish betwixt the Natures (which you deny)
therefore we say it was his Humane Nature that was ignorant of the day of
Judgment; for with his Divine Nature he knows all things, Joh. 2.25. And by
virtue of it he could and did forgive sins; which two things, viz. To search
the heart, and and to forgive sins, none but God can do; therefore we cannot
conceive how he could become our Savior, and Mediator, except he had these two
Natures in one Person: for if he had not took our Nature, and so appeared
before God in our stead, bearing our sins in his own body, as St. Peter says,
1 Pet. 2.24. And so St. Paul. says, Was made sin for us who knew no sin, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. for else Justice
could not have punished him.

2. If he had been put to death in the flesh, which we say only died (which
distinction you deny); but we, with St. Peter, say he was put to death in the
flesh, but quickened by the Spirit (which we call his Divine Nature): for as he
did bear our sins, so also our punishment for sin, which was death, but by his
Divine Nature he overcame it, as aforesaid, 1 Pet. 3.18.

Obj. 2. Peradventure some will object against these things as I have before
laid down, saying, He may be the Son of David although he did not take of the
flesh of the Virgin Mary (and so by consequence the flesh of David) inasmuch as
he was born of the Daughter of David; for it may be read, Born of a Woman, as
well as made of a Woman, Gal. 4.4. as also Romans 1.3. born of the Seed of David.

A. We say with you, He was born of the Seed of David, and so of the Virgin
Mary. But yet so as he was also made of the Seed of David, and of a Woman,
Which thing you deny, viz. that he was made of the Seed of David; and if so,
then he was not properly the Son of David, although born of a Daughter of David
[no more than Bethsheba's Child was Vriah's, which was begotten of her by
David, which you know was David's and not Vriah's Child, although she was his
Wife] for no man is properly the Son of such a man, except he partake of the
substance, nature, or flesh of that man: But you say Christ did not do so,
therefore he was not (by your Opinion) the Son of David.

Obj. 3. But no Child (say they) does take any thing from his Mother but only
nourishment, therefore Christ did not.

A. Who told you so? not God's Word (and do you know by experience how bones do
grow in the womb) but if your Opinion be true, why then does God forbid his
Children to marry their Sister by the Mothers side, how is she kin to him if
she was begotten by another father: But God says your Opinion is false, as you
may see, Levit. 18.9, etc.

Some Queries to the Eutychians.
Query 1. Whether does not the Eutychian Opinion, in denying the two Natures in
Christ, viz. the Divine and Humane, by consequence deny the Lamb, the Priest,
and the Altar, mentioned in the Law to be types of Christ, contrary to the
Analogy of Faith?

Answ. They do: for Christ, as Man, is the Lamb; as God, the Altar; and, as
God-Man, the Priest.

Q. 2. Whether does the Holy Ghost apply these three to Christ in the New
Testament, yea or nay?

A. Yes, he does apply them; for he is the Lamb or Sacrifice for sin, Joh.
1.29. Heb. 9.26. and 10.10. and the Altar, Heb. 13.10. and the Priest, Heb.
5.6. For as the typical Lamb was without blemish, even so was Christ, says St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 1.18. and 2.24. Secondly, The Priest was sanctified, or set apart
to offer a Sacrifice acceptable to God; even so was Christ, Joh. 17.17.
Thirdly, As the Altar did sanctify the Sacrifice, even so did the Godhead of
Christ the Humane Nature, Heb. 9.14.

Query 3. Whether does not the Eutychian Opinion make the threefold Offices of
Christ of none effect, or deny them all?

A. Yes; for the Divine Nature cannot be anointed to be Priest, Prophet, and
King.

Query 4. Whether can any man come to the Father but through Faith in these
threefold Offices of Christ?

A. No; for what the Tabernacle or Temple was to them under the Law, that is
Christ to us under the Gospel: And, as God manifested to them in the Temple,
was the proper object of worship to them; even so God manifested to us in
Christ, is the proper object of worship to us: for the Flesh, or Humane Nature
of Christ, is the medium, or mean, by which we have access to God in all our
Worship. This is proved, Heb. 10.19, 20, etc.

Some Arguments to prove the Opinion of the Eutychians, heretical and dangerous.
Argum. 1. That Doctrine or Opinion that says Christ was not the Seed of the
Woman, Genesis 3.15. which was promised of God to break the Serpents head, is a
dangerous.

Arg. 2. That Opinion that makes the Tabernacle or Temple, Lamb, Priest, and
Altar, ordained of God for Divine Worship (till Christ came in the flesh) no
true types of him, is a dangerous Opinion: But such is their Opinion, Therefore
dangerous.

Arg. 3. That Opinion which in it self, or the natural consequences depending
thereon, makes void all the promises of God concerning man's Salvation by
Christ, must needs be a very dangerous Opinion: But such is their Opinion;
therefore dangerous.

The Reasons appear plain to every impartial Reader in all these three
Arguments.

But here I will add, That either the Seed of the Woman, Genesis 3.15. was God,
which was justly offended with Adam for his sin: Or else it was the Man Christ
which was made of a Woman, Gal. 4. But it was not God, that was made of a
Woman; therefore Man. And now for you to say that God the Creator of all things
in Heaven and in Earth, Col. 1.16. made himself a Creature (or was made so) is
false, as I said before, and also impossible, since God is Perfection it self.
And to say that he passed through the Virgins womb as Water through a Conduit
(as some Heretics have said) is also false. And to say he had an imaginary
body, and not a real body (as some Heretics have said) is also very false, as
appears by his death and resurrection.

As to the proof of the second Argument, That the Lamb, the Priest, and the
Altar were types of Christ; see what is already said in the Questions and
Answers, as also the Scriptures thereunto annexed. Which cannot be applied to
him, ( viz. Christ) except you with us grant the two Natures to be in one
Person. If you can, show us how you do it.

As to the proof of the third Argument, That your Opinion does deny all the
Promises of God, I prove it thus. That Opinion that denies Christ to be the
true Son of David, denies all the Promises of God concerning man's Salvation:
But such is your Opinion; Therefore, etc.

2ly. That Opinion that denies the proper signification of the Sacraments,
viz. Baptism, and the Lords Supper, must needs be a dangerous Opinion: but such
is your Opinion, therefore dangerous. The reason of the minor Proposition is,
because it denies the two Natures in Christ, which are lively set forth by the
Sign and the thing signified by these Sacraments.

1. For, as all the Ordinances of God's instituted Worship, as Sacrifices under
the Law, etc. so all the Sacraments under the Gospel, seem to have immediate
relation to Christ, as God manifested in the flesh. For, you may observe they
consist of two parts, the one Natural, the other Spiritual; the one External,
the other Internal; the one as it were the Body, the other the Soul of it; the
one representing the Humanity, the other the Divinity of Christ: so that every
Ordinance of Worship is (as it were) a representation of Christ incarnate.

2. The Divine Essence or Godhead in Christ, seems to be the proper object of
all Worship; for Christ says, God is a Spirit, and therefore will be
worshipped in Spirit and in Truth. And St. Paul says, That the fullness of the
Godhead dwells in Christ bodily, Col. 2.9. not locally, but by personal
Union; and this is the proper object of all Gospel Worship, as I have said
before. And it was so in the time of the Law: for the Temple was God's
dewlling place, Psalm. 76.2. there was the only place of God's public Worship,
Ps. 29.2. No Sacrifice might be offered in any other place, Deuteronomy. 12.26, 27.
for there the Spiritual worshippers had by Faith a sight of God, and communion
with him by Christ, Psalm. 63.2. and 68.24. Toward the Temple they were to look
wheresoever they were, 1 King. 8.29. Therefore what the Temple was to them
under the Law, the same is Christ to us under the Gospel; therefore, as the
true worshippers did not worship the Temple (although the false did) but God
that dwells in the Temple; even so, we may not worship the Temple (only) viz.
the Humane Nature of Christ, but God in it; for it is the Spirit that
quickneth, Joh. 6.53, 54. And as there was in that Temple a Vail to go into the
Holiest of all, where God dwelt, between the Cherubims; even so it is now, Heb.
10. We pass through the vail, viz. the flesh of Christ, into the Holiest, if we
are led thereby to worship that Godhead that dwells in it. This is a right
conception and true worship of God. For the Humanity of Christ was to the
Godhead, as a back of mettle to a Crystal glass: for, look on such a glass in
its pure substance, and it is transparent; put a back of mettle to it, and it
gives a beautiful reflex: So if we take up conceptions of the Godhead in its
pure Essence, it is transparent; if we consider of God as he is Infinite,
Almighty, Immense, Eternal; what is this to the Creature or our comfort? If we
consider him in his Power, Justice, Wisdom, Holiness, Goodness, and Truth, what
is this to us? yea, all these are against us as we are sinners: But if we take
up a conception of God in all his Attributes, as they appear to us in Christ,
so they make a most comfortable reflex upon us. In this Glass we behold the
Glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same similitude, from glory to
glory by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. In this Glass we behold that
Wisdom by which we are instructed, that Righteousness by which we are
justified, that Power by which we are preserved, that Grace by which we are
chosen and called, that Goodness by which we are relieved and supplied, that
Holiness by which we are transformed, that Glory to the which we shall be
conformed: by all which it appears that our right apprehension and due
conception of God must spring from the manifestation of God in Jesus Christ;
For no man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him, Matthew. 11.27. For the Saints in the Law meditated devoutly upon his coming
in the flesh, many Prophets and righteous Men, says Christ, desired to see the
things which you see, and have not seen them, Matthew. 13.17. Luke 10.24. and
what were these things? Surely it is God manifested in the flesh, as appears
by St. Luke, Luke 10.24.

Now as Aaron the high Priest was chosen from amongst his brethren (and not of
a stranger) Exodus 28.1. even so Christ the Antitype of Aaron, was taken out of
the Tribe of Judah, which were his brethren according to the flesh, Heb. 2.17.
For it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah, says the Holy Ghost, Heb.
7.14. And this is that which Moses said, A Prophet shall the Lord your God
raise up unto you from amongst his brethren like unto me, him shall you hear in
all things, Deuteronomy. 18.18. whatsoever he shall say unto you, Acts 3.23. But
notwithstanding all this, the Eutychians deny that he was flesh of our flesh,
although the Holy Ghost says it again and again, both by the holy Prophets in
the old Testament, and the holy Apostles in the New; for St. Paul says, We are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, Ephesians. 5.30.

Now since he was flesh, as the Eutychians confess, and yet deny him to be our
flesh, against all these faithful Witnesses as aforesaid. I now desire them to
tell me (if they can) what flesh it was, since St. Paul knew but four kinds of
created flesh, viz. one kind of flesh of Men, another of Beasts, another of
Fish, and another of Birds, 1 Cor. 15.39. Now which of these will you choose? If
neither of these, I pray assign of what matter the flesh of Christ was made;
for we, with St. Paul, know no other than these four kinds of flesh.

Moreover, Christ is figured out by Melchisedec and his Priesthood, Heb. 7. for
as he was a Priest and King, even so was Christ also; and as he was without
Father, and Mother; even so was Christ, viz. without Father, in respect of his
Humane Nature; and without Mother, in respect of his Divine Nature.

Now there is no knowing of God aright, but in, by, and through Christ (as I
said before): for in the works of Creation, God is above us; in his works of
Providence, a God without us; in the Law, a God against us; in Himself; a God
invisible to us; only in Christ he is Emmanual, God manifested in our flesh,
God in us, God with us, and God for us; therefore in Christ God is apprehended
aright, and there also worshipped aright. 1 John 2.23. Whosoever denies the
Son, has not the Father: but he that acknowledges the Son, has the Father
also; Who is a liar but he that denies that Jesus is the hrist; he is
Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son, verse, 22.

Now as the Eutichians err in their Opinion about Christ our Mediator, even so
they do about the Holy Trinity also; for they do not rightly understand nor
believe the Unity and Trinity spoken of, 1 John 5.7. Now if they be three, they
be three Operations, or three Manifestations, or three Subsistances: but they
be not the two former, therefore the latter, viz. three Subsistances: for St.
John says, The Word was with God, and was God, Joh. 1.1. Now where there is
one, and another with him, there must needs be a distinction; but St. John
says it is so; therefore.

2dly, Where there is one sending, and another sent, there is a distinction:
But the Father sends, and the Son was sent; therefore a distinction, Joh.
3.17.34. for, God sent his Son into the World, etc.

Again; the Father and the Son send the Holy Ghost, Joh. 14.16. it is another
Comforter; therefore a distinct Person both from the Father and the Son. Now if
these have all of them, ( viz. the Father, Son, and Spirit) Understanding and
Will, then they are Persons and not Qualities, for no Qualities can have
Understanding, and Will, see 1 Cor. 12. from ver. 3. to. 12.

If the Father, Son, and Spirit, be all Creators of Heaven and Earth; then are
they God by Nature; but they are all Creators of Heaven and Earth, therefore
God by Nature, Genesis 1.16.

2dly, If they all know the thoughts, and search the heart of man; then are
they God by Nature: but they all do so; therefore.

3dly, If they may all be ultimately sinned against; then are they God by
Nature: but they may be so; therefore.

4thly, If we may worship them with Divine Worship; then are they God by
Nature; but we may worship them with Divine Worship; therefore.

5thly, If we may be baptized in their Name; then are they God by Nature: but
we may, yea ought to be baptized in their Name; therefore God by Nature, Matthew.
21.19, 20.

The reason is plain, because we expect the remission of our sins in his Name,
into which we were baptized, as also promise to worship him in Spirit and in
Truth; for God is a Spirit, and therefore will be worshipped in Spirit, and in
Truth.

Now albeit St. John says, speaking of Christ, I and my Father are one, Joh.
10.30. He does not by this saying deny the three Persons, for in that he says
we are, he teaches us that he and his Father be not one Person, forasmuch as
ARE cannot be spoken of one Person properly; and in that he says ONE, he
declared that he is of the self-same substance with his Father. Oh the
exceeding deepness and power of God's Word, which is as a two-edged Sword; for
with these two syllables Are, and One, it confounds two Heresies, viz. the
Arrians, and Patrip^ssions, and Sabellians, which wrest that saying of Christ,
He that sees me, sees the Father also, Joh. 14. which must be understood of
their Essence, and not of their Persons, as appears by these words, I go to
prepare a place for you (says Christ): and if I go, I will come again: which
plainly proves a distinction of the Person, verse. 2, 3. If we may not believe
St. John, that there be three that bear record in heaven; viz. the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghosh; and these three are one, 1 John 5.7. to be a Unity
and Trinity as aforesaid; then these absurdities will unavoidably follow, That
if the Father be both the Son and the Holy Ghost; as he is, if their Persons be
one, as well as their Essence is one, which is indivisible: Isa. 44.6. I am,
and there is none besides me. Then the Father was he which took our Nature upon
him, Heb. 2.16. the Father was tempted of the Devil, he suffered hunger and
thirst, he was buffeted and and scourged of the Jews, and put to death by
wicked hands; he also came down in the likeness of a Dove, and also of fiery
Tongues; he begat himself; he is greater than himself; he sent himself into the
World; he gave himself a Seat at his own right hand; he is the express Image of
himself; he is greater than himself. But if our English Eutychians cannot see
these things, as aforesaid, to be blasphemy against God the Father, yet I hope
you will see them to be great absurdities; for they are the natural
consequences of your Opinion: for you say, it was God that died in the likeness
of Man: and to prove this, you wrest (as you do other Scriptures) Phil. 2.6, 8.
for you say, He that was in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal
to God; and you say, He put himself in the likeness of Men, and being found in
fashion as a man, he (...) himself, and became obedient to death, even the
death of the Cross; wherefore God also has highly exalted him, etc. Now if the
Godhead was turned into flesh, as Water was turned into Wine (as you say it
was); and there can be but one God by Nature, both you and we say (and I hope
believe); then, if the Father be that one God; [For, to us there is but one God
the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom are all things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.6.] Then I pray consider of
your Opinion, as also the bad consequences that depend upon it. For, if you
shall still be obstinate, and deny that the Eternal Word did ever take any
flesh of the Virgin Mary into Personal Union with it self (as we say it did),
but will still say and believe that the Eternal Word, viz. God the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, did make himself a Creature, viz. Man, and so died for our
sins; Then how you can acquit your selves from being rightly called blasphemers
of the Eternal God, which is only Immortal, and Immutable, (as I said before) I
cannot yet tell because of the reasons aforesaid, etc.

Now forasmuch as I understand, by some late Conferences I have had with our
English Eutychians, that they deny (or at least doubt of) God's Omnipresence;
and, with the Anthropomorphites, think of God as if he were some old Man
sitting in some one place on a Throne, as Kings use to do; and so, with the
Papists and, Socinians, think that one may see, from his right hand to his
left, as Dr. Owen says in his Answer to Mr. John Biddles Catechism. Now you
may see by this, how one Error begets another. For first they deny the
Divine Essence of the Eternal God to be Infinite, Immense; and as the Prophet
Jeremiah says, To fill Heaven and Earth, Jer. 23.24. And as Solomon says, The
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him, how much less this House which I have
built, 2 Chronicles. 6.18. But they not minding such Scriptures as these (or else
not understanding of them) but reading some other Scriptures, which speak of
his coming down from Heaven to see Sodom, etc. Genesis 18, 19 chap. As also
because man was made in his Image, and that he has hands and feet, etc.
Therefore they cannot tell how he should properly be a Spirit or Spiritual
substance, Joh. 4.24. and therefore cannot understand the blessed Trinity, as I
said before.

And indeed, without this be granted, the Trinity cannot be proved to be three
Persons, and yet but one God, as we say and believe, as aforesaid: for although
we distinguish the Persons in the Godhead, yet we do not separate them: because
the Essence is Infinite, and Omnipresent. Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I fly from
thy Presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in
Hell, behold, thou art there, Amos 9.2, 3, 4. And to give you one instance what
we mean when we say they are distinct, and not separated from the Essence of
God, we mean after this manner: as when we-say there are three Faculties in the
Soul of Man, viz. Understanding, Will, and Memory; now these three Faculties
are distinct, yet not separated from the Soul, for the Soul acts wholly in
these three, yet not three Souls, but one Soul: even so is the Eternal Godhead
in the Father, Son, and Spirit, and yet but one God: but this of the blessed
Trinity is such a great Mystery, that no earthly similitude will set it out
plainly to our capacities. But I pray consider the Vision of the three Men that
appeared to Abraham, Genesis 18. and the two that went to Lot, Genesis 19. And there
you may see, although they be three Persons, yet but one Lord, and so called
and worshipped of Abraham; see chap. 18. and of the two that went to Lot, after
that they had told him their Message, then he never called them Lords, but
Lord; see Chap. 19.18. Which two were the Son, and Holy Ghost, which were sent
by the Father, Chap. 18.21, 22. for the Father is said to send the Son, and
Spirit, but he is never sent of them. And thus you may see how Abraham saw
Christ and was glad, Genesis 18. compared with John 8.56, 58, etc.

Quest. How is God said to be present in all places at once? Psalm. 95.2, 6. and
139.7. And also to fill Heaven and Earth? Jer. 23.24.

Answ. There is a fourfold Presence of God mentioned in the Scriptures; the
first is his Presence with all his Creatures, (which we may call his general
Providence) whereby he preserves all his Creatures substances, and gives unto
them to live, move, and have a being; and this extends it self to all his
Creatures, both good and bad, Acts 17.28. The second degree is the Presence of
Grace, whereby he does not only preserve the substance of all his Creatures,
but also gives grace onto them; this is to the Church of God on Earth. The
third degree is the Presence of Glory peculiar to the Saints and Angels in
Heaven, where they shall see God face to face. The fourth degree is the
Presence of the Godhead of the Son, with the Manhood of Christ; for, in him
dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9.

Now for the better understanding of this Mystery, we must know that the
Scriptures are to be taken four ways, (at least some of them) viz. first
Historically; secondly, Analogically; thirdly, Allegorically; and fourthly,
Morally. As to instance in one of them for brevity sake. Numb. 21.9. And Moses
made a Serpent, and put it upon a Pole, etc. It has these four significations,
the first is Historical, it was a Serpent made; 2dly, Analogically, it was
lifted up; so must Christ, Joh. 3.15. 3dly, Allegorically, that is another
thing was meant by it, as appears by Hezekiah's taking of it away, and
calling of it Nehushtan, that is, a piece of Brass, 2 King. 18.4. 4thly,
Morally, for they were to look upon it for their cure: Even so must we look
upon Christ by Faith, as says the Prophet Isaiah, Look upon me and be ye saved
all the ends of the Earth.

Now that he is present with all his Creatures to preserve their substances, as
I said before, appears from Isa. 40.12. Who has measured the Waters in the
hollow of his hand, and meted out Heaven with the span, and comprehended the
dust of the Earth in a measure, and weighed the Mountains in scales, and the
Hills in a balance; behold, the Nations are as the drop of a bucket, and are
counted as the small dust of the balance; behold, he takes up the Isles as a
very little thing, verse. 15. By which phrases is meant, that he governs and
disposes of them at his pleasure: for neither the Sun could give his light to
us, nor the Fire heat; all these will perish if he withdraw his Presence but a
moment from them; as also the Beasts of the Field, for if he take away their
breath, they die, Psalm. 104.28, 29. Even as the body of a Man when the Soul is
gone, as St. James says, The body without the Spirit is dead: For, as St.
Paul, In him we live and move, and have our being, (Acts 17.28.) As also
certain of your own Poets have said, For we are all his offspring, 1 Cor. 8.6.

Obj. But sin makes a separation betwixt us and God; for what communion has
light with darkness, and Christ with Belial? Therefore he is not present with
them, etc.

A. This is not to be understood in the first degree, viz. to preserve their
substances, as in Acts 17. but is meant in the second degree, viz. his Grace
with his Church on the Earth. Joh. 14.23. If any man love me, says Christ, he
will keep my words, and my Father will love him and we will come unto him and
make our abode with him: which is meant of his Grace, and Love; and his
dwelling with them is by his Holy Spirit, as appears by his answer to Judas,
which asked, How is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not unto
the World? he had told him before, verse. 15. and 17. If you love me, keep my
Commandments, and I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom
the World cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him; for he
dwells with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortless, I
will come unto you. Thus you see how sin separateth us from God's Favor,
Grace, and Spirit, but not from his Presence: as David says, Whither shall I
go from thy Spirit? Or, Whither shall I fly from thy Presence? If I ascend up
into Heaven, thou art there: If I make my bed in Hell, thou art there: If I
take the wings of the Morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea,
even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me. And as Amos
says, speaking of sinners, Amos 9.2. Though they dig into Hell, thence shall
my hand take them; though they climb up to Heaven, thence will I bring them
down; and though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and
take them out thence, etc. For we must not imagine him to be contained in any
one place, says the Prophet, Jer. 23.24. Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says
the Lord? For, as Solomon says, The Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens cannot
contain thee, how much less this House which I have built? 1 King. 8.27. And
St. Stephen says, He dwells not in Tabernacles made with hands, Acts 7. and
yet he dwelt, says David, betwixt the Cherubims. And the Lord says of Zion,
This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell: therefore says the Prophet,
Blessed be the Lord out of Zion that dwells at Jerusalem, Psalm. 135.21. Now
this must be meant of his Grace, or gracious Presence there, and not his
personal Presence; for if so, then he was not in Heaven at that time (which I
think no wise man will believe); therefore when St. Paul says, Whilst we are
at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord: he means the beatifical
Vision, or face of God in glory, which cannot be seen with these mortal eyes;
therefore he says, When we are absent from the body, we are present with the
Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. he means in the third degree, viz. the glorious Presence
of God in Heaven with the Church Triumphant, Heb. 12.22.

Q. 2. If God be a Spirit, Joh. 14.24. how then does the Scriptures ascribe to
him hands, and feet, and almost all the parts of a man, since Christ says, A
Spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have, etc.

A. This is to be understood Metaphorically, as also by way of Analogy. For,
like as men use to hold water in the hollow of their hand, and also span with
it; even so, the Lord, albeit he is a Spirit, or spiritual substance, yet to
help our infirmity speaks to us, as it were, in our own language, and says
he measures Heaven with a span, and holds the water in the hollow of his
hand, Isa. 40.12. And as men see with their eyes, and hear with their ears;
even so the Lord is said to do, Psalm. 34.15. The eyes of the Lord are over the
Righteous, and his ears are open unto their Prayers. The hand of the Lord has
driven out the Heathen. Now a Spirit has not hands, eyes, and ears, etc.
Therefore when the Scriptures attribute these to God, viz. hands, eyes, lips,
tongue, nose, heart, head, face, and back-parts, etc. it is not to be
understood literally, but in the second or third sense, viz. Analogically, or
Allegorically, that is, another thing is meant; as Gal. 4.24. As for Example:
his right hand signifies his Power: for David says, The right hand of the
Lord does valiantly; the right hand of the Lord is exalted, Psalm. 118.15, 16.
And his finger is compared to the Holy Ghost, Luke 11.20. But if I with the
finger of God cast out Devils, no doubt the Kingdom of God is come unto you:
compared with Matthew. 12.28. But if cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, then
the Kingdom of God is come unto you. And thus I might show how the rest might
be applied, but for brevity sake I forbear.

Q. 3. How is God said to repent, Genesis 6.6. since other Scriptures say, he is
not as Man that he should repent, or as the Son of Man that he should change
his mind? For the gifts and callings of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29.

A. Albeit God is said sometimes to be angry with us, and sometimes pleased,
this does not prove any change in God, but when we break his Commandments and
set light by his Promises, and follow our corrupt ways, we are changed, and
not he; We be mutable, he is immutable; for in him there is no variableness nor
shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. He is said to be pacified and pleased, when we
turn from our evil ways, and so turn to him by true repentance. See for this
Jonah 3.9. Joel 2.12. Jer. 18.18. For when God is said to laugh at men's
calamities, and mock when their fear comes, Prove. 1.26. We are not by these
and suchlike sayings, to think that God has such Affections, and Passions as
be in Man; for God hates such as mock at his Messengers and despises his
Word; yea, God abhoreth the scornful man: but as those men that laugh at our
calamities, are the furthest off from helping of us out of it; even so is God
when he laugheth at our calamity. See Prove. 1.26, 27, 28. So he is said, Psalm.
44.23. to sleep, Arise, wherefore do thou sleep, O Lord? Arise for our help,
and redeem us, for thy mercy sake, verse. 26. Now the Lord keeps his Vineyard
lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day, Isa. 27.3. David says, He
neither slumbereth nor sleeps, Psalm. 121.4. But this is to be understood
Metaphorically, as I said before; as when he is said to awake, it is meant his
speedy coming to help us, opposite to sleeping, which is his delaying to come
to help us. And so when Moses is desirous to see his face, and to speak with
him face to face, it must be meant of some high degree of his manifestation of
Grace, but not of Glory: for so no mortal man can see his face and live. No man
has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him, Joh. 1.18. for he is invisible, 1 Timothy 1.17. who
only has immortality, dwelling in that light which no man can approach unto,
whom no man has seen, nor can see: for he sits upon the Circle of the
Earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers. That stretches out the
Heavens as a curtain, and spreads them out as a Tent to dwell in. That
brings the Princes to nothing, he makes the Judges of the Earth as vanity.
To whom then will you liken me, or shall I be equal, says the Holy One? Isa.
40.22. to the 26. For, as St. Paul says, By these things we speak the Wisdom
of God in a Mystery, even the hidden Wisdom which God ordained before the World
unto our glory, which none of the Princes of this World knew; for, had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory; but God has
revealed them to us by his Spirit: for, the Spirit searches all things, yea,
the deep things of God. Now we have not received the Spirit of the World, but
the Spirit that is of God; that we might know the things that are freely given
to us of God; which things also we speak, not in the words that man's wisdom
teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual: But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God;
for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. etc.

Now I have, according to my measure, given you my understanding of these great
Mysteries of God, and the Father, and of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, Col.
2.2. in as short and plain a method as I could, for your information, etc. Now
of that which has been spoken as concerning God, by me in this Treatise, this
is the sum; That God is a Spirit, Joh. 4.4. or spiritual substance, or pure
nature, immutable, invisible, unsearchable, filling Heaven and Earth. Full of
understanding, of truth and righteousness, of mercy and wisdom, and all manner
of goodness; without beginning, and without ending, not created nor made, and
Maker of all things, subject to nothing, and governing all things, knowing all
things, yea, even the inward thoughts and intents of the hearts of men;
forgiving sins; only to be honored and called upon, only hearing our prayers,
justifying, and saving us; of an almighty arm, and majesty; the Father
unbegotten, the Son begotten, the Holy Ghost proceeding from them both, as I
have proved by the Word of God, which cannot lie. Now all these things (as
aforesaid) be rightly applied to the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; so that it
plainly appears, that to whomsoever these things may rightly be applied, he
is God by Nature, and not by Name only, as they are, Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye
are Gods, but ye shall die like men, etc. But unto God the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, are these things only properly and truly applied: therefore they
only are God by Nature. 1 John 5.7. There be three that bear record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, and these three are one. And we know
that the Son of God is come, and has given us understanding that we might know
him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ;
this is the true God and Eternal Life. Little Children, keep your selves from
Idols, verse. 20, 21. Now the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all, Amen. 2 Cor. 13.14,
etc.

CHAP. VIII. Containing a brief Repetition of the present Discourse concerning
the glorious Trinity and Person of Christ.
NOw because I would, if possibly I could, remove all doubtings about the Holy
Trinity, concerning their being three Persons, and one God; I will further add
to what I have said, some Arguments to prove that they are all three God by
Nature: that so I might satisfy some, who must and will have their reason
satisfied, or else they will not believe it. And because all the Opinions that
I oppose in this Treatise (as aforesaid), seems to grant the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ to be God by Nature, Gal. 4.4. I will therefore take it pro
confesso, and reason with them by an Argumentum ad hominum. And, first, for the
better understanding of the honest and simple-hearted, which peradventure may
conscionably doubt whether the Son, and Holy Ghost, be God equal with the
Father; because of the late opposition that is made against it by the
maintainers of the aforesaid Opinions. I say, I will go in this plain method,
and make a comparison betwixt the Father and the Son, viz. as he is the Eternal
Word, Joh. 1.1. in several things that I find in Scripture concerning them: and
then I will apply these to the Holy Ghost also, as you may see if you will, for
I hope you are not obstinate.

First Proposition. The Father is a Spirit by Nature, Joh. 4.24. therefore God.
Parallel to this the Son is a Spirit by Nature, therefore God. Proof from God's
Word, 2 Cor. 3.17.

Propos. 2. The Father is immutable, therefore God. Parallel to this, the Son
is immutable, therefore God: proof from God's Word, Heb. 1.12.

Prop. 3. The Father is invisible and immutable; therefore God. Parallel to
this, the Son is invisible and immutable; therefore God. Proof from Gods Word,
1 Timothy 6.16.

Prop. 4. The Father is everywhere present with his People; therefore God.
Parallel to this, the Son is everywhere present with his People; therefore God.
Proof from God's Word, Matthew. 18.20.

Prop. 5. The Father is full of understanding; therefore God. Parallel to this,
the Son is full of understanding; therefore God. Proof from God's Word, 1 Cor.
1.30. Joh. 10.30.

Prop. 6. The Father is Eternal; therefore God. Parallel to this, the Son is
Eternal; therefore God. Proof from God's Word, Rev. 1.8, 11.

Prop. 7. The Father is the Maker of all things; therefore God. Parallel to
this the Son is the Maker of all things; therefore God. Proof from God's Word,
Col. 1.16.

Prop. 8. The Father governs all things; therefore God. Parallel to this, the
Son governs all things; therefore God. Proof from God's Word; Joh. 5.17.

Prop. 9. The Father knows all things; therefore God. Parallel to this, the
Son knows all things; therefore God. Proof from God's Word, Matthew. 9.4. Joh.
2.25.

Prop. 10. The Father forgiveth sins; therefore God. Parallel to this, the Son
forgiveth sins; therefore God. Proof from God's Word, Mark 2.10. Luke 7.49.

Prop. 11. The Father is to be prayed unto; therefore God. Parallel to this,
the Son is to be prayed unto; therefore God. Proof from God's Word, Acts 7.50.
and 9.6. Romans 10.13.

Prop. 12. The Father gives what gifts he pleases; therefore God. Parallel to
this, the Son gives what gifts he pleases; therefore God. Proof from God's
Word, Ephesians. 4.8.

Prop. 13. The Father is Almighty; therefore God. Parallel to this, the Son is
Almighty; therefore God. Proof from God's Word, Rev. 1.8. and 15. 3, 4.

Now to whomsoever all these things may be rightly applied, he is God by
Nature; but unto the Son, as well as unto the Father, may all these things be
rightly applied: therefore the Son is God by Nature, Joh. 10.30.

Now all these may be applied to the Holy Ghost also.

Proposition 1. The Father is a Spirit; by Nature, and not by Creation;
therefore God. Even so also is the Holy Ghost; therefore God. Joh. 14, 16
Chapters.

Prop. 2. The Father is Immutable; therefore God. Even so is the Holy Ghost;
therefore God. Joh. 14.16.

Prop. 3. The Father is Immutable and Invisible; therefore God. Even so is the
Holy Ghost; therefore God. Joh. 14, 15.

Prop 4. The Father is everywhere present; therefore God. Even so is the Holy
Ghost; therefore God. Psalm. 139.7.

Prop 5. The Father is Eternal; therefore God. Even so is the Holy Ghost;
therefore God. Genesis 1.2.

Prop. 6. The Father is the Maker of all things; therefore God. Even so is the
Holy Ghost; therefore God. Job 26.13. and 33.4. Psalm. 36.5.

Prop. 7. The Father governs the Church; therefore God. Even so does the Holy
Ghost; therefore God. Isa. 63.11. Acts 13.2. and 8.26.

Prop. 8. The Father knows all things; therefore God. Even so does the Holy
Ghost; therefore God. 1 Cor. 2.10.

Prop. 9. The Father does forgive sins; therefore God. Even so does the Holy
Ghost; therefore God. Mat. 28.19, 20.

Prop. 10. We may and ought to be baptized in the Name of the Father; therefore
he is God. Even so we may and ought to be baptized in the Name of the Holy
Ghost; therefore he is God. Matthew. 28.19, 20.

Prop. 11. The Father gives what spiritual gifts he pleases to the Church;
therefore he is God. Even so does the Holy Ghost; therefore he is God. 1 Cor.
12.

Prop. 12. The Father sends whom he will to preach the Gospel; therefore he
is God. Even so does the Holy Ghost; therefore he is God. Acts 18.2.

Prop. 13. The Father raises men from the dead; therefore he is God. Even so
does the Holy Ghost; therefore he is God. Romans 8.11.

Now to whomsoever all these things may rightly be applied, he is God by
Nature: But to the Holy Ghost, as well as to the Father, may all these things
be rightly applied; therefore the Holy Ghost is God by Nature.

Now of that which has been said, concerning Christ's Divine Nature, this is
the sum. For I have endeavored in this Treatise, to show you in twenty
Particulars, that Christ is God by Nature. And here I will repeat them all for
your memory-sake. The first is his Eternity. 2. His Simplicity. 3. His
Immutability. 4. His Invisibility. 5. His Immensity. 6. His Infiniteness. 7.
His Omnipotency. 8. His Wisdom. 9. His Goodness. 10. His Love. 11. His Grace.
12. His Mercy. 13. His Long-suffering. 14. His Holiness. 15. His Justice. 16.
His Faithfulness. 17. His Truth. 18. His Omnisciency. 19. His Omnipresence. 20.
His Providence over all his Creatures. All these twenty Properties and
Attributes, belong to God only. But all these belong to Christ as he is David's
Lord; therefore Christ, as he is David's Lord, is God by Nature, who is God over
all blessed for ever, Amen. Romans 9.5, etc.

And now I will briefly show you how he is David's Son according to the flesh
(as I have said before.) First, He had the substance of a true Body, and
reasonable Soul. 2. The Properties of Body and Soul; in the body, length,
breadth, and thickness, and circumscription. And in the Soul, the faculties of
understanding both simple, and compound, as Will, Affection, Love, Hatred,
Desire, Joy, Fear, etc. The Powers also of Hearing, Feeling, Seeing, Smelling,
Tasting; Moving, Growing, Eating, Sleeping, etc. 3dly, He took unto himself the
blameless infirmities of man's Nature, which are certain natural defects in man,
as Passions of Body and Mind, as to be Hungry, Thirsty, Weary, Sad, Sorrowful,
and Ignorant of some things, and Angry; also, to increase in Stature, Wisdom,
Knowledge, etc. So that as the holy Ghost says, We see by these things, that
he was made like unto his brethren in all things; yea and in all points tempted
like as we are, yet without sin, Heb. 2.17. and 4.15.

Now since the Scriptures do affirm all these things to belong properly and
truly to Christ, as he is David's Son and Offspring, then must he needs be Man
by Nature. For unto no Creature neither in Heaven nor in Earth, does the Holy
Ghost apply all these things properly and literally, but to man only, etc. If
he do, show me an instance, for as yet I know none: and therefore why you
should so much as once doubt whether he took our Nature, ( viz. the flesh of
Mary) since the Scripture affirms it so plainly again, and again, I cannot
imagine. But when I do not only hear you say you doubt, but confidently deny
that ever he took any flesh of the Virgin Mary. This makes me to stand and
admire, and with St. Paul say, Who has bewitched you, that you should deny so
many plain and evident proofs; can any Article of the Christian Faith be more
plainly proved than this is? surely no.

Now if I did not think that the Devil had bewitched many, and that Pride,
false Opinions, and Self-love had blinded men's understandings, See Mr. Greenham
about the Family of Love, page 803.
I could not believe any judicious man that believes the Scriptures to be true,
if he will but now sit down in humility, and seriously consider what has here
been said from them, to prove that Christ is God by Nature, and also Man by
Nature, can still remain doubting and unbelieving. But if he be one that was
once enlightened into this Truth, and also professed it with us, and was
baptized into this Faith, and yet did not receive it in the love of it; and
after all this advice, which now and at other times, has been used, by my self
and others, to them; I say, if they shall still oppose this Truth, then what
can I think; but that if they do not speedily repent of this their dangerous
Opinion, of denying the Lord that bought them, 2. Pet. 2.2. then that which is
written in 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. will come upon them. But that it may never be so, is
and shall be the Prayer of your very good friend, which loves your Persons but
not your Principles, (though happily not so esteemed of you) that God would give
you Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth, that you may recover your
selves out of the snare of the Devil, who has taken some of you captive at his
will.

CHAP IX. Containing an Answer to several Objections.
Object CHrist as Man was flesh and bones, and not a Ghost, as you seem to say
we by our Opinion make him; and this shows your Ignorance of our Opinion, and
therefore you sentence it as you do; But does not Paul say, Romans 8.3. he came
in the [likeness] of sinful flesh? therefore he took not our Flesh, as you say
he did.

Answ. St. Paul does not say he took upon him the likeness of flesh, simply as
it is flesh, but of the flesh of sin, or sinful flesh: for he had said before,
Chap. 1.3. That he was made of the Seed of David according to the flesh. And
also again in Chap. 9.5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom, as concerning the
flesh, Christ came, etc. And I pray you tell me what St, Paul means by these
words, verse. 3. For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
Brethren my Kinsmen according to the flesh? And then you may tell your selves
what he means by these words, verse. 5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as
concerning the flesh Christ came: The word flesh being the same in the 3d and
5th verse, and of the same signification.

Object. 2. From Joh. 1.14. But the Eutychians say, That the Divine Nature of
Christ was turned into flesh, and so was made like to his brethren in all
things excepting two, viz. sin, and earthy matter.

Answ. 1. The Holy Ghost does except but one thing, viz. Sin, (if it be proper
to call sin a thing) Heb. 2.17. and 4.15. And how dare you say two? Have you no
fear of the curse of God coming upon you, since he says, Cursed is he that
adds, or diminishes? See Deuteronomy. 4.2. Rev. 22.18. Add thou not unto his words,
lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar, Prove. 30.6.

Bur, Secondly, I answer to that of Joh. 1.14. (it having the most show of any
of the Texts that I know for your Opinion) therefore I will endeavor by God's
help, to show you that it was never written to that end, to justify your
Opinion; and therefore I pray consider what St. John says, verse. 1. The Word
which was in the beginning was with God, and was God; by whom all things were
made, and without whom was nothing made that was made. In whom was Life, and
the Life was the light of men, for he lights every man that comes into the
World: by whom the World was made; Was in the fullness of time made a Man in a
Humane Body, having his Divine Majesty dwelling in him, full of Grace and
Truth; so that we beheld his Glory, says St. John, in his Miracles, in his
Grace, and Truth, in his Holy and wise Doctrine, such as manifested him to be
the only begotten of the Father, verse. 14, 16. which is in the bosom of the
Father; mark that word, is in the bosom of the Father; he does not say which
[was] but [is], which must be understood of his Generation before the World was
made, of the substance of his Father, for the term notes Generation, and
subsistence from his substance, not Creation or making that which was the
Creator into flesh, that so he might be a Creature, and so die; this was
impossible, since God cannot die, nor yet be changed, as I have often said and
proved in this Treatise, from 1 Timothy 1.17. Jam. 1.17. and many other places of
the Holy Scriptures.

Thirdly, John does not say he was begotten flesh of the Virgin Mary, but made
flesh; for says he, The Word was made Flesh, even as St. Paul says, Romans 1.9.
made of the Seed of David; and came of the Fathers according to the flesh,
Chap. 9.5. and made of a Woman, Gal. 4.4. And so, as St. Peter says, He came
out of the loins of David, according to the flesh, Acts 2.30. for so God had
sworn to David, Psalm. 132.11. For Solomon was but a Type, which came out of his
loins, 1 King. 8.19. All these Texts do expressly teach us that Christ had a
Humane Nature, which is termed the flesh; as it is frequent by the word flesh
to understand a man or Humane Nature. See Romans 3.20. No flesh can be justified
in his sight, which must be understood of men, also Chap. 11.14. Isa. 57.7.
Gal. 2.16. Joh. 17.2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he
should give Eternal Life to as many as thou have given him, etc.

Fourthly, Consider this word, raised up according to the flesh, out of the
loins of Divid; which plainly shows that there was another Nature, which was
David's Lord: Matthew. 22.44. which was not raised up out of his loins, which was
God over all blessed for ever, Romans 9.5. Else why was it not said of him
without this distinction, as of Solomon, Thou shall not build the House, but
thy Son that shall come forth out of thy loins. 1 King. 8.19. He does not say,
according to the flesh, neither is this distinction made, concerning any man
but only Christ; which was Emmanuel, God and Man in one Person, or, God with
us, Matthew. 1.23. From whence I infer, That He who is so David's Son according
to the flesh, raised out of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh; made
of the Seed of David according to the flesh, and of the Father's according to
the flesh; As that he also is David's Lord, and the Son of God, God over all
blessed for ever, is consubstantial with his Father as touching his Godhead,
and consubstantial with us as touching his Manhood: but such is Jesus Christ;
therefore God by Nature, and Man also. And now, I hope, I have Answered your
great Objection, and also told you how he is truly called the Son of God, as
being in the bosom of his Father, and also how he is truly called the Son of
Man, and so the Son of David, as being made of a Daughter of David, which Mary
was. See for proof of this Luke the 3d Chap.

And now what has been said in Answer to this Objection, if heeded by you,
will Answer all your Objections, from Joh. 3.15. and Joh. 6. from the 50 verse
to the 64. For John says, No man has ascended up to Heaven, but he that came
down from Heaven, even the Son of Man, which is in Heaven: which proves the
union of Natures in one Person, otherwise he could not be in Heaven and Earth
at one time.

Now I hope you will not say with the Socinians, your Adversaries, that after
his Baptism he ascended immediately up into Heaven, and there received his
Commission from his Father to preach the Gospel, as Moses did his in Mount
Horeb, concerning the Law, Exodus 20. And yet if Christ has but one Nature as
you say, (with them he had not) then I pray tell me (if you can) Whether the
Eternal Word was ever called Man, or the Son of Man, properly before the Holy
Ghost overshadowed the Virgin Mary; and so he was born of her, or made of her
according to the flesh; for it is the Person ( viz. the Word) that is said to
come down from Heaven, as appears, Joh. 6.62. What if ye shall (says Christ)
see the Son of Man ( viz. Christ's Humane Nature) ascend up where he ( viz. his
Divine Nature) was before? For as he is the second Adam, he was not there
before, as appears by what St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 15.46. The first Adam was
made a living Soul, the last Adam was made a quickening Spirit. Howbeit that was
not first which is spiritual; but that which is natural, and afterward that
which is spiritual: The first Man is of the Earth, Earthy; the second Man is
the Lord from Heaven. As is the Earthy, such are they also that are Earthy; and
as is the Heavenly, such are they which are Heavenly. And as we have born the
Image of the Earthy, we shall also bear the Image of the Heavenly. So that by
this comparison, the natural Man was before the spiritual, which cannot be
meant of the Eternal Word, which St. Paul calls the Lord, the Spirit, 2 Cor.
3.17. For so considered as he is the Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14. 1 Pet. 3.18. he
was before Adam, or else he could not have Created him, and all other things
which he did, Joh. 1.3. Col. 1.16. So then, as the natural Adam was the first
Man that God Created, so the second Adam ( viz. the Humane Nature of Christ)
was the first Spiritual Man that was raised from the dead, and so ascended up
into Heaven, and was glorified, and so is the beginning of the Creation of God,
Rev. 3.14. And the firstborn from the dead; for as St. Paul says, He was the
first fruits of them that sleep: and so because of the Personal Union, is
called the first and the last, even he that was dead and is alive, and behold,
says he, I live for evermore, and have the keys of Hell, and Death, Rev.
1.18. Now the Name Almighty which is applied to Christ, Rev. 1.8. must needs be
meant as he was David's Lord, Psalm. 110.1. And as St. John calls him David's
Root. But when St. Paul calls him the second Adam, it must be as he is his
Son, or offspring; for the true Adam is never properly in all the Scripture
applied to God, viz. the Divine Nature: for you know Adam signifies Earth,
viz. the Matter which Man was made of. And as for the term Heavenly, it is as
truly applied to the Saints, as to the Humane Nature of Christ; for verse. 48.
As is the Earthy, such are they also that are Earthy; and as is the Heavenly,
such are they also that are Heavenly. Which St. Paul applies to the Saints
after their Resurrection, verse. 44. It is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body. So that Paul does not run the Parallel betwixt the Natural
body, and the Spirit, viz. the Creator as aforesaid: For if you observe him, he
calls the second Adam Spiritual also, verse. 46. and calls the Saints
Heavenly, verse. 49. Now will you say, because the bodies of the Saints after
their Resurrection are Spiritual bodies, therefore their bodies are Spirits?
Surely no. Even so, albeit the second Adam after his Resurrection is called
Spiritual, that therefore his body is a Spirit, as the Papists think: even so,
albeit the Saints bodies are called Heavenly, does that prove that the original
Matter they were made of, came from Heaven? You will surely say, No. Even so
say I of the body of Christ. For the main design of the Apostle in all this
Chapter, was to prove the Resurrection of the dead, as appears by verse. 13. But
if there be no Resurrection of the Dead, then is not Christ risen: And verse.
17. If Christ be not raised, your Faith is vain, you are yet in your sins; then
they also which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished. And verse. 22. For as
in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive, etc. Now where
there are diverse Opinions, they may be all false, there can be but one true,
and that one Truth oft-times must be fetched by piecemeal out of diverse
branches of contrary Opinions, etc. For, although the Lord has made all
Nations of one blood, and commanded them to seek the Lord, Acts 17.30. yet if
you divide them into thirty parts, says Mr. Perkins, nineteen of them be
Heathens, and Pagans; then there remains but eleven, and of these, five be
Turks and Mahometans; then there remains but a sixth-part of the thirty; and of
these six, How few do believe in God aright! (God knows they be very few): as
for the twenty four parts of the thirty, they do not own Christ to be their
Savior, no not so much as in Profession; as to the other six-parts, it is
true, they all confess him to be the Son of God, and in some sense their
Savior also: Yet so, as by some of their Opinions, they by just consequence
deny him, either in his Divine Nature, or in his Humane, or else in the Union
of Natures, and so by consequence deny the true Christ, and of them that do
profess him to be both David's Lord, and David's Son also; yet of them how few do
love him, and keep his Commandments. Luke 6.46. Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and
do not the things that I say? The Lord grant for his Sons sake that I and you
may be of those Sheep that will hear the Voice of the true Shepherd, and so
follow him; and will not follow a stranger, Joh. 10. Where shall I begin to
wonder at thee, O thou Divine and Eternal Peacemaker, the Savior of Men, the
Anointed of God, the Mediator between God and Man, in whom there is nothing
which does not exceed, not only the conceit, but the very wonder of Angels; who
saw thee in thy Humiliation with silence, and Adore thee in thy Glory with
perpetual Prayers and Rejoycings; Thou wast for ever of thy self as God, of the
Father as the Son, the Eternal Son of an Eternal Father; not later in
Beginning, not less in Dignity, not other in Substance, begotten without
diminution of him that begat thee, while he communicated wholly to thee, which
he retained wholly in himself, because both were Infinite, without inequality
of Nature, without division of Essence; when being in this estate, thine
infinite Love and Mercy to desperate Mankind, caused thee, O Savior, to empty
thy self of thy Glory, that thou might put on our shame and misery!
Wherefore not ceasing to be God as thou were, thou beganst to be what thou wast
not, viz. Man, to the end thou might be a perfect Mediator betwixt God and
Man, which were both in one Person; God, that thou might satisfy; and Man,
that thou might suffer; that since Man had sinned, and God was offended,
thou which were God and Man, might satisfy God for Man; None but thy self
which art the Eternal Word, can express to us this great Mystery, how God
should be manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
Preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, and received up into
Glory, and we in him, etc.

CHAP. X. Containing the use of the whole Treatise.
NOw, as aforesaid, I will further add, to that that I have said, something by
way of Use and Application, and so leave the whole to the blessing of God, and
your serious Consideration.

Use. 1. Concerning the Incarnation of the Son of God, 1 Timothy 3.16.
we must know that it is a great Mystery, and therefore here observe;

First, Who is Incarnate? The second Person in Trinity: First, for that God by
him created Man, and therefore by him must we be recreated and redeemed:
Secondly, for that he is the Essential Image of God, to restore the Image of
God lost in Adam. So this I believe the whole Godhead is not incarnate, Joh.
1.14. Luke 1.35.
nor any Person but the Son; the Person of the Son (I say) subsisting in the
Godhead.

Secondly, This I must say and believe, that he was a perfect Man in every
respect like to Adam, sin only excepted, subject to all unblameable and general
infirmities which appertain to the whole Nature of Man, as Passions of Body and
Mind.

Thirdly, This I must believe and avouch, that it was necessary that he should
become Man: first to satisfy God in that Nature we offend: Secondly, for that
not one else could fulfill Righteousness which the Law required of us, but he:
Thirdly, for that our Redeemer must die for our sins: Fourthly, He must be a
Mediator, and make Requests, and speak to God and Man for Reconciliation; Man
before the Fall could speak to God face to face, but now he cannot, nor may not
come near, but in the face and favor of Christ, whose face is to be found in
the Gospel.

Duties which follow this Faith,
First, Draw near to Christ and cleave unto him, for we see he is come near us,
and become our Emmanuel. Isa. 7. Secondly, Here is a Pattern and President for
us of unspeakable Humility, Psalm. 22. Isa. 53.
Phil. 2.6, 7. There is a secret Pride in all the Sons of Adam, till God change
their hearts, and this Pride, the less we discern it, the more it is; and the
more we discern it, the less it is.

This I observe touching this Incarnation of Christ, That his Conception by the
work of the Holy Ghost was wonderful: for it was done in the Womb of the
Virgin, that albeit he took of her very flesh, which came of sinful Adam, yet
was the flesh of Christ, I mean his Humane Nature, Body and Soul, without sin.
To prevent that original corruption which comes to Mankind by natural
Propagation, the great Wisdom of God provided, That his Incarnation should be
by the immediate work of the Holy Ghost, without any natural Generation, or
Means of Man on Earth, or Angels in Heaven or Earth, Heb. 2.14.

I proceed on to speak of the Birth of Christ: He was born of the Virgin Mary,
and of the Union of Natures Divine and Humane in this one Person. This I
believe indeed, for so did the Patriarchs and Prophets of old, because of the
Divine Oracles which God gave them concerning the Incarnation of the Son of
God, Genesis 3.18. and 12.3, 4. and 21. Isa. 7.14. and therefore much more ought
we, seeing we have in the Gospel the Complement of all those Prophesies, Luke
2.7. Matthew. 1.25. to believe in Jesus Christ born of the Virgin, but also in
time, and according to the course of Nature born of the said Virgin, and
brought forth into the World by her.

First, a Duty following this Faith is this; Thanksgiving for the Incarnation
of the Son of God, as we see by the Examples of the Angels praising God for
this benefit, Luke 2.14. The Virgin praising God for this benefit, Luke 1.46.
And the holy Priest Zachary praising God for this benefit, Luke 1.68.

Secondly, A Consolation following this Faith is Preached unto us by the
Angels, Luke 2.10. when he says, Behold, I bring you tidings of great joy that
shall be to all People: Hence comes, First, Peace with God: Secondly, Peace
with our own Conscience: Thirdly, with the Holy Angels: Fourthly, with all the
Creatures of God in the frame of Heaven and Earth. The proper Name of Christ's
Mother was Mary, this is testified often in the New Testament, Luke 2.5, etc.
This Name is added for a more certain and special description of his Mother,
that my Faith may be the better certified of the truth of all Divine Oracles
and Prophesies concerning him: for this holy Woman being (as Matthew and Luke
testify) of the noble Race of the Kings of Judah, it is clear that our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ came of the Seed of David, and so of Abraham according
to the Promise. Genesis 12. and 49. Luke 2.

Again, she is called A Virgin, both to let us see the accomplishment of the
Prophecy, Isa. 7.14, 21. and to assure us of that as aforesaid, that is, That
he is the only begotten Son of God, conceived by the Holy Ghost, and not by the
ordinary course of Nature.

And this blessed Mother of Christ a holy Prophetess, Luke 1.48. We do
willingly honor her three ways, First, by thanksgiving to God for her:
Secondly, by a reverent estimation of her: Thirdly, by imitation of her
excellent Virtues.

And thus having seen by clear evidence from the Word of the Lord, that our
blessed Lord and Savior, as touching his Natures, is very God and very Man: it
rests only that we learn also by Divine demonstration, that these two Natures
are united in one Person.

Use 2. First, here then we must be advertised that there be two kinds of
Unions: Union in Nature, and Union in Person. Union in Nature is when two or
more things are joined or united into one Nature, as the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, being and remaining three distinct Persons, are one and the
same in Nature, or Godhead. Union in Person is when two things are in that
manner united, that they make but one Person or Substance: as the Body and Soul
of Man meeting together make one Man.

Secondly, This Union of Natures then here is this; The second Person in the
Trinity, or the Son of God does assume to it a Manhood in such order that the
same being void of all Personal being in it self, does wholly and only subsist
in the second Person in the Trinity, or depends wholly on the Person of the
Son: So that now it is a Nature only, and not a Person; because it does not
subsist alone as in other men.

Thirdly, This then I understand and believe here, that the everlasting Son of
God, without any putting off of his Divine Nature, without any commixtion or
conversion, was made that which before his Incarnation he was not, to wit, very
Man. By taking flesh by the Power of the Holy Ghost from the Virgin, and an
Humane Soul created of nothing, both which Natures being united together in a
most admirable Personal union, make one most blessed Person, even the most
sacred Person of our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, And our Lord Jesus Christ has in his Humanity so assumed all the
Properties of Man's Nature, that he became in all things like unto us ( Heb.
2.17.) sin only excepted: for he has so Personally united unto himself our
Nature, that we cannot say properly of his Passion, that only the bare Humanity
suffered (which yet is only passible) but this we are to say, that the Person
which is very God has suffered in our Nature.

Fifthly, and lastly, We must not believe that the Lord Christ assumed our
Nature (as he did sometimes under the Law, before his Incarnation, take to him
the form of Man and Angel for a time) but retains still and for ever, the very
body and Soul of Man, howbeit now glorified: For the Apostle says, Our
Mediator hot only [was] but also [is] the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. living
for ever to make intercession for us, Heb. 7.25. Romans 8.34.

Consolations following this Faith concerning Christ's pure Conception,
Incarnation, and this unspeakable union of Natures in this one sacred Person,
are these;

First, I understand and conceive he is a most fit Advocate to his Father being
very God, and a most comfortable Mediator for me, being very Man,
well-acquainted with all my grievances, and one I may boldly draw near unto,
Heb. 2.16, 17, 18. and 4.16.

Secondly, I conceive also that he has been so acquainted in our flesh, with
our temptations, that he has a special experience of our infirmities in his
own sacred Person: not that the Son of God has need of our Afflictions and
Temptations to make him Merciful unto us, but for that we can best persuade our
selves of his Mercy, when we learn that he has been acquainted with our
Passions.

And now I will tell you briefly, what I mean by the Properties of the Humane
and Divine Nature: And by the Communication or Conjunction of Properties, as I
said before.

When I say and believe, that Christ did assume all the Essential Properties of
Man's Nature, I mean he took not only the Soul and Body of Man, but also every
quality and adjunct thereunto appertaining (excepting sin) for he had the
Understanding, the Reason, the Will, and all the Affections of Man (without
sin) being made like his brethren in all things, Heb. 2.17.

Again, when I believe and say, That Christ did retain in his Personal Union of
both Natures, all the Properties of his Divine Nature, I mean these and the
like, that he was, this very Person now God and Man, Eternal, Almighty,
Incomprehensible, Immutable, most Perfect; for these and the like be the
Properties of the Divine Nature.

Thirdly, The Communication of these Properties (as the learned speak, for the
better understanding of some Scriptures uttered concerning this sacred Person)
is this, when we ascribe that which is proper unto one Nature. unto the other
because of the aforesaid Personal Union of both Natures: as when the Apostle
says, God has purchased the Church with his own blood. Acts. 20.28.
This manner of speaking is with respect to this Union, and herein that which
is proper to the Humane Nature is ascribed unto the Divine: for that this
sacred Person which did this great Work with his own blood is very God. But
here we be also to observe, that there is no Communication of the Essential
Properties of these Natures; but in the concrete only (as Logicians speak) not
in the abstract; as we may say truly, and according to the Doctrine of
Godliness, that God died for us; but we may not say therefore, the Deity died
for us.

And here beloved, I will show you once more, why our Mediator must be very God
and very Man, and that these two Natures must thus admirably be united
together, and his Conception so pure.

First, briefly for the first; He must be very God. First, because he has
received a Charge from his Father (which did require an infinite Power) to wit,
by his Merits and Virtue to save the Elect or Believers, for it was needful
that his Price should over-prize our sins. Secondly, If he had not been very
God, he could not have overcome death, Romans 1.3, 4. Thirdly, for that it
behoved him also to overcome and kill sin and death in us, even in our
Consciences. Joh. 5.24, 25. and to quicken us, Romans 8.11. by giving us the
Spirit of Faith to apprehend all his Merits, and to apply the same unto our
selves. Now who can give the Holy Ghost but God himself? Luke 11.13. Joh. 3.7,
8. Lastly, He was to loosen and destroy all the accursed works of Satan in us.

Secondly, And for the second Point, He must be very Man. First, that God might
declare his unchangeable Justice, and hatred of sin, and his unspeakable Love
and Mercy to the Elect: the first he shows in punishing sin in his own Son:
the second he declares in that he punishes not our sins in out selves, but in
another. Secondly, That we might conceive rightly of the Brotherly Affection of
our Mediator toward us: and how that he which sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified, are all of one. Thirdly, For that God had confirmed it with an
Oath, that the Messiah should come of the loins of David, Psalm. 133. and 89.
and of the Seed of the Woman according to the Gospel preached in the beginning
in Paradise, Genesis 3.15.

Thirdly, For the third Point, This I believe and avouch briefly, That
Salvation could not have been obtained for Man, unless the Nature of God and
Man were united together in one Person. First, Because otherwise this work had
not been performed by blood of the Son of God, and so it had been insufficient
for us. Secondly, Because the Humanity of Christ could never have born that
punishment for sin. Thirdly, Salvation thus obtained could never have been
maintained, but that these Natures be thus knit together: for that Christ is
and must be the pledge of our Reconciliation for ever, Psalm. 110.1. Matthew.
22.44. Fourthly, By this means we have as it were kindred with God in Jesus
Christ, who is become our Emmanuel, God with us, or God manifest in our flesh.
Matthew. 1.1. Tim. 3.16.

Fourthly, For the fourth and last branch of the Question; I say, and believe,
that it was necessary our Lord and Savior should be pure, without the stain of
sin in his Conception, and that the Holy Ghost in this great Work did so
provide. First, For that the most glorious and Divine Nature of God could never
else be united unto the Humane. Secondly, For that a sinner could never have
been accepted to make this Atonement, or to offer up any Sacrifice for sin.
Thirdly, For that he could not have Sanctified others, unless he were the most
Pure, and the most Holy One of God in himself. Heb. 2.11. and 10.9, 10.

Thus then the Lord Jesus Christ, our most blessed Savior and Redeemer, has
taken to himself of the whole mass of mankind; he took, I say, one Portion
thereof and did perfectly sanctify it, by the power of the Holy Ghost, and out
of it derives perfect Holiness and Sanctification upon all his Elect, by
imputation of his Merits for their Justification, and by his Holy Spirit
working, in them inherent Righteousness and Sanctification, that so they may
serve him continually in this life, and for ever.

And here I will also show you the use of this Article which we reasoned so
much on in our Church-meetings, when we were upon the Creed, viz. I believe
that he was crucified, dead and buried. All the Evangelists testify with one
accord, that this was the form of his Execution, he was crucified on a Cross;
and to fill him with pain, his hands and feet were fastened with nayls unto the
Cross. Acts 3.18. Gal. 3.1. Phil. 2.8.
And all this was done to accomplish God's Eternal Decree manifested before by
the Prophets. The brazen Serpent was a picture of this, Numb. 21 Joh. 3. For so
he says himself, As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so must the
Son of Man be lifted up, that all that believe in him perish not, but may have
life everlasting. And again, Joh. 12.32. And when I shall be lifted up from the
Earth, I will draw all men unto my self: Of this the Psalmist Prophesied,
saying, They pierced my hands and my feet.

Secondly, That we might in Conscience be resolved that Christ came under the
Law, Gal. 3.13.
and suffered the Curse thereof for us, and bare in his own Body and Soul the
extremity of the Wrath of God for us. And albeit other punishments were notes
of God's Curse, yet was the death of the Cross in a special manner above the
rest accursed by virtue of a particular Commandment, and special Word
pronounced by God himself, foreseeing and fore-shewing what manner of Death
Christ our Lord should die.

Thirdly, The Apostle assures us, that in this form of Execution, we may
behold how Christ did undertake all the Malediction due unto all the Elect or
Mankind himself: for he says, Gal. 3 13. That he was made a Curse for us: And
again, in the like prhrase, 2 Cor 5.^1. He was made sin for us. By which manner
or speaking we may not fear that any manner of reproach is offered the Son of
God: For both Sin and the Curse following, are his by imputation. Though in
regard of himself he was no sinner, yet as he was our Surety, he became sin for
us, and consequently the curse of the Law for us, in that the Curse every way
due unto us, by imputation and application were made his.

Instructions and Consolations which follow this Faith.
First We learn here with bitterness to bewail our sins; for Christ suffered
here the Wrath of God, not for any offense that ever he committed, but all for
us; and therefore just cause have we to mourn for our own sins, which brought
our Savior to this low and base estate. If a man should be so far in debt that
he could not be freed, unless the Surety should be cast into Prison for his
sake; nay, which is more, be cruelly put to death for his debt, it would make
him at his wits end, (if there were left but natural and civil humanity in him)
and his very heart would bleed. And this is the case with us; by reason of our
sins, we are God's debtors, yea, bankrupts before him; yet have we gotten a
good Surety, even the Son of God himself, who to recover us to our former
liberty, was crucified and died for the discharge of out debt. And therefore,
as the Prophet says, We should look upon him whom we have pierced, and lament
for him. Look as the blood followed the nayls that were stricken through the
blessed hands and feet of Christ; so should the meditation of Christ's Passion
be as nails and spears to draw blood from our hands and hearts for our sins.

Secondly, If thou doubtest where to see and find Christ crucified, because the
Prophet Zachary bids thee look on him: Be advertised, That he is set before thy
face as nailed and fastened on a Cross, wheresoever his Gospel is truly
Preached in thine hearing; for so the Apostle teaches us, Gal. 3.1. Oh foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth, before
whose eyes Jesus Christ was discribed in your sight, and among you crucified?
We must seek God's face in Christ, who is the living form or most bright glory,
wherein we behold God himself: and we must ever seek Christ's face in the
Gospel: if we find it not there, we perish everlastingly, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. We
need not go to Crosses, nay, we must not go, but to the Glass he has himself
appointed for us. Note this word [till]
And remember it, that till such time as we come thus by Faith and Meditation
of the Gospel, we lie continually as poisoned by Satan, that old Serpent, and
as stung to death.

Thirdly, We learn to follow Christ in the pursuit and crucifying of our sins,
for so we are taught, Gal, 5.24. They that are Christ's, have crucified the
flesh with the affections and lusts thereof: That is, they endeavor to kill
the Power of Sin in themselves by Repentance, Prayer, Fasting, Meditation,
conference with the Saints, and by avoiding all occasions of offense.

Fourthly, we here learn in this president, that seeing the Son of God was not
only thus racked and crucified by men, but also bare the Wrath of God in his
Soul; that therefore we must learn not to make so little account of sin, as
commonly we do.

Fifthly, Whereas the Person crucified was the very Son of God, it is manifest
that the Love of God unto us in our Redemption, is endless; like the deep Sea
without bank or bottom: as it is testified, Joh. 3.16. And if we shall not
acknowledge this to be so, our condemnation will be the greater.

Sixthly, The Curse of God being here once and fully born of the Son of God,
not for himself, but for his Elect: It stands not with God's Justice to lay
any Curse on them (they continuing in the Faith) any more: wherefore when they
be afflicted, their punishments are but temporary, and not Curses, but Crosses,
Chastisements which proceed not from Anger, as it is to the wicked, Isa. 27.9.
but from a most loving Father, and so ever to be accounted, Psalm. 103. Heb.
12.5, 6, 7, 8.

Now I will here declare what his enemies did against him, both Jews and
Gentiles, and of his Passions on the Cross; what herein we be specially to
observe: First, They stone him bot, (as many Malefactors were executed) as
Achan, Josh. 7. and Naboth, 1 King. 21.13. but for a greater reproach, they
Crucify him, and this was the most shameful death among the Jews. Secondly,
They Crucify him after much beating, bleeding, and fainting; and so make his
green-wounds again to lie open, even before the Sun, to his greater grief and
pain. If the Son of God is Crucified for us, we must be content in like manner
to part with all for his sake, that we may possess him, and follow his Example.
Thirdly, They pierced his hands and feet, according to the Prophecy of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 22.16. in those parts which are most lively and sensible, and
so the weight of his body was born up by hands and feet fastened to the Cross;
but not in that gross manner that blind Papists have imagined; but the feet
nailed assunder with two distinct nails (as Godly Ancients have delivered,)
Fourthly, They gave him Vinegar and Gall to drink, tempered with Myrrh, Matthew.
27.34. Some think to take away his senses and memory intoxicating (as it were)
his brain. Thus they hastened his death, See Med. Jos. Hall page 501.
not having any respect at all of his Soul, whether he died in peace and favor
with God, yea or nay. Others think it was to hasten his death. Howsoever it
was, every sinner here is to be advertised, That it was and is he, as well as
the Jews tempers, who has tempered such a Cup of Poison for Jesus Christ.
Fifthly, They Crucify him between two Thieves, Matthew. 27.38. for his greater
shame, whereby they testify that they esteemed him no common sinner, Isa. 53.6.
but the Captain of all Thieves and Malefactors. So think thou thy self with
Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15.
that thou art the greatest of all sinners. Sixthly, They all mocked him, both
Jews and Gentiles, wagging their heads, and speaking spiteful words against
him. Mat. 27.39, 45. Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it up in
three days, save thy self. And again, He saved others, let him save himself.
The Jews paid dearly for this mocking and for crying, His blood be upon us and
our Children: For their Children abide under the heavy wrath of Almighty God
for it unto this day. Seventhly, and lastly, When the Lord Christ had made an
end of all things, and had given full satisfaction to his Father's Justice,
after all his wrestling with Satan and Sinners, and after many Passions in Soul
and Body: He concludes all his wearisom fight with this Prayer immediately
before his death: Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit, Luk 23.46. By his
example he teaches us to recommend our Spirits to the Father of Spirits. Who
can preserve any work so well as the crafts-master? And shall not the faithful
Creator of Souls do this more carefully than man? In great dangers we commit
our Jewels to our best Friends: so do thou thy Soul unto Jesus Christ, that
thou may say with St. Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. I. know whom I have believed, and I
am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against
that day.

The Passion of Christ is a mirror of all Virtues, which are the more
excellent for that they be set before us not in Rules and Doctrine, but in his
own holy Practice; I shall name some of them in order.

The Prophet Isaiah names six Virtues or special Graces proper to Christ and
communicates by him in some measure to all his Members, Chap. 11.2. First, The
Spirit of Wisdom: Secondly, Of Judgment: Thirdly, of Counsel: Fourthly, of
Fortitude: Fifthly, of Knowledge: and Sixthly, of the Fear of the Lord.

First, For Wisdom and Judgment they be two special Graces; differing, as I
take it, in men on this manner. The former is the general comprehension or
knowledge of things: The later is the experience of that knowledge in
particular actions. Experience in other things will clear this distinction. We
see in Physic, and other Arts, many by much reading, to have obtained singular
knowledge, so that they think with themselves they could do great matters, yet
when they come to have the use of their knowledge in some particular matters,
they are sometimes, nay, oftentimes to seek, and their knowledge for want of
experience does soon fail them. Now for the Son of God, he was full of Wisdom
and Spiritual Understanding, and yet respecting his Humanity, it is testified
of him, Luke 2.52. that he increased in Wisdom. His Wisdom did appear in the
whole work of our Redemption; in foreseeing and fore-shewing to his Apostles
all things which should happen and be done to him by the Jews; assuring them
that this was his Fathers Will, manifested by the Prophets: his singular
Judgment is to be seen in his preparation to that Conflict with Satan and
Sinners, by Meditation and Prayer, in choosing so fitly the time and place for
his apprehension; and in all this most apt and fit Answers to all Questions and
Demands made unto him.

Secondly, For Counsel: The Lord Christ was full of the Spirit of Counsel; for
he was able to withstand and to Answer all the Counsel of Hell and Satan, of
Annas and Caiaphas, of Pilate and Herod against him. He was ready in all
temptations to Answer all Doubts which the Prince of Darkness was able to
object against him: He was not doubtful, nor to seek for counsel in the whole
work, nor in any part of the work of our Redemption. The Spirit of Counsel did
appear notably in him in all his Arraigmnent and Passion.

Thirdly, The Spirit of Fortitude was in him in a most rich measure: For he
wrestled not in this action with flesh and blood, but incountered with
spiritual Powers and Principalities, even with all the power of Hell. This is
the strong Lion of the Tribe of Judah; and the Seed of the Woman, which in his
great strength breaks the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. He was so full of Might,
that with one word speaking he cast down all that came to take him, even to the
ground.

Fourthly, He was full of the Spirit of Knowledge to discern all his Enemies,
and to discern what was in them; for so it is testified of him, Joh. 18.14.
Jesus knowing all things that should come unto him, etc. He knew all their
purposes, desires, pretenses, and all their designments.

Fifthly, The Spirit of the Fear of the Lord he was also replenished with; as
appears in all his service and obedience to his Heavenly Father; for he
honors him in all his work, and faithfully performs all that service in all
respects for the which he had sent him, ever seeking his glory. Joh. 13.31. Now
the Son of Man is glorified, and God is glorified in him.

Sixthly, For Humility, He is the only Pattern that ever was on Earth; for this
cause the Apostle wills us to caray within us the same mind that was in
Christ Jesus; that is, the same Spirit of Humility: For says he, He being in
the form of God, and thinking it no robbery to be equal with God; yet he made
himself of no reputation, and took on him the form of Servant, and was made
like unto Men, and was found in shape as a Man: he humbled himself and became
obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross.

Seventhly, For the Spirit of Meekness: He was full of Mildness and Meekness in
the whole course of his life, as himself truly testified of himself: Matthew.
11.28, 29. Come unto me all that are heavy laden, and I will ease you: Take my
yoke on you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of heart; and ye shall
find rest unto your Souls. This virtue did notably appear in his Passion: For
the Prophecy of Isaiah was accomplished in him: He was oppressed and
afflicted, yet did he not open bis mouth. For so we sind it testified; for when
false witnesses urged him, and Caiaphas, yet he was silent, because he was
willing to die, and there was no place to speak, either for the When to speak.
Glory of God, or the good of Men.

Eighthly, As St. James commends Job for Patience; so much more may the Son of
God be recommended as a Mirror of Patience to all the World: for he was soft
in his Answers, and calm in his Speeches to all his most bloody Enemies; to
Judas betraying him with a kiss, he said, Matthew. 26.50. Friend, wherefore art
thou come? And to the High Priests Officers which smote him, Joh. 18.23. If I
have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil, but if I have well spoken, why
smitest thou me? Herod thought him a Fool for his Silence and Patience; whereby
we be taught in all unjust Railings and Injuries not to give rebuke, but either
to keep silence, or else to speak so much as shall be for our just defense.

Ninthly, He was full of Love, Mercy, and Compassion, in the midst of his
Passions, even to his Enemies: He cured Malchus's ear, which Peter had cut off
with his Sword. And when they were practicing against him all treachery, even
then he performed the work of a Mediator, praying for them unto his Father,
saying, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do: For his Friends,
he is most mindful of them, and loving unto them, even in his greatest
Passions: In his Apprehension, he desires his Disciples might be let go
freely; Joh. 18.8. If ye seek me, let these go their way. As for Peter, after
he had renounced lam with bitter execrations, he turned back, and looked
graciously on him, and quickened him again, Luke 22.61. He showed mercy on the
Thief which did hang by him on the Cross; comforting him in these words, Verily
I say unto thee, To day thou shall be with me in Paradise, verse. 43.

Lastly, He recommends his Mother to the custody of John, Joh. 19.26, 27. where
he teaches Children to give all Honor, and to perform all duties of Love,
Care, and Reverence to their Parents.

Finally, We find in Christ's Passion, a notable president for Perseverence:
For he wades through all the Sea of his temptations, he never slinks back, nor
turns aside to rest him, till he comes to the very end of all his wearisom
race; notwithstanding all the torments and tears he had within and without, yet
he rested not till he came to the mark he set before him, then he cried, It is
finished; all my work is accomplished; and so he departed from evil Men and
evil Angels unto God, and unto the Spirits of Righteous Men, and Holy Angels.

Thus then we see in his Passion the practice of many most excellent virtues;
whereby he did not only gain Merits to save us, but also gave special
Instructions to guide and direct us in the whole course of our life.

Thus far I have declared my Faith concerning the Passion of Christ under
Pontius Pilate; and now I will show you what I believe concerning his Death.

I do believe that he died; I believe his death was not a fiction or imaginary
death, but a true death indeed, according to the Prophesies which were before
delivered concerning him. Isa. 53. He was cut off from the Land of the living.
Dan. 9. The Messiah shall be cut off. The Types and Sacrifices of Lambs daily
in the Temple, did fore-shew and preach the death of the Lamb of God. The
accomplishment and truth of the Types and Prophesies are recorded faithfully,
Joh. 1.29. and chapter 19. Mat. 26 and 27 Chapters, Mark 15. Luke 23.26.

First, He died to satisfy the Justice of God for the Elect, that he might
free them from death, and from the fear of death, as it is written, Heb. 2.14.
Forasmuch as the Children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part with them, that he might destroy through death him that had
Power over death, that is the Devil; and that he might deliver all them, which
for fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage.

Secondly, He died to fulfill all the Promises of God from the beginning, Genesis
3.15.

Thirdly, I say, his death was voluntary and an accursed death: First,
voluntary, for so he speaks, Joh. 10.18. No man takes my life from me, but I
lay it down of my self. Secondly, It was an accursed death: for so it is
written, Gal. 3.13. Christ was made a curse for us: and how? He shows it in
the words following, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree: As if he
should avouch in effect, that Christ's death was accursed; that is, that it
contained in it the first death; that is, the separation of Body and Soul; for
that for a time he did apprehend and undergo the wrath of God due to Man for
sin, yet was he never out of God's favor; for, in the midst of his loud cries,
he calls God his God, Matthew. 27.46. He was never so oppressed of death as the
damned are: For, as he suffered the bodily death without any corruption of
body, so be suffered the extreme pangs of the Soul; but not as forsaken of God,
more than in his own apprehension and feeling.

Fourthly, The Comfort and Use we have of this Faith; or, the Blessings we reap
by the death of Christ are many, and very precious, never to be forgotten of
true-hearted Believers.

1. This voluntary and true obedience of Christ unto death, even this accursed
death, is our Righteousness before God, as it is written, Romans 5.19. As by the
disobedience of one man many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one
Righteous, many are made Righteous. In this Righteousness of Christ's Death
lies the chief matter of all our felicity and rejoicing, as the Apostle
speaks, Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing* but in the
Cross of Christ. There is no one thing more recommended in so many and so
evident Prophesies than this: So by the Death of Christ, I am freed from the
second Death.

2. By this Faith in Christ crucified and dead for us, I behold to my exceeding
comfort, a divine proportion between the infinite debt of God's Elect, and the
satisfaction done by the death of Christ unto God's Justice for the same, as
infinite as the debt.

3. I see the unspeakable love of God to his Elect, continually preached unto
me, and manifested as before mine eyes, Joh. 3.16.

4. I see that God's Divine Justice is satisfied by Christ's Death, in the same
Nature which offended him, Genesis 3.15. Heb. 2.14. to mine exceeding great
consolation.

5. My trembling Conscience by this Faith is quiet and pacified, for I feel
hereby that the pollution of my Conscience is done away, because my heart is
sprinkled with the blood of Christ, Heb. 9.14. and the scorching heat of it is
abated by this Water of Life, which streams unto my heart from the side and
heart of Jesus Christ; Zach. 12.10, 11. and 13.1.

6. The first Death by Christ is turned into a blessing, and made unto me a
gate of Life: So that now I may truly say, That the day of Death is better unto
me, (I being in Christ) than the day wherein I was born.

7. The Death of Christ does ratify his last Will and Testament unto me. Thus
it pleased the Father to make authentical and to seal unto me the Covenant of
Grace, Heb. 9.16.

8. By his Death he has not only taken away the condemnation of sin ( Romans
8.1.) for us, but also has broken the power and infection of it in us. The act
of Christ's Death is past, but the virtue and powet thereof endures forever:
When we have Grace to deny our selves, and to put our trust in Christ, and by
Faith hold him fast in our hearts: then as Christ himself by the Power of his
Godhead overcame Death, Hell, and Damnation in himself for us, so shall we by
the same Power of his Godhead and Grace dwelling in us; Ephesians. 3.20. Gal. 2.21. 2
Cor. 13.5. crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof, Gal. 5.25,
26.

9. The Death of Christ ought to be to all impenitent Sinners, the greatest
Motive to move them, and turn them unto Christ, and to humble them, because
they have pierced him by their sins: This I say ought to cause them to mourn
for him (as the Prophet Zechary speaks, Chapter 2.10.) whom even they themselves,
and not the Jews only, have wounded, Isa. 53. wherefore if this move them not,
their case is dangerous.

10. Be ready, if thou be a Believer, to lay down thy life for Christ, (if
need so require) as he has done for thee, and to die rather than to do any
thing which thou know manifestly to be contrary to his Will: Of this mind
were all the Martyrs and Faithful People of God in all Ages.

11. To give some special Instructions: if it be doubted, what the Altar was
whereon Christ offered his Sacrifice, because the Papists avouch it to be the
Cross: I believe rather, that Christ himself was the Priest, the Sacrifice, and
the Altar, as I said before: the Sacrifice, as he is Man; the Priest, as he is
both God and Man; the Altar, as he is God: For the property of an Altar is to
sanctify the Sacrifice, as Christ says, Matthew. 25.9. Now Christ as he was
God, sanctifies himself as he was Man: Joh. 17.19. For their sakes sanctify I
my self: And this he did, First, By setting apart his Manhood to be a Sacrifice
unto his Father for our sins: Secondly, By giving unto his Sacrifice merit and
efficacy to be a meritorious Sacrifice: wherefore the Wooden-Cross was not his
Altar, as Papists have imagined.

12. The Prophet Haggai says, that the second Temple built by Zerubbabel, was
nothing in beauty unto the first which was built by Solomon: For it wanted five
things which the first Temple had: First, The Appearing and Presence of God at
the Mercy-Seat between the two Cherubims: Secondly, the Vrim and Thummim on the
Breast Plate of the High Priest: Thirdly, The Inspiration of the Holy Ghost upon
extraordinary Prophets: Fourthly, The Ark of the Covenant which was lost in the
Captivity: Fifthly, Fire from Heaven to burn their Sacrifices. And yet
notwithstanding all this loss, the same Prophet, in the same Chapt. the 10th
verse. following, assures, That the Glory of the last House should be greater
than the first: Because the Sacrifice of Christ at his coming should give Glory
and Dignity to it: And for that his Presence, Preaching, and Teaching in it,
gave it more Glory than the former five special Graces and Gifts of God did or
could give unto the first Temple. So I believe that Christ died and was buried,
and rose again the third day, according to the Scriptures, Romans 4.25. He died
for our sins, and rose again for our Justification, 1 Cor. 15.3, 4, 14.

Now I will speak of the manner of his Resurrection, and the Use of it.

First, The Lord Jesus being truly dead and buried, rose again by his own
Almighty Power; as is often testified, Joh. 18. No man takes my life from me,
but I lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it down, and have power to
take, it again. And so his Apostles, Paul and Peter, assure us, he quickened
himself by his own Spirit, Romans 1.11. 1 Pet. 3.18. whereby he does approve
himself comfortable unto us to be the very Son of God, as St. Paul notes, Romans
8.4. saying, He was declared mightily to be the Son of God, touching the Spirit
of Sanctification, by the resurrection from the dead.

Secondly, As touching the form he rose in, or how his body was qualified. I
Answer, Thar after his Resurrection his body was glorified richly, yea, most
gloriously qualified with supernatural Graces: His body was incorruptible, and
it was made a shining body, a resemblance whereof some of his Disciples saw in
the Mount: and it was endued with Agility to move as well upward as downward,
as may appear by the Ascension of his Body to Heaven, which was not caused by
constraint, or by any violent Motive, but by a property agreeing to all bodies
glorified.

Yet, in the exaltation of Christ's Manhood, we must remember two Caveats;
First, he did never lay aside the Essential Properties of a true Body, as
length, breadth, thickness, visibility, locality, or to be in one place at
once, and no more, but keeping all this still, because they serve for the Being
of his Body. Secondly, We must remember, that the gifts of Glory in Christ's
Body are not infinite, but finite: for his Humane Nature being but a Creature,
and therefore finite, could not receive infinite Graces, etc. Christ's Body is
not Omnipotent and Infinite: for this is to affirm he had no Humane Body, and
to make the Creature the Creator. That it might appear unto his Disciples he
had a glorious Body and was changed: he was not always in their presence, but
came often suddenly into their presence: and once the doors being shut, the
doors giving place, and being opened, as says See Mr. Perkins upon the Creed.
page 275.
Mr. Perkins, they knew not how: He that thickened the Water to walk on, can
cause Doors and Locks to give way unto his coming, without any piercing or
passing through them, as Papists have imagined.

Finally, That he had a true Body, a real Body, the very same wherein he
suffered, and not a feigned body (as Heretics have avouched) is testified by
many Arguments unto us; he showed some scars, wounds, and blemishes of his
Passion, in his Body now glorified, as then remaining for the confirmation of
men: and to this end he conversed with men: He did eat and drink often in the
presence of his Apostles after his Resurrection.

The Use of this Article concerning Christ's Resurrection, and of this Faith,
is this; First, The Resurrection of Christ is a public testimony, that he has
perfect Righteousness for all such as trust in him: and if there had remained
but one of our sins either unperfectly punished in him, or not fully satisfied
by him, he could not assuredly then have risen from the death; for where but
one sin is, there must be death, Romans 6.23. as God has decreed. Like as then
the Father by delivering Christ to death, has indeed condemned our sins in
Christ, Romans 8.3. so by raising him from death, he has absolved Christ from
our sins, and us in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.17. Romans 4.25. As our sins are condemned
and punished in the death of Christ: so our absolution and discharge is in his
Resurrection: Christ was given to death for our sins, and raised again for our
Justification.

Secondly, The Believer is truly said to be dead to sin; or to be dead with
Christ: because the virtue of Christ's death works effectually in his heart the
death or sin: and next to be buried with Christ into his death; Romans 6.2, 3, 4.
because of the virtue which proceeds from Christ's burial to cause him so to
bury sin, that it never can rise up any more to be so stirring in him, as it
was before he came co Christ. And lastly, The Believer is as truly said to be
risen with Christ, Col. 3.1. because a special Virtue and Grace proceeds also
from Christ's Resurrection to the believing heart, to quicken it unto newness
of life. And this is that Grace which the Apostle desires more and more to feel
and find to abound in himself, when he desires to know Christ better, and the
virtue of his Resurrection, Phil. 3.10. wherefore we must embrace Christ risen
in the arms of our precious Faith, and so apply him unto our hearts, that we
may sensibly feel virtue to come from him, not only to crucify our old
Affections, but also to stir up daily, new, holy, and heavenly Affections in
our hearts: Col. 3. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are
above, etc. 1 Pet. 1.3. We art regenerate to a lively hope, by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead. As it was in the cure of the Woman that had the
Bloody Issue: so it is in the curing and quickening of sinners, which are full
of Bloody Issues; all which must be stanched and cured by a certain virtue
derived from Christ into them, Mark. 5.29, 30. This is the Prayer, Ephesians. 3.19.

Thirdly, The third fruit which is joined with the second, is the assurance of
our perseverance in Grace, and of our full victory against Sin and Death; for
they that are ingrasted into Christ by Faith, and continuing therein unto
death, draw from him such a spiritual Life and Power, as they shall never lose,
no not in the parting asunder of Soul and Body. Romans 8.38. Joh. 8.51. If any
Man keep my Woad, he shall never see death.

Fourthly, The last benefit of his Resurrection, is the resurrection of our
bodies. The truth is this; That good and bad shall rise again, yet there is a
great difference in the rising of the one and the other; for the Godly shall
rise by virtue of Christ's Resurrection, and that to Eternal Glory: But the
Ungodly rise by the Power of Christ as he is a terrible Judge, and to execute
Justice on them. Now to the Faithful, Christ is said to be the first fruits of
them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.16. Because as in the first Fruits of Corn being
offered unto God, the owner had an assurance of God's blessing on the rest: So
here by Christ's Resurrection the Believers have a Pledge of their own
resurrection.

Now of his Ascension into Heaven: Luke says, Acts 1.9. That he was taken up:
the meaning is, this was done principally by the mighty Power of his Godhead,
and partly by the supernatural property of a glorified Body, which is to move
as well upward as downward without constraint or violence. And thus Christ
ascended into Heaven really and actually, and not in appearance only. And he
went also locally by changing his place, and going from Earth to Heaven, so as
he is no more on Earth bodily, as we are now on Earth.

And whereas it may be doubted, If he be so departed from us, at touching hit
bodily Presence how that may be true, that he said he would be with us unto the
end of the World? Matthew. 28.20.

The Answer is; He said also, That he would leave the Word to go to the Father
Joh. 16.28. wherefore he must be understood to speak by a distinction. True it
is, he was before Abraham, Joh. 8.85. and so is he with the Church to the
Worlds end, according to his Divine Nature, in Majesty, Grace, Virtue, Power,
and Effectual working of his Holy Spirit, Joh. 17.11. and 14.16, 17. and 16.13.
But his bodily Presence is in Heaven.

Secondly, If any doubt further, Whether the Natures be not thus severed, if
where the one it, the other is not always?

I Answer, No: For the Divinity which cannot be comprehended, must of necessity
out-reach, and yet comprehend the Humanity, and thereunto be personally united.
It is not always that of two things conjoined, where the one is, there must be
the other also. For the Sun and his beams are both joined together, yet they
are not both in all places together; for the body of the Sun is seated and
carried only in his Celestial Orb in the Heavens, but his beams are here
beneath on the Earth. In those Holy Phrases then we must remember that (as
Learned Men speak) the Properties of both Natures must be distinguished in
Christ, for in such places, properties belonging to one Nature, are ascribed
unto the other, because of the Hypostatical Union of both Natures in one
Person. -- And thus far for the sense of the words of this Article; where we
see briefly that Christ's Ascension is an Exaltation, or a receiving up of his
Humanity to fit in the highest Heavens, till the glorious day of his Appearance
in Judgment, Heb. 1.3.

Now I come to the use of this Faith.

First, When I do thus believe the Ascension of Christ, I do believe also all
the Effects thereof, and all the Holy Adjuncts appertaining thereunto: namely,
these two principal, which the Apostle specially mentions, Ephesians. 4.8, 12.
First, that when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive. By
Captivity, I understand a multitude of Captives, as the Psalmist does, Psalm.
68.19. By Captives here are meant the World, the Flesh, Sin, Satan, and Death
it self: and whatsoever Engines and Confederates these had against Christ in his
Humiliation, and his Members all their days on Earth; He so triumphed over
them all on his Cross;, Col. 1.12. but especially in his Ascension, that
howsoever they may fear us otherwhile, and scar us to waken us from Security;
yet they shall never hurt us, for Christ has taken away their sting, 1 Cor.
15.55. and has pinioned their hands behind them as Captives and set us Free,
if we will come unto him when he calls us by his Gospel. Wherefore if we refuse
now his Call, our state is the more dangerous. See Mr Perkins upon the Creed.
page 285.
A man lies bound hand and foot in a dark Dungeon, and the Keeper sets open the
Prison door, takes off his Irons, and bids him come forth: If he refuse, and
say he is well, may it not be said he is mad, and who will pity him in that
case. This is the state of all impenitents, and contemners of the Gospel.

Secondly, It is said also. That then he gave gifts to his Church, as Kings do
in their triumph; and his gifts were those, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors, and Teachers, for the planting of the Church, and the Propagation of
the same, and for the gathering of his Elect to the Worlds end. If these were
Christ's principal blessings which Christ gave his Church in his Ascension, and
so richly and highly to be accounted, as being destinate and sent for so great
a Work as the building of the Body of Christ, which is his Church on Earth,
Ephesians. 4.12. Then they do not believe rightly and truly the Ascension of Christ,
that so basely and vilely esteem the sacred Ministry and Preaching of the
Gospel of Christ, and the Administration of his Sacraments, as Atheists and
Papists, and all carnal Gospellers do.

Thirdly, Like as our Justification is ascribed unto his Resurrection and Merit
of the same: So our proceeding in Grace and Perseverance may truly be
attributed to his Ascension to Heaven, and Intercession there for us, Joh. 17.
And like as he could never have risen in that Body wherein he was accursed for
us, unless he had been acquitted, and justified from all our sins: so much less
could he have Ascended into the highest Heavens, if he had not been pure from
all our spots imputed unto him: His Ascension is a clear evidence of his
Righteousness, Joh. 16.9 10. and consequently, of our Righteousness in him, and
by him; for which these Articles are sweetly knit together for the confirmation
of our Faith, touching our free Justification by Christ, Romans 8.33, 34. Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Is God that justifies: who
shall condemn? It is Christ which died, yea, or rather which is risen again,
who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request for us. Wherefore ever
remember to reject the Doctrine of Antichrist, who teaches that Christ by his
Death did merit our Justification, but we once Justified, do further merit our
Salvation. Whereas thou feast here, not only the beginning, but also the
continuance, yea, the accomplishment of the whole Work of our Salvation, in our
Vocation, Justification, Sanctification, and Glorification, is wholly and only
to be ascribed to the merit of Christ.

Fourthly, We receive also by his Ascension, a confirmation touching our
Ascension into Heaven; for in believing the one, we believe the other: for the
Head and Members must go together. We be not now coldly to look for Heaven, but
by lively Hope to possess it: for that we possess it in our Head already. For
this cause it is written, Ephesians. 2.6. That God has made us to sit together in
Heavenly places in Christ. He has there a Pledge for us, even our flesh, and
we again by his Ascension have received from him an heavenly Pledge, even his
Spirit: Joh. 6.7. I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you, that I go
away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you. 2 Cor. 1.22.
He has sealed us, and given us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.

DVTIES.
First, That our Conversation be in Heaven where Christ is. Our Hearts, our
Thoughts, our Words, our Works, our whole Conversation must be such, as if we
conversed already with the Angels in the highest Heavens.

Secondly, If we believe we be possessed of Heaven in Christ; we must strive to
enter into him with holy Contention of Spirit, using the means he has
appointed, that we may come unto him with all the good-speed we can. If we be
assured of his Purchase made for us by his Blood, we must pass through all
dangers to come unto him, and unto it; and not only contend to get in our
selves, but also endeavor to bring with us all we can, specially all such as
God by near bands of Love has knit unto us; as our Wives and Children, etc.
providing as much as in us lies, that they may be with us, Heirs together of
the same Grace of life, 1 Pet. 3.7.

Thirdly, In all grievances of Body and Mind, seek to no means for ease, but
only to the Comforter, and the means he has appointed and ordained in the
Word. If thou believe the Ascension of Christ, remember this was one end of
his Ascension, to send down the Holy Ghost to work more effectually, and
comfortably in the hearts of his Children. And therefore endeavor in and by
the Word and Sacraments to be comforted by him, in all affliction of this life.

I believe that Christ sits at the right hand of God, etc. Here two things
must be understood: First, Note.
That this blessed Person of the Son has the same equality of Majesty and
Glory with the Father: Secondly, By this phrase is also understood that the
Humane Nature of Christ is exalted to a most high excellency of Glory, even to
execute Judgment as he is the Son of Man, Joh. 5.27. -- And it may not be here
said, is in the Resurrection; That like as Christ rose only in respect of his
Humane Nature, so also he sits at Gods right hand in respect of the same
Nature: for the session an God's right hand is not a property of Nature, but
signifies the state of the Person of Christ, resting now in the execution of
his Offices, as being King, Priest, and Mediator between God and his People.

The Benefits which follow this Exaltation and Session of Christ, at the right
hand of God, are either in respect of his Priesthood, or of his Kingdom.

The Believer gains these benefits by his Priesthood.

First, He is now, and may be truly persuaded, that as the Covenant of Grace
and Priesthood of Christ have no end; Heb. 8.6. 1 Timothy 2.5. 1 John* 2.1. Joh. 17.
so his Intercession for him, and for all and every Believer, shall never cease
to the end of the World, for all. Romans 8.34. Christ is risen again, and sitttth
at the right hand of God, and makes request for us, and for every one. I have
prayed for thee, Peter, that they Faith fail not. The manner of this is thus:
He appears in Heaven as a public Person in our stead: He appears in the sight
of God for us, Heb. 9.24. and makes the same Requests he made on Earth, Joh.
17. The difference between Christ's Passion and Intercession is this: The
Passion is a satisfaction to God's Justice for us, etc. and as it were the
tempering of a Plaster: but Intercession applies it to the very sore. So then
the Believer is hereby sweetly comforted in heart, being persuaded that Christ
Jesus, God and Man, (now sitting in great Majesty and Glory in Heaven) First,
hears his Prayers in Heaven: And Secondly, accepts and sanctifies all his
Sacrifice and Service, which the Believer offers to the Father by his hand,
Heb. 13.15. Psalm. 119.106. for all our Service is imperfect, yet for his
Intercession sake it is accepted as perfect.

A second Consolation here arises to the believing heart: he may now with
boldness go to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4.16. because we have there an High
Priest that sits at the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens, Heb. 8.1. And
for this cause the same Apostle in the same Epistle, Chap. 10.19, 20. bids
us draw near, with a true heart, and with an undoubted persuasion of Faith. And
again most sweetly, Phil 4.6. Be careful for nothing, but in all things let
your requests be showed unto God in Prayer.

A third Consolation is this: His Intercession preserves every Repenting Sinner
in the state of Grace: that being once Justified and Sanctified, they may so
continue unto the end.

Fourthly, A most sweet Consolation in this: The Intercession of Christ in
Heaven casts down such beams of Grace into the Believers heart on Earth, that
it causes another Intercession of the Spirit in him; or causes the Spirit of
Prayer to be effectual and working in him: Zach. 12.10, 11. Romans 8.26. He
gives us his Spirit, which helps our infirmities, and makes Request for us,
with sighs and groans that cannot be expressed; but he which searches the
heart knows what is the meaning of the Spirit, for he makes Request for the
Saints according to the Will of God. The Holy Ghost makes Request by stirring
every repenting heart to pray with groans and sighs, which the mouth cannot
express: and this is a special fruit of the Intercession of Christ in Heaven.
So that a Man may soon know by the Spirit of Prayer in his own heart, how
Christ prays for him in Heaven. A Man may soon find it by his own coldness,
or fervency in Prayer; or by the inward groans of his heart, when he cannot so
well express his grief in words before God.

Here I renounce the Opinion of Papists touching Intercession, as being
Heretical, uncomfortable, and condemned of God: First, For that the Saints
departed (who be their Mediators with Angels) know not our particular wants and
griefs. Secondly, For that he that makes this Intercession, must bring
something of his own, of price and value, unto God, to procure the grant of his
Request. Thirdly, It is a Prerogative belonging only to Christ, to make Request
in his own Name, and for his own Merits. Fourthly, Scriptures never mention any
other, but contrarily. Fifthly, We must Pray to him in whom we believe, Romans
10.14. We believe only in one God, etc. therefore we pray only to one God.

Furthermore, As touching his Kingdom, we are well to consider what Kingdom he
has; next, what the administration of his Kingdom is, and how comfortable to
the Believers.

First, That he is Lord and King over all in respect of Creation, as also of
Preservation and Providence, it is manifest; Col. 1.16, 17. For by him were all
things created in Heaven and Earthy, etc. and in him all things consist: He is
the same also much more by right of Redemption. And his Kingdom is Eternal and
Spiritual, respecting the very Conscience, having that only absolute Power to
Command and Forbid, to Condemn and to Absolve the Soul and Conscience. This is
testified, Acts 2.36. Let all Israel know for a surety, that God has made him
both Lord and Christ, this Jesus (I say) whom ye have crucified. And to
testify this his Excellency; when Christ went up to sit on his Throne for the
Government of his Church, it is said, He gave great gifts to his Church, far
excelling the gifts of Earthly Princes in their Coronations: for (it is said)
He gave his Church Aposties, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Now
the End and Use of these Gifts and Benefits given by this Great King is
comfortable: for there it is said, That these were given for the Collecting of
his Church, and the Building of it: Luke 11.13 Acts 16.6, 9. Isa. 11.2, 3, 4,
5. Acts 2.32, 33.
This Collection is a separation of the Precious from the Vile, Jer. 15.19. and
a translation of Men from the kingdom of Darkness into the Kingdom of Light, 1
Pet. 2.9, 10,11. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. by the Ministry and Dispensation of the Word of
Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. outwardly, and the working of the Holy Ghost
inwardly. And this is the first part of Christ's Office in his Kingdom.

Secondly, Christ leads his precious People as a great General does his Army,
through the Wilderness of this World, into his everlasting Canaan. And this he
does also by the same means, whereby he called them by his Word and Sacraments
outwardly, the mighty operation of his Spirit inwardly. And in this Travel, he
does Exercise them (as in Canaan) with manifold Afflictions and Temptations in
this life, Psalm. 23. and yet defends them against the rage of all Enemies:
First giving them in their lifetime strength to suffer, and to fight against
all his Enemies most mightily. Phil. 1.24. Unto you it is given for Christ,
that not only ye should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake. Chap.
4.13. I am able to do all things through him which strengthens me. Romans 8.36,
37. For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are counted at Sheep for
the slaughter; Nevertheless, in all these things we are more than Conquerors,
through him that loved us. And in death it self, he never forsakes them, Romans
8.38, 39. but then makes an everlasting Separation between them and all their
Enemies, Zech. 13. Luke 16.

Now I shall speak something to the last Article concerning Christ, which is
this: From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

First, I say, this Article follows fitly after the former for confirmation of
it: For the excellency of his Kingdom shall mightily and wonderfully appear in
the execution of Justice, in the great day of the general Judgment which shall
be in the last day of the World. First, to Judge, or to give Judgment is the
proper Action and Function of a Judge, in Condemning, or Justifying of any Man.
In Condemning, by pronouncing him guilty of Sin; and therefore adjudging him to
some punishment for his Sin. In Justifying, by pronouncing him just, or
acquitting him of Sin, and so freeing him from the punishment of Sin. I say
then the meaning of this Article is this: I believe that Jesus Christ does not
only now exercise his Kingly Office in Heaven (as is afore-shewed) but shall
also triumphantly descend from the right hand of his Father in a visible form,
and corporal Presence, to judge all men that shall be found at his coming alive
or dead.

Now to proceed in order to speak of this great Judgment, these Points must be
considered: First, By what Arguments it may appear that there shall be a
general Judgment. Secondly, What the form and manner thereof shall be.
Thirdly, How this Argument serves to comfort us, and to humble us.

First, That there shall be an Universal Judgment, may appear thus, against
cavillers that deny it.

First, Luke 8.17. Joh. 12.48 Jud. 14.15 2 Timothy 4.1, 7, 8. Joh. 5.22, 27.
The Scriptures are most evident for this, Psalm. 50.1. The God of Gods has
spoken, and called all the Earth from the rising of the Sun to the setting of
the same: our God shall come and shall not keep silence. Heb. 9.27. It is
appointed unto Men that they shall once die, and after that comes the
Judgment.

Secondly, Christ promises his coming to Judgment by himself, Matthew. 25.31.
and by his Apostles, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.

Thirdly, For that he has charged us to wait for his Coming, Romans 8.23 Ephesians.
1.14.
Luke 21.28. and for the Redemption of our bodies, Luke 21.28.

Fourthly, For that the Justice and Mercy of God requires this, to punish the
Wicked, and to crown the Godly, which we see is not in this present life,
therefore there is a special day and time appointed with God for it.

Fifthly, For that the Lord has often forewarned the World of this. First, By
pronouncing the sentence of death against sin, even before the Fall, Genesis 2.17.
Secondly, By repeating the same sentence in his Law, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Thirdly, By
the evidence of Conscience, citing, as it were, Men to appear at a time
appointed before the great Judge, Romans 2.15, 16. Fourthly, By his Judgments
particularly on Sodom and Gomorah, on Egypt, on Jerusalem, and all the Jews,
and generally on the World in the deluge.

First, The preparation unto Judgment. First, Before his Coming, preparation
shall be made by fire. Psalm. 50.3. A fire shall devour before him, (as we heard
before out of St. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.7, 10, 11, 12.) for Heaven and Earth must
pass through a fire; not to consume them to nothing (for then where should
Christ appear in Judgment, and Sinners must be Judged on the Earth, and in the
place where they have sinned) but to consume their Leprosy and Corruption,
wherewith the sin of Man has infected Heaven and Earth, and so being as Gold
purified in fire, they may shine bright and glorious, and may be fit to
entertain the Majesty of this great King at his glorious Coming to Judgment:
for as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7.31. It is the figure or form, not the Nature
or Substance of the World that passes away. The same is testified, Romans 8.21.
The Creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the of the Sons of God. So Acts 1. and Psalm. 102.27, 28.
The Heavens shall wax old, etc. and shall be changed, meaning into a better
state: as other Scriptures also testify; Rev. 21.1. Isa. 65.17. and 66.22.
Tit. 2.14.

Secondly, Then shall be the appearing of the Glory of the Mighty God, and of
our Savior Jesus Christ, who shall come from the highest Heavens, accompanied
with an exceeding great Host of mighty Angels, and Souls of righteous men. Heb.
12.22. 1 Cor. 6.1, 2.

Thirdly, Then shall be heard the sound of a Trumpet, a wonderful piercing and
long continuing sound, summoning all Men and Angels unto Judgment.

Fourthly, The good Angels shall gather all Nations, and bring all unto the
place of Judgment; all (I say) the living and the dead, for the very dead
shall first be called out of their Graves, and they shall come clothed with
their own bodies. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. 2 Thessalonians. 4.16. 2 Timothy 4.10. And with them
shall appear all that be alive, changed in a moment in the twinkling of an
eye: and corruptible bodies shall become incorruptible, natural shall be turned
into spiritual, living immediately by the virtue and Power of God. And the
bodies of the Saints shall be like the glorious Body of Christ, shining as the
Sun, Matthew. 13.43. And the Wicked shall be full of shame and dishonor. Dan.
12.2. The evil Angels also, they are reserved for the Judgment of the great
day, Jude 6. And then Antichrist, the Son of Perdition, shall appear in his
colors, who shall be consumed and wasted continually by the Spirit of Christ,
preaching in the Gospel, but his final abolishing and perdition shall be at the
glorious Coming of Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 7.8.

Fifthly, Then shall Christ sit in his Throne of Judgment: Note.
as the Evangelists speak, Then shall he sit upon the Throne of his Glory,
Matthew. 25.31. and this Throne shall be like a flame of fire, Dan. 7.9. So that
the Wicked shall desire the Mountains to cover them from the sight of it.

Sixthly, This done, the Lord wall make separation between the Elect and the
Reprobate: as he does here on Earth in the Church make separation between the
Precious and the Vile, by the fame of his Gospel preached: Confer Mat. 3. and
Jer. 15.
So will he by his own immediate Voice and Ministry of his Angels, make a final
separation in that day between the one and the other. The Sheep which heard his
Voice and testified their Faith by their innocence, like Lambs, they shall
stand on his right hand: They which contrarily testify their Unbelief by their
lasciviousness and lusts like Goats, Ezekiel. 34.18.
shall be set on his left hand.

Seventhly, Every man's particular cause shall be tried before this Judge by
the Evidence which his Works shall give with him, or against him; 2 Cor. 5.10.
We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil.

Here, the better to assure us of the truth and certainty of the Lord's
proceeding and of his particularizing of all things in this action; the Holy
Ghost tells us, that the Lord has, as it were, Books of Record to manifest all
and every Work of Man; and his Books be Three in Number:

First, His Book of Providence, which is the knowledge of all particular
things, past, present, and to come, Psalm. 136.16.

Secondly, His Book of Judgment, which is divided, as it were into two parts:
First, His Prescience, or knowing every thing far more evidently than we know
any thing recorded ii a Book before our eyes. Secondly, The second part of the
Book of Judgment, is the Conscience of every man standing before him, which
shall then be so qualified by the great Power of God, that it shall be able to
record and testify so much of all his particulars as shall serve to testify
his Faith and Justification by Christ, or his most just Condemnation without
Christ.

The third Book is The Book of Life, which is the Eternal Decree of God
concerning the Salvation of all Believers by Christ; whose Names be written in
this Book, that they (being as God's precious Pearls) of this Book, Isa. 4.3.
and Exodus 32.32. and of this distinction of Books; Rev. 20.12. And I saw the
dead both great and small stand before God, and the Books were opened: and
another Book was opened which is the Book of Life, and the dead were judged of
those things which were written in the Books, according to their Works. And
after that men's Works are made manifest by these Books, then must they be
tried whether they be good or evil; the Gentiles and Jews that never heard of
Christ, by the Law of Nature, which shall prove them inexcuseable, Romans 2.12,
16. The rest that have heard, shall be tried by the Law and Gospel, verse. 16.
The Word of God shall serve as a Bill of Indictment for the just Condemnation
of all such as have contemned the Law and Gospel of Jesus Christ. Joh. 12.48
For the Sentence of the Judge in the last day of general Judgment shall be
nothing else but a manifestation and declaration of the Sentence pronounced and
published before by the Ministry and Preaching of the Gospel touching the
Justification and Condemnation of every particular Person. Now after the
manifestation of all things, and that every particular Conscience sees his
blessed Justification by Christ, or his just Condemnation by Unbelief and for
his Works; then the Judge shall proceed to his definitive Sentence: and this is
twofold.

The first is pronounced to the Elect in these words, Matthew. 25.34. Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the beginning
of the World: This Sentence is full of affection and love, most sweet and most
comfortable, recommending the free Grace of God, their Election, their
Adoption, and Blessedness in Christ, and not their Works, for the cause of
their Salvation: and then he adds the Evidence of their Faith, by the works
of Mercy which they have done to his Members here on Earth; I was hungery, and
you gave me to eat, etc. The Answer of the Saints, saying, When saw we thee an
hungry, etc. argues that they are far from vain glory in their Works, or
seeking any Justification by them, and Christ's last words to them, Inasmuch as
you did it to the least of these my Brethren, etc. gives us an infailable
Argument of God's Child, which is, not to love because we arc loved again, but
to love for Christ's sake, and the living Members of Christ, because we see his
Picture and Image in them renewed, this is a special Grace of God: and of this
love speaks David, Psalm. 16. All my delight is in his Saints which are in the
Earth. 1 John 3.


The second Sentence pronounced against the Reprobates is, Go ye Cursed into
Hell fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; for I was hungry, and you
gave me no meat, etc. In which Sentence are contained a heap of woes, present,
and to come: for the present, what can be more woeful than to see so many
admitted into the Kingdom of God, and yet themselves shut out and excluded;
yea, peradventure to see them that they have hated, and disdained, and refused
to give any honor unto; as when the Rich man shall see Lazarus received by God
into the Kingdom of Heaven, whom he vouchsafed not to set among his Servants;
and that which is more, to see themselves separated, hated, and tugged by an
innumerable sort of ugly Devils, out of the presence not only of God, but their
Fathers, Mothers, Wives, Husbands, Children, Friends, Lovers, and Acquaintance,
who shall deride and laugh at them, forgetting all bonds and obligations of
Nature, and rejoicing at the execution of God's Justice in their Condemnation;
so that no eye either of God or Man shall pity them, nor no tears, prayers,
suits, cries, yellings, or mourning can be heard, or prevail with him who is
their Judge, nor one to mediate or speak for them to reverse or stay Judgment,
but needs without mercy, without stay, without any farewell, they shall
presently be cast even to the endless, easeless, and remediless torments of
Hell. Never was there poor wretch that was condemned at the Tribunal of mortal
Judgment, to be compared to this estate; for there the conclusion of the Judges
Sentence is, Lord have mercy upon thy Soul: but here, the Lord himself shall
not only not show any token of Mercy and loving Countenance, but also with a
Voice surpassing any Thunderclap to be heard in all Heaven, Earth, and Hell,
Curse them Body and Soul to the Pit of Hell for evermore. And if this were all
the present woe, yet were not the case so heavy, for besides this, what guilt
of Conscience, what biting envy, what horror of mind, what distraction, what
murmuring against the Lord, what cursing of themselves, their day of birth, and
Father and Mother, what remembrance of their former lives misspent; and to
conclude, what does not the fear of Hell work upon them: surely my heart
dreadeth, my mind fails to think upon, to hear, to see, to consider their
wringing of hands, their knocking of breasts, their cries as it were filling of
Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, and my Tongue and Pen cannot express it, but must
rest with that saying, There is no peace to the wicked says the Lord, Isa.
57.21.

Now, Beloved, a few words by way of Comfort, and so I shall conclude. First,
What can be more comfortable to good men than to consider and remember that the
Lord has appointed a day to Judge the World in Righteousness, by the Man
Christ Jesus, which was dead and buried, and raised and ascended, and sits
at the right hand of God, which also is ordained Judge of quick and dead,
against whom and for whose sake the Wicked rage, and the Godly endure; and
therefore it is said, He shall come, ( viz. in the Clouds) which was interred
in the Earth: the sorrows of the Grave cannot hold him, no nor the Heavens when
the latter day comes, but he makes his Clouds his Charriots, his Messengers
flames of fire, burning up the World, and rides upon the wings of the Wind,
and comes with the voices of Archangels Trumpets; Arise O you dead, and let
all men come to Judgment. O, how happy shall it be that day with them, which
have served and kissed the Son, and that can say, For thy sake we have been
killed all the day long! How shall he recompense them, that have fed him? How
shall he pay them, that by Almsdeeds and holy Works, have lent unto him? How
shall he honor them, that have honored him? How shall he revive and comfort
them, that have died or mourned for him? * See Mr. Perkins upon the Creed.
And to conclude, Shall he not give them ten thousand times more than all their
evils amounted unto in this present World? Well! O Christ, we believe that thou
shall come to be our Judge: we therefore pray thee help thy Servants, whom thou
have redeemed with thy precious blood; Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, and make
them to be numbered with thy Saints in glory everlasting.

Now beloved, I shall speak one word to the Place of Glory, and so I shall
conclude this matter.

Luke 12.32. Fear not, little Flock, its your Fathers good pleasure to give you
the Kingdom.

Matthew. 25.34. Come, ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for
you from before the Foundation of the World.

Joh. 3.4. Except a man be born of Water and of the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God.

1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant Mercy, who has begotten us again to a lively Hope,
by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, verse.4. To an Inheritance immortal
and undefiled, which fades not away, reserved in the Heavens for us.

Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that those that thou have given me, be with me
where I am, that they may behold my Glory which thou have given me.

By all which it is manifest that the Place is Heaven where God and Christ is,
where is fullness of Joy, and at his right hand are Pleasures for evermore. As
it is written, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into
the Heart of Man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. He
that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, and he shall
be my Son.

And because I cannot speak of the Excellency of this Place, and the Glory that
is therein, but I shall darken it through my ignorance thereof: therefore I
will conclude with these words, Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they which do his
Commandment, that they may have right to the Tree of Life: and may enter in
through the Gates into the City. Verse. 17. And the Spirit and the Bride say,
Come; and let him that hears say, Come; and let him that is athirst, Come;
and whosoever will, let him take of the Water of Life freely. Amen, even so,
come, Lord Jesus.

The Authors APOLOGY to his Friends, giving them some Reasons why he did not
Print the other part of the Manuscript with this, since it was once intended,
and so much desired by many Friends; which consists chiefly of these
particulars, viz.
1. HOw many ways a man may be guilty in partaking of other men's sins, from 2 Timothy 5.22. where is showed Eight ways.

2. Of ten Capital Sins which many men be (I fear) guilty of (if not some
Churches also) which for brevity sake are all reduced to two Heads, viz.
Heresy and Hypocrisy; as also the remedies for the Cure of the Cankering
Nature of these two great Sins; which is true Faith in Christ, and sincere Love
to him.

3. An Essay for a right stating of the question; Whether Christ died for all
men? or, for the Elect only? Which when I have showed you my meaning about it,
by God's help, it may be a means toward an Union, which I hope is unfeignedly
desired by some of both Parties: For doubtless it would be very much to God's
honor, and the Churches peace. And that I may attain to the end by me
propounded as aforesaid, I intend (God willing) if ever it be published to the
view of the World, to proceed after this manner: As First, To show the End of
Christ's Death, and the Application of his Death. Secondly, The Salvation
wrought on Earth by Christ in his own Body with God for Men: And the Salvation
in the Application thereof he works from Heaven by his Spirit in Men to God.
Thirdly, God's Love of Compassion, and his Love of Delight. Fourthly, The
Portion of Spirit sent forth before Christ's Coming in the Flesh, and since his
Coming and Ascension: All which the Scriptures make distinct: But they are
usually confounded by the inconsiderate; as I hope, by God's Grace, I shall be
enabled to make it plainly appear. Now the reason why I did not Print it with
this, was, because it would make it too voluminous (or big) so that the poorer
sort of Christians, for whose sake it was chiefly intended, could not be able
to but it. I could show many more Reasons, but shall forbear to declare them
here.

FINIS.

