A NEW HISTORY OF CHINA, Containing a DESCRIPTION OF THE Most Considerable
Particulars OF THAT Uast Empire.

Written by Gabriel Magaillans, of the Society of Jesus, Missionary Apostolic.

Done out of French.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Newborough, at the Golden Ball, in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1688.

THE PREFACE.
FOR these Hundred Years last past, there have been Printed such a great number
of Relations of China, that they who have read them, will perhaps believe too
readily that they can receive no New Information from this. However, my
Confidence is such, that if they will but take the Pains to read it, they will
hardly find therein any thing which they have read before in others.

China is a Country so Vast, so Rich, so Fertile, and so Temperate; the
Multitude of the People so infinite, their Industry in Manufacture, and their
Policy in Government so extraordinary, that it may be truly said, that ever
since the undertaking of Long Voyages, there was never any Discovery made, that
might stand in Competition with this Kingdom. These are things known to all the
World; and so there needs not much more to be said, to make the Learned
apprehensive, that the Subject is large enough to fill many more Volumes then
yet are extant, and to employ the most able and judicious Writers.

To this it might be added, That among all the great numbers of Relations that
have been Printed upon this Subject, there are few that merit Public
Reputation, or that have been written with a design to inform us of the most
considerable Particulars of that Vast Empire. The Relation of Ferdinand Mendez
Pinto, in all other places, where he does not speak of the Portugal Affairs, is
stuffed with Fables and Chimera's, which he has invented with a most wonderful
fertility of Imagination: And which he has seasoned with so many Circumstances
and studied Discourses to persuade and prepare the belief of his Reader, that
there are several Persons who take them for real Truths. But those are Errors
now not at all to be regarded, seeing that the most part of the Nations of
Europe have given us very exact and sincere Descriptions of China, and many
other Countries of which that Author speaks.

For Example: He says that the City of Nan Kim, which is known to be seated in
a smooth and level Plain, is situated upon a Mountain: That the River of Kiam,
which runs through it, and is called Barampina, comes from Pe kim, and the
Greater Tartary: That China contains Thirty two Kingdoms: That the City of Pe
kim is Thirty large Leagues in compass, whereas it is not above Four in
circuit, or Five at most, taking in the New City: That it has Three hundred and
Sixty Gates: An Hundred and Twenty Canals, of Three Fathom deep, and Twelve
broad; and Eighteen hundred Bridges of Freestone; whereas there are only Nine
Gates, and one small River that belongs to it: That in one single Prison, of
two Leagues square, there are kept Three hundred Thousand Prisoners, appointed
still for the Repair of the Great Wall: That there are other Buildings also to
be seen, as wonderful or as extravagant; and one among the rest of a League in
circuit, built in the middle of the pretended River of Barampina, etc. That the
King of Tartary came and sat down before Pekim, with Twelve hundred Thousand
Foot, Six hundred Thousand Horse, Seventeen thousand Ships, and Fourscore
Thousand Rhinoceroces that carried the Baggage belonging to the Army; and that
the same King lost in six Months and a half, above Seven hundred and fifty
Thousand Men. I could give an account of several other of his Fables,
particularly of what he tells us of Two pretended Emperors, both of equal
Puissance, Siammon and Calaminban; the first of which had in his Empire Seven
hundred Provinces, Fifty thousand Elephants, and Eighteen hundred and fifty
Thousand Soldiers in continual Pay; and many other things, which none but this
Author ever heard of. But I shall forbear to make any longer stop upon these
Fables and Stories, which there is no Man but will be ashamed to believe, more
especially since there is not the least shadow of Truth in any thing that he
says of the Island of Calempluy, or in what he reports concerning the Language,
Names, Manners and Government of the Chinese.

The Relation of F. Gonzalez de Mendoza is true and sincere, as to what he
recounts of the the Travels of Martin de Harrada, and Jerome Marin into China.
But both those two Fathers, and the Author himself, listened with too much
credulity to the vaunting Relations which the Chinese made of the Grandeur of
their Empire, as may be seen by that which follows. For he allows China to be
Eighteen hundred Leagues in length, though all the World knows that it lies
within Twenty two or Twenty three Degeees, that is to say, not above Four
hundred and fifty Leagues in length. He Alters and changes the Names of the
Provinces in such a manner, that it is almost impossible to know them again. He
makes the City of Pe Kim as big as Ferdinand Mendez Pinto does, assuring us in
two Places of his Relation, that a Man mounted upon a good Horse, and riding
from Morning till Night, will have much ado to cross the City within the
Walls; for the Suburbs are not included in this Journey, which take up
altogether as much Ground: To which he adds, That the Chinese also report it
to be larger. He says moreover, That in the single Province of Paguia, which
must certainly be Pekim, there are Two Millions, Five hundred and fifty
Thousand Soldiers; and within the whole Kingdom Five Millions, Eight hundred
forty six Thousand five Hundred Foot, and Nine Hundred Forty eight Thousand
Three Hundred and Fifty Horse.

Pedro Cubero Sebastian, in his Voyage of the World, Printed at Naples in 1682.
says almost the same things. But that is nothing to be wondered at; for that
besides that he often mistakes in speaking of the most Known Countries of
Europe, it is apparent that he has copied what he speaks of China from the
Authors before mentioned.

I could cite several other Relations of China, the Authors of which appear to
have been very much mis-inform'd in several things. But besides that such a
Rehearsal would be both troublesome and unprofitable, we have several others that
make us amends for the Imperfections of the other. Among the rest, the
Relations which seem to me most worthy of Credit and Esteem, are those of
Father Trigaut, the Annual Letters of China; the Relations of Father Semedo,
Father Martini, and the Modern Ones of Father Adam Schall, Father Greslon,
Father Rougemont, Father Couplet, R. P. of Orleance, and some others.

The Relation of Father Trigau^, was the first that ever gave us any exact
Information of China. But in regard his Principal design was to give an account
of the Origiginal of the Missions of the Society of Jesus, in that vast
Country, and of their Settlement by Father Matthew Ricci; 'he never speaks but
occasionally of the Affairs of China. Father Semedo indeed applies himself
wholly to the Description of the Country, in the First Part of his Relation,
wherein he has been very fortunate. Father Couplet in his Chronology, and
Father Martini in his First Decad of the History of China, and his Relation of
the Tartar War, has published almost a complete Succession of the History of
that Kingdom. The same Father Martini in his Atlas, has made a Geographical
Description of it, so complete and full, that there hardly remains any thing
more for us to desire. And lastly, the Annual Letters and other Pieces which I
have cited, giving an Account of the various Successes of the Missions which
they undertook, inform us of several Notable and Curious Particulars. But though
these Authors are every one worthy to be esteemed and valued: Certain it is,
that we wanted still a very great number of Considerable Particulars, whither
it were, that the Subject was too Copious to be exhausted, or that those other
designs which they proposed to themselves, diverted their particular
Industries. However it were, it is apparent, that Father, Magaillans had it in
his thoughts to have supplied all the Defects which he found in those other
Pieces, and whatever was wanting that might give us a perfect knowledge of
China. For they who read this Relation, will find that the Matters therein
contained, have either been wholly omitted by all other Authors, or else but
very slightly touched; and therefore in regard they are things of great
Curiosity, I make no question but this Translation will be grateful to the more
exact Part of the Learned World.

In a word, it seems to me to have all those Advantages that suffice to
recommend it to the Reader. The Matter is of great consequence, and becoming
the Curiosity of all those that desire to know remote Countries, since it has
described with an extraordinary Exactness, and Part by Part, what is most
Considerable in that same Famous Empire of China. There you shall find it
determined by evident Proofs, that the Countries of Catay and Mangi are
comprehended in that Spacious Kingdom. It discourses at large of the Chinese
Language; of the Letters and their Composition, of the Words which they
comprehend, of the Excellency of the Language, and how easy a thing it is to
attain it; which gives us a far different Idea of it, from whatever we have had
till now. Of the Chinese Books, and their Antiquity; and the great number of
them upon all sorts of Subjects. Of the Antiquity of their Kingdom and their
Kings. Of the Certain and Successive Continuance of the Chinese Chronology from
the next Ages to the Deluge. It shows us the Industry of the Chinese in many
things, their wonderful Form of Government, and all their different Tribunals,
with a world of other Circumstances. There you find an exact Acount of all
their Public Works, and a particular Description of some Magnificent Bridges,
the Great Canal, the City of Pe Kim, their most Sumptuous Houses, their
Principal Temples, and the Vast and Spacious Palace of the Emperor, which
comprehends within it several others, sufficient to make us admire their
Architecture, and the Form and Contrivance of their Buildings. Lastly, there is
a Description of a certain sort of Wax, which is not any where else to be
found; of the Riches of China, of the Emperor's Revenues, of some Remarkable
Ceremonies; and of so many other Particulars, which it would be here too
tedious a trouble to repeat.

The Author was well informed of all those things, of which he gives us an
Account. He had traveled over all the Chiefest Parts of China, from the Year
1640. to 1648. at what time he was carried to Pe Kim, where he stayed Nine and
Twenty Years at the Court; that is to say, till his Death, which happened in
the Year 1677. without stirring from thence, unless it were once that he was
sent to Macao by the Command of the Emperor. So long and constant a Residence,
the Knowledge of the Language and Books, his Conversation with Persons the most
Considerable in the Kingdom, the Liberty which he had to enter into the Palace;
the Choice which he made of the Matters and Particulars of which he gives an
Account, will easily confirm us that he had a perfect Knowledge of the things
of which he gives us the Relation. So that although the Description which he
gives us of the Emperor's Palace, does not agree with that which we find in the
Dutch Embassy to China, yet there is all the Reason of the World to prefer the
Testimony of this Author, before that Relation.

The Sincerity also and Reality of Father Magaillans farther appear by this,
that he makes no scruple to Correct Father Martini, where he knows him to be in
an Error. Tho in other places he confirms by his Testimony the Esteem which all
Europe had for the Works of that Father; and for that he speaks with Moderation
of many other things where the Authors have strech'd too far in their Relations.

Having thus far given an Account of the Worth and Merit of this Relation, it
will not be improper to tell the Reader how it fell into my Hands. It is now
about Three Years since, that F. Couplet coming to Rome in the Quality of
Procurator for the Missions of China, had several Occasions to wait upon
Cardinal d' Estrees, where I had the Honor to be at that time. His Eminency
asked him several curious Questions concerning China, but chiefly concerning Pe
Kim, the Emperors Court, and the Government and Policy of that Great Kingdom.
To which the Father gave His Eminency all the Satisfaction he could desire, so
far as he knew. But in regard he had never been but once at Pe Kim, when he was
carried Prisoner thither in the time of the late Persecution, he answered the
Cardinal with his usual sincerity, That he was not so well informed as to those
other particular Questions which His Eminency put to him; but that he had
brought out of China a Portuguese Manuscript, written by F. Gabriel de
Magaillans, where he would find the Plenary Satisfaction of all that he desired
to know; and at the same time presented the Manuscript to His Eminency, who
having read it over with great delight, gave it into my Hands upon a proffer
which I made him to Translate it.

However, I found it a more Difficult Task then I imagined; for tho Father de
Magaillan's had delivered it fairly written, yet by an Unfortunate Accident, it
hapn'd to be half Burnt; so that I was forced to have recourse to the Confused
Original, which had been luckily preserved, which being the greatest part
writt'n in loose Papers, it required a great deal of time to place them in
order, and find out the connections.

The Author had entitled his Work, The Twelve Excellencies of China: But this
Title seemed to me to be too much affected, and not answerable to the Subject;
for it was not limited to twelve Excellencies of China, in regard it contained
a far greater Number, as they that read the whole will easily find. Besides
that, the Division which he had made was not proportionable to the Matter,
there being some of those Excellencies which did not take up a Page or two, and
others that filled up above thirty or forty: So that I thought it more proper
to divide the Relation into one and twenty Chapters, and to give them Titles
answerable to the Matters therein contained. In other things I have not swerved
at all from the Method and Sense of my Author; neither have I made the least
Alteration; only that I might conform to the Style and Genius of our Language,
I have not tied my self so Strictly and Literally to his Expressions: and by
what I have said, you may be confident that this Relation has never appeared in
any other Language, nor was ever Printed before, and by consequence that it is
altogether New.

I also observed in Reading* That there were several things which did not seem
to me to be sufficiently explained, for the understanding of such as have not a
perfect Knowledge of China; and that the Description of Pe kim, and the
Emperors Palace might seem obscure to many People; I have therefore endeavored
to remedy the first of these two Inconveniences by Notes in Italick, which I
have placed at the end of the Chapters, because I would not crowd the Margins
nor interrupt the Text, but preserve the Original in its Purity and Credit, and
leave the Reader at liberty to make use of them or let them alone. For remedy
of the Second Inconvenience, I have made a Draught of the City of Pe kim and
the Palace, collecting together with great Care what the Author had spoken
dispersedly in several parts of his Relation. Mounsieur Peyronett an Ingenier
of good repute, drew out the Draught at my Request fair upon Paper, to which I
added the Explanations of every thing, with Letters which relate to others that
are Engraved upon the Plane.

And further, to satisfy entirely the Curiosity of the Reader, and to give
more Reputation to the Book, I have added the Life of Father Magaillans, who
was the Author, which I was the rather inclined to do, because it seems to me
to be but very short and modestly written. It was writ by Father Lewis Buglio a
Cicilian, and Father Magaillan's inseparable Companion, from the Year 1640, to
the Year 1677, that is to say, for near the space of thirty seven Years
together. Father Buglio died in the Year 1682, in great Reputation for his
Virtue and Learning; so that the Care which he has taken to Write the Life of
our Author, is a double Approbation of his Work.

I must here take notice by the way, that I have not observed the Portuguese
Orthography, in spelling the Name of our Author; for the Portugueses write it
after this manner, Magalhanes: But in regard few People in France can so
pronounce it, I altered it into Magaillans, which the French pronounce not much
different from the Portuguese pronunciation of Magalhanes. This Father was of
the same Family of the famous Ferdinand de Magaillans, who was called by the
Corruption of Languages Magellan, and was the first that discovered the
Magellanick Straits, in the extreme parts of the Southern America. I have also
made use of the Word Mandarin or Mandarim, which the Portuguese make use of to
signify the Officers and Magistrates of the Kingdoms of Siam, Cochinchina, Tum
kim and China; as well for that all the other Relations make use of the Word,
as also for that it is a Word well known in France, ever since the coming
thither of the Mandarins of Siam: The Word is derived from Mandar, to command,
and comprehends all sorts of Officers and Magistrates.

This remark obliges me to add another upon the Pronunciation of the Chinese
Words and Letters, for the better understanding how to pronounce them, in
imitation of the Chinese. Their Words are all Monosyllables, or else of one
Syllable, without exception, and so they are to be pronounced all at once, and
without any distinction of Syllables, of what number of Consonants and Vowels
soever they are composed. For Examples, Kiam, which is the name of the greatest
River in China, must be pronounced all at a time, and not as if it were two
Syllables Ki-am. In like manner the Words Liuen, Hiuen, do not make two
Syllables, Li-ven, nor three Li-u-en, but only one Syllable, which is to be
expressed by pronouncing them all as one Syllable, yet so as to express the
Sounds of all the Letters. Not but that the Chinese have Words composed of
several Syllables: but these Syllables are always separated, and from different
Words, as Tai yuen, the Names of the capital City of Xan si: Cham hien chum,
the name of a Tyrant mentioned in the Relation. Thus we write in France, St.
Malo, Havre de Grace, by separate Words, and not in one Word, as Villeneuf,
Montroyal: Nevertheless there is this Difference, that St. Malo is formed of
two Words and three Syllables, and Havre de grace of three Words and five
Syllables, whereas the Chinese Names have never more Syllables than Words; thus
Tai yuen is composed of two Words and two Sillables, and Cham hien chum of
three Words and three Syllables only.

As for their Letters, though there are as many Chinese Letters as there are
Chinese Words, yet they may be expressed by means of our European Letters,
adding necessary Accents to distinguish them in speaking, as is explained in
this Relation; which being premised, you shall see after what manner the
Chinese pronounce.

A, They have a sound in their Language which answers to our A, as in the Word
Nan kim.

B, They have no Sound that answers B; but in the room of it they make use of
P, thus instead of Cambalu, they say, Ham pa lu.

C, Before A, O or U, must be pronounced as our Ca, Co, Cu; but before E and I,
it must be pronounced Tze, Tzi, and not Ce, Ci.

Ch, Must be pronounced as Tcha, Tche, Tchi, Tcho, Tchu.

D, is not pronounced in the Chinese Language, but only T, which is nearest to
it.

E and F, are pronounced as in France.

G, before A, O, U, must be pronounced Nga, Ngo, Ngu, as if there were an N
before the G. But before E and I, as we pronounce Ge, Gi, H must be pronounced
with a strong Aspiration of the Throat, like the Welsh Ll.

I, K and L, as we do.

M, at the end of a Word, must be pronounced open and softly, without making
any Stop by closing the Lips, otherwise they pronounce it as we do.

N, at the End of a Word, is to be pronounced hard, putting a stress upon it,
as in the Latin Word Lumen; otherwise as we do.

P, as in France.

Q, in the same Manner, unless when a U follows, and then it is pronounced as
in the Latin Word Quam.

R, is never pronounced by the Chinese.

S, As we do.

T, As we pronounce it in Totality and Totus.

V Consonant as we do; U Vowel, as the Latin U, or the French Ou, except in
these Words, Chu, Triu, Xiu, You, Tiu, Niu, Siu, etc.

X, Is pronounced as in Portuguese or Ch in French, as for Example Xansi,
Xensi, as if it were written Chansi or Chensi.

I took those Observations upon the Pronunciation from Father Couplet, from a
Chinese that was brought out of China, from my Author, and out of Father
Greslones Preface to his Relation.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Names which the Chinese and Foreigners give to China; and of
the Countries of Catai and Mangi p. 1 CHAP. II. Of the Extent and Division of
China, of the number of the Cities and other walled Towns; and some other
particulars observed by the Chinese Authors p. 31 CHAP. III. Of the Antiquity
of the Kingdom of China, and what a high Opinion the Chinese have of it p. 59
CHAP. IV. Of the Letters and Language of China p. 68 CHAP. V. Of the Wit of the
Chinese, and their principal Books. p. 87 CHAP. VI. Of the Civility and
Politeness of the Chinese, and of some of their Feasts. p. 101 CHAP. VII. Of
the Public Works and Buildings of the Chinese, and particularly of the Grand
Canal p. 113 CHAP. VIII. Of the great Industry of this Nation. p. 121 CHAP. IX.
Of the Navigation of the Chinese p. 128 CHAP. X. Of the great Plenty of all
things in China p. 133 CHAP. XI. Of the Nobility of the Empire p. 145 CHAP.
XII. Of the wonderful Government of this Empire; of the Distinctions between
the Mandarins, and of the Council of State p. 193 CHAP. XIII. Of the eleven
Supreme Tribunals, or of the six Tribunals of the Mandarins for Letters, and
the five Tribunals of the Mandarins for Military Affairs p. 200 CHAP. XIV. Of
several other Tribunals of Pekim p. 218 CHAP. XV. Of several Tribunals and
Mandarins of Provinces p. 241 CHAP. XVI. Of the Grandeur of the Emperor of
China, and of his Revenues p. 250 CHAP. XVII. A description of the City of Pe
kim: Of the Walls that enclose the Emperors Palace: and the Form of the
Principal Houses of China p. 265 CHAP. XVIII. Of the twenty Apartments
belonging to the Emperors Palace. p. 281 CHAP. XIX. A Description of twenty
particular Palaces contained in the Inner Enclosure of the Emperors Palace p.
303 CHAP. XX. Of several other Palaces, and some Temples erected within the
same Enclosures p. 314 CHAP. XXI. Of the Emperors seven Temples in Pekim, and
how the King goes abroad upon the performance of Public Ceremonies. p. 319
THE PLANE OF THE CITY OF PEKIM YE METROPOLIS OF CHINA
A Scale of 10 Chinese furlongs which. amount to 2730 Geometrical Paces one
Chinese furlong making 273 Geometrical Paces

An EXPLANATION of the Plane of the City of PEKIM.
A The Walls of the ancient City of Pekim nere 4 leagues in Circuit B The 9
Gates of the same Wall C The Streets of the City D 1 The first Enclosure of the
Palace two leagues in Circuit D 2 The second Enclosure D 3 The third Enclosure
where the Emperor resides E The south and principal Gate of the City F The
first street ^ch. you pass through upon you^ entrance into the City G A Palace
encempassed with a Marble Balu^ trade H The second street ^^h. two Triumphal
Arches I The (...) Apertim* 1 The street of perpetual repose 2 2d. (...) ^ch is
the first within the outer enclosure of the Palace 3 3d. called the Portal of
the beginning 4 4. is The second Enclosure 5 5 Called the supreme Portal 6 6
Called the supreme Imperial Hall 7 7 Called the Hall thrice exalted 8 8. (...)
the Supreme Hall in the middle 9 9 (...) of ^overaigne Concord where the Em^
(...) in Counc^l ^^h his Colaos 10 10 The (...) of Heaven 11 11 (...)* (...) of
Heaven in ^^h. and ye two (...) the Emperor lodges himself 12 12 The
Beautiful House 13 13 The House which receives Heaven 14 14 (...) and Gardens
15 15 The (...) of the Inner Enclosure 16 16 The High ^aisd Portal on the south
side with a place to manage Horses 17 17 The Park and artificial Mountains 18
18 Consisting of three Houses 19 19 The Portal on the north side 20 20 The
Enclosure called ye Portal of repose 123 to 20 Are 20 particular places
belonging to the Emperor for several uses K The first Palace between the two
Enclosures L The second Palace M 3 Palace upon the Lake N 4 Palace upon a
Mountain O 5 Palace nere the Lake P 6 Palace nere the Lake Q 7 Palace R 8
Palace of the Fortress S 1 Temple of the 4 within ye Palace T 2 Temple V 3
Temple X 4 Temple Y 24 Places for the Mandarins Z 5 Temples in ye new City mark
1 2 3 4 5 and 1 Temple in the Old City and 2 Temple in the Old City A A The 6
Tribunals markd 1 2 3 4 5 6 ^^h. A A B B The 5 Tribunals of ye military
Mandarins


map of Beijing (Peking)

A New Relation OF CHINA:
Containing

A Description of the most considerable Particulars of that Great Empire.

CHAP. I. Of the Names which the Chinese and Foreigners give to China; and of
the Countries of Catai and Mangi.
IT is a Custom usual in this Empire, that when any new Family ascends the
Imperial Throne, the Sovereign gives a new Name to his Dominions. Thus under
the Reign of the preceding Family, China was called Tae mim que, that is to
say, a Kingdom of great Brightness. But the Tartars who govern it at present
have called it Taa cim que, or a Kingdom of great Purity: and this is the
Appellation most common among the Chinese. However in regard the formerly
there have been Kingdoms in it highly fam^s either for their long Continuance,
or for the Virtues of their Princes, or the number of Learned Men, or for some
other Advantages, they have preserved and still make use in their Books of
Names which were then in Practice, (...) as are those of Hia que, Xam que, Cheu
que, H^n que, etc. Which gives us to understand, that although these Names
signify China, yet they were rather intended to denote the Reigns of several
Royal Families, than to signify the Kingdom it self.

In their Books and Petitions to the King, they generally make use of the Word
Xam que, that is, High and Sovereign Kingdom. The Learned Men in their Writings
and their Books make choice of the Word Chum que, which signifies the flower*
of the Middle, or Center. And indeed the most usual and common Name for all
China is Chum que, or the Kingdom of the Center; which name is given to it,
either because they believe that China lies in the middle of the World, or
because the first King of China established his Throne in the Province of
Honan, which was then as it were, the Center of the Kingdom, or lastly because
it is much more considerable than all the barbarous and poor Kingdoms that
surround it. That same Hyperbolical Word also Tien Hia, or the Kingdom that
contains all that is under Heaven, is very frequently made use of. So that when
they say Tien Hia (...) ^im, all that is under Heaven is in Peace, it is the
same thing as to say China is in Peace. China likewise has other Names, which I
forbear to mention, because they are less in Practice.

Foreigners call it Hara Kitai, Catai, Cataio, Mangi, Nica Little, Chin, China,
and Kina. The Tartars that lie to the West call the Chinese, Hara Kitai, or
the Black Barbarians; which is the Name they give also to China it self. The
Europeans instead of Hara, say Cara; for that in regard the Tartars pronounce
Ha, with a very strong Aspiration, strangers believe they say Cara, and not
Hara. For that Reason it is that Marcus Paulus and other Authors call by the
name of Can, that Emperor, who between the years 1260, and 1275. conquered the
Western Tartary, and all China, instead of calling him Han, that is to say,
King, in the Language of the Western Tartars. The same word also is at present
in use among the Eastern Tartars, who are Masters of China; and who were
formerly so barbarous that they had not any

The Muscovites, as I was informed by some residing in this Court, in imitation
of the Tartars, Kitai. The Kingdom of Chahamalaha, the Inhabitants of which are
Mahumetans, and which confines to the Province of Xansi, the Kingdom of Tumet
or Tibet, which environs a good part of the Provinces of Xensi and Xansi* and
that of Usangue Su Chuen, having corrupted the word Kita, call it Kata^, and
the Merchants that come from Indostan, and other parts of the Indies call it
Cataio. By which we clearly find that the Kingdom of Cataio, of which Father
Anthony de Andrad^ speaks in his Relation of Tibet where he had been, signifies
no more than China, and that Grand Catai, is no other, then Grand China; to
which alone may be attributed whatever has been said of China. So much the
rather for that of all the Kingdoms seated between the Indies, and the Eastern
Extremities of Asia, only those that lie upon the Sea are known; the rest are
small, barbarous, poor and untilled.

The Eastern Tartars moreover in derision called China, Nica Little, or the
Kingdom of the Barbarians, though at present, now they are settled therein, and
are become Masters of it, they call it Tulimpa Little, or the Kingdom of the
Middle. The Kingdoms of the Indians, as Canara, Bengala, and others call it
Chin, as I was informed in the Province of Su Chuen by two Iognes, of which the
one had been at Goa, and had learnt some Portugal Words; and, as I understood
at Pekim, by some Merchants of the Country. This name of Chin seems to have
been given to China by the Indians, because of the Family of Chin, who reigned
a Hundred sixty nine Years after Christ; though I find more probability to
believe that it comes from the Family of Cin, who reigned two Hundred forty six
before Christ, the chief of which Family was Master of all China, and among the
rest of the Province of Yun nan, which is not far distant from Bengala, because
the Chinese pronouncing strongly, and whistling the Word Cin through the
Teeth, the Indians that cannot imitate them, pronounce it Chin, and the
Portugals, who took this word from the Indians, not having any word in their
Language that ends in N, have added an A at the latter End. The Italians write
China like the Portugheses; but they pronounce it K^na; and so they ought to
write it Cina, to give it the same sound as the Germans who write schina.

By what has been said we find apparently that Cataio, Hara Kitai, and China
are all one and the same thing, and not different Kingdoms, as Cluverius would
have them to be; who in his fifth Book of his Introductions to Geography,
Chapter Fifth, frames several Kingdoms as Catai, Tangut, Tainfu and others,
which he seems to have borrowed from Marcus Paulus: whereas they are not the
names of Kingdoms, but only the corrupted names of certain Cities of China. And
this is particularly manifest by the word Tainfu, which is no other then Tai
Yuenfu, the Metropolis of the Province of Xansi, where the Tartars settled
their Court before they Conquered the Province of Pekim. The Description also
which Cluverius gives of the Province of Tainfu, agrees perfectly with that
City and the Country that belongs to it For there are the best Grapes in China;
and good store of Iron near the City of Lu began, which furnishes Pekim and the
rest of the Provinces, especially those that lie toward the North, with Nails,
and all sorts of Iron Utensils and Instruments. Marcus Paulus speaks of another
City of that Province which he calls Pianfu, though the Chinese call it Pim yam
fu. Cluverius has also borrowed from Marcus Paulus the corrupted word Cambalu,
the Capital City of Catai; for neither the Western nor Eastern Tartars have any
B. as we shall show in due place in our Tartarian Marcus Paulus instead of Came
should have written Han, that is King; and instead of Balu, Palu, which
signifies Court, and consequently instead of Cambalu, Hanpalu, which in the
Tartarian Language signifies the Kings Court. And then he should have taken
notice that there were two Hanpalu's, or Kings Courts; the ancient Court, at
present but a mean place, distant about three Leagues from Pekim toward the
East, which is called Tum Cheum, and the new Court which is Pekim, which Marcus
Paulus calls Taidu, instead of Tai tu, which signifies the great Court.

Some Authors question whether the Kingdom of Mangi, of which M. Paulus makes
such frequent mention, be not a different Kingdom from China; but there is no
doubt to be made but that it is comprehended within it. For M. Paulus divides
China into two Kingdoms, Catai and Mangi: Comprising under the Name of Catai
all the Nor thern Provinces and under that of Mangi all the Southern. The word
Mangi is derived from Mant Zu, which signifies Barbarous: For that the Southern
Chinese, to mock the Northern, Pe tai, that is, Fools of the North: and the
other to pay the Southern Chinese in the same Coin, call them Nan Man,
Barbarians of the South, or else barely Mantzu, Barbarians. The Tartarians
likewise in contempt of the Chinese, call them also Mantzu or Barbarians. But
in regard the Tartarians, especially the Eastern, cannot well pronounce the
Syllable tzu, they say gi, Mangi; which I have heard a Thousand and a Thousand
times for three and twenty Years together that I lived among them. And so
without question, it was in the time of M. Paulus, who being a stranger could
not understand the force of the Language, but hearing the Tartars so often call
the Southern Chinese, Mangi, believed it to be the Name of the Kingdom or
Nation, and not a name of Reproach.

However that there may be no farther doubt but that the Names of Catai and
Mangi, are quite different, and do not both of them signify China, I shall
here translate a piece of the forty fourth Chapter of the second Book of Marcus
Paulus, by which it will evidently appear, that what I affirm is a constant and
assured Truth. For having spoken in the former Chapter of the great River,
which by reason of the vastness of its Stream, the Chinese call ^ am eu Kiam,
or the River Son of the Sea* he goes on in this manner.

Caingui ^s a small City upon the Banks of this River upon the South Side,
where they gather ever Year a great quantity of Rice, the greatest part of
which is carried to Cambalu to supply the Court of the great Came. These
Provisions are transported to Catai by Water, over Rivers and Lakes, and one
large and deep Canal, which the great Came has caused to be made for the passage
of Vessels from one River to another, and to go from the Province of Mangi to
Cambalu, without going by Sea. This is a work of wonder for its Situation, and
its Length, but more for the benefit which the Cities receive from it. The
Great Cham also caused to be raised all along the Banks of the said Rivers and
Canal very strong and spacious Damms for Travelers to walk upon. These are the
words of M. Paulus, and we shall speak of this great Work in the seventh
Chapter.

But as for Caingui, mentioned by that Author, to speak properly, it is neither
a Town nor a City. The Chinese call it Chim Kiam* Keu, that is, the Mouth of
the Son of the River, in regard that an Arm of the River separates in that
place, and after it has run through part of the Province of Nan Kim, crosses
the Country of Che Kiam as far as the Capital City of it called Ham Cheu. On
both the sides of this Mouth, there is one of those sort of places which the
Chinese call Ma teu, that is, a Place frequented for the sake of Trade:
Because the Barques there meet and come to an Anchor to ride secure in the
Night time. Now this Place of which Marcus Paulus speaks, might well be called
a Town, by reason of the extraordinary number of Vessels that resort thither,
tho it be neither walled, nor have buildings enough to form a City.

Now though this be perfectly known by all such as are employed as Missionaries
into this Kingdom, yet I cannot forbear, to the end I may make this matter yet
more evident, to unfold some other passages of the same Author, and to begin
with the names of so many Cities, of which he makes mention in his History. In
the twenty seventh Chapter of his second Book he speaks of the City of Tainfu,
which the Chinese call Tai yuen fu, and which as we have said, is the Capitol
of the Province of Xansi. In the 28th. Chapter he speaks of another City of the
same Province, called by the Chinese, Pim yam fu, and which is a City of the
second Rank, as being the most Rich and Potent in the whole Empire, except that
of Sucheu in the Province of Nankin. In the 56th. Chapter he speaks of the City
of Coiganzu, which is called Hoai ga^ fu, which is a Town of great Trade, and
very Rich, by reason of the great quantity of Salt which is there made, as in
the Territory round about, and which is thence transported into several parts
of the Empire, as M. Paulus observes in the same Chapter. In the 65th. Chapter
he speaks of the City of Chian gian fu, which is called Chim Kiam fu. In his
seventieth Chapter he describes the City of T^pinxu, otherwise Tai (...) fu, in
the Province of Namkim. In the 75th. he mentions the City of Fogiu, otherwise
Fo Cheu, the Capital of the Province of Fo Kien. In the 76th. He has the City
of Quelinfu; which is called Kien nim fu. He also reports that about this City
there are a great number of Lions, and that he repeats several times in other
places; which gives us to understand that he was mis-inform'd in most things,
since it is certain that the Chinese never saw a Lion, not so much as in
Picture; and therefore they paint a Lion quite another Creature than he is* For
my part, I am persuaded that M. Paulus is mistaken, in believing those great
and furious Tygres which are so common in that Empire to be Lions* And he
confirms me in this Persuasion by saying in the 14th Chapter of his second
Book, that the Great Han has Lions trained up to hunt the other wild Beasts;
and that they are marked with white, black and red lists or streaks, and are
larger then the Lions of Babylon. All which perfectly agrees with the
descriptions of the Tygres or Leopards, which several of the Princes of Asia
make use of in their Ch^ces; but not at all with the descriptions of Lions. The
same Author makes mention of several other Cities, the names of which are so
changed, that they are so far from being Chinesie, that they have no
resemblance to the Language. Nevertheless we clearly find that the Provinces
and Cities which he places in Catai, and Mangi belong all to China, because
they generally end with the Syllable fu, which in the Chinesie Language
signifies a City. For example the Metropolis of the Province of Canton is Quam
cheu fu. Quam cheu being the proper name that distinguishes it from the rest,
and fu signifies a City, as Polis among the Greeks: and so Constantinopolis
signifies the City of Constantine, and Adrianopolis the City of Adrian.

We draw the second Proof of the Description which M. Paulus makes, in the
sixteenth and seven teenth Chapters of his second Book, of the old and new City
of Pekim, and the King's Palace, in regard that all that he speaks of it is
conformable to what we see at this day, and to what we shall describe in the
Progress of this Relation*

The third is drawn from the Wine which is Muy. This Coal is brought from
certain Mountains two Leagues distant from the City, and it is a wonderful
thing that the Mine has never failed, notwithstanding that for above these four
Thousand Years not only this City so large and Populous, but also the greatest
part of the Province has consumed such an incredible quantity, there being not
any one Family, though never so poor, which has not a Stove heated with this Coal
that lasts and preserves a Heat much more Violent then Charcoal. These Stoves
are made of Brick like a Bed or Couch three or four Hands Breadth high, and
broader or narrower according to the number of the Family. Here they lie and
sleep upon Matts or Carpets; and in the day time sit together either upon
Carpets or Matts, without which it would be impossible to endure the great Cold
of the Climate. On the side of the Stove there is a little Oven wherein they
put the Coal, of which the Flame, the Smoke and Heat spread themselves to all
the sides of the Stove, through Pipes made on purpose, and have a passage forth
through a little opening, and the Mouth of the Oven, in the which they bake
their Victuals, heat their Wine, and prepare their Cha or The; for that they
always drink their Drink hot. The Halls and Chambers of Wealthy Persons have
every one their Stove, not raised like those of the Poor, but underneath; so
that the Floor serves for the Stove where they Eat, Study, Walk, and Sleep:
either upon Carpets, Beds, or Chairs. The Cooks of the Grandees and Mandarins,
as also the Tradesmen that deal in Fire, as Smiths, Bakers, Dyers, and the
like, both Summer and Winter make use of this, Coal: the Heat and Smoke of
which are so violent, that several Persons have been smothered therewith; and
sometimes it happens that the Stove takes Fire, and that all that are asleep
upon it are burnt to Death. Therefore to avoid the pernicious Effects of this
Smoke, there needs no more then to set by the side of the Stove a large Vessel
full of clear and fresh Water. For the smoke gathers to the Water and
intermixes with it in such a manner that the next day the Water will smell as
strong and loathsome as the smoke it self.

The fourth Proof is that Marcus Paulus in the 37th. Chapter of his second Book
describes a famous Bridge, seated two Leagues and a half from Pekim toward the
West, in these words. When you leave the City of Cambalu after you have
traveled ten Miles, you meet with a River called Puli Sangan, which empties it
self into the Ocean, and is Navigable for many Vessels that carry Merchants
Goods. Upon this River there is a very fair Stone Bridge, and perhaps there is
not the like of it in the World. This Bridge is in Length three hundred
Geometrical Paces, and eight in Breadth, so that ten Horsemen may conveniently
ride a*Breast. There are four and twenty Arches, and five and twenty Piles that
support it, and it is all made of Serpentine Stone wrought with wonderful
Curiosity. The Securities to lean upon on both sides are made of Tables of
Marble, and Pillars ranged with an extraordinary Symmetry. At the two Extremes
it is broader then at the top of the Ascent, but when you are up, you find it
as flat and level as if it had been laid with a Line. In that part there is a
very large and high Column reared upon a Tortoise of Marble, with a huge Lion
near the Base, and another above. Over against this there is another very fair
Column, with a Lion distant about one Pace and a half from the former. The
Columns of support that serve for rails are a Foot and a half one from another,
and the spaces between are filled up with Tables of Marble, adorned with
several Sculptures, to prevent People from falling into the River. In a word,
upon every Pillar there is a Lion of Marble, which is a very pleasant Sight to
behold. These are the Words of M. Paulus. It seems the Printer forgot some
words toward the End, which render the Author's Description obscure. However I
have translated them as they ought to be* and according to the Structure of the
Bridge.

This Bridge is the most beautiful in China, but it is not the biggest; for
there are those which are much longer. The Author says the River is called Puli
Sangan, which is a name given it by the Western Tartars, who were then Masters
of that Empire, and of whom there are still at Pekim many intermixed among the
Eastern. It is called by the Chinese, Hoen Ho, or the muddy River, by reason
that the rapidness of its stream carries along with it a world of Earth that
renders it all the Year long, thick, and muddy. He says that this Bridge has
four and twenty Arches, whereas it has but thirteen, and that several Vessels
Sail upon this River, which is Impossible. For though it be very well filled with
Water, it is not Navigable by reason of the great Number of Falls, Windings,
and Rocks of which it is full. But that which carried M. Paulus into these
Mistakes, was this, that about three Leagues farther toward the West, there is
another River and another Bridge of four and twenty Arches. Of which there are
five in the middle vaulted, the rest are flat and covered with long and very
broad Tables of Marble, very well wrought and cut in a straight Line. In the
midst of the Bridge the Columns are to be seen of which M. Paulus speaks in his
Description. The River is called Cieu li ho, or the River of Glass, because it
is clear, quiet, and Navigable. And thus you see the Author mistakes one Bridge
for the other: The first is the fairest in China, and perhaps the fairest in
the World for the excellency of the Workmanship, and the Materials of which it
is made. It is all of white Marble very fine and well wrought according to the
perfect rules of Architecture. On the sides stand a Hundred and forty Pillars
of Support, allowing Seventy to each side. They are a Pace and a half distant
one from another, and the Spaces between filled up with square panes of Marble,
Carved with several sorts of Flowers, Fruitages, Birds, and other Creatures; a
piece of Workmanship no less Magnificent, then perfect and to be admired. At
the entrance of the Bridge toward the East there are two fair Pedestals raised
high, and covered with Tables of Marble, upon which are two Lions of an
extraordinary Size, and carved as the Chinese represent them. Between the
Legs, upon the Backs, Sides and Breasts of these Figures are cut in the same
Marble, several young Lions in several Postures, some slightly fastened to the
Lions, some Rampant, other Couchant, some Descending, some Ascending, with a
surprising Beauty and Delicacy. At the other end, toward the West, are to be
seen upon two Pedestals, two Elephants, both of the same Marble, wrought with
as much Art and Perfection as the Lions. M. Paulus forgot to make mention
either of the one or the other, unless perhaps they might be added afterward.
However the Chinese averr that this Bridge was built two Thousand Years ago
without having sustained the least damage in all that time, till our Days. But
upon the Vigil of St. Laurence's Day in the Year 1668. after an Extraordinary
Drought which had lasted all that Year, it began to Rain, and the Rain
continued Day and Night till the sixteenth of August, with so much Violence, as
if whole Rivers had poured down from Heaven. The Seventeenth of August about
eight of the Clock in the Morning, of a sudden there came a Deluge that
overflowed the new City, the Suburbs and the Planes adjoining. Presently they
shut up the Gates of the old City, and stopped up all the holes and clefts with
Chalk and Bitumen mingled together, to prevent the entrance of the Water. But
the third part of the Houses of the new City were overturned, and an infinite
number of poor Creatures, especially Women and Children were either drowned or
buried in the Ruins. A great number of Villages and Houses of pleasure were
carried away by the Impetuosity of the Inundation; and the same thing happened
to the Neighboring Cities. All the People fled for Refuge to the high Places;
or clim'd up to the tops of the Trees, where several confounded with their
Fears, or fainting for want of Food, dropped down into the Water, and miserably
perished. In other Provinces their happened Accidents and Calamities yet more
strange, occasioned by dreadful Earthquakes. So that it seemed to be the
Pleasure of God to punish those Insidels for the Persecution which they had
raised against the Christian Religion, and the Preachers of the Gospel. Never
was ^en the like Consternation in that Court, where all Men were reduced to
utmost despair, not being able to divine the Cause of so extraordinary a
Deluge. At last, the King, having sent out certain People upon Rafts of Timber,
for they have no Boats at Pekim, to examine the Reason, they found that the
troubled River, of which we have already made mention, had broken down the
Damms, and made it self a new Channel cross the Fields and Suburbs of the City*
which begat such an amazing Fear in the Minds of the People, that the King and
the Grandees were just upon the point of removing to some other place. The same
Fury of the Inundation carried away several Rocks, which knocking against the
Piles of the famous Bridge, shook it in such a manner, that they broke down two
of the Arches.

The fifth Proof is, that M. Paulus in the thirty second Chapter of the same
Book speaks of that great River, which the Tartars call Caramoran, and the
Chinese, Hoam Ho, or the yellow River; in regard that the slimy Mud which it
carries with it, makes the Waters to look of that Color. In the thirty sixth
Chapter he makes mention of another River which he calls in the Chinese
Language, o Kiam, or the great River, and which the Chinese, as we have said
already, call Yam cu Kiam, or the River Son of the Sea. In the thirty sixth
Chapter, describing the City, which he calls Kimsai, and which erroneously he
will have to signify the City of Heaven, though the word, as we shall show
hereafter, signifies a Court, he reports several Particulars concerning it; for
example, that the City is seated between a Great Lake, and a great River; and
that round about the Lake are to be seen several Palaces of the Grandees, and
diverse Temples of the Bonzes, and many other things which are very true; only
that he stretches too far where he says that the City is an hundred Miles in
Circuit, wherein he shows himself rather a Poet then an Historian. However it
be, the Description which he makes of the City and Palace of Cambalu
sufficiently demonstrate that Catai is a part of China; and that what he says
of the City of Kimsai, is enough to prove that Mangi is another part of the
same Empire: for that the greatest part of his Relation is entirely conformable
to what we our selves have seen. Yet if M. Paulus had understood the Chinese
Language, as he says he understood that of the Tartars, he had with more
Exactness set down the Names of the Cities and Provinces, and other
particulars, which he reports concerning that Empire. But it is no wonder he
should so often corrupt the Names, since we our selves, who upon our first
arrival applied our selves with all the industry imaginable to understand the
Chinese Letters and Language, after the Study of several Years were frequently
deceived and quite mistook some part of the words. So that we must not be
surpised if a Knight, who only minded his Military Designs, and to court the
Favor of the great Han, and only conversed with the Tartars, who for want of
Politeness are the greatest Corrupters of Words above other Nations, should
fall into the same Inconvenience. For he has corrupted Names in such a manner,
that they among us, who have the greatest Knowledge of the Language and the
Empire, have much ado to pick out the meaning of many of his Mistakes.
Nevertheless, by a strict Examination of the Situation of the Places, and other
Circumstances of his Relations, we at length find out what he intends.

Father Martin Martini, so famous for his Atlas of China, as witty and
ingenious as he was, could not exempt himself from committing the like Errors.
Insomuch, that we who have resided in this Empire for so many years, have found
it very difficult to understand the Persons and the Places of which he speaks;
especially in the Names that ought to terminate in M, and which he always ends
in Ng. For example instead of saying* Pekim, Nankim, Chekiam, Yumlie, Cumchim,
he always writes Peking, Nanking, Chekiang, Yeunglie, Cungching. Wherein he
must of necessity be deceived, because that manner of writing does no ways
correspond with the Chinese Pronunciation, which answers to that of our M. and
not of Ng* Nor will it avail to say, that the Germans pronounce I Am, open with
a soft production of the sound almost like Ng, because they express it somewhat
through the Nose; for that the letter M, whether pronunced open or close, has
always a much greater correspondence with the Chinese and Latin Pronunciation,
then the letters Ng. So much the more, because the Germans pronounce I Am final
open rather like In or En, then Im or Em. So that indeed this Reason might have
been in some measure pardonable, had the Father written in High Dutch, or only
to the Germans; But having writ in Latin and for the benefit of all Europe, he
ought to have conformed to the most exact and common Pronunciation.

Philip Cluverius in his sixth Chapter of his sixth Book, makes a doubt whether
the City of Kimsai* of which M. Polo makes mention in his sixty eighth Chapter
of his second Book, were the Court of the King of Tartary, or the King of
China. He also with good reason takes notice of the Hyperboles which M. Polo
makes us in describing the said City of Kimsai. For the resolving of which
Difficulties it will be necessary to observe, that instead of Kimsai, he ought
to have written Kimsu, the Master Court. For that Kim signifies a Court, and Su
a Master: The Court being as it were the Model of the Rest of the Kingdom.
Kimsai then, or Kimsu was the Court of the Princes of the Family of Sum, whom
the Western Tartars despoiled of the Kingdom in the time of M. Polo. A hundred
years after that Nankim and Pekim were the Courts of the Princes of the Family
of Mim, which of later Years was destroyed by the Eastern Tartars. Which being
granted, I answer, that Father Martin, to whom I refer the Reader for fear of
being tedious, has very well unravelled those Difficulties, and corrected the
Hyperboles of M. Polo, who like a Young man as he was, has enlarged many things
much beyond the Truth. Nevertheless as to the number of twelve thousand
Bridges, which M. Polo tells us there are in Kimsai, and which Father Martin
grants for a Truth, I cannot so easily give my consent. For besides that we
have seen the contrary, the Chinese themselves, who stuff their Writings with
so many impertinent particulars, would never have omited a circumstance of that
Importance. Also what M. Polo relates of the vastness of several Bridges under
which Vessels may Sail without striking their Masts is no way probable; since
it is not to be believed, that they should be all so ruined that there should
be no traces of such Structures remaining. Thus much I know, that a Famous
Chinese Author who has written a Treatise of the Grandeur of this Empire, and
of whom I shall relate many things hereafter, does not allow the City of Ham
Cheu, which is the same with Kimsai, above five considerable Bridges. Nor would
he have failed to have spoken of that extravagant height of the Bridges of his
Country, had there been any ground for his so doing. The rest that M. Polo
relates concerning this City is true, granting him only some Excursions and
Enlargements according to his Custom. But to clear all disputes concerning this
same City of Kimsai, more especially because Father Martini speaking of this
Ham Cheu in his Atlas, Fol. 109. varies in what he says of the Oriental and
Western Tartars, I shall here produce an extract which I took for this very
purpose out of the Chronicles of China.

To the end then that Family may be reckoned into the number of the Imperial
Families of this Empire, of necessity that Family must either have subdued the
whole or the greatest part of it. For if it has conquered no more then only two
or three Provinces, that Family is only called Pam-Chao, or a Collateral
Kingdom, nor is it to be admitted into the Direct Line of the Imperial
Families. Those then that we are now to speak of are of that Number.

In the year of JESUS CHRIST, 1200. A Captain of the Oriental Tar^ars that some
years since subdued this Empire made himself Master of the Provinces of Pekim
Xansi, and Xantum, which the yellow River separates from the other Twelve.
Thereupon he caused himself to be Crowned King, and Named his Family Tai-Leao.
Some Years after another Captain of the Eastern Tartars made War upon him, got
possession of his Kingdom, exterminated the Reigning Family, and called his Own
and his Kingdom Tai-Kinque, or the Kingdom of Gold, which continued till the
year 1260. At what time the other twelve Provinces were subdued by an Emperor
of the Family of Sum. Upon this some of his chief Ministers advised him to send
great Presents to the Grand Han, who had a little before subdued the Western
Tartars, and to desire his Assistance for the Expulsion of the Tartars out of
the three Provinces which they had Usurped. But others of his Counselors laid
before him the ill consequence of provoking that terrible Nation of the Western
Tartars, or molesting the Eastern, with whom they had for several years
preserved an Amicable Correspondence; withal, that it was no good Policy to
expel Tigres, and bring more cruel Lions into their Room. Nevertheless the
first Counsel, tho the worst, was followed: And the Grand Han was called in
with his Tartars, already the Vanquishers of so many Nations, who in a short
time exterminated the Family of Tai Kim and made themselves Masters of the
three Provinces. But so soon as they had finished that Conquest, perfidiously
they turned their Arms against the King of China, who kept his Court in a City
belonging to the Provinces of Honan, bordering upon the yellow River. This
Prince being terrified by the Neighborhood of those Barbarians fled in all
have to the City of Ham Cheu in the Province of the Che Kiam, where he settled
his Court. Of which the Han no sooner had intelligence, but he crossed the
yellow River, and after little or no resistance made himself Master of the
Provinces of Ho Nam, Nan Kim, and Che Kiam, and consequently of the Village of
Ham Cheu, which M. Polo calls Kimsai. Thereupon the King of China, fled into
the Province of Fo-Kien, and from thence into that of Quamtum, where having
Embarked himself with a design to seek out Foreign shelter, he suffered
Shipwreck in the Golf of the Island of Hai Nan, and there miserably perished,
so that all the rest of China submitted voluntarily to the Grand Har. This is
what I have taken out of the Histories of China, by which it is clearly to be
seen that Ham Cheu, and Kimsai are one and the same City. And that the word Tai
Kim does not signify a Mountain, there being no such thing in Tartary, as it
is imagined, but the Kingdom of Gold. Which is the Title that was formerly
given to the Oriental Tartars.

Notes and Explanations of the first Chapter.
P. 3. As we shall relate in it is due place.
THE Author, as has been already said in the Preface, not being able to finish
this Work, has not according to his promise made out the Original of the
Eastern Tartars. Nevertheless several Authors have made some mention of them,
as Father Martini in his History of the War of the Tartars, and in his Preface
to his Atlas of China: The Embassy of the Hollanders to Pekim. Father Adam
Schall in his Letters printed at Vienna in the year 1665. And Father Couplet in
his Chronology of China printed this year. By which Authors and particularly by
the two latter it appears, that it is not above a little while since the
Eastern Tartars, now Masters of China, have had any Kings, and that the
Original of those* Princes is so obscure, that as modern as it is, it is
altogether intermixed with Fables.

Father Adam reports that the Eldest of the Uncles of the Emperor Xunchi, the
Father of him that now reigns, had told him several times, that it was about
ten Generations since that three Nymphs or Goddesses called Augela, Chaugula,
and Foecula descended from Heaven to bath themselves in a River of Tartary.
That Foecula having discovered under her Cloths which she left upon the shore,
a sort of Nightshade or Herb called Alkakengi with red Fruit, devoured it with
such a greedy Appetite, that she became with Child. That her two Companions
returning to Heaven she remained upon Earth till she was brought to bed of a
Boy; which she suckl'd, and afterward left in an Island of the River, telling
him that she was returning to Heaven, but that a Fisherman would come and take
care of his Education, which happened accordingly. That this Child became a Man
of an extraordinary Valor, and that his Sons and Grand Children ruled this
Country. But that in the fifth Generation the People rebelled against this
Family, which they defeated and exterminated, all but one who betook himself to
flight. This Prince being close pursued, and not being able to run any farther,
sat himself down upon the ground despairing to save his life; At what time a
Mag-pye came and perched upon his head, and deluded his Enemies who took him
for the stump of a Tree, and not for a Man. And thus it is easy to see, as
Father Adam observes, that thus far the Relation is altogether Fabulous, and
clearly demonstrates that the Original of the Emperor of China is very obscure,
and has nothing of Illustrious or Renowned. That which follows is certain and
unquestionable. In regard the Person, such as he was, lived at the beginning of
this Age, and made himself sufficiently known by the bloody War which he made
upon the Chinese in revenge of the Death of his Father, whom the Chinese
Mandarins had caused to be murdered, and of other outrages committed against
his Nation. Father Adam says, that he was Lord of the Valley of Moncheu, which
Father Martini takes for a great City. The Emperor Van-lie gave him the
Government of that same Valley and the neighboring Countries, upon condition
he should defend them against the Incursions of the Oriental Tartars who were
divided into seven small Principalities. He was called Tiel Mini, and died in
the year 1628. His Son, a Person of more Wisdom and Moderation continued the
War till his death which happened in the year 1634. Cumte, his Son, in some
measure, completed the Conquest of the Empire of China; but died before he
obtained the possession of it in the year 1644. His Son Xunchi, at the age of
six years, was acknowledged Emperor at Pekim, and di'd in the year 1662.
Leaving for his Successor his Son Camtri the Monarch reigning at present. This
Catalogue of the Tartarian Princes of Father Adam's confirmed by Father Couplet
in his Chronology, by Father Rougemont in his Historia Tartaro-Sinica, and the
Embassy of the Hollanders, gives us to understand that Father Magaillans had
good reason to justify himself for saying, that the Tartars had neither any
King, nor any word to signify a King; seeing that it was but in this Age that
their Princes have derived their Original from a petty Captain of a Hord, or
chief leader of Banditi's or wandering Tartars.

Here we are farther to observe that Tartary which comprehends all the Nothern
Asia is divided by the Chinese into Western and Eastern. The Inhabitants both
of the one and the other, are for the most part wanderers with their Flocks and
Herds, and live in Tents. But the Western are incomparably more potent then the
Eastern, in regard they possess all that Country which lies between the extreme
part of the Province of Pekim and the Countries of the Mogul, the Persian and
the Muscovite; All which they possessed entirely in the Reign of Saint Lewis.
The Eastern Tartary reaches from the Country of Leaotum, beyond Iapon, and
comprehends the Province of Niuche, to the North of Corea; The Province of
Niulhan to the North of Niuche; that of Yupi to the East of Niuche; and the
Country of Y^co, to the North-East of Iapon, and to the East of Yupi. But these
Countries are poor and ill peopled; There being not above two or three little
Cities in them all; the rest is barren uncultivated, and full of Woods and
Mountains. Letter of Peter Ferdinand de Verbiest.
Nevertheless these Tartars are not a little formidable when they are united,
as being hardened to labor in a rigorous Climate, and almost always
ahorleback, and employed in hunting or busied in War. They made themselves
known by their incursions into China above two hundred years before the Birth
of Christ: And in the twelfth Age after the Incarnation they possessed
themselves of the Provinces of Leaotum, Pekim, Xensi, Xansi and Xantum. But the
Ancestors of the Tartarian Prince who Reigns in China, were so far from being
Masters of all the Eastern Tartary, that they were not Lords of all the
Province of Niuche, where, as has been said, there were seven or eight destinct
Sovereigns. And Father Adam observes that Tien^um Great Grand Father to the
Emperor Reigning at Present, when he entered into China, had not above eight
thousand men, which were soon increased by the concourse of the rest of the
Eastern Tartars, and an innumerable Number of the Western Tartars, which the
fame of his Victories and the noise of prodigious Booty drew to his Assistance.

P. 3. The Kingdom of Chahamalaha, whose Inhabitants are Mahometans, and which
borders upon the Province of Xensi.
This Name of Chahamalaha, is not to be found as I verily believe, in any Mapp,
nor in any other Relation; But I am persuaded by what our Author says of it,
that it is the same place which Father Martini calls Samahania; and which, as
he does, I take to be the Country of the Usbegs, or of Mavralnara, of which
Samarcand is the chief City: For that we know not of any other Kingdom of
Mahometans to the West of Xensi, where there are several considerable Cities,
Palaces and Houses artificially built, and good Architecture, store of Gold and
Silver-Plates and other things which the Chinese allow the Country of
Samahania or Samahan, by the report of Father Martini. Nor must we be
surpised, that the Chinese assure us that this Kingdom borders upon the
Province of Xensi; for that they never travel toward the West, nor have any
other knowledge of the Countries situated Westward, then what they learn from
the Information of the Caravans that come once in two or three years to trade
in China, under pretense of an Embassy. For the Merchants make use of that
Invention, to get leave to enter into China, which would be otherwise denied
them. They rendevouze in the Kingdom of Cascar, as you may find in the Travels
of Benedict Goez, inserted into the Relation of Father Trigaut. But formerly
and especially in the time of Tamerlan, who made Samarcand one of the chiefest
Cities in the World, they went for the most part from that City. And it is very
probable that those Merchants to give themselves the greater reputation,
assumed to themselves to be all of the Kingdom of Samarcand, and that the
Chinese, who want the Letter R, and easily confound C. with H, wrote Samahand,
instead of Samarcand. For the same reason also the Chinese observing the
Merchants arrive a Sucheu the last City of the Province of Xensi, and styling
themselves all Natives of Samahan or Samarcand, might readily believe that
Samahan bordered upon the Province of Xensi.

P. 3. Usangue.
This must certainly be the same Country which Father Martini calls Usucang,
and which is contained within the Kingdom which the Chinese call Sifan,
situated to the West of the Province of Suchuen, The Relation of Father Anthony
de Andrada calls it also the Country of Ussangue, and says that it is situated
to the East of the Kingdom of Tibet, twenty days journey from China.

P. 3. Father Antony de Andrada, etc.
Father Anthony de Andrada traveled twice into the Kingdom of Tibet. The
Relation of his Second Travels in the year 1624. with Father Concalo de Sousa
which was Printed at Lisbon in the year 1628. speaks very clearly of China. For
there we find, that it is not above twenty days journey from the Kingdom of
Ussangue or Ussang; and that Ussang is not above forty days journey from the
City of Caparange, where the King of Tibet keeps his Court, and where those
Fathers arrived from Agra in less then two months and a half, passing through
Sirinagar. As for Catai, in regard the People of Tibet are very ignorant, they
spoke of it very confusedly to Father Andrada; to whom they asserted that Catai
was a great City. By the way we may observe, that by that Relation and by the
Atlas of Father Martini, who in his History of the War of the Tartars tells us
also that the Province of Suchuen borders upon the Kingdom of Tibet, that the
Kingdom of Tibet is situated to the East of the Country of the Great Mogul, and
not to the North, where the most part of our Maps place it. So much the rather,
for that Father Benedict Goez in his Travels which he made always to the North
of the Empire of the Great Mogul; from the Country of the Usbegs traveling
continually Eastward as far as China.

P. 5. The Tartarian Alphabet which we shall give you in due place.
Father Magaillans, not being able to perfect his Work, has not given us this
Tartarian Alphabet. But it is to be found in the Grammar made by Father
Ferdinand de Verbiest, which will suddenly be printed at Paris.

P. 6. Mangi, or Mantzu, Barbarians.
Father Nicholas Longobardo in his Letter written from China 1598. and printed
in Latin at Mayence in 1601. tells us, that the Chinese called those of the
Province of Quamtum Mangi, that is to say, Barbarians. Manginos, that is,
Barbarous People, which confirms the opinion of Father Magaillans.

P. 10. Stone-Coal, and Stoves of China.
Almost all Authors that speak of China, agree that in the Northern Provinces
the cold is much more intense, then it ought to be, considering the climate,
and situation under the fortieth or forty second degree. They also speak of the
Stoves which are very Common, and built all alike in all those Northern
Provinces. See the Relation of Father Trigant l. 4. c 3. Father Semedo. Part 1.
c. 3. and Father Martini's Atlas in his Description of the Provinces of Xansi,
and Pekim, where he says that the two Mountains out of which they dig their
coal, are very near to the City of Pimko, and are called Kie, and Siu vu.

P. 12. That which causes M. Polo to commit these Mistakes, is this, that three
leagues, etc.
Father Martini in the Description of the Province of Pekim confirms this
conjecture in these words. The River Lu keu, which is also called Sangean,
passes to the South-West of the Royal City. You cross over a stately Bridge
where a man may count several Arches of Stone, it is plain that he speaks of the
River that runs to the West of Pekim, and the Bridge built over it, and that
this is that of which M. Polo makes mention. For that there is no great
difference between the name of Sangean, which Father Martini gives it, and that
of Sangean, or Buli Sangan, as M. Polo calls it. Father Greslon in his History
of China l. 3. c. 8. speaks of an Eastern Bridge, in these words; In the
Province of Pekim, there was a Bridge of an admirable Structure, above three
hundred paces in length, of which two Arches are broken. And Father Magaillans
tells the true reason of the fall of those two Arches the ninth of August 1668.
To which Father Greslon adds, That the rest of the Bridge fell the 26. of the
month of Aug. the same year. He says moreover that it was called Lo-Co-Kaio,
that it had been built a thousand years, and that it was not above six Leagues
from Pekim. The Fathers Rougemont and Intorcetta in their Relations confirm the
fall of the rest of the Bridge the 26 of August 1668. three thousand years
after it was first laid: And the first of those Fathers tells us, that the same
Bridge was three hundred and sixty paces in length.

P. 15.
These Reasons of Father Magaillans are so much the stronger, because his
Opinion is conformable to the practice of all those that have wrote concerning
China, both before and after him, as Father Adam, a German; Father Greslon, a
Frenchman; Father Semedo, an Italian; Father Rougemont, a Flemming, etc. And
for that Father Martini has not been followed by any but by the Author of the
Embassy, who has either copied or borrowed from Father Martini, all that he
speaks concerning China, except the Gests of the Ambassadors from Camtum to
Pekim, and their Negotiations. So that it is no wonder the one has imitated the
other in his Orthography. Father Greslon also in the Preface to his Relation,
proves against Father Martini, that the Chinese words ought to be pronounced as
our Author tells us.

P. 16.
We could add several other Reasons to prove that Catai is no other then China
deduced from the Silk, many Fruits, Plants and Animals, which according to M.
Polo breed and grow in China, and are not to be found in any part of Tartary.
But this has been so often bandy'd about for these hundred years, and all
Authors who have writ upon this Subject, have proved it by so many different
Arguments, besides what our Author alleges, that it would be but time ill
spent to labor any more about it. Besides that there is no person now that
questions, or can doubt of it, unless he would be wilfully blind; I shall only
observe that the reason why men might formerly be deluded was this; because
that when the Western Tartars undertook the Conquest of China, there were two
Emperors: The one was the Real Chinese Emperor of the Family Sum, who possessed
the twelve Southern Provinces; the other was the King of the Eastern Tartars of
the Family Tai-kin, who possessed the three Northern Provinces, the Country of
Leaotum, and the Eastern Tartary. These two Emperors were vanquished one after
the other, and their Kingdoms subdued between the years 1225. and 1280. This
being granted, it may be readily apprehended, how easy it was for the Oriental
Authors, and such as had heard talk of those Conquests, to believe that the
real Emperor of China was Master of all China, as now we know it; and that the
other Emperor of the Family Tai-kin, whose Empire was more Northerly, lived in
Tartary to the North of the great Wall; where for that reason our Ancient
Geographers have placed Cambalu, and many other Cities and Countries.

CHAP. II. Of the Extent and Division of China: Of the Number of the Cities and
other walled Towns; And some other particulars observed by the Chinese Authors.
IT is now eighteen years since Father Francis Fierrado Vice-Provincial of
China, and afterward Visitor of Iapan and China, ordered me to write the
History of this Empire, and the Progress of the Gospel, there first begun to be
preached now fourscore and thirteen years ago; But the Employments of the
Mission, and the Persecutions we have undergone, have hindr'd me from going on
with it. The Fathers Nicholas Trigaut a Flemming, Alvaro Semedo a Portuguese,
Martini Native of Trent, Antony Govea, and Ignatius de Costa in their yearly
Relations have treated very largely upon this Subject. But the Beauty, the
Grandeur, and the Antiquity of this Empire, are such copious Subjects, that
though there has been much already written concerning them, yet there remains
much more to be said. Wherefore I thought it my duty to set down in this place
the chiefest Observations which I have collected together

China is seated almost at the utmost Extremities of Asia toward the East. It
lies under twenty three degrees from North to South, from the Fortress of Cai
Pim, placed upon the Frontiers of the Province of Pekim in forty one degrees of
Latitude to the Meridional point of the Island of Hai Nan in eighteen degrees
of Elevation, and A to the South of the Province of Quamtum. So that the length
of China from North to South, according to the Chinese Books, is five thousand
seven hundred and fifty Li, or Furlongs. Which makes

402 Spanish or Portugal Leagues at 17 to a degree.
575 French Leagues at 25. to a degree. ^45 German at 15. to a degree. 1380
Italian Miles at 60. to a degree. 5750 Li or Chinese Furlongs at 250. to a
degree.
From the Point of Nim Po, a Seaport Town in the Province of Che-kiam, where
the Portugals were formerly wont to trade, and which Ferdinand Mendez calls
Leam Po, to the extremity of the Province of Suchuen in a straight Line from
East to West, it is accounted

297 Spanish and Portugal Leagues. 426 French Leagues. 255 German Miles. 1020
Italian Miles. 4080 Chinese Furlongs at 240 to a degree.
But if you would have the length of China where it is longest, you must take
it from the last place to the North-west of the Province of Leaotum called
Caiyven, to the last City of the Province of Yunnan called Cin tien Kiun min
Fu. Take it thus, and then the longest length of this Empire will b^

525 Spanish Leagues. 750 French Leagues. 1800 Italian Miles. 8400 Chinese
Furlongs, at four and a half to a Mile of Italy.
The truest breadth of China, to take it from Tam Chan, the most Easterly place
of the Country of Leao tum, and which joins to the Kingdom of Corea, to the
Place called Tum tim to the West of the Province of Xensi is

350 Spanish Leagues. 500 French Leagues. 300 German Miles. 1200 Italian Miles.
5400 Chinese Furlongs.
There are fifteen Provinces in this Empire, which for their largeness, their
Riches and Fertility may well be called Kingdoms. Which the Chinese rank in
this Order according to their Antiquity and Precedence. Pe kim, Nan kim, now
called Kia^m Nan, Xansi, Xantum, Ho nan, Xensi, Che Kiam, Kiam si, Hu quam, Su
chuen, Fo Kien, Quam tu^m, Quam si, Yunnan, Quei cheum. The Country of Leao tum
might also well deserve the Name of a Province by reason of its extent; but the
Chinese include it within the Province of Xan tum. The Provinces that lie upon
the Sea are Pe kim, Xan tum, Nan kim, Che Kiam, Fo Kien, and Quam tum. Those
that border upon Foreign Kingdoms are Pekim, Xansi, Xensi, Su chuen, Yunnan,
Quamsi. The Midland Provinces are Honan, Hu quam, Kiamsi, Quci cheu. By which
it appears that Cluverius trusted too unwarily to false Relations, when he
reckons up Eighteen Provinces in China, and among the rest the Kingdom of
Cochinchina. For though that Kingdom, and that of Tum Kim were formerly subject
to China, 'twas but for a very few Years, and it is a long time ago since they
threw off that subjection. There are several Islands also belonging to China;
as the Great and Little Lieu Kieu; Tai Van, which the Portugueses call Formosa,
where the Hollanders had a Fortress which was wrested out of their hands by a
Chinese Pirate some Years since, and where they lost a great number of Men, and
great Guns, and a great quantity of Goods. Hai Nan and Hiam Xan, where stands
the City of Amagao, or Macao, upon the Southern Promontory of that Island, and
a great number of others, some Inhabited, others quite Desert. The Kingdom of
Corea is not an Island adjoining to China, as Cluverius believes, but a great
Promontory of the Firm Land, extending it self from the North to the South.
Neither is Xam Hai an Island, as Martini writes in his Atlas, and marks it in
his Map; but a Fortress so vast and so well fortisi'd by Art and Nature, that
it may compare with the best in Europe. It stands upon the firm Land near the
Sea, between the Province of Pe Kim and the Country of Leao tum.

The Places Walled in, through the whole extent of this Empire, amount to the
number of Four Thousand Four Hundred and Two; and are divided into Two Orders,
the Civil and Military. The Civil Order comprehends Two Thousand Forty Five
Walled Towns, that is to say, One Hundred Seventy Five Cities of the first Rank
which the Chinese call Fu: Two Hundred Seventy Four of the Second Order, which
they call Cheu^, One Thousand Two Hundred Eighty and Eight Cities which they
call Hien, Two Hundred and Five Royal Hosteries, or Places of Entertainment,
called Ye; and an Hundred and Three Courts of Guard, or Royal Hosteries of the
Second Rank, which they call Cham Chin.

Among the Cities and Towns of this Empire I reckon several, seated in the
Provinces of Yun Nan, Quei cheum, Quam Si, and Su chuen, which however pay no
Tribute to the Emperor, nor yield him any Obedience, but are governed by
particular and absolute Princes. These Towns are for the most part so environed
with high Mountains and steep Rocks, as if Nature had taken a particular Care
of their Fortification. Within which Mountains lie Fields and Plains for
several Days Journeys; where are to be seen Cities both of the first and second
Rank together with many Towns and Villages. The Chinese call these Lords Tu
Su, or Tu Quon, that is to say Mandarins of the Country: For that as they
believe there is no Emperor of the World but the Emperor of China, so they
are conceited that there are no other Princes or Lords but such as they to whom
the Emperor gives that Title. Nor do they give the Title of Mandarins of the
Land or Country to those, but to distinguish them from others by a kind of
Contempt of Foreigners. The People that are subject to these Lords speak the
same Language with the Chinese, although besides that, they have a particular
Language also. Their Manners and Customs are somewhat different from those of
the Chinese: nevertheless their Complexion and the Shape of their Bodies are
altogether alike; but as to their Courage, you would think them to be quite
another Nation. The Chinese stand in fear of them; so that after several
Trials which they have made of their Prowess, they have been forced to let them
live at their own liberty, and to consent to a free Traffic and Commerce with
them. In the Relation which I have made of that Famous Tyrant Cham Hiem Chum,
concerning which Father Martini wrote to me upon his return out of Europe, that
he had left a Copy of it in the Secretary's Office at Rome, and another in the
College of Conimbre, where it was publicly read, I give an account of what
be^ell one of these Sovereign Lords. I shall here repeat it in few words, to
the end the Puissance of this Empire may be the better understood, where they
make little account of the Forces of these Lords, though they are very
considerable, and that their Dominions are seated in the heart of the Provinces
of China.

The Tyrant Cham Hien Chum not enduring there should be any one that refused to
yield him Obedience in the Province where he had caused himself to be Crowned,
and where he vaunted that he had laid the Foundations of his Empire, sent a
Command to one of these Lords whose Principality lay nearest to his Court, to
come and attend his Person, acknowledge him his Sovereign, and pay him that
Tribute which was due to him. The Lord sent him back for Answer, that neither
he nor his Predecessors had ever paid any Tribute to the Emperor of China;
which Answer put the Tyrant into such a Chase, that he immediately sent an Army
to force him to Obedience. But his Army was in a short time deseated by the
Prince. Cham Hien Chum thereupon raised another Army more numerous then the
first, and marched himself in person to enter the Territories of the Prince;
who being a person of great Courage, and favored by the Advantage of the
Places, gave the Tyrant Battle, overthrew him and forced him to retire, enraged
at his ill Success, yet more animated to Revenge then ever. For that reason he
raised a Third Army, and gave the Command of it to his first adopted Son called
Sum Co vam, of whom I have sometimes made mention in the Annual Letters of this
Mission. He was a Person Learned, Prudent, Courageous, and so affable and good
natured, that many times he effected those things by his Prudence and
Sweetness, which his Father could not bring to pass with all his Armed Force
and Cruelty. And indeed he knew so well to manage the haughty Spirit of the
stubborn Prince, that he not only obliged the Prince to acknowledge his Father
for his Sovereign, but to assist him with Men and Money to complete his
Conquest of China. He carried him in his company to the Court with all his Army
consisting of Forty Thousand Men, all picked and chosen Young Men clad in the
same Colored Habit, and Armed with a sort of Cuirasses and Head-pieces of
quilted Cotton. Upon his arrival the Prince Mustered his Army in the place
appointed for those kinds of Exercises in every City of China. The Tyrant on
the other side received him with many Extraordinary Caresses and Marks of his
Favor and hearty Affection, and invited him publicly to a solemn Feast the
next day, where the Prince failed not to attend him. But in the midst of the
Music, the Comedy and Jollity of the Banquet, the Persidious and Cruel Tyrant
ordered a most rank and nimble Poison to be presented him in a Glass of Wine,
which dispatched him in a few Moments. Which done, he caused his whole Army
ready drawn up for that purpose to surround and put to the Sword all the Forces
of the unfortunate Prince, and not to let a Man escape. Which was executed with
so much the more ease, because the poor People not mistrusting any such
Treachery were surpised without a Leader, without Arms, and all in disorder.
And of this accident I my self was an Eyewitness; which I therefore here
relate to show the Grandeur of this Empire.

Nor ought any Man to scruple the belief of what I have here related concerning
the Number of the Cities and Towns far more numerous then what Father Martini
sets down, in regard I take in all those belonging to these Petty Sovereigns,
whose Principalities, though they do not acknowledge the Emperor, are
nevertheless seated in the middle of his Empire, in the Four Provinces which I
have named. I have also included the Cities and Towns of Leao tum, and of the
Province of Yun Nan, which the Chinese excessively addicted to their own
Formalities, never put into their Ordinary Catalogues, but in the particular,
which I have said they make of the Raigns of certain Families.

The Chinese have caused to be Printed a Public ^inerary which contains all
the Roads and Passages as well by Water as by Land, from Pe kim to the utmost
parts of the Empire. This Book the Mandarins buy, when they go from Court to
their several Governments and Employments at a distance, as also all other
Travelers, to the end they may be able to know the Roads, the distance of one
place from another, and the Furlongs of every Journey. In this Book all the
Royal Highways in the Empire are divided into Eleven Hundred Forty Five Days
Journeys, every one of which have a certain place where the Mandarins are
Lodged and Entertained at the King's Expenses when they go to their several
Employments. But when they deprive them of their Charges, they lose also the
Privilege of Royal Entertainment. These Eleven Hundred Forty Five Places are
called Ye or Chin, that is to say, Places of Entertainment and Attendance. And
this Name is given to them not without reason. For there they wait for the
coming of the Mandarins with as much care and circumspection, as if they were
upon their Guard against an Armed Enemy. Of these Places there are Seven
Hundred Thirty Five in the Cities of the first and second Order, in the
Frontier Town, and in the Castles in the heart of the Empire. Two Hundred and
Five in the Places called Ye, and Three Hundred and Three in the Places called
Chin. Both the one and the other were formerly built in those places where
there were no Towns, and may be called Towns of the second Rank; because they
are all Walled, have Mandarins for their Governors, and because there are some
which are larger and better peopled then many Towns and Cities. There are a
Hundred and Two which have no Walls, but such as are very large and very
Populous. The Day before the Mandarin sets forward, a Courier is dispatched
away before with a little kind of a Trencher which the Chinese call Pai, upon
which is written the Name and Employment of the Officer, with his Name and Seal
at the bottom. So soon as that is seen, they cleanse and make ready the Palace
where he is to Lodge. Which preparations are more or less sumptuous, according
to the dignity of the Mandarin, of Diet, Porters, Horses, Chairs, Litters, or
Barges, if he be to go by Water, and in a word of whatever it be that is
needful. In these Hosteries likewise are entertained proportionably all sorts
of other Persons whether Chinese or Foreigners, to whom the King is pleased to
grant that favor; the convenience of which I found my self, when I was sent
some years ago to Macao. In these places the King's Couriers take what they
have occasion for, either for speedy have or refreshment. There they find
Horses ready saddled; but for fear they should not be always ready, a furlong
or two before the Courier arrives at the Hostery or Inn, the Courier gives
several loud Bangs upon a Basin called Lo, which he carries behind his back,
and then they saddle a Horse for him with all the speed imaginable: So that he
presently Mounts and leaves his other Horse behind him without any farther
trouble.

The Kingdom of China contains Eleven Millions, Five Hundred and Two Thousand
Eight Hundred Seventy Two Families, not including the Women, Children, Poor
People, Mandarins employed, Soldiers, Batchelers of Art, Licentiates, Doctors,
Mandarins dispensed with from Service, such as live upon the Rivers, the
Bonzes, Funuchs, nor any that are of the Royal Blood; for they only reckon
those that cultivate the Land and pay the King's Rents and Tributes. So that
there is in the whole Empire of China Fifty Nine Millions, Seven Hundred
Fourscore and Eight Thousand Three Hundred Sixty Four Males. Thus much for the
Civil Order of China.

The Military Order contains Six Hundred Twenty Nine large Fortresses of the
first degree, and of great Importance, either upon the Frontiers, as the Keys
of the Empire, to keep out the Tartars, or upon the Consines of the Provinces
against Rebels and Robbers. The Chinese call them Quan, and that of Xam hai,
of which we have spoken already, is one of the Number.

There are Five Hundred Sixty Seven Fortresses of the Second Rank, which are
called Guei in the Chinese Language. And that same place called Tien ^im g^ei,
or Fortress of the Well of Heaven, of which Father Martini speaks in his Atlas,
p. 36. is of the same number. By which you may guess at the rest of the
Fortresses of the second Rank. They reckon Three Hundred and Eleven Fortresses
of the Third Rank, called So. Three Hundred of the Fourth Rank called Chin,
which retain the same Name and the same signification with those of the fifth
Civil Order; and a Hundred and Fifty of the Fifth Rank, called Pao.

There are a Hundred Fortresses of the Sixth Rank, called Pu; and lastly, Three
Hundred of the Seventh Order, called Chai. These latter are of several sorts;
for some of them stand in the fields, and serve for places of Refuge for the
Countrymen, who retire thither with their Cattle and Goods, when any Tartars,
Robbers or Rebels harrass the Country: as also when the Emperor's Armies are
upon their March. Others are seated upon the Precipices of steep Mountains, to
which there is no other ascent but by steps cut out of the Rock, or by the help
of La^ders made of Ropes or Wood, which they remove as they please themselves:
And these Fortresses generally have no Walls because they need none. Others are
seated upon Mountains, which are nevertheless approachable: and therefore on
that side where they lie open they are guarded with a double or treble Wall:
And both of these and of the other before recited I have seen several in the
Provinces of Su-chuen and Xensi. By this account it appears, that the fortified
Places amount to the number of Two Thousand Three Hundred Fifty Seven, which
being added to those of the Civil Order, make up Four Thousand Four Hundred and
Two. Besides which, there are within and without the great Walls that environ
China above Three Thousand Towers or Castles, called Tai, of which every one
has its proper Name. In those Towers are kept Guards and Watches all the Year
long, which give the Alarm so soon as the Enemy appears, in the Day time by
Erecting a Banner upon one of the highest Towers, and in the Night by setting
up a Lighted Flambeau. Should we reckon these Towers or Castles among the
Fortified Places of which these latter would make an Eighth Order, there would
be then in all Five Thousand Three Hundred Fifty Seven.

About a hundred and Fifty Years ago a certain Mandarin of the Superior
Tribunal of Arms, compiled two Volumes which he Dedicated to the Emperor, and
which he Entitled Kiu pien tu uxe, the Practice of the Mapps of the Nine
Frontiers. He meant by that the Nine Quarters into which he had divided the
Great Walls that Environ a part of China for four hundred and five Portuguese
Leagues together, which make 23 Degrees and ten Minutes from East to West, from
the City of Cai^ yeun, seated at the Extremity of the Country called Leao tu^m
to that of Can so, or Ca^n cheu, seated upon the Borders of the Province of
Xensi. And this too must be understood of the Fortification running in a
straight Line; for should we take in all the Turnings and Windings of the
Mountains and Walls, the whole without question would amount to above five
hundred Portugal Leagues. In those Books he represents in three Maps all the
Passages of the Mountains that are accessible, and in a hundred and twenty Nine
other great Maps, Thirteen Hundred twenty seven Fortresses great and small,
which he says are all necessary to prevent the inroads of Tartars. So that if
the Chinese were not so Negligent, so Cowardly, so Covetous, and persidious to
their Prince as they are, the Tartars could never have surmounted those Walls
nor got footing within those Castles, so well disposed in all Places requisite,
and so strongly Fortified as well by Nature as by Art. And indeed it is
apparent as well by their own Histories, as by what we have seen in our time,
that the Tartars could never enter into China, but when either the Cowardice or
the Treacherous Avarice of the Commanders opened them a Passage. This the
Tartars knew and therefore offered them a Moiety of their Plunder and Booty,
and were no less punctual in their performances then they had been liberal in
their promises upon their Return into Tartary. For the continuance of which
Trade they always left a Passage open for these Inroads, which the Tartars
failed not to make twice a Year; nor could all the Rigorous punishments which
the King inflicted upon several of those Traitors deterr the rest from their
disloyal Traffic with his Enemies. Or if he at any time did restrain some
within the bounds of Duty, then the Tartars enlarged their Offers. But then
such was the eager desire of those persidious Officers to heap up Wealth, that
at length they surrendered into the hands of a small Number of half Barbarians
the Richest and most Populous Kingdom in the World.

In the same Book you see the number of Soldiers that keep Guard upon the
Frontiers, to the number of Nine hundred and two Thousand Tartars are upon
entering into China, are innumerable; there being Nine hundred fourscore and
nine Thousand an hundred sixty seven Horses appointed for those Forces. The
Emperors Expenses for the Payment of the Officers and Soldiers amounts every
year to five Millions, thirty four Thousand seven hundred and fourteen Livers.
Were these Books printed, and their Maps Engraven with that skill and exactness
as Maps are done in Europe they would be the Admiration of all curious Persons.
It were to be wished that some one would take the pains to give us a lively
Representation of the Walls, Fortresses, and other the most remarkable things
in this Empire.

Now by what we have said concerning the Number of Soldiers appointed to Guard
the Walls and Frontiers against the Tartars, an easy judgment may be made of
the Number of those that are employed upon the Borders of the Provinces, in the
Cities, Towns and other walled Places of the Provinces, of which there is not
any one that has not a Garrison. They amount to the Number of seven hundred
sixty seven Thousand nine hundred and seventy Men, which in time of Peace Guard
and attend in the day time upon the Mandarin's, Ambassadors, and other Persons
whose Expenses the King defrays, and in the Night time keep Guard about their
Barques, or their Lodgings. The Horses also which the King keeps as well for
the Service of his Troops, as for his Posts and Messengers amount to five
hundred sixty four Thousand and nine hundred. But when there happens any
Revolt, or any War, the Armies which rendevouze from all the Provinces are
almost innumerable.

And now because my time is short, and my occasions oblige me to Brevity, I
shall here set down the Principal Wonders of this Empire, of which the Author
before mentioned gives a larger account.

There are in the fifteen Provinces three hundred thirty and one Famous
Bridges, not much inferior to that of which we have already spoken; and to
those which are described by Father Martini, and M. Polo in their Descriptions
of China. And therefore I shall say no more upon this Subject, seeing that if I
were to describe every Structure in particular that is considerable, it would
require the labor of several Volumes.

There are also in China two thousand fourscore and nineteen Mountains, Famous
^her for being cut into the shape of Monstrous Idols, (as is that which I have
mentioned in the Relation of my Travels from the Province of Kiam nan or
Nankim, to that of Su Chuen, and which I sent into Europe in the year 1643.) Or
for their Fountains, their particular Plants, and their Minerals of great
Virtue; or for their extraordinary strength, and other Prerogatives which
distinguish them from others.

Their Famous Waters, such as are their Lakes full of Fish, their hot
Fountains, no less Medicinal than Wonderful, the large Streams and Navigable
Rivers are to the number of one Thousand four Hundred Seventy and Two.

There are one Thousand Fourscore and Nineteen Pieces of Antiquity to be seen,
as Statues, Famous Paintings and Vessels of high Price, and greatly esteemed.
One Thousand one Hundred Fifty Nine Towers, Triumphal Arches, and other such
like Magnificent Pieces of Workmanship, Erected in Honor of Renowned Princes;
Men famous for their Valor or their Learning, or of Widows and Virgins
renowned for their Chastity and Virtue. Two hundred seventy two Libraries
embellished with sundry Ornaments, stored with great numbers of Books, and
built at vast Expenses.

There are likewise to be seen seven Hundred and Nine Temples Erected by the
Chinese at several times in memory of their Ancestors and considerable for
their Largness and the Beauty of their Architecture. For it is the Custom of
the Chinese to testify an extraordinary Affection and Obedience to their
Parents, especially after their Death; and therefore to make this manifest to
the World, they cause to be built at great Expenses most stately Halls,
wherein, instead of Images and Statues, they set up in Cartredges the Names of
their Ancestors and Parents. Also upon certain days of the Year appointed by
the Family to which the Temple belongs, they assemble all together in these
Halls, where they prostrate themselves upon the ground in token of Love and
Veneration: Which done, they offer Incense, and afterward make a spendid Feast
at several Tables richly set Forth, and adorned with an extraordinary Decency,
and a great Number of Dishes and Viands well dressed.

They reckon about four Hundred and Fourscore Temples of Idols very Famous and
much frequented by reason of their Riches, their Magnisicence and the Pretended
Miracles and Fables which they report concerning their Idols. In these Temples,
and in others of which the Number through the whole Empire is incredible, no
less than three Hundred and Thousand Bonzes have their Habitations. I must
confess I could not conceive there should be so great a Number; and therefore I
put the Question to a Mandarin of the Tribune of Ceremonies who was one of my
friends, whether it were true or no ^ For that the Bonzes are under the
Jurisdiction of this Tribunal and receive their Licenses from it, which they
call Tutie. This Mandarin upon a diligent search informed me, that within the
City and Court of Pekim only there were Six Thousand Six Hundred Sixty eight
Bonzes unmarry'd, called by them Ho xam, and five Thousand and Twenty Two
Married, and which like the former have also their Pass-ports and Licenses; by
which said he, you may judge of the number dispersed over the whole Empire.
Besides that you are farther to observe that within the Number of three Hundred
and fifty Thousand mentioned by the Chinese Historian, are only comprehended
the Bonzes which have Licenses: But in regard that among six or seven Bonzes
not above one or two generally have Licenses, should they all be reckoned into
the Number, they would certainly amount to above a Million.

There are moreover six Hundred Fourscore and five Mausoleums, Famous for their
Architecture and their Riches. For in China all Persons are prohibited under
great Penalties to bury their dead within the Walls of their Cities, or of any
other place whatever. So that after they have put the Corpse in the Cossin, all
the Chincks and Jointures of which are stopped up with Bitumen to prevent the
scent of the dead Body, they leave them in the House where they died for some
Months and many times for two or three years together, the Magistrate in all
that time having no power to to constrain them to an Enterrment. It is also
lawful, when a Person dies at a distance from his own House, to transport his
Body from one City or Province to another; as it is usual for the Richer sort
and the Mandarins to do; provided nevertheless that they do not bring their
dead Bodies through the Cities, but round about by the Walls. These Coffins,
which are generally of some sort of precious Wood, cost many times two hundred,
and sometimes above a thousand Crowns. And the Children of the Deceased are so
obsequious as to cause these Cossins to be carried for several days, and
sometimes for a whole months Journey together, at an extraordinary expense, to
lay them in the Sepulchers of their Ancestors. And indeed the Sepulchers of
their Grandees are very magnificent Structures, and certainly deserve ^oth to
be seen and Admired. For they are very fair and large Houses all vaulted,
erected upon a Mountain or plain, wherein they also presently put the Coffin,
and cover it with as much Earth as will make a little Hillock which they adorn
and plant in wonderful Order and Symmetry with Trees of several sorts. Before
the Hillock they Erect a large Altar of white Polished Marble, upon which they
place a great Candlestick of Marble, Steel or Tin, and upon each side another
Candlestick of the same materials. Then upon each side, and in several files,
you shall see ranged in very good order a great number of Figures of Mandarins,
Gentlemen, Pages, Eunuchs, Lions, Horses Saddel'd, Camels, Tortoises, and other
Creatures. Whose Actions and Movements are represented with that lively
briskness, that you would think them alive indeed, the Chinese being very
happy in their manner of expressing in dead Sculpture the most lively Passions
of the Mind, as Joy, Fear, Anger, Melancholy, and the like.

They reckon Three Thousand Thirty Six Men famous and renowned for their
Virtues, their Knowledge, and their Prowess, their Loyalty toward their
Princes, their Obedience toward their Parents, or for some good Work or Action
performed for the benefit of their Country. They also reckon Two Hundred and
Eight Virgins and Widows, who for their Chastity, their Courage, and Heroic
Actions, are thought worthy of Eternal Memory, and are Celebrated in their
Stories and Poesies, as being honored by the Chinese with Titles,
Inscriptions, Temples, and Triumphal Arches.

Lastly, There are in China Thirty Two Princes or Petty Kings Palaces, much
less then the Emperors, but which resemble those in form, and in the disposal
and contrivance of the Halls, Chambers, Gardens, and all other Parts according
to the Model of that Palace where the Emperor keeps his Residence.

Notes upon the Second Chapter.
A. P. 32.
IN the Portuguese Original, just against this part, the Author has set down
these words in the Margin. A Ly, contains a Hundred and Sixty Paces; a Pace,
Six Cubits; a Cubit, the length of this Margin. A Ly, is a Chinese Furlong; a
Cubit is a Chinese Foot. I measured likewise exactly the length of the Margin
in the Original, which, as the Author says, is equal to a Chinese Cubit, and
found that it was to the Foot of Paris as Seven to Eight; that is to say, that
the Foot of Paris exceeded the Chinese Cubit, a Seventh part of that Cubit. But
in regard it is very requisite to know the proportion of these Measures, we are
to understand, that in Geography all Itinerary Measures are ^o be reduced to
one degree of a great Circle of the Earth.

There has been great Labor and Industry employed in all Ages, and among all
the more Eminent Nations to determine the Measure of one of these degrees; but
with so little success, and so much uncertainty, that you shall hardly meet
with two Geographers that agree in this particular, as may be seen in their
Works, and more especially in the reformed Geography of Father Riccioli, a
Jesuit, who has made a large Collection of those varieties of Opinions.

'^would be to no purpose to dive into the Causes of both their Errors, or of
the great difficulty to determine precisely the measure of a degree. Let it
suffice therefore to say, that at length the Royal Society of Sciences at
Paris, composed of the most Learned Men, and most Ingenious Astronomers and
Geometricians of Europe, has brought this difficult undertaking to perfection
with so much Caution, Care and Exactness, that we cannot believe that future
Ages will be able to add any thing to their Inventions. Here then is the
Proportion or Measure of the great Circle of the Earth, according to the
Measures of several Countries.

The Measure of the Great Circle of the Earth.
Fathoms of Paris -- 57060 Paces of Bolognia in Italy -- 58481 Perches of Rhine
of 12 Foot to each -- 29556 Parisian Leagues of 2000 Fathoms -- 28 Middle
Leagues of France of about 2282 Fathoms -- 25 Sea Leagues, or an Hour's running
-- 20 English Miles, 5000 Foot to each -- 73 1/200 Miles of Florence of 3000
Fathom -- 63 1/10
The Circumference of the Earth.
Fathoms of Paris -- 2054 1600 Leagues of 25 to a degree -- 9000 Sea Leagues --
7200
The Diameter of the Earth.
Fathoms of Paris -- 6538594 Leagues 25 to a Degree -- 2864^ Sea Leagues --
2291 59/71 The Measure of a Degree -- 57660 Fathoms Of a Minute -- 951 Fathoms
Of a Second -- 61 Fathoms
Supposing the Foot of Paris of 1440 parts.
The Foot of the Rhine or Leyden has -- 1390 The Foot of London -- 1350 The
Foot of Boloyne -- 1686 The Fathom of Florence -- 2^80 Value of a Degree --
57060 Fathoms Of a Minute -- 951 Of a Second -- 16 Fathoms
By these Measures it is apparent, that it is to no purpose to say that a Degree
contains so many Foot of France or Spain, or so many Italian or German Miles,
if you do not at the same time tell the Number of Fathoms and Feet which those
Miles and Leagues contain, and the Measure and Proportion of the said Fathoms
and Feet.

This being granted, it is no wonder that the Itinerary Measures have been so
uncertain in Europe till now, that they should be much more uncertain in China,
more especially considering that the Chinese are very Ignorant in Geometry,
and very little skilled in Astronomy, and for that the Missionaries can hardly
find time, and requisite Conveniences to measure a Degree, and examine the
Proportions between the Measures of China and those of Europe. However they
have already rectified the Map of this great Kingdom very much, by several
observations, and illustrated many things. But still they are frequently
obliged to have recourse to the Chinese Authors, ^s Father Magaillans
acknowledges in this place, because the Bigness and Proportion of the Cubit,
and Furlong with the Measures of Europe are still unknown.

Father Riccioli upon the Authority of Father Martini believes the Chinese
Cubit, to be equal to the Ancient Roman Foot of Vilalpandus; but I find by the
Measure marked down by Father Magaillans, that it is les^ by about a
Seventeenth part.

The Fathers Massei, Trigaut, and Semedo, will have the Li, or Chinese Furlong,
to consist of Three Hunderd Chinese Paces of Six Cubits each, and the Fathers
Martini and Magaillans, assert it to contain Three Hundred and Sixty.

Father Trigaut and Father Semedo allow Five Chinese Furlongs to an Italian
Mile of Sixty to a Degree. Father Martini Four, and a Sixth part. Father
Magaillans in the computations which he makes of himself allows Four Furlongs
and a half to every Italian Mile.

Father Trigaut believes that there ought to go Three Hundred Chinese Furlongs
to One Degree. Father Semedo Two Hundred Fifty Five. But the Fathers Adam,
Martini, and Magaillans, admit no more than Two Hundred and Fifty; which
according to the judgment of the two last, make Fourscore and Ten Thousand
Chinese Paces, or Five Hundred and Forty Thousand Chinese Cubits or Feet. But
as I have said already, both the Ancient as well as the Modern Geographers,
were all in a Mist, before the Academy of Sciences found out the true Measure
of a Degree. So that all that is to be done, till the Jesuits which the King
has sent to China, send us the exact Itinerary Measures of that Country, is to
follow the Opinions of Martini and Magaillans, conformable to the Measure of
the Chinese Cubit, marked down by the latter, and according to the largeness of
a Degree measured by the Gentlemen of the Academy of Sciences. We know well
that there are in China Two certain Measures; which are the Che or Chinese
Cubit or Foot, and the Puu or Pace, or the Chinese Fathom. The Che is to the
Foot of Paris as Seven to Eight And so a Degree containing Three Hundred Forty
Two Thousand Three Hundred and Sixty Foot of Paris, will be equal to Three
Hundred Fourscore and Eleven Thousand Two Hundred Sixty Eight Feet, or Che of
China, and Four Sevenths. Now according to all the Authors that have writ of
China, the Puu or Chinese Pace contains Six Che or Cubits. But the Puu is to
the Fathom of Paris as Seven to Eight; so that Fifty Seven Thousand and Sixty
Fathoms of Paris, contained in one Degree, amounts to Sixty Five Thousand Two
Hundred and Eleven Puu's, Paces or Fathoms of China, and 3/7.

The Fathers, Adam, Martini, and Magaillans, who seem to be the most exact,
allow Two Hunderd and Sixty Furlongs to a Degree; so that there remains no more
to be known, then how many Puu's or Paces every Furlong contains. Now it cannot
contain Three Hundred and Sixty, as those Fathers say; for then a Degree would
contain Fourscore and Ten Thousand Paces, or Seventy Eight Thousand Seven
Hundred and Fifty Fathoms of Paris; and by consequence would be too large by a
Third Part. So that of necessity they must have allowed too many Paces to a
Furlong. Which makes us believe that those Fathers trusted to the Calculations
of the Chinese, or that Father Magaillans had recourse to Martini's Atlas: or
that it might be an Error of the Press, which might easily mistake 3 for 2.
Which last Opinion is so much the more probable, for that if instead of
allowing Three Hundred and Sixty Puu's or Chinese Fathoms to a Furlong, you
admit no more then Two Hundred and Sixty, and then Multiply them by Two Hundred
and Fifty Furlongs, the Product will be Sixty Five Thousand Puu's or Chinese
Paces. Which approaches so near to Sixty Five Thousand Two Hundred and Eleven
Puu's or Paces, to which I have equaled the Fifty Seven Thousand and Sixty
Fathoms of Paris, which compose a Degree according to the Measure of the
Academy of Sciences, that the difference hardly amounts to a Furlong.

These things being granted, it follows that a Degree of the Great Circle of
the Earth amounts to
Feet of the Guild Hall of Paris 342360 Geometrical Paces each of Five Parisian
Feet 68462 Fathoms of Paris, Six Foot each 57060 Che or Chinese Feet or Cubits,
which are to the Foot of Paris as Seven to Eight 391268 Puu or Chinese Paces or
Fathoms, each of Six Che, or Feet, and which are to the Geometrical Paces, as
10 to 10, or 42 to 40, and to the Fathom of Paris as 7 to 8. 65211^ (...), of
Furlongs at 260 Puu's or Paces, and which amount to about double the Furlongs
of the Greeks and Romans 250 Miles, 60 to the Degree, at 4 1/6 Furlongs each,
and 1086^ Puu's or Paces, or more truly 1086 300/420 60 Sea Leagues of an Hour
at 12 1/6 Furlongs, or at (...) Puu or Paces each 20
These Computations may serve to rectify the Measures which we meet with, as
well in this Relation as in others, till the Jesuits sent by the King to China,
give us the exact measure of the Cubit or Foot, of the Pace or Fathom, and the
Furlong of the Chinese, whence it will be easy to gather the measure of a
Degree of a Great Circle in China.

B. p. 36. In the Relation which I have made of the Exploits of that famous
Tyrant Cham Hien Chum, etc.
From this Relation it is that Martini has taken what he writes of Cham Hien
Chum, in his History of the War of the Tartars, as he acknowledges himself.
There, he confirms what our Author tells us of some Independent Princes in
certain Provinces of China, by another example of a Sovereign Princess, in the
Province of Su chuen, who came in Man's Apparel to the Succor of the Chinese
Emperor, in the stead of her Son, who was an Infant. He relates that she
performed with her own hand many Valiant Exploits; as well against the Tartars,
as against the Rebels. Father Couplet also in his Chronology makes mention of
this Amazon or Independent Princess.

The great Encomiums that Magaillans gives in this place to Sun co vam, one of
the Adopted Sons of the Tirant Cham hien chum may perhaps awaken the Curiosity
of the Reader to understand what became of him at length. To which purpose I
have here set down what I met with in the History of Father Rougemont, who
alone makes mention of him.

After the Cruel Tirant Cham hien chum, was slain and his Army defeated by the
Tartars, Sun co vam retired with a small Force into the Province of Junnan,
which he valiantly defended for some Years against the Tartars. For he defeated
them in several Encounters, and won so high a Reputation by his Valor, and by
his Glorious Atcheivements, that he was declared Emperor by his Army in the
Year 1650. But at that time there was an other Emperor of the Royal Race,
called Yum Lie, Grandchild to the Emperor Van Lie, who Died in the Year 1620.
This Young Prince had been acknowledged Emperor in the *Provinces of Quam si,
and Quei cheu, and in a great part of Quam tum. But in the Year 1650, the
Tartars having Reconquer'd all the Province of Quam tum, fell upon that of Quam
si, and constrained Yum Lie, to fly for shelter into the Province of Yun nan,
where Sun co vam was sole Lord and Master. The Friends and Favorites of Sun co
van^ advised him to put the Fugitive Emperor to Death, and to maintain himself
in the Sovereign Power that had been conferred upon him. But he absolutely
resus'd so unworthy an Action, and more then that, declared that he was
resolved to acknowledge Yum Lie, whose Birth had given him an undoubted Right
to the Crown. In short he acknowledged the Fugitive Emperor, and all his
Officers and Soldiers followed his Example. His Forces were very numerous and
well disciplined, and there was great hopes that so brave a Captain would have
resettl'd the Affairs of China, and driven out the Tartars. But the Vices of
the Emperor, who took no care of his own Affairs, as being wholly addicted to
Wine and Women, prevented the Success. For this bad Management of himself
brought Yum Lie in^o Contempt among his Subjects; and Sun co vam repenting
perhaps that he had resigned the Empire to him, left him only the Name of
Emperor, with wha^ was requisite for his own and the subsistence of his Family.
However this harsh Usage of the Emperor displeased several of the Commanders of
the Army, and among the rest, one of the chiefest among them called Li ^im Que;
before the best Friend that Sun co vam had, and his Brother by Adoption, as
being both Adopted by the Tirant Cham hien chum. Thereupon the Quarrel between
these Two Great Persons grew to that height, that they broke Friendship, parted
their Forces and fought one against the other, till at last in the heat of the
Combat Sun co vam's Soldiers deserted him and went over to the Enemy; so that
he had much ado to escape by flight with only Three Hundred Men that continued
faithful to him. Upon which, despairing ever to resettle the Affairs of China,
he surrendered himself to the Tartars; who having his Virtues in high Esteem
and Veneration, advanced him Laden with Honors to the Dignity of a Petty King.
Some time after, Yum Lie, bereft of the Assistance of so great a Captain, was
in a short time by the Tartars deprived both of his Empire and his Life, the
Prowess of Li tim not being sufficient to withstand their Power. Nevertheless
that the Eldest Son, the Wife and Mother of the same Emperor had been Baptized
in the Year 1648. by Father Andrew Kassler a Jesuit, the Son being named
Constantine. Thus much I took out of the History of Father Rougemont.

C. P. 43. In the same Book you may see the number of Soldiers that keep Guard
upon the Frontiers, etc.
There is some difference among Authors, concerning the number of Soldiers in
China, which nevertheless is very extraordinary. Father Trigaut asserts that
there are above a Million; Father Martini, near a Million, and by the report of
Father Semedo, Father John Rodriquez, who was a person very Curious, and one
that had Traveled much in China, assured him, that by what he had met with in
the Chinese Books, that the number of Soldiers in the several Provinces of the
Kingdom amounted to Five Hundred Fourscore and Fourteen; and Six Hundred
Fourscore and Two Thousand Eight Hundred Fourscore and Eight to Guard the great
Wall against the Tartars; not including the Soldiers which belong to their
Fleets. But we ought rather to give Credit to ihe Relation of Father
Magaillans, a more Modern Writer, and who took what he asserts out of a Book
presented to the Emperor himself. However, we are to consider that these
Soldiers are not like to ours in Europe, neither for Courage nor Discipline, as
being no other for the most part then the Country Militia. For Father Semedo,
speaking of the Soldiers of the Provinces, says they are of ^ittle worth; and
that we are not to think they follow no other Employment then that of being
Soldiers. ^or that they are generally Inhabitants in the places where they are
Enrolled; and follow their Trades, some Shooe-makers, others Tailors, etc. And
Father Trigaut in his Second Chapter tells us, that to the end we may kn^w the
number of the Soldiers to be incredible, we ought to observe that almost half
the People of the Three Northern Provinces are ^oll'd i^ ^he Service of the
Emperor. (...)* Magaillans (...) firm^ the same thing, where (...) ^ays that
the Ex^e of the Emperor every Year for Nine Hundred a^ Two Thousand and Fifty
Four Soldiers that Guard the W^* including Officers and all, amounts but to
(...) Millions Thirty Four Thousand Seven Hundred and Fourteen Livres, which is
not above half a Pistol a Year for every Man, which could never maintain them,
did they not follow their Trades to support themselves and their Families. And
for that very reason we are not to think such a number of Soldiers incredible,
which the Chinese Historian Cited by Father Magaillans, allows as well for the
defense of the Frontiers, as the inner parts of the Provinces, which amounts to
Sixteen Hundred Seventy Thousand and Twenty Four: More especially considering
the vastness of the Empire numerously Peopled, and that the Soldiers have
neither Courage nor Discipline. And therefore Father Martini tells us that the
Tartars are better Soldiers then the Chinese, but neither of them comparable
to the Soldiers in Europe.

CHAP. III. Of the Antiquity of the Kingdom of China, and what a high Opinion
the Chinese have of it.
THis Kingdom is so Ancient that it has preserved its form of Government, and
has continued during the Reign of Twenty Two Families, from whence have
descended Two Chinese hold for certain and unquestionable. For should we rest
satisfied with what they look upon to be very probable, it would be Four
Thousand Six Hundred and Twenty to this present Year 1668, since this Kingdom
began. The Chinese however have Three Opinions concerning this matter. Some of
their Books six the Original of their Kingdom some Hundreds of Thousands of
Years before the Creation. But though the Vulgar sort believe this to be true,
yet the Wiser and more Learned sort, hold those Books for merely Fabulous and
Apocryphal, more especially since Consucius has condemned that Error. The
Second Opinion makes King Fohi to be the Founder of this Kingdom, who was the
first that Reigned toward the Consines of the Province of Xensi the most
Western part of China, and afterward in the Province of Honan, seated almost
in the middle of the Empire. So that according to their Books it was Two
Thousand Nine Hundred Fifty Two Years before the Birth of Christ, that this
Prince began to Reign, about Two Hundred Years after the Universal Deluge,
according to the Version of the Seventy Interpreters. All the Learned Men hold
this Opinion to be probable, and many among them take it to be unquestionable.

The Third Opinion is, that the Foundations of this Kingdom were laid about
Four Thousand and Twenty Five Years ago by a certain Prince whose Name was Yao.
Which last Opinion, being held among them as an Article of Faith, should any
Chinese refuse to believe, he would be looked upon as a Heretic, and as such a
one be severely punished. So that should the Preachers of the Gospel but once
testify either by Writing, or by Word of Mouth, that they make a doubt of it,
that alone would be sufficient to shut the Door upon our Sacred Religion, and
cause us all to be sentenced to Death. The very bare suspicion, without any
Foundation, of a Man's Incredulity in that point, being a sufficient ground for
Banishment. For this reason it is that the Fathers of the Mission have obtained
leave from the Holy See to stick to the Version of the Seventy, approved by the
Church in the Fifth General Council; as well for that the Two latter Opinions
are very probable, as to avoid the forementioned Inconveniences and many others
which may be easily imagined. And indeed it must be acknowledged that there is
not any Kingdom in the World that can boast a Train of Kings so Ancient and so
well continued. Those of the Assyrians, the Persians, the Greeks, and Romans,
have had their Periods; whereas that of China continues still, like a great
River that never ceases rolling along the streams that fall from its first
Fountain.

This long continuance and other Excellencies of China of which we have already
spoken, and of which we are to speak in the Progress of this Relation, infuse
into the Chinese a Pride most Insupportable. They put the highest value
imaginable upon their Empire and all that belongs to them; but as for
strangers, they Scorn 'em to the lowest pitch of Contempt, and all the
advantages of their Wit and Learning, though they themselves have little or no
Knowledge. Which is not so much to be wondered at, since Pride proceeds from
Blindness and Ignorance. In their Maps they allow a vast Extent to China, but
represent all other Kingdoms round about it, without any Order, Position, or
any other Mark of good Geography; small, contracted, and with Titles Ridiculous
and Contemptible. As for Example; Siao gin que, or the Kingdom, the Inhabitants
of which are all Dwarfs, and so little, that they are constrained to tie
themselves several in a Bunch together for fear of being carried away by the
E^gles and Kites. Niu gin que, or the Kingdom where all the Inhabitants are
Women, who Conceive by looking upon their Shadow in a Well, or in a River, and
bring forth none but Girls. Chuen sin que, or a Kingdom where the Inhabitants
have all a Hole in their Breasts, into which they stick a piece of Wood, and so
carry one another from place to place. A Kingdom where the Inhabitants have
Bodies like Men, and Faces like Dogs. A Kingdom, where he Inhabitants have such
long Arms that they reach down to the ground: with many other such Descriptions
of the same Nature. In short, they represent the Neighboring Kingdoms, such as
are those of the Tartars, the Iapanners, of the Peninsula of Corea, and those
other that border round about upon China, under the Title of the Four Barbarous
Nations. They say, that besides China, there are Seventy Two Kingdoms, which
they paint all very Diminutive in the middle of the Sea, like so many
Nutshells, and their Inhabitants all Deformed and Monstrous with Gestures so
ridiculous or terrible, that they resemble rather Apes and Wild Beasts then
Men. Of latter times having understood something of Europe, they have added it
to their Maps, as if it were the Island of Tenariff, or some Desert Island. And
therefore it was, that the Viceroy of Quam tum, in the Year 1668, after he had
spoken of the Embassy of the Portugueses in a Memorial which he sent to the
Emperor, added these words; We find very plainly, that Europe is no more then
only Two little Islands in the middle of the Sea.

They divide the Heaven into Eight and Twenty Constellations, and China into so
many Quarters, to every one of which they allow one of these Constellations,
and call them by their Names, not leaving so much as one for the rest of the
Kingdoms. They give to their own most Lo^ty and Magnificent Titles, but to
Foreign Countries most Barbarous, Disagreeable and Scornful Names; on purpose to
Exalt their own Empire, by Disgracing all other Kingdoms.

At what time I resided with Father Lewis Buglio in the Capital City of the
Province of Su chuen, there was a Persecution begun against the Christian
Religion at the Instigation of several Thousands of Bonzes who assembled
together from all parts of the Province, and the same time accused us in all
the Tribunals of the Province, more especially before the Tribunal of Crimes,
which is called Began chan su, the President of which made answer to the Petition
of the Bonzes in this manner,

If these Strangers remain in their Habitations without stirring forth, or
teaching new Inventions, Chum que chi ta vu so pu yum, that is to say, This
Kingdom is so vast, that it is able to contain both the Natives and the
Foreigners, there being room enough for as many more; but if they Teach any new
Doctrine different from the Sacred and True Doctrines which we profess in this
Great Empire, or if they go about to surprise and delude the People, let them
be Punished with every one Forty Lashes, and Expelled the Province.

Father Nicholas Longobardo having discoursed for some time concerning the Law
of God to some of the Eunuchs, and with those solid Reasons and Arguments, that
it was apparent enough, that they were inwardly convinced, They gave no more
then the following Reply,

Chum que chi vai huan yeu tao, that is to say, What is this that we see, what
is this this that we hear? Is it possible that without the Limits of this
Empire there should be any Rule, or any Path whereby to arrive at true Virtue?
Is there any other Belief, or any other Law? And I have many times observed,
that when I have been discoursing with the Learned concerning the Christian
Religion, and the Sciences of Europe, they asked me whether we had their Books?
To which when I answered No, they replied altogether surprised, wavering and
scandalized, If in Europe you have not our Books and our Writings, what
Learning or what Sciences can you have? However these Insidels deserve both to
be pitied and excused, since it is impossible to imagine the high Idea which
not only the great Lords and Learned Men, but also the Vulgar People have
conceived of this Empire. And certainly, besides that our Nature enclines us
always to put a Value upon our selves and all that belongs to us, the
extraordinary Grandeur and Advantages of this Kingdom contribute very much to
puff up the Minds of the Chinese with foolish Imaginations, and unparalled
Pride.

Notes upon the Third Chapter.
A. P. 59.
THE Chronology of China is of extraordinary Importance, by reason of its
Antiquity: and I believe that neither the Portugueses nor Castillians have in
all their Voyages made a more considerable Discovery. The Annals of the
Chaldeans and Egyptians might perhaps have stood in Competition with those of
China, and perhaps those of the Tyrians also, and some other Oriental Nations,
of which Josephus makes mention. But they are lost a long time ago, as well as
the Histories of Berosus the Chaldean, and Manathon the Egyptian, of which we
have no more then only some few fragments of little or no use. The Greeks and
Romans have left us nothing of certainty before Herodotus, for that reason
called the Father of Historians. Who nevertheless did not write till about Four
Hundred and Fifty Years before Christ. And if we go back to the Original of the
Olympiads, they did not begin till about Seven Hundred Seventy Seven Years
before Christ. But the Cycles of the Chinese, and their Cronologies, begin Two
Thousand Six Hundred Four score and Seventeen Years before Christ, under the
Reign of Hoam ti: And two Thousand nine Hundred Fifty two Years, according to
the sentiments of those that stick to the second Opinion, and acknowledge Fo hi
for the first Emperor of China. And though we should rest satisfied with the
third Opinion, which makes Yao the first Emperor of China, their Chronology
would begin two Thousand three Hundred Fifty seven Years before Christ; that is
to say, fifteen Hundred sixty nine years before the first Olympiad. And indeed
I know no reason why any man should refuse to give Credit to this Chronology,
in regard it is well pursued and well circumstanc'd: that it is less fabulous
than the first times of the Greek and Roman History; and for that there are set
down therein several Eclipses, and other Astronomical Observations which
perfectly agree with the Computations of our most learned Astronomers in these
latter Ages; as I have seen in some Manuscripts written upon this Subject. To
which we may add that almost all the Parts of the Chinese History have been
written by Authors that lived at the same time. As for Example, the Acts of
King Yao, are written by the Secretaries of Xun, his Successor. The History of
Xun, and his Successor You, was compiled by Authors then living, and is
contained, together with that of King Yao, in the two first Parts of the most
Ancient and venerable Book among the Chinese, called Xu Kin. It is divided
into six Parts; of which the four last contain one part of the History of the
Second and Third Imperial Family. Nor is there any doubt to be made either of
the Antiquity or truth of the two first Parts of the Book Xu kin, seeing that
Confucius who lived Five Hundred and Fifty Years before Christ, so often makes
mention of it, and has collected with great industry several authentic Pieces
that contain several particulars of the Lives and Government of the first Kings.

Another Philosopher, called Lao Kiun, Confucius' s Contemporary, as also
another Author more Ancient then He by two Hundred Years, whose name was Tai su
lum, often quote these Ancient Histories. Confucius also wrote himself a
History of several Wars of China for the space of two Hundred Forty and one
Years; which he begin at the Forty ninth Year of the Emperor Pim ^am, the
Thirteenth Prince of the Third Family called Che^; that is to say, 722 Years
before the Birth of Christ, since which time there have been a great Number of
Historians in every Age, which the Chinese still preserve, and out of which
they have compiled General Histories, of which there is one of several Chinese
Volumes in the Kings Library.

To this we may add that the certainty of this Chronology is confirmed by many
circumstances conformable to the Holy Scripture, which are not to be found in
any other History: as for Example, the long life of their first Kings, like to
that of the Patriarchs in the time of Abraham. Thus they tell us, that Fo hi
Reigned a Hundred and Fifty Years; Xin nun, his Successor, a Hundred and Forty,
Hoam ti lived a Hundred and eleven Years: Xao hao that succeeded him a Reigned
a Hundred, Ti co a Hundred and Five, Yao, a Hundred and Eighteen, Xun his
successor, a Hundred and Ten You, a Hundred Years: after whom there was nothing
extraordinary in the Age of the Emperors. We find also that Fo-hi began to
Reign in the Province of Xensi, the most Westerly part of all China, which
shows that either he or his Father came from the West where Noah and his
Children remained after the Deluge. That his Kingdom was but of a narrow
extent, and the number of his Subjects but small; so that he might seem to be
rather the potent Father of a Family like Abraham, then a King or an Emperor.
That he and his Subjects lived upon Herbs and wild Fruits, drank the Blood of
Beasts, and clothed themselves with their skins. That his Successor Xin nun
avented the Art of Tillage, and many other such like Circumstances. The
greatest part of these Passages are to be found in the History of China by
Martini, in the Chronology and Prefaces of F. Couplet, Printed at Paris with
tee works of Confucius; and in several parts of our Author, chiefly in the
Fifth and Sixth Chapters.

It may be objected, that this Chronology does not agree with the Vulgar
Translation of the Bible. But besides that God has not vouchsafed us the Holy
Scripture to make us Learned but Virtuous; and so there may have happened some
omission, or mistake in the Dates; it may be answered that the question about
the Continuance of the World after the Deludge is not yet decided; that their
Chronology agrees with the Translation of the Septuagint, which is authentic
and received by the Church as well as the Vulgar. But this is not a place to
enlarge upon this Subject, they who desire to know more may consult the Book
which Father Pezeron, a Barnardine has newly Printed upon this Subject.

Nor can it be said that the Fathers have by agreement juggl'd up this
Chronology: For we find they have spoken truth in the Rest of their Relations;
that they make no scruple to correct one another when they are mistaken, as you
may see by our Author in several places: That the Jacobins, Augustinians and
Franciscans who have had several quarrels with the Jesuits in reference to
their Mission, agree with them in this particular, and never accuse them to
have erred in their Chronology. And lastly, that the Hollanders who have sent
several Embassies into China, and who have several Thousands of Chinese at
Batavia, never reproved the Jesuits for any mistake upon this occasion. On the
other side they put a great value upon Martini's Works, which are printe in
Holland, as also China illustrated by F. Kirker.

CHAP. IV. Of the Letters and Language of China.
Although the Egyptians vaunt themselves to have been the first that ever made
use of Letters and Hieroglyphics; yet certain it is that the Chinese had the
practice of Letters before them. All other Nations have had a way of Writing in
common, consisting of an Alphabet of about Four and Twenty Letters, which have
almost all the same sound, though differing in shape. But the Chinese make use
of Fifty Four Thousand Four Hundred and Nine Letters, which express what they
signify with so much Grace, Vivacity and Efficacy, that you would think them
not to be Characters, but Voices and Languages that spoke, or rather Figures
and Images that represent and express to the Life what they signify; so
wonderful is the contrivance of their Letters. For proof of which, I shall here
set down a Paragraph of a Treatise which I composed concerning the Chinese
Language.

The Chinese Letters are either Simple or Compounded. The Simple Letters are
made of Lines, Points and Folds, as (...) sin, (...) mo, (...) tu, (...) chu.
The Compounded Letters are formed of several Simple Letters put together, as
(...) xu, (...) chu. The Letter xu signifies sincere, sincerity, and is
composed of the Letter (...) in, which signifies, as; and the Letter (...) sin,
which signifies a Heart; for that the Countenance and Words of a sincere Man
are like his Heart.

The Letter chu signifies a Pillar or Column, and is composed of the Letter
(...) mo, which signifies a Tree Wood, or a piece of Timber, and the Letter
(...) chu, which signifies a Lord or Master; because the Pillars are as it were
the Masters of the House, and the Props that support it. And because a Forest
contains several Trees, the Letter (...) lin, which expresses this word, is
composed of two (...) mo. When the Forest is very thick it is expressed by the
Letter (...) sen, formed of three (...) mo. And thus by what we have said, you
may judge of several other Contrivances which are very numerous in the
composition of the Chinese Letters, which have so much Force and Efficacy to
explain, as also to persuade what they signify, that many times it happens
that the change of one Letter in a Process is enough to cause the Party
accused, or the Accuser, to lose his Estate or his Life.

Nor will it be amiss in this place to examine whether the Chinese Letters be
not Hieroglyphics, or no?

In the first place I am apt to believe, if we consider their first Original,
that without doubt they are Hieroglyphics For that the Ancient Letters which
the Chinese say were made use of in the first Ages of the Empire, were the
Images and Figures, though imperfect, of the things visible which they signified.
For example, the Ancient Letter, which signified the Sun was this* ge, and that
which is now in use is made thus (...) ge. The Letter which signified the Moon
was made after this manner (...) yue, but now thus (...) yue. The Letter which
signified the Ancient Foundation of any thing, had this Figure (...) puea, but
the Modern Letter is shaped thus (...) puen, and so of the rest. By which it
may be seen that many of the Ancient Letters were Figures that represented the
things which they signified; and by consequence that a part of the Chinese
Letters are Hieroglyphics.

In the second place the same thing may be said of the Modern Letters
considered in themselves. For that the greatest part of them are composed of
simple Letters; of the signification of which they retain something always. For
example, all the Letters that any way relate to a Woman are composed of the
Letter niu, which signifies a Woman, and of some other Letter. Thus the Letter
ciu, which signifies, that a Man Marries, or takes a Woman, is composed of the
Letter ciu to take, and the Letter niu, a Woman. The Letter Kia, which
signifies that a Woman Marries, is composed of the Letter Kia, which signifies
a House or Family, and the Letter niu, which signifies a Woman. Which is the
same thing as to say that a Woman is in her House or Family. For that the
Chinese holds that a Married Woman is in her Husband's House or Family, and
not in her Father's. By these Examples of the composition of their Letters a
Man may see, that they are Hieroglyphics, since they represent to the
Imagination the thing which they signify with so much grace, and after so
ingenious a manner.

In the third place it is the nature of Hieroglyphics not to be the natural
figures of the things which they signify, but only to represent them, either
naturally, or by the Institution of Men. Now all the Chinese Letters are either
natural figures, as the Ancient representations of the Sun, the Moon, and the
like; or else figures appointed to signify something, as are all those which
are appointed to signify something that has no figure, as the Soul, Beauty,
the Virtues, the Vices, and all the Actions of Men and Beasts.

Fourthly, It cannot be said that our Letters are in like manner
Hieroglyphics: Because there is not one in particular that represents or
signifies any thing but only when it is joined to another. Whereas every
Chinese Letter has its proper signification, and still preserves it though joined
with others. For example, in the Letter Lim which signifies a Bell; for it is
compounded of the Letter Kin which signifies Metal, and the Letter Lim which
signifies to Command; in regard there is no way more easy to command then by
the sound of a Bell. By which it is evident that these two Letters in the
composition preserve their particular signification.

Fifthly, In regard the Chinese Letters are not simply Lines or Characters, but
figures appointed to represent or signify something, it follows of consequence
that they are not simple Letters like ours, but Hieroglyphics. Where we are to
take notice that these Hieroglyphick Letters which extremely help the Memory to
remember them, and contribute much to know and distinguish what they signify,
in regard that every Genus and every Species has a distinct Letter which is to
be found in all those that signify the things contained in the same Species.
For example, all those Letters that signify those things which have any
Relation to Fire, infallibly contain in their composition the Letter Ho, which
signifies Fire. So the Letter cai, which signifies Calamity, is composed of the
Letter mien a House, and the Letter ho Fire, for that no greater misfortune can
befall a Man then to have his House burnt down. The Letter hoam is composed of
the Letter hoam which signifies a great King, and the Letter ho or Fire,
because there is nothing in the World that has more Splendour and Luster then a
King. And so it is in other things that have any Relation or Resemblance to
Fire. The Letter tem which signifies a Mountain of hard Rocks, serves also for
Stairs or Ladders. The same observation is also to be made in all Letters that
belong to Mountains. And what we have said of these two Species, is to be
understood of all others. These Reasons and these Examples plainly demonstrate,
not only that the Chinese Letters are Hieroglyphics, but the neatness and
subtilty of the Wit of the Chinese.

The Language and Letters of the Chinese have been invented with a wonderful
deal of Contrivance; in regard they are all Monosyllables, as, Pa, Pe, pi, po,
pu. Pam, pem, pim, pom, pum. Ta, te, ti, to, tu. Tam, tem, tim, tum: and so of
the rest. There are also several other Monosyllables, of which the Chinese
make no use, as Ba, be, by, bo, bu. Ra, re, ri, to, ru. Pom, tom, mom, nom. So
that the number of their words considered in themselves, is not above three
Hundred and twenty; but if they are considered with their differences and
distinctions, there are are enough to form a perfect Language. For example, the
Syllable Po, taken after eleven several manners, makes eleven several Words,
and signifies eleven different things. And indeed, it is a wonderful thing,
that every Monosyllable should be a Noun, Pronoun, Substantive, Adjective,
Adverb and Participle; that it should be a Verb, and signify the Present,
Imperative, Subjunctive and Infinitive; the Singular and Plural with their
Persons. The Present, Imperfect, Perfect, Aori^s, and Future Tenses. These
varieties proceed from the manner of Pronunciation in varying the Voice, the
tone or accent, which is either soft or strong, Grave, Acute, or Circumflex; as
also in observing or not observing the Aspiration. The difference of Accents in
Pronunciation is known by the diversity of the tones of the Voice. For example,
the simple Accent or Tone is when we pronounce with a smooth and equal Voice;
which we mark with this simple and equal Figure. -- We express Aspiration with
this Mark, (...), of which the Greeks also made use to signify their
Aspiration. All this is to be seen in the following Example of eleven manners,
acording to which the Syllable Po may be varied. (...). When this Syllable is
pronounced with an accent smooth and equal, (...) signifies Glass. With a Grave
(...) signifies to boil, with an Acute (...) signifies to winnow Corn or Rice.
With a Circumflex (...) signifies sage or Prudent, and liberal. With a close
Circumflex pointed at top Po signifies to prepare: When pronounced with a
Circumflex charged and aspirated, (...) signifies an Old Woman: with an equal
accent aspirated, (...) signifies to cleave or break: with an Accent level and
aspirated (...) signifies stooping: with an acute accent elevated and
aspirated, (...) signifies never so little, or almost; with a Circumflex open
and aspired (...) signifies to Water: With a close Circumflex aspirated and a
point above, (...) signifies a Slave or Captive.

In the Treatise of the Letters and Language of China; which I composed for
those that come to Preach in this Empire, I have explained at large these
eleven manners of Pronunciation, which are very intelligible by what goes
before, and what follows. However what I have here said is sufficient to show
the Contrivance of the Language, which having no more than so small a number of
Monosyllables, is yet so copious and so expressive; for it unites, changes and
intermixes them after so many various manners, and those so eloquent, that
there is nothing can be more wonderful; as you may see in the following
example. The Letter mo^, being alone, signifies a Tree, a piece of Wood, or the
proper name of a Family, etc. But in Composition it comprehends a great number
of other significations. Mo^ cu^m, is the name of several Saints, which as the
Chinese pretend, never die, but fly from one Wood or Mountain to another. Mo^
to signifies the Clapper of a Bell. And because it serves to make People hear,
the Chinese have very elegantly applied the name of Mo^ to^ to Masters,
Doctors and Preachers of the Faith, because that by their Voices, their Writing
and Examples they cause People to hear and learn, according to the words of the
Scripture, In omnem terram exivit sunus eorum. For this reason it is, that the
Chinese give the Title of Mo to, by way of Excellency, to Cum fu ci us, for
that he taught the natural Law of the Ancients, and is Master and Doctor of
that Nation. Mo^ leao signifies a quantity of Timber prepared for Building. Mo^
tria^m, is the name of a certain Odor. Mo ngeu, signifies by Chance: as also
certain Figures or Puppets, which the Chinese carry when they accompany their
Dead. Mo kin, is the Name of a certain flower that blows and spreads in the
Morning; but in the Evening withers and falls. Which the Chinese aptly make
use of in the Composition of their Letters, to express the short endurance and
inconstancy of worldly Felicity. Mo puen signifies a wooden Bowl. Mo tien a
Scholar of the College Royal. Mo signifies a Tree, and tien Heaven, as much as
to say, a Scholar of the College Royal, is like a Tree planted in Heaven. Mo
qua signifies a Quince; a sort of Fruit, which only grows in the province of
Xansi. The Chinese never eat it, but make use of it in Physic only. Mo kie
signifies wooden Shoes. Mo lan, Bars or Grates. Mo cien a Wedge of Wood. Mo
quai, a Batoon or Cudgel. Mo no a Man of few words. Mo quem a Batoon, or an
impudent Person, or a Porter. Mo hia, a Chest or Coffer. Mo siam a Court
Cupboard. Mo you, a wooden Instrument like a Fish, which the Bonzes play upon
when they say their Prayers, or beg Alms. Mo ul a Mushrom. Mo ciam or Mo cum, a
Carpenter. Mo nieu literally signifies Cows of Wood; and Metaphorically an
invention for the carrying of great Burdens: alluding to a certain Person, who
as the Chinese say, formerly made cows of Wood so artificially, that they
moved of themselves and carried great Burdens. Mo nu, a sort of small
Orainges. Mo nun the name of a precious Stone. Mo sim, the Planet Jupiter. Mo
kiun an enchasing, also a hook. Mo mien Cotton. The Syllable mo may be thus
joined after several manners, which I omit for brevity sake. So that as we, out
of four and twenty Letters, form all our words, by placing them after several
manners, in like manner the Chinese form all their words and discourses by
variously intermixing their Syllables one with another. And this they make it
their business to do with so much Perspicuity, Grace, and Significancy that in
some measure they equal the Greeks and Latins. At the end of the Treatise of
the Chinese Letters and Language, which I have already mentioned, I have
Collected Alphabetically all the Theological and Philosophical terms, which our
Fathers made use of in the Books which they composed for the Chinese. And I
have observed, that there are a great number of words that express their
Signification much more happily and easily then ours: so curious and eloquent
is that Language.

It may be demanded of me perhaps how it can be that one and the same Word
should have so many significations and how they who understand them can
distinguish them? To which I answer, that the variety of Signification arises
from the various couching of the Monosyllables together, as we have showed in
the Syllable Mo^, and the difference of the Accents and Tones, as we have
demonstrated in the Syllable Po. This distinction is so natural to the
Chinese, that without making the least reflection upon the tones or accents,
they readily understand all the different significations of the same
Monosyllable. I say without the least hesitation or reflection. For that indeed
the People know not what either tones or accents mean, which are only
understood by the Poets, and our Fathers that travel into China, who having
acquired that Knowledge, come to understand the Language with Ease, which else
they could never do without an extraordinary deal of Trouble. We are beholding
for this curious and profitable observation of the tones to F. Lazaro Catanco.
And I have endeavored to explain it by the Comparison of a Musician, who by
labor and skill has acquired a readiness to know and express the six tones,
ut, re, mi, fa, sol, la, which another Man born with necessary abilities,
naturally expresses and distingnishes without the help of Rules or Art. It does
not follow nevertheless that the Chinese sing out their words when they speak,
as one of our Fathers of Macao imagined; or that they carry a tablet about
their Necks, upon which they write down what they would say, when we do not
understand them, as I was made believe when I first traveled into the Empire.
Or that the Chinese cannot whisper a Man in the Ear, as once I thought,
imagining it was necessary for them to exalt their Voices to express their
tones and accents. The contrary to which may be easily evinced by this Example.
Should I say in Europe that there was a difference of tone in the Syllable to
of the Latin words, totus and totaliter, perhaps I should hardly be believed:
and yet there is nothing more certain. For in totus, to is pronounced with a
clear and strong Voice, by opening the Lips; but in totaliter, the same
Syllable is pronounced with a weaker sound, and with the Lips more close. So
likewise in the Chinese Language, the Syllable to pronounced with an acute and
elevated Accent has the same sound that to in totus, and signifies slothful or
to fall; in regard a slothful Man seems as if he were tumbling every step he
takes; but to in the Chinese Language pronounced with a Circumflex marked with
a Point, has the same Sound with to in totaliter; and signifies to study, or a
solitary Person; because that a Man must be retired that will read or study to
advantage. The Chinese Language has many other Qualities and Advantages that
show the Wit and Industry of those that invented it. But I pass them over in
silence for brevities sake.

However I cannot forbear to assert, that the Chinese Language is more easy
then the Greek, the Latin, or any of the other Languages of Europe At least it
cannot be denied me but that it is much more easy then the Languages of those
other Countries where our Society is employed in Missions: which is an
Advantage not a little considerable. Nor is this a thing to be questioned, in
regard my Sentiments are conformable both to reason and Experience. for in the
first place it is most certain, that there is nothing which more condnces to
the acquiring of a Language then the Memory; and by consequence that Language
must be the most easy which has fewest words: in regard a small number of
words is more easily retained then a more Copious quantity. Now the Chinese
Language is the most concise of all others, as not being composed of above a
hundred and twenty Monosyllables: whereas the Greek and Latin contain an
infinite number of words, of Tenses, Moods, Numbers, Persons, etc. But the
Chinese Language requires only a Memory to retain the Accents, which are as it
were the form that distinguishes the signification of Words; and to learn how
to pronounce the three Hundred Monosyllables.

In the Second place it is most certain, that he who will Industriously, and
under a good method, apply himself to study the Chinese Language, may be able
in a Years time to understand and speak it very well. And we find by experience
that our Fathers that are at present employed in the Mission, at the end of two
Years became so perfect in the Language that they were able to Confess,
Catechize, Preach and Compose, with as much ease, as in their own Native
Tongue, though there is not the least resemblance between their Language and
ours, and that the Fathers are generally persons far advanced in Years. Which
they could never attain to in Europe where the Languages generally have a
dependence one upon another.

That there is no question to be made of this apparent truth, when we consider
the great number of Books which the Fathers have made and translated, and daily
make and translate into the Chinese Language, which are esteemed and admired by
the Chinese themselves. Such as are those Books which Father Matthew Riccio
composed upon our Sacred Law, and upon several other Subjects. Of whom the
Chinese speak to this Day as of a Prodigy of Knowledge, and all sorts of
Knowledge: So that there is not any Person of Quality in the Empire that does
not know and speak of him with Applause. The Learned quote him in their
Writings as one of their most famous Doctors; and the Handicraft-Workmen to put
off their Wares, and sell them at a higher Rate, assure the Buyers that they
were the Inventions of that Illustrious Person Father Matthew Riccio. In short,
they esteemed and honored him to that degree, that several believe, that as
Cum fu ci us was the Prince, the Saint, the Master, and Doctor of the Chinese,
so Father Matthew Riccio was the same among the Europeans: Which was the
highest Praise those Idolizers of Cum fu ci us could give him. Father Diego
Pantoja has also composed several Learned Treatises of the Seven Deadly Sins,
of the Seven Virtues which are their Contraries; upon the Pater Noster, upon
the Ave-Marie, and the Credo. The Fathers Alfonso Vanhone, and Iulio Aleni,
wrote several Tomes upon the Christian Religion, upon the Life of Christ, of
the Holy Virgin and the Saints, and upon several other subjects. Father Manuel
Dias the younger, translated all the Gospels, with the Commentaries and
Explanations of the Fathers, which makes a Work no less Large, then Pious and
Learned. Father Francis Furtado published a Treatise of Rhetoric and Logic,
with certain other Books de Coelo and de Mundo, as also of the Soul of Man. The
Fathers John Terencio, John Roo, and John Adam, have written a great number of
other Books upon our Holy Law, and upon all the parts of the Mathematics.
Father Lewis Buglio, who was always my chiefest Consolation and inseparable
Companion in all my Travels, Afflictions and Imprisonments, for Thirty Years
together, translated the first part of St. Thomas, which the more Learned
Chinese esteem and admire to that degree, that I heard one of them who had
read the Treatise of God, declare his thoughts in these words, Certainly this
Book is a Mirror wherein to let us see our own Ignorance. The same Father
Buglio wrote several other Pieces upon several other subjects; among the rest,
that Eloquent and Learned Apology, in answer to a Book which Yam quam siem,
that wicked Infidel, published both in this Court, and over the whole Empire,
against the Christian Religion and the Preachers of it; and which he Entitled
Pu te y, Because I could no longer. Whereupon the Father that he might conform
himself to the Style and Language of the Country, Entitled his Answer, I have
Answered because I could no longer forbear. Both Titles are very significant in
the Chinese Language: But the Fathers was more highly esteemed because it
carries two significations. The First, I refute, because I could no longer
forbear; the Second, I have refuted a Book Entitled, Because I could no longer
forbear. And which was more to be wondered at, the Father composed the greatest
part of these Books, in the Boats, upon the Roads and in the Inns, under the
Power of Rebels and Barbarians; in Prison with Three Chains upon his Legs,
Three about his Neck, and Six upon his Hands; and in a word, in the midst of
continual Persecutions. I could say much more in praise of that person truly
Pious, and o^ great Reputation* did I not fear that the sh^e which I had in his
Sufferings, and the strict Friendship that was between Us, would render me
suspected of too much partiality. Father Ferdinand Ver^st ^t the same time
wrote a Learned Answer to (...) or rather a Satyr full of Mistakes and Dol^
^norance, which the same Yam quam siem wrote against the European Mathematics.
Father Anthony Gouvea composed a Catechism. Father John Monteiro wrote two
Books, the one of the Law of God, and the other of True Adoration. Father
Francis Sambiesi wrote Four Treatises, Of the Immortality of the Soul; Of
Morals; Of Painting, and Sounds, all very short and highly esteemed. I my self
wrote a Treatise of the Resurrection of Christ; and another of the Universal
Resurrection. Nicholas Trigaut, Lazaro Cataneo, Gaspar Ferreira, and Alvaro
Semedo, all Fathers of the Society have composed Dictionaries very large and
very exact, and Gaspar Ferreira has written above Twenty Treatises upon several
Subjects. Father Soeiro made an Abridgment of the Christian Law; and Father
Nicholas Longobardo, who Died but a few Years ago in this Court, Fourscore and
Sixteen Years old, has written several Godly Treatises, besides a Treatise of
Earthquakes, highly esteemed by the Learned of this Empire. In short there
have been a great number of other Books written concerning the Christian
Religion, and of all Sciences and Subjects which amount in all to above Five
Hundred Tomes Printed besides Manuscripts. There is Printed in China a
Catalogue of all the Fathers that ever Traveled into the Country to Preach the
Gospel; wherein are also the Names set of all the Books which they have
written. From whence I conclude, that so many Books could never have been
translated and written in a Foreign Language, and in so short a time, had not
the Language been very easy: So that it follows that the Chinese Language is
more easy to learn then any other; and that it is withal very Elegant, very
Copious, and very Expressive; since it wants for no terms to explain and unfold
the Subtilties and Mysteries of Theology, Philosophy, and the rest of the
Sciences.

I will conclude this Chapter with the first Paragraph of the first Article of
the Commentary which I made upon the Works of Cum fu cius, with which our
Fathers always begin, when they first set themselves to study the Chinese
Letters and Language, to the end that by this short Sample the Beauty of the
Language, and the Wit of the People, may be the better displayed. They read the
Letters beginning from the top down to the bottom, and from the right to the
left: but that I might the better conform to the Customs of Europe, I have
placed the first Column upon the left hand. To explain them you must put them
together according to the Order of the Ciphers. The Marks, or Zero, which are
to be seen at the bottom of some Letters are the Points and Accents of the
Chinese. The Order of the Letters, and the Explanation of the Text, are taken
from two Chinese Commentators; of which the one, who lived about Three Hundred
Years ago, was called Chu^ hi; and the other, who was a Colao, was named Cha^m
Kiu Chim, who Died in the Year 1610, at what time Matthew Riccio arrived at
this Court, of whom I have already spoken in this Chapter.

(...) 4 Great men (...) 1 consists in the second place (...) 3 teach (...) 2
to renew (...) 2 to (...) 3 the People (...) 1 the Rule (...) 4 consists in the
3d place (...) 5 consists in the first place (...) 5 to stop (...) 6 to
enlighten (...) 6 at (...) 7 reasonable (...) 7 the Sovereign (...) Nature
(...) 8 Good*

The Commentary and Explanation of the Text.
THE Method for Great Men to Learn, consist^ in three things. The first is to
unfold the Rational Nature: The Second is, to reform Mankind; And the Third to
stop at the Sovereign Good.

As to the First, the Rational Nature is the Heart of Man, for the Chinese
make no distinct on between the Understanding and the Will; but attribute to
the Heart what ever we attribute to those Faculties. The Heart is a substance
pure and intelligent without any Darkness or Obscurity: and where Man has
always ready, all requisite Reasonings to answer to all difficulties that
present themselves. But because that at the very moment of our Birth, this
Intelligent and Rational Nature is cag'd up and enclosed within the Prison of
the Body, and for that our inordinate Passions keep it bound and chained, it
comes to be obscured and troubled. For this reason it is necessary that Men
should apply themselves to Learning and Information by putting of Questions, to
the end the Rational Heart may be delivered from it is Bondage and Slavery, that
so it may be able to break the Chains and Fetters of the Passions, and return
to it is primitive Beauty, light and understanding; in the same manner as a
Tarnish'd Mirror being polished recovers it is former Luster.

The Second consists in Reforming the People. For example, I who am a King, a
Magistrate, a Father of a Family etc. If I have already purified my Rational
Nature, it is my duty to extend it to that degree, that she may be able to
communicate her self to other Men, by causing them to abandon the Corruptions
and defilements of Vice and evil Customs, and I ought to deal so by my People,
as I do with Garments, when they are spotted or besmeared. For if they are well
washed and scoured, they become clean and handsome as they were before.

The third consists in attaining and stopping at the Sovereign Good. This
Sovereign Good is the Sovereign Accord of things and of Reason. When Great Men
enlighten their Intelligent Nature, and renew the Virtue of the People, they do
it not by hap-hazard or without design: but all their end is to bring their
Virtue to perfection; to the end there might not be one single person among the
People whose Virtue was not renewed, or who was not renewed by Virtue. When
they are arrived at a degree so sublime, and to such an extraordinary
Excellency, they may be assured they have attained the Sovereign Good; like
those who after a long and tiresom journey at length coming to their own homes,
may say they have attained the final end of their traveling. These are the
three most necessary and principal things in that Book, and as it were the
Mantle or outward Garment that Covers the Cloths, or as the string that holds a
row of Beads together. These are the expressions of the Chinese Commentator.

Here by the way we may observe, that possibly there can be nothing more proper
then these words of Cum fu cius to explain the functions of a Minister of the
Gospel, who is obliged in the first place to perfect himself and next his
Neighbor, to the end we may arrive at the Sovereign Good, which is God, the
Supreme and utmost end of all things. Nevertheless, the Chinese being Pagans
and carnally minded People, have accommodated these three points to the
Government of the Kingdom, wherein like Politicians they place all their
happiness and Ultimate End.

In the second place we are to observe that the Ancient Chinese did understand
there was a God. And therefore when I oppose their Learned Men in dispute, I
frequently make use of this Dilemma. Either Cum fu cius did understand what he
desin'd, or he did not: If he did understand what he defined, he knew there was
a God, who is no Other than that Sovereign Good of which he speaks, and which
you also ought to know and adore as well as he. If he did not understand that
what he defined was God himself, he was very Ignorant; since as you your selves
confess, the Syllables Chi and Xen signify that Sovereign Good which contains
and comprehends all others: which is an Attribute that cannot be given to any
Creature, what Advantages soever he may have, but only to God alone. Some there
are who being touched with Heavenly Grace, submit to the truth: Others not
knowing what to answer, and unwilling to acknowledge that Cum fu cius was
ignorant, rather choose to abide in their Error, and to follow their Pride and
Passions, and cry, They Will come again another time.

Notes upon the Fourth Chapter.
I shall add nothing farther to what our Author has said concerning the Chinese
Language, the Nature and Genius of which he has sufficiently set forth: And as
for those who desire to see more, they may consult the sixth Chapter of the
Relation of F. Semedo, who fully confirms what here F. Magaillans avouches. I
must only observe this by the way, that he gives us in this place an Idea of
the Chinese Language, far different from what he gave us formerly.

CHAP. V. Of the Wit of the Chinese and their Principal Books.
ONE of the Ancients has told us, that A^ia was very fertile in great Wi^s. But
he would have been more strongly confirmed in his Opinion, had he had any
knowledge of China. For if they who best invent, most suddenly and easily, may
be said to have more subtle and better Wits then others, the Chinese ought to
be preferred before other Nations, since they were the first that invented
Letters, Paper, Printing, Ponder, fine Porcelaine, and their own Characters.
Though they are ignorant of many Sciences, for want of Communication with other
People, nevertheless they are accomplished in Moral Philosophy, to which they
solely bend their Studies for the most part. Their Wits are so quick and
apprehensive, that they understand with ease when they read the Books which the
Fathers of our Society have written, the most subtle and difficult Questions as
well in Mathematics, and Philosophy, as in Theology. Perhaps there may be some
who will not so readily believe what I assert; but I can assure them, there is
nothing more certain, in regard that I have known some Learned Christians, and
Infidels also, who understood without any instruction, as we could find by
their discourses, the Questions concerning God and the Trinity, which they had
read in the first Part of Saint Thomas Translated by Father Buglio.

What Kingdom is there, whatever the number of the Universities be which it
contains, where there are above ten Thousand Licentiates as in China; of which
Six or Seven Thousand meet every three Years at Pe kim, where after several
Examinations, there are admitted three Hundred sixty five to the Degree of
Doctors? I do not believe there is any Kingdom where there are so many Scholars
as there are Batchellors of Art in China which are said to be above Fourscore
and ten Thousand, nor that there is any other Country where the knowledge of
Letters is so universal and so common. In regard that in all the Provinces,
more especially the Southern, there is not any Man Poor or Rich, Citizen or
Husbandman, that cannot both Write and Read. And in short, I do not believe
there is any Region unless it be (...), that has published so many Books as the
Chinese have done.

The Chronicles of the Chinese are almost as Ancient as the Deluge; as
beginning not above two Hundred Years after it, and being continued to this
present time by several Authors: by which a Man may guess at the number of
Volumes which their History contains. They have several Books of Natural
Philosophy where they Treat of Nature, her Properties and Accidents. It Is true
they intermix mistakes and impertinences with truth; but it is for want of Art
and Knowledge, not for defect of Wit; they have also several Books that Treat
of the Mathematics and Military Discipline, and several Excellent Treatises of
Physic, wherein they show the smartness of their Wits, by making several solid
and learned Discourses upon the Pulses, or beating of Arteries, of which they
have a particular knowledge; upon the Manner of knowing and distinguishing
between Deseases and Deseases, they have several Pleasant Romances and Books of
Chivalrie, like those of Amadis de Gaul, O^lando Furioso, D. Quixote, etc. and
Volumes of Histories and Presidents of Obedience of Children toward their
Parents: of the Loyalty of Subjects toward their Princes: of Agriculture:
Eloquent Discourses, Pleasant Poems full of Witty Invention, Tragedies and
Comedies; and lastly a very great Number of Treatises upon an Insinity of other
Subjects: besides that such is their readiness and quickness of Invention, that
there are very few Licentiates or Doctors that do not publish at least one or
two large Volumes.

They have five Volumes which they call U Kim or the five Writings, which among
them are the same as the Holy Scriptures among us. The first is called Xu Kim,
that is to say a Chronicle of five Ancient Kings, which the Chinese esteem and
worship for Saints. The three last were the Heads of three different Families,
that reigned for almost two Thousand Years: that is to say, almost as long as
the Nineteen Families that succeeded them, including also that of the Tartars
that Reigns at present. The first of these Emperors was called Yao, who
according to the Chinese Chronicles began his Reign four Thousand and Twenty
five Years ago, counting to this present year, 1668. or about Five Hundred
Years after the Deluge, according to the Calculation of the Seventy
Interpreters. This Prince, the Legislator of the Chinese, was eminent for
several Virtues; more ^specially for his extraordinary Clemency, Justice and
Prudence. Now in regard he saw that his Son had not those Qualities which are
requisite for a Good Governor (for by the Report of the Chinese, they put a
higher value upon Virtue, then upon all other Endowments) he chose for his
Co-partner in the Empire one of his Subjects, called by the name of Xun, whom
he declared Emperor upon his death Bed, and gave him his two Daughters for his
Wives. This President the Chinese make use of to maintain Polygamy; but the
Fathers of our Society return for answer, according to the Sentiments of the
Fathers and Doctors of the Church, that God at that time permitted plurality of
Wives, because it was requisite for the Multiplication of Human Kind, and for
peopling the Earth. The Chinese are satisfied with this Answer, because the
first of their sacred Books informs them, that at that time China was but very
thinly inhabited. Moreover they approve the Exposition which Father Iulio Aleni
makes upon that passage in the Books called Keu to ge chao, composed by the
Learned Christians of the Province of Fo-kien, from what they had heard the
Learned Father discourse both in public and private* that is to say, that though
the words of the Text of that first Book are Cil Niu, those two Monosyllables
do not signify two Daughters, but the second Daughter of the Emperor Yao,
which he Married to his Successor. For that the Chinese, as it is the Custom
at present, never gave no other Names for distinction's sake, but only that of
the Order of their Birth: As for example, the First, the Second, the Third,
Son. So that when they read, that Yao gave to Xun, Cil Niu; the meaning is,
that the Emperor gave him his Second Daughter, the Letter Cil, being no more
then the Figure 2 among us.

That Emperor Xun is applauded in this Book for many Virtues; but more
especially for his Obedience to his Father, and his Affection to his Brother,
who both endeavored to have killed him several times: but he suffered all
their Cruelties with an extraordinary Patience. Among other Examples of his
Virtue, there are two Philosophers who report, how that one Day his Father and
his Brother, who were both as Wicked, as he was Virtuous, commanded him to go
down into a Well to cleanse it. Immediately he Obeyed; but he was no sooner at
the bottom, but those Barbarians transported with Fury and Malice, drew the
Ladder, and threw down great Stones, pieces of Wood, and what ever they could
find next at hand to destroy him in the Well However he got out through a
passage which he discovered under ground. Nevertheless he was so far from
seeking to revenge that excess of Fury and Inhumani^y, that he repaid them
with greater Marks then ever of Respect and Love.

The Third Emperor was called You, who having served the Emperor Xun, during his
Life time, with great Loyalty and Advantage, the Dying Prince made choice of
him for his Successor, in regard that his Son, besides that he was notoriously
Wicked, was no way endowed with parts to Govern the Empire. This Emperor You,
during the Reign of his Predecessor, took care to drain away the Water of the
Deluge, which at that time overslow'd a great part of the Plains of China; and
which the Chinese call by the Name of Hum Xui, or the Great Deluge of Water.
This Emperor was desirous, as his Successors had done before him, to choose,
for his Successor, one of his Subjects called Ye, who had been assistant to him
in the Government of his Kingdom: but the People would not permit him,
declaring that the Emperor's Son was a Person Endu'd with all Virtues necessary
to Govern them well; and so they put him in possession of the Empire. The
Princes that succeeded this last Emperor, Reigned by right of Succession, and
not of Election, till the Emperor Kie, a Vicious and Cruel Prince, who was the
last of this same first Family.

The Fourth Emperor, called Chim Tam, was the Founder of the Second Royal
Family. His Eminent Virtues had obliged the preceding Emperors to make him King
of the Kingdom of Po, which is at present comprehended within the Province of
Ho nan. He took up Arms against the Emperor Kie, and after he had delivered the
People from so Cruel a Tyrant, made himself Master of the Empire. During the
Reign of this Emperor, there was such a Drought, that there was neither Rain
nor Snow for Seven Years together, as if the Heavens had been made of Brass.
The Fountains and Rivers were almost all dried up; the Land became Barren; and
these Calamities were attended with Famine and Pestilence. In the midst of
these Fatal Extremities the Emperor forsook his Palace, quitted his Royal
Habit, and covering himself with certain Skins, went up to the top of a Hill
called Sam Lin, where as he lay prostrate upon the Earth, he made the following
Prayer. Lord, if thy People have offended thee, punish them not, because they
have ignorantly transgressed against thee; Punish me rather, who here present
my self before Thee as a Victime ready to suffer whatever thy Divine Justice
shall be pleased to ordain.

He had scarce concluded this Prayer, before the Sky was all overcast with
Clouds, and poured down Rain in such abundance, that it sufficed to Water ^ll
the Territories of the Empire, and restore them to their pristine Fertility.
From hence it is, that when the Chinese make any scruple about the Mystery of
the Incarnation, we endeavor to convince them by this Example; telling them,
that this King covered himself with the Skin of a Lamb, and offered himself a
Sacrifice to obtain Pardon for the Sins of the People, yet thereby did nothing
lessen the Luster of his Dignity: So likewise, though God was pleased to Cloth
himself with the homely Covering of our Humanity, and was offered up as a Lamb
in Sacrifice for the Sins of the People, he has no way lessened* but rather
exalted his Almighty Power, his Infinite Mercy and Goodness: and has thereby
made it so much the more clearly appear, that he was infinitely above this
King, who was no more then a Man, and a mere Creature. The Chinese presently
submit to this Argument, as well because it seems to them to be Rational and
Convincing, as also for that they are very much pleased to hear that we make
use of their Histories and Examples to prove the Verity of our Religion.

This Emperor had for one of his Counselors a Holy and Famous Learned Person,
who lived several Years hid up in the Mountains among the Wild Beasts, because
he would not submit to the Tyrant Kie. The Offspring also of this Emperor Chim
Tam Reigned above Six Hundred Years till the Rule of King Cheu, who was no less
Wicked and Cruel then Kie. So that when the Chinese call a Prince a Kie, or a
Cheu, it is the same thing as when we call such a one a Nero, or a Dioc^esian.

The Fifth Emperor called Vu Uam, was the Son of Ven Uam, King of the Kingdom
of Ch^u^, which is now a part of the Province of Xensi. Who not able to endure
the Wickedness and Tyranny of King Cheu, set upon him, Vanquished him in
Battle, and made himself Master of the Empire. This Emperor Vu Uam had a
Brother highly esteemed for his Prudence and other Virtues, whom he made King
of the Kingdom of Lu, now a part of the Province of Xa^n Tu^m, and of whom he
made choice upon his Deathbed to Govern the Empire during the Minority of his
Eldest Son. He it was, according to the report of the Chinese, who above Two
Thousand Seven Hundred Years ago, first ^ound out the Use of the Needle and
Compass. For the Emperor his Nephew, having received the Honor of an Embassy,
and the acknowledgment of a Tribute from a Country called Tum Xim, and Cochin
China, or Kiao chi que, and all by means of the Industry and Prudent Conduct of
his Protector, the same Governor presented the Ambassadors with a kind of
Compass, by the Direction of which they might return the nearest way home,
without exposing themselves to the Toil and Hardships of of those ^ound about
Windings and Wanderings through which they had labored in coming to Court. So
that this Prince is one of the Heroes and Saints of the Chinese, who have an
extraordinary veneration for his Memory: Now when the Emperor Vu Uam returned
in Triumph from the Battle, wherein the Tyrant Cheu had been defeated, his two
Brothers Pe y, and Xeo ci, famous for their Virtue and Nobility, met him upon
his March, and after they h^d stopped him by taking his Horse by the Bridle,
they boldly, and in very sharp and severe Language reproved him, for having
seized upon the Empire, and forced the Emperor to burn himself in his Palace,
together with all his Treasures; that notwithstanding he were so vicious and so
cruel, yet he was both his Lord and Prince ordained by Heaven: that it was his
Duty to advise him to amendment like a good Subject, not like a Traitor to put
him to death: and lastly that he ought to surrender the Kingdom to the Children
of the deceased Prince, to let the World see, that he had not been pushed
forward by any motives of Ambition, but only out of a Desire to deliver the
Title from Tyranny and Oppression. But when the two Brothers sound that he
would not follow their Counsel, they retired to a desert Mountain, protesting,
they would rather choose to die in that manner, then eat of the Products of
those Territories which Vu Uam had ^usurp'd, for fear they should be thought in
some measure to approve his Treason and Revolt.

The History of these five Kings which the Chinese look upon as so many
Saints; especially the four first, and their Offspring, is the subject of the
first Book, which is in as great Reputation among these Infidels, as the Books
of the Kings among us Christians. The Style of it is very ancient, but very
exact and elegant. Vice is there blamed, and Virtue applauded, and the Actions
of King and Subjects related with an entire sincerity. And to the End, the more
curious Reader may see the Energy and Briefness of the Chinese Language and
Letters, which were at that time in use; I will here set down five words taken
out of the Book already mentioned in reference to the King Yao; Kin, Mim, Ven,
Su, Ga^n. That is to say, King Yao was great and venerable; he was most
Perspicacious and Prudent. He was very Composed, Modest, and Courteous. He
appeared always Pensive and Studious, searching continually after the best
means how to govern his People and Empire: and therefore he lived all the time
of his Reign in Comfort, Quiet, and Repose.

The second Book is called Li ki, or the Book of Rites and Ceremonies. This
contains the greatest part of the Laws, Customs and Ceremonies of the whole
Empire. The principal Author of this Book, is the Brother of the Emperor Vu
Uam, of whom we have spoken already. He was called Cheu cu^m, and was equally
venerable as well for his Virtue, as for his Prudence, Learning, and good
Conduct. This Volume contains the Works of several other Authors also, the
Disciples of Cum fu cius, and other interpreters, more modern, and more
suspected, which therefore ought to be read with so much the more
Circumspection, there being many things therein contained which are accounted
Fabulous.

The third Volume is called Xi Ki^m, containing Verses, Romances, and Poems;
all which are divided into five sorts. The first of which is called Ya sum, or
Panegyricks and Encomiums, sung in Honor of Men famous for their Virtue, or
their Endowments. There are also several Gnomonics, or Verses containing
Precepts, which are sung at their Funerals, their Sacrifices, the Ceremonies
which the Chinese perform in honor of their Ancestors, and at their most
solemn Festivals. The second is called Que fu^m, or the customs of the Kingdom.
These are Romances or Poems chosen out among those which were made by private
Persons. They are never sung, but only rehearsed before the Emperor and his
Ministers of State. Therein are described, without any dissimulation, the
manners of the People; how the Empire is governed, and the present state of
Affairs. Which seems to be the same thing with the Ancient Comedies of the
Greeks, that spared neither the Vices of Private Men, nor the miscarriages of
the public Magistrates. The third sort is called Pi que, that is to say,
Comparison. For that all which is therein contained is explained by Com^arisons
or Similitudes. The fourth sort is called Him que, that is to say, to raise or
exalt. Because this sort of Poetry begins with something that is curious and
lofty, to prepare and raise Attention to that which follows. The fifth sort is
called Ye Xi. That is to say, Poesies rejected or separated: because that, Cum
fu cius having reviewed this Volume of Poems rejected those which he either
mislik'd or thought to be fabulous. However they are still quoted, and left as
they are.

The fourth Volume was composed by Cum fu cius, and contains the History of the
Kingdom of Lu, his native Country; at present comprehended within the Province
of Xan ^um. The Chinese put a high value upon this Book, and are all in
Ecstasie when they read it. He wrote this History of two Hundred years
Transactions, after the manner of Annals; where he exposes as in a Mirror, the
Examples of Princes both Virtuous and Wicked, referring the ^ents to the Times
and Seasons wherein they happened. And therefore he gives to his Book the Title
of Chun cie^, or Spring and Autumn.

The fifth Volume is called Ye kim, and is esteemed the most ancient of all the
Rest, because the Chinese affirm that Fo hi their first King was the Author of
it. And indeed this Book is worthy to be read and esteemed, in regard of the
noble Sentences and Precepts of Morality which it contains. I believe truly
that the good Maxims which are scattered up and down in this Volume might be
writt'n by King Fo hi; but that the rest was added by others who were desirous
to give Reputation to their Visions, under the name of this famous Prince.
Nevertheless, most certain it is, that the Chinese have an extraordinary
veneration for this Book, and look upon it to be the most profound, the most
learned and mysterious of any in the World; and that for the same reason they
believe it to be almost Impossible for them to understand it, and that
strangers ought neither to see or touch it.

The Chinese have also another Volume of equal Authority with those
beforementioned, which they call Su xu that is to say, the four Books, by way
of Excellency. This is a Volume of Extracts or Abridgments, being as it were
the very Marrow and Quintessence of the former Five. The Mandarins ^ull out
from thence the Sentences and Texts, which they propose for* Themes to the
Learned that are to be Examined before they are admitted to the degrees of
Batchellors, Licentiates, and Doctors; and upon which those Persons Write and
Comment for their Reputation. It is divided into four Parts. The first treats
of the Laws, and the Doctrine of Men famous for their Knowledge and their
Virtue. The second discourses of the Golden Mean. The third contains a great
number of Moral Sentences well expressed, solid and profitable to all the
Members of the State. These three Parts were writt'n by Cum fu cius, the first
Doctor of the Chinese, and were published by his Disciples. The fourth Part,
which is as big as all the other three, was writ by the Philosopher Men su, who
was born about a Hundred Years after Cum fu cius; and is honored by the
Chinese, as a Doctor of the second Order. This is a Work wherein there appears
a wonderful deal of Wit, subtilty and Eloquence. The discourses are pertinent,
the Sentences grave and moral, and the Style lively, bold, and persuasive. All
the Missionaries of our Society in these Parts, very industriously study the
Letters and the Language of the four Parts of this Book. And from thence, and
out of the former five it is, that so many Treatises and Commentaries of
various Authors, as well ancient as modern, of which the number is almost
Infinite, and give us occasion to commend and admire the Wit, the Industry and
Eloquence of that Nation, are derived as from so many Springs and Fountains.

Notes upon the Fifth Chapter.
A. P. 96.
THE Subject or Ground of this Book is no more than a Table of sixty four
Figures, every one consisting of six Lines, which are all of a Piece, as thus,
-- others of two Parts, as thus; -- -- *The Chinese attribute the Writing of
this Table to their first King Fo hi; but no body can divine what was the
design or meaning of the Author. However it is certain that about twelve
Hundred Years before Christ, Prince Ven Uam, Father of the Emperor Vu* Uam,
Founder of the third Royal Family, and his second Son Cheu cum, undertook to
interpret this Enigmatical Table, and that five Hundred Years afterward, the
Philosopher, Cum fu cius, made Commentaries upon the Interpretations of those
two Princes. But whatever those three Authors have written upon this Subject
amounts to no more then only from the agreeement and vicissitude of the
Elements, and other natural things, to draw Politic and Moral Maxims and
Conclusions, and Precepts also as well for the Princes as their Subjects. But
that which renders this Table pernicious, is this, that the Idolaters called
Tao su, the Bonzes and Fortune Tellers make a bad use of it to confirm their
Superstitious Predictions, forging out of that variety, and many other things
which they intermix therewith, an infinite Number of Confederacies, and vain,
and Impertinent allusions; by virtue of which they boast themselves able to
foretell whatever shall befall a Man whether Fortunate or Unfortunate. Epitomes
of the first Commentators of this Table of Fo hi may be seen more at large in
the Prefaces of Cum fu cius which are newly Printed, together with several
others particulars concerning the Principal Books of the Chinese, of which our
Author speaks in this Chapter.

CHAP. VI. Of the Civility and Politeness of the Chinese, and of some of their
Feasts.
SEveral Books might be writt'n of the Civility, Complements and Ceremonies of
the Chinese. They have a Book which gives an Account of above three Thousand,
and it is a wonderful thing to see how ready and punctual they are in those
Particulars. At their Marriages and Funerals, in their Visits and Feasts, the
Master of the House, though a Person of greater Honor and Dignity then any of
his Guests, always gives the chief place of Pre-eminence to the Eldest. The
eldest give place to those that come farthest off, but all to Foreigners. When
any Ambassador arrives, from the very day that his Embassy is accepted of, to
the time of his departure, the Emperor furnishes him with all manner of
Provisions, Horses, Litters, and Barks. At Court he is lodged in the Royal
Court, whether the Emperor sends him, at every two days end, a Feast ready
dressed out of his own Kitchen, as a Mark of his Favor and Good Will. For the
Kings of China above all things, study to receive and entertain all Strangers
with Splendour and Magnisicence, as F. Buglio and my self have frequently found
by Experience for the space of two years that we were lodged in the Royal Inn,
when we came from the Province of Su chuen to the Court. It Is true indeed, that
this Civility is not always performed with the same Decency and regularity;
nevertheless the fault is no way to be attributed to the King, but to the
Baseness and self-Interest of his Officers, who privately purloyn and turn to
their own Use what the King with an extraordinary Bounty allows for the
entertainment of Strangers.

There is not any Nation that equals the Chinese in the Multitude and Variety
of Titles and Honorable Names by them made use of in their Complements, which
I am not able to explain, because that neither our Languages, nor the Greek and
Latin have any words by which they may be expressed. They have also a great
number of Names whereby they distinguish the various Degrees of Parentage. For
example, we have only the Names of Grandfather and Grandmother, whither by the
Father or Mother's side: but the Chinese have all different to distinguish the
four Relations. In like manner we have only the word Uncle to signify the
Brothers of the Father and Mother. But the Chinese have words which not only
distinguish the Brothers of the Father from those of the Mother, but also tell
ye which are Younger or Elder then the Father or the Mother; and so of the rest
of the Kindred. This Nation also surpasses all others in the care which they
take of their Garments; in regard there is not any Person though never so poor
which is not modestly, fashionably and decently habited. It Is a surprising
thing to see them all, upon the first day of the year, in their new Cloths
fashionable spruce and clean. Insomuch that you shall not meet any one person
how wretched soever, but what affords a pleasing object to the Eye. Nor is the
modesty of this Nation less to be admired* The Learned Men are always so
composed, that they believe it crime or a sin, to make appear the least Gesture
or Motion which is not exactly conformable to the Rules of Decent Behavior and
Urbanity. The Women affect Modesty, Chastity and Honesty to that degree that a
man would think those Virtues were born with them. They live in perpetual
Retirement, never so much as showing their hands bare; so that if they are
obliged to present any thing to their Brothers or Brothersin-Law, they lay the
Present upon the Table with their hands exactly covered with their Sleeves,
which for that Reason are very long and large; and then the Brothers come and
receive it. Which is the Reason that the Chinese are highly offended when they
see the Images of our Saints with naked Feet: and truly for my part I think
they have very good Reason for it. For that those Representations do no way
agree with that Angelick Modesty and Purity which those Saints professed: and
therefore those Pictures are defective and counterfeit, in regard they neither
resemble the Originals, nor in their Imitation sufficiently follow either the
History, or Nature, which is the perfection of Painting. Besides that there is
no likelihood that young Virgins should go barefoot, and that it is a
ridiculous hing to Paint them in glorious and Rich Habits, and not allow them
Shoes and Stockins.

The Chinese reduce their Civility, or Conversation one among another to five
Heads; that is to say, Of a King toward his Subjects; of a Father toward his
Sin; Of a Husband toward his Wife; Of an Elder Brother toward the Younger; and
of one Friend toward another. These rules include a great part of their Morals:
but I shall dilate no farther upon this Subject; for that I should never be
able to make an end, should I go about to give an account of all that they
write of the Loyalty of Subjects toward their Prince; Of Obedience of Children
toward their Parents; Of the Submission of Wives toward theirs Husbands; Of
Brotherly Affection, and that Amity and respect which ought to be among
Friends. I could speak of the Noble Order observed in their Political
Government; but for that I shall reserve a whole Chapt^r, before I finish this
Relation.

Among the Festivals of the Chinese one of those which they celebrate with
most joy and solemnity is the fifteenth Day of the first Moon of their Year.
That day they kindle so many Bonfires, and light up so many Lanthorns, that if
the whole Empire were to be seen at one time from the top of some high
Mountain, You would believe it all in a Blaze like some Vast Fire-work. There
is hardly any person either in City or Country, upon the Sea shores or upon the
Rivers, that does not set up Lanthorns painted and fashioned after several
manners, or that does not fling about Squibs and Bombs burning in the Air like
Boats, Towers, Fish, Dragons, Tigers, Elephants, with a Thousand other
surprising sorts of Fireworks. Which gives me an Occasion to relate what I saw
with my own eyes in the year 1644. In the Province of Su chuen, at what time F.
Lewis Buglio and my self were detained Prisoners by that Cruel Tyrant Cham hien
Chum, He invited us to see the Fireworks which he had ordered to be prepared
against the Night of this same fifteenth day: and indeed there was an infinite
number admirable for their Curiosity and their Invention: But that which most
surpised me was the following Machime. This was an Arbor covered with a Vine
of Red Grapes of which all the Joyners work burnt without consuming, while on
the other side, the Stock of the Vine, the Branches, the Leaves, the Clusters
and Grapes themselves consumed by degrees; yet not so, but that you might all
the while discern the Redness of the Clusters, the Green of the Leaves, the
Chestnut color of the Vine so lively represented, that you would have sworn
that every thing had been natural and not counterfeited. But that which more
astonished us, was to see that the Fire, which is an Element, so active and so
devouring should move so leisurely, that it seemed to have quitted its own
Nature to obey the precepts and commands of Art, which were only to represent
the Arbor to the life and not to burn it.

Nor are the Lanthorns less to be admired. For as I have said already, there is
not any House, whether Poor or Rich, where you do not see them hanging up in
their Halls, in their Courts, and before their Windows; and they are of so many
different Fashions, that there is not any Figure which they do not represent.
Those that are made for the Poor are of a small value. But there are others
which are made for the Rich, so curious for their Painting and Artificial
Contrivance, that they are worth Five, Ten and Twenty Pistoles: and others
which are made for the Mandarines, the Visitors, and Viceroys of Provinces, for
the Princes and the Emperor, which cost a Hundred, two Hundred, and sometimes
three Hundred and four Hundred Pistoles: which though it may seem a thing
difficult to be believed, is nevertheless most certainly true. The largest are
hung up in the Royal Halls, or else in the Courts upon Scaffolds erected on
purpose. They are twenty Cubits and sometimes more in Diameter: and the Lamps
and Candles of which there are an infinite number in every Lanthorn, are
intermixed and plao'd within-side, so artificially and agreably, that the Light
adds beauty to the Painting; and the smoke gives life and spirit to the Figures
in the Lanthorn, which Art has so contrived, that they seem to walk, turn
about, ascend and decend. You shall see Horses run, draw Chariots and till the
Earth; Vessels Sailing; Kings and Princes go in and out with large Trains: and
great numbers of People both a Foot and a Horseback, Armies Marching, Comedies,
Dances, and a thousand other Divertisements and Motions represented: and all
the whole Nation spend the whole night by the light of these pleasing Objects,
and in the midst of the Music of several Instruments that attend the Feasts,
more or less magnificent, which every one makes with his Family, his Kindred
and Friends. Sometimes at the same time, they will have counterfeit Comedies,
represented by little Poppets, which are moved by hidden Wires; Or else by the
shadowings of white pieces of Silk very sine and transparent, and made on
purpose. It is a wonderful thing to see those little Wooden Poppets, and
Artificial Shadowings represent Kings, Queens, Captains, Soldiers,
Swashbucklers, Merry Andrews, Learned Men, or any other thing personated upon a
Theater: How they will weep, express Joy, Sorrow, Anger and all the rest of the
Passions: With what Industry, and facility those Artists cause the Figures and
Shadowings to move. Nay sometimes you would almost think they spoke too; for
the Machinists, while the Figures move, will be counterfeiting the Voices of
little Children with so much address, that a man would think that all he saw
was absolutely natural; so ingenious and inventive is that Nation.

The Chinese relate the Original of this Lanthorn Festival after this Manner.
They tell ye that sometime after the Establishment of their Empire, a certain
Mandarin beloved of all the People for his Virtues and his rare Qualities, lost
his only Daughter whom he passionately loved near the Bank of a River.
Whereupon away he went and sought for her all along the River side; and because
the People had an extraordinary affection for him, they followed the Mandarin
with Flambeaux and Lanthorns, weeping and wailing as he did. But though they
sought a long time up the stream and down the stream, as Ceres sought for her
Daughter in vain, all their labor proved to no purpose, for they could find
nothing. This is the Vulgar Opinion of the People. But in regard this Story is
very like to that which occasioned the Festival solemnized the fifth day of the
fifth Moon, which the Inhabitants of Macao, if I am not deceived, call Lumba
Lumba, and the Chinese Lu^m Chuen, that is to say Barks made in the form of a
Dragon, wherein they sport themselves that day upon the Rivers, the Learned in
their writing relate another occasion of the Original of the Lanthorn Festival
in this manner.

About Three Tousand Five Hundred Years ago Reigned the last King of the first
Family Hia, who was called Kie, of whom we have already spoken. This King,
being a Person very cruel, and addicted to his pleasures, discoursing one day
with one of his Queens, which was the Lady that he most entirely loved, or
rather upon whom he doted even to folly, complained to her of the short
continuance of the pleasures of this Life: that there were but very few Men who
lived aHundred Years; and there was never any one that spent all his days in
perfect joy and divertisment. That in winter the days were very short, and the
nights tediously long; and in Summer quite the Contrary, the Nights very short
and the Days very long. Which inequality was the reason, that Man could not
take any pleasure that was capable to give him satisfaction: that the Sun was
no sooner risen but set again; that it was the same thing with the Night: that
time flew away two swiftly: that life was not long enough to content our
desires; and that he wondered Nature should be so cruel and rigorous to Mankind.
To whom the Queen, All this, said she, Sir, signifies nothing; I know a way to
prolong time in such a Manner that it shall be sufficient to give you
satisfaction. Make but one day of a whole Month, and one Month of a whole Year:
by which means the Years, the Months and Days will be so long, that living Ten
Years, you will have a Hundred Years of Pleasure and Content. This would be an
excellent Invention replied the King, had thou but the power to stop and
retard the Motion of the Heavens, the Sun, the Moon and Stars. I confess, said
the Queen, that neither You who are the Son of Heaven, and Master of so vast an
Empire, nor my self, nor any human Power, are able to change the Laws of
Nature. But you may blot out of your remembrance both Time, the Heavens, and
the Stars by devising new Heavens, and new Time of your own after this manner.
Do but order a Palace to be built with Rooms and Chambers so contrived, as that
they may neither have Doors nor Windows, nor so much as the least chink and
cranny to admit the light either of the Sun, Moon or Stars. When your Palace is
finished, and all the Rooms are thus perfectly darkn'd, carry thither all your
Treasures of Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, and costly Furniture; Store it with
what delights you fancy most, I mean Young Men and Virgins all selected and
culled without any defect. Then You and I will go and live there our selves
without any other Cloths but what Nature has afforded us. After all these
Preparations, You may of a sudden and all at once cause a Thousand Flambeaux,
and a Thousand Lanthorns to give you a new Light, which presenting to your Eyes
the Objects which you love with so much passion will cancel the remembrance of
Time, the Heavens, the Sun, the Moon and even of your self at length: For you
will be so charmed with your Pleasures, that a Month will seem no more to you
then a day, nor a Year any more then a Month. The Flambeaux and the Lanthorns
will perform the Office of the Sun, Moon and Planets, and every Room will
appear a Heaven adorned with Stars; and by this means you shall create new
Heavens and new Time. The Emperor transported with his Lusts, and swayed by his
vain Pleasures, was so taken with the Queens contrivance, that he appointed all
things to be done according to the Advice of his Lascivious Queen. And when all
things were done according to his wish, He spent a whole Year in this Palace,
abandoning himself to all manner of dishonest and voluptuous Pleasures, minding
neither his Court nor his Kingdom. And these follies together with several
other unjust and crew Actions, enforced his Subjects to revolt and choose in
his Place the Emperor Cham tum, the Chief of another New Family of which we
have already spok'n* After the Death of the Emperor Kie, the Chinese destroyed
his new Palace where he had perpetrated so many wicked Actions, and abolished
all the Laws and Statutes enacted by that same cruel Tyrant, unless it were his
Invention of Flambeaux and Lanthorns which they preserved to Celebrate the
Festival before mentioned.

The Chinese also relate, how that about Two Thousand Years afterward,
another Emperor of the Tenth Royal Family, who was called Tam, suffered himself
to be Deluded and Governed by a Mountebank of the Sect of those that are
called. Tao Su, whose Profession it is to Cheat the People, the Nobility, the
Learned Men, and even the Princes themselves, by means of their Chemical
Operations, and their Gorgeous and Glorious Promises of continual streams of
Gold and Silver, Life almost Eternal, and to Empower them to fly from one
Mountain, City, or Province to another in a few Minutes. Now then this Emperor
having surrendered his Understanding to one of these Impostors or Magicians,
told him that he had a great desire Yam Cheu, in the Province of Kiam Nan, the
most Curious and most Celebrated over all the Empire, for their Beauty, their
Riches, and their Workmanship; but, said he, I am afraid that if I go
Incognito, and in Disguise, least some Disorder or Tumult should happen in the
mean time in the Court or Kingdom; or if I should take this Progress with an
Attendance and Train suitable to my Dignity, besides the Burden and Charge
that I shall be to the People, I fear that all Men will condemn me of Folly,
and think it strange that so great an Emperor should take a Journey so long and
tedious for the Divertisement of a few Hours.

Let not your Majesty be disturbed at that, replied the Magician, for I promise
your Majesty, that without exposing your self to any of these Inconveniences
which you have propounded to me, I will so order the matter, that the next
Lanthorn Night, which is not far off, you shall set forward, return to your
Palace, and see the Lanthorns with all the satisfaction you can wish or desire.

In a few Hours after that, there appeared in the Air Chariots and Thrones all
of White Clouds, and drawn by Swans. Immediately the King and Queen betook
themselves to their Chariots, with a great number of Damsels and Ladies of
Honnour, together with the Musicians of the Palace: and then away flew the
Swans with an extraordinary swiftness, and in a few Moments arrived at Yam
Cheu, which the Clouds, enlarging themselves, covered all over. And then it was
that the King at leisure viewed the Lanthorns which the People had Lighted, and
to recompense them for the Divertisement which they had given him, he caused
his Musicians to Charm their Ears with a Consort of Voices and Instruments; at
the end of which, he set forward again for his Capital City, and in the
Twinkling of an Eye found himself at home in his own Palace. Within a Month
after, there came a Courier, according to custom, with a Dispatch, by which
Intelligence was given to the King, that upon a Lanthorn Night several Holy Men
were seen hovering over the City of Yam Cheu upon Thrones of Clouds drawn by
Swans, and who at the same time had Ravished their Ears with a most Harmonious
Musical Consort of Voices and Instruments.

Lastly they tell you that about Five Hundred Years ago there was a King of the
Family of Sum, renowned for his Noble Qualities and Virtues, more especially
for his Mildness and Affability. That this Prince, to show the Affection which
he had for the Nobility and People, was wont every Year to appear publicly in
his Palace for Eight Nights together, without his Guards, and all the Gates set
open, and to suffer the Multitude to take a view of all the Fireworks and
Lanthorns, which were very large and magnificent, and of several forms, that
were in the Halls and Courts; all the while entertaining his Subjects with
Music befitting the Grandeur of an Emperor that made himself so familiar to
the whole Assembly.

These are the Stories which the Chinese recount touching the Original and
Augmentation of Honor given to the Lanthorn Festival, so famous over all
China. Upon which, I have the longer insisted, to the end that by this same
pattern, the Reader may judge what might be enlarged upon other Subjects.

Notes upon the Sixth Chapter.
A. P. 110. Yam Cheu in the Province of Kiam Nan.
THE City of Yam Cheu is seated near the Mouth of the Grand Canal, in the River
Kiam. It is very Wealthy, Eminent for Trade, and Adorned with Magnificent
Houses, built for the most part by the Merchants themselves, who are Enriched
by their Traffic in Salt, of which there are vast Quantities drawn out of
several Salt Pits upon the East side of the City. The Wealth of this City is
the Cause, that the Inhabitants are exorbitantly addicted to their Pleasure,
insomuch that several Little Girls are there bred up, the most Beautiful that
can be found, and taught to Dance and Sing, and instructed in all other Female
Allurements that may render them Agreeable who being thus accomplished ^re sold
at dear Rates for Concubines to the more Wealthy sort. No wonder then that they
spare for no Cost to Divertise themselves, and to render their Lanthorn
Festival the most Pompous and Magnificent above all others in China. Almost all
the Relations mention this Feast after the same manner as our Author does, but
not with so many Circumstances. Kiam nan signifies a Province to the South of
the River Kiam. Under the Chinese Kings, this Province was called Nan Kim, as
also the Capital City belonging to it; that is to say, the Court of the South;
as Pe-kim is called the Court of the North. For then there were two Courts, and
the City of Nan Kim enjoyed the same Privileges and Immunities which the City
of Pe-kim did. But the Tartars have deprived them of their Franchises, and
changed the Name of Nan Kim, into that of Kiam Nim, that is to say, the Repose
of the River Kiam. Which Custom of altering Names is very Ancient in China, and
has also been practiced from time to time in reference to other Cities.

CHAP. VII. Of the Public Works and Edifices of the Chinese, and particularly
of the Grand Canal.
THE Public Works and Structures of the Chinese, in my Opinion, surpass in
number and largeness, all those of other Kingdoms which are known to us. The
Palaces of the Princes and Principal Mandarins appear to be Cities, and the
Houses of Wealthy Private Persons resemble so many Palaces. They consist of
Five or Six Apartments, not one above another, as in Europe * but one beyond
another, and upon the same Platform. Every Apartment is separated from the
other by a large Court, from which you ascend into the Halls and Chambers by an
ascent of Six or Seven Steps. I have spoken in general of their Works and
Buildings in the Second Chapter. I have also described in the First Chapter the
Celebrated Bridge which is to be seen not far from Pe-kim, and I intend to
speak more at large, in the last, of the Emperor's Palace. Nevertheless, that I
may give a more just Idea of the Grandeur and Magnificence of the Public Works
of China, I shall here make a Rehearsal of what I have already said in the
Annual Letters of the Year 1659. touching the Grand Canal; which if I am not
deciev'd, surpasses all other Works of this Nature which are upon the Earth.

Tartars Conquered all China. Their Emperor settled his Residence in the City
of Pe-kim, which he founded anew, to the end he might Govern his Territories
with more ease; for that he was also Lord of all the Western Tartary, which
extends it self from the Province of Pekim to the Territories of the Mogul, to
Persia, and the Caspian Sea. But in regard the Northern Provinces could not
furnish so large a City with Provisions necessary for their subsistence, he
ordered a great number of Vessels to be built, to bring Victuals, Spices and
Merchandise of all sorts to Pe-kim, from the Southern Provinces. However
perceiving the Incertainty of those Voyages, and how that Calms and Tempests
caused the loss of an infinite Quantity of Provisions and Merchandise, he
employed Workmen without number, who at vast Expenses, and with an unparalled
Industry, opened a Canal, Three Thousand Five Hundred Chinese Furlongs, or Two
Hundred Forty Five Portugal Leagues in length, through several Provinces. This
Canal, as well to weaken the Current of the Stream, as to make it more deep by
retaining the Water within it, is furnished with Seventy Two Sluices, which the
Chinese call Cha^. They have every one great Gates, which are made of large
Pieces of Timber; and which are shut up in the Night, but set open in the Day
time, for the passage of the Barks: And the greatest part of these Sluices are
passed through with a great deal of ease. But there are some which are not to
be shot, but with a great deal of Pains and Danger. More especially one, which
the Chinese call Tien Fi-cha, or the Queen and Mistress of Heaven; thereby to
express in Hyperbolical Terms the extraordinary Height of it. When the Barks
are rowed against the Stream, and come to the bottom of this Sluice, the
Watermen fasten to the Prow a great number of Cables and Cordage, which are
drawn on both sides the Canal, by Four or Five Hundred Men, and sometimes more,
according to the Burden of the Vessel, and the Weight of the Lading. Others at
the same time labor at Capstanes placed upon the Walls of the Sluice, which are
very broad and built of Freestone. Besides the Ropes already mentioned, there
are others which are very strong, wound about great Pillars of Stone or Wood to
hold the Vessel if any of the other Cordage should chance to break. When these
Cords are all fastened, they begin to Haule by degrees, as it were keeping time
to the sound of a Basin, upon which they knock at first but softly, and with
some intervals between the strokes: but when half the Bark at least is raised
to the height of the upper Channel, in regard the Current is then much
stronger, they knock upon the Basin with thicker strokes; at what time the Four
or Five Hundred Haule all together with loud Hey Boys, and give such a stretch,
that the Vessel mounts up in a Moment, and is secured in the dead Water between
the sides of the Canal and the middle of the Current. The Vessels on the other
side, fall down with more speed and ease, but with more danger. For the
prevention of which, they fasten a great number of Cords to the Poop, which are
let go, or held tite, with equal Care and Observation, by those that hold the
Ropes on both sides the Canal. At the same time there are other Men on both
sides the Vessel, who with long Poles with Iron Heads, guide the Bark through
the middle of the Canal, to prevent her striking against the Jaumes, or great
Stones, to which the Gates are fastened. Which when the Bark has passed, the
Cords are lets go which kept her from plunging, and at the same time the
Current carries her as swift as an Arrow out of a Bow, till she stop by degrees
as the Stream grows weaker and weaker, and carries her according to her usual
course. This Canal begins at the City of Tum Cheu, distant about two Leagues
and a half from Pe-kim. There is in the same place a River, with the Current of
which Vessels drive, till near the Sea it falls into another, through which the
Vessels Sail for some few Days. But then you come into a Canal made with hands;
and after you have Sailed Twenty, or Five and Twenty Leagues, you come to a
Temple called Fuen Hui Miao, or the Temple of the Spirit, which divides the
Waters. As far as this place you Row upon the Canal against the Stream, but
when you come just against this Temple, you begin to Swim with the Stream, and
make use only of your Oars. Now I would fain know of our Engineers and famous
Wits of Europe, how this can be, and whether it be a Work of Art or Nature? A
Bark lies cross the middle of the Canal with the Prow to the West on the Temple
side, and the Poop to the East. Now on the one side the Water runs toward the
North, on the other side, it runs toward the South. To unfold this Riddle, you
are to understand, that on the East side at the distance of about half a Days
Journey, there lies a great Lake between high Mountains, the Waters of which
swelled a good large River that bent its course toward the Sea upon the East
side. Now the Chinese stopped up that Outlet, and having cut through the
Mountain, opened a Canal by which they brought the Water to the Temple. In that
part they hallowed two other Canals, one toward the North, the other toward the
South; and this with so true a proportion and regular Line, that the Waters
coming to the middle before the Temple, take their leaves, and one part of the
Streams runs equally to the North, and the other toward the South, as you may
see by the following Figure,



This Canal in some places runs through the middle of Cities, in other places
along by the Walls. It crosses one part of the Province of Pe-Kim; afterward
all the Province of Xan tum, and after it has entered into the Province of Nan
kim, discharges it self into that great and rapid River, which the Chinese
call the Yellow River. Upon this River you Sail for about two days, and then
you come into another, where you Sail about the length of two Musket Shot, at
what time you meet with a Canal, which the Chinese opened upon the Southside
of this last River, and which runs toward the City of Hoai ngan: afterward
this Canal runs through many Cities and Towns till it come to the City of Yam
cheu, the most famous Seaport Town of all in the Empire. Soon after it
discharges it self into the River Kiam, a good days Journey from the City of
Nan Kim. Certainly this was an Undertaking and Performance very great and
Magnificent: nor is the Building of Eleven hundred forty five Royal Inns much
inferior to it. Only the raising of several Thousands Fortresses, and the
Walls Five hundred Leagues in length which environ China, is more to be wondered
at.

Notes upon the Seventh Chapter.
A. P. 114. It is now above Four hundred years ago since the Western Tartars
conquered, etc.
CHingis Can, the Founder of the Monarchy of the Tartars, the largest that ever
was in the World; or at least his Son Octay Can, about the year 1220. began the
Conquest of North China, setting upon the Eastern Tartars, in whose Possession
it had been about a Hundred and seventeen years, according to the Chronology of
F. Couplet. But the entire Conquest of China was not Completed till the year
1220. by the Fifth Emperor after Ching is Can, called by our Historians in
imitation of the Eastern Tartars Cublay Can, or Cobila. The Chinese who give
him great Encomiums, call him Xi Su; and affirm, that formerly he was called Ho
pie lie: which I believe to be no other than the Name of Cublay or Cobila
corrupted, in regard the Chinese Pronounce very ill, and corrupt almost all
the Names and Words of other Nations, as our Author has observed in his first
Chapter, that M. Polo had Corrupted the ^artar Name of the Ancient Pe Kim,
calling it Can b^lu instead of Han palu. The Chinese commit the same Mistakes
in the Pronunciation of Foreign Languages, changing Letters and adding Vowels
to facilitate Pronunciation; in regard that all the Words of their Language are
Monosyllables. Thus I have seen in a Manuscript Discourse of the Necessity of
performing Divine Service in the Chinese Language, which highly deserves to be
Printed, that the Chinese instead of Crux, Pronounce Cu lu c^. Instead of
Pronouncing Beatus, they say Pe j^ su s^. For Baptizo they cry Pa pe ti so; and
in stead of Bartholmeus, Pa ulh to lo meusu. And in the same manner it is very
probable that they might have said Ho pie lie, instead of Cublay or Cobila,
changing the C into H, and the b into p: so reading Hopili instead of Cobili,
and adding e to facilitate the Pronunciation.

This Prince Xi Su, or Cubluy Can it was, that caused the Grand Canal to be
made, which the Author describes with his usual Exactness, and which is without
question one of the most Magnificent and Admirable undertakings in the
Universe. Only there is one thing we would fain know, whether these Sluices are
made like those in France and the Low Countries; that is to say, whether they
are made of two Gates at a distance one from the other, between which the water
rises. For by the Relation of Father Magaillans, and that of F. Trigant, the
Chinese Sluices seem to be no more than only a b^re Gate made fast with pieces
of Wood let fall perpendicularly till the Overture be wholly stopped up. The
water being swelled in this manner, they draw up these pieces of Wood one after
another, and then cause the Vessels to ascend or fall, which sometimes would
not be able to Sail for want of Water in the Canal, if i^ were not retained and
stopped by this Invention. But this is not so convenient as a Sluice with two
Gates and a Hutch between both. Thus the Author of the Relation of the Dutch
Embassy reports, that the Sluices in China are not opened but with great
difficulty, and that they are a great hindrance to the Voyage. However this is
a Thing very Remarkable, that a man may at any time go from one end of China to
the other, for the space of above Six hundred Leagues, unless it be one Journey
only by Land between the Provinces of Quam Tum and Kiamsi, or between the
Cities of Nan hium, and Nan began, where you Embark again upon the River of Can.
Upon which it will not be amiss to observe that the Author of the Dutch Embassy
made a considerable Mistake in confounding the River Can, with the great River
Kiam, which comes from the Province of Iunnan, and touches only the Northern
Extremity of the Province of Kiamsi, whereas the River Can divides it in two,
running through it from South to North.

CHAP. VIII. Of the great Industry of this Nation.
THe Magnificence, and great Number of Public Works in China, is not only the
Effect of vast Charges and Expenses; but of the extraordinary Industry of the
Nation. They do all manner of Mechanic Works with a far less number of Tools,
and with more Ease than we do. For as in this Country here is not a foot of
Land that lies wast; so there is not any Man or Woman, young or old, lame, deaf
or blind, that has not a way to get a Livelihood, or that has not some Trade or
Employment. The Chinese have a common Proverb, Chu^m qu^e vu y vo, In China
there is nothing thrown away. How vile and useless a thing may appear to be, it
has its Use and may turn to Profit. For example, in the City of Pekim only,
there are above a Thousand Families, who have no other Trade to subsist on, but
only by Selling of matches for Tinderboxes, and weeks for Candles. There are
also as many that have nothing else to live upon, but by picking up in the
Streets and among the Sweepings of Houses, Rags of Silk, Cotton and
Linen Cloth; pieces of Paper, and other things, which they wash and make
clean, and then Sell to others that make use of them in several Trades. Their
Invention also for the carrying of Burdens is very curious; for they do not
carry their Burdens by main Strength as we do, but by Policy, which they are
to carry, either with Cords or Hooks, or put them in Baskets or Hampers, and
hang them afterward at both ends of a flat piece of Wood made on purpose,
which they take up upon their Shoulders equally poised, so that the Burden
weighs as much on the one side as on the other. Which Invention is a very great
Convenience; it being most certain that Burdens equally poised, are much more
easy to carry.

In all the Cities and Towns of the Empire, there are two Towers, the one
called the Drum-Tower, and the other the Bell-Tower; which serve to tell the
Hour of the Night. For the Chinese divide the Night into five parts longer or
shorter, according as the Nights are longer or shorter, and as they are longer
in Winter than in Summer. At the Beginning of the Night or first Watch, the
Watchman strikes several strokes upon the Drum, and the Bell answers him after
the same manner. After that, during all the first Quarter, the Watchman gives
one stroke upon the Drum, and another Watchman one rap upon the Bell with a
wooden Hammer. And this they do all the first Quarter, observing the space of
time that a Man may say his Creed between the stroke and rap together. When the
second Quarter of the Night begins, then they give two strokes, and two raps
apiece at the same distance of time, till the beginning of the third Quarter,
and then they give three strokes and raps apiece. When the fourth Quarter
begins, they give four; and when the fifth Quarter begins, five; and as soon as
Day breaks they redouble their strokes, as they do at the Beginning of the
Night. So that let a man wake at any time of the Night, he shall know by the
City Signal what Hour of the Night it is, unless the wind sit so as to hinder
the sound.

At Pekim in the King's Palace, you may see Drums and Bells upon the high
Towers, and Portugal. But the sound of it is so loud, so clear and harmonious,
that it rather seems to be a Musical Instrument than a Bell.

F. Athanasius Kirker in the second Chapter of his Sixteenth Book of Musurgie,
or Art of Concords and Discords, assures us, that the Bell in the City of
Erfort under the Elector of Mayence, is the biggest not only in Europe, but in
all the World. Nevertheless we have seen with our own Eyes, and observed by the
trial which we made in the year 1667. that it is much less than that which the
Fathers John Adam, and Ferdinand Verbiest got Erfort taken out of Father
Kirker's Book, and those of the Bell at Pekim, compared by F. Ferdinand
Verbiest, after this manner:

1. The Bottom of the Bell of Erfort, is seven Chinese Cubits and ^. 1. The
Diameter of the Bottom of the Bell of Pekim, is Twelve Cubits and ^. 2. The
Thickness of the Bell of Erfort toward the Closure, is 6/10 of a Cubit and 7/10
of 1/10. 2. The Thickness of the Bell of Pekim toward the Closure, is 9/10 of a
Cubit. 3. The Inner Depth which F. Kirker calls Altitudinem inclusae
Curvaturae, is Eight Cubits and five Tenths. 3. The Inner Depth of the Bell at
Pekim, is Twelve Cubits. 4. The weight of the Bell of Erfort, is Twenty five
thousand four hundred Pound. 4. The weight of the Bell of Pekim, is a Hundred
and Twenty thousand Pound of Brass.

This Bell is that which is appointed to give notice of the Watch or Hour of
the Night in the City of Pekim, and I dare confidently averr, that there is not
the like Bell in Europe, and in all probability it is the biggest in the World.
When they strike upon it in the Night, the sound or terrible roaring rather
which it makes, is so loud, so full, and so r^sounding, that after it has
spread it self over all the City, it extends it self over the Walls into the
Suburbs, and is heard a great way round about the neighboring Country.

The Kings of China, together with this extraordinary Bell caused Seven others
to be Cast, of which there are Five that still lie upon the Ground. But of
those Five there is one that justly deserves to be admired, as being all
over-cover'd with Chinese Characters, so fair, so neat, and so exact, that they
do not look as if they had been cast, but written upon Paper by some judicious
and excellent Writing-Master.

The Chinese have also found out, for the regulating and dividing the Quarters
of the Night, an Invention becoming the wonderful Industry of that Nation. They
beat to Powder a certain Wood, after they have peeled and rasp'd it, of which
they make a kind of Past, which they roll into Ropes and Pastils of several
Shapes. Some they make of more costly Materials, as Saunders, Eagle, and other
odoriferous Woods, about a fingers length, which the wealthy sort, and the Men
of Learning burn in their Chambers. There are others of less value, one, two
and three Cubits long, and about the bigness of a Goose Quill, which they burn
before their Pagods or Idols. These they make the same use of as of Candles to
light them from one place to another. They make these Ropes of powdered Wood of
an equal Circumference, by the means of Moulds made on purpose. Then they wind
them round at the bottom, lessening the circle at the bottom till they come to
be of a Conick figure, which enlarges it self at every Turn, to one, two and
three hands breadth in Diameter, and sometimes more; and this lasts one, two
and three days together, according to the bigness which they allow it. For we
find some in their Temples that last ten, twenty or thirty days. These Weeks
resemble a Fisher's Net, or a String wound about a Cone; which they hang up by
the Middle, and light at the lower end, from whence the Fire winds slowly and
insensibly, according to the windings of the string of powdered Wood, upon
which there are generally five marks to distinguish the five parts of the
Watch, or Night. Which manner of measuring Time is so just and certain, that
you shall never observe any considerable Mistake. The Learned Men, Travelers,
and all Persons that would rise at a precise hour about Business, hang a little
weight at the Mark, which shows the Hour when they design to rise, which when
the Fire is come to that point, certainly falls into a Copper Basin, that is
placed underneath, and wakes them with the noise of the fall. This Invention
supplies the want of our Larum Watches, only with this difference, that this is
so plain a thing and so cheap, that one of these Inventions, which will last
Four and twenty Hours, does not cost above Three pence; whereas Watches that
consist of so many wheels and other devices, are so dear, that they are not to
be purchased but by those that have store of Money.

Notes upon the Eighth Chapter.
A. P. 121. They fasten the things which are to be carried, etc.
THis Invention as it is described, is altogether like to that which the Women
in Holland (he might have said the Men in England) make use of to carry their
Milk-Pails about the Streets, of which no question but that F. Magaillans was
ignorant. But it is of no use in the world to carry a Burden of one entire
piece.

B. P. 123. The City Drum is fifteen City Cubics Diameter, etc.
I have observed in the first Note upon the second Chapter, that the Chinese
Cubit was a Parisian Foot, as seven to eight. So that these fifteen Cubits
amount to thirteen foot and of Paris. Which shows us, that this Drum is of a
Prodigious bigness; seeing that by the Proportion of the Diameter to the
Circumference, this Drum must be Forty one foot and a quarter, or near seven
fathom in Compass.

C. P. 123. F. Athanasius, Kircher, etc. affirms that the Bell of the City of
Erfort, etc.
Father Kirker certainly had never heard of several Bells in Europe bigger than
that of Erfort. For to go no farther than France, the Bell of Roan called
George d' Amboise, weighs about Forty thousand weight, as the Inscription upon
it declares. Those of Rhodez, of St. John of Lion, and the two which were cast
for Nostre Dame in Paris, are almost as big as that of Roan. As certain it is,
that F. Kirker had never heard of the Bells at Pe-kim, since he has
acknowledged his Error in his China illustrata, after F. Gruber had sent him
the Extract of a Letter from F. Ferdinand Verbiest, containing the Description
of that Bell at Pe-kim, which F. Kirker has quoted and Printed in his China
Illustrated. Neither had F. Magaillans ever seen this last Piece of F. Kirker.

As for the Bells of Pekim, F. Ferdinand Verbiest in his Letter, and F. Couplet
in his Chronology tells us that they were cast about the year 1404. by the
Order of the Emperor Chim su, otherwise Yum lo, the Uncle of Kien ven ti, and
second Son of Hum vu, who expelled the Western Tartars out of China, and
founded the Royal Family Tai min ga extirpated this last Age by the Eastern
Tartars. This Emperor Chim su caused five of these Bells to be cast, every one
of which weighs a Hundred and twenty thousand weight, and there is no question
to be made, but that then they were the biggest in the World. But James
Rutenfels in his Relation of Muscovie, which he wrote in Latin, affirms that
there is one much bigger in the Palace of the Grand Duke at Moscow, which
weighs Three hundred and twenty thousand Pound, and that it is of that
Prodigious weight, that no Art of Man can raise it, nor hang it in the Tower
called Yvan velichi, at the bottom of which it lies upon pieces of Timber.

Father Rougemont tells us in his History, that F. Adam caused two of the Bells
at Pekim to be cran'd up into a Tower a Hundred and fifty Chinese Cubits, or
One hundred thirty one Foot and high, by the help of Two hundred Workmen only,
to the great Astonishment of the Chinese, who thought he must have employed as
many Thousands: and that two years after he caused a third Bell to be cran'd up
in the same manner, but with more Ease, though he employed no more than a
Hundred and twenty young Men. F. Intorcetta observes in his Relation, that the
Bells of China have no Clappers, only they make them sound by striking with a
Hammer upon the outside of the Skirt.

CHAP. IX. Of the Navigation of the Chinese.
NAvigation is so common and so Universal in this Kingdom, that there is hardly
any City or Town, especially in the Southern Provinces, that does not enjoy the
benefit of some River, some Lake, some Canal, or some Navigable Arm of the Sea;
insomuch that there are almost as many Inhabitants upon the Water as upon the
dry Land. Which is a Sight no less pleasing then surprising, when a Stranger
comes to any Port in the Evening, to see one City of Vessels upon the Water,
and another of Houses upon the Land. They that put off very early, or come too
late, are forced to Sail or Row for several Hours together, between Vessels
that lie not far from the Shore on both sides. Moreover, there is such a Trade
at some of these Ports, that it is half a days time, and sometimes more, before
a Man can get clear of the Vessels that lie before the Town Insomuch that a Man
may say, there are two Empires in China, the one upon the Water, and the other
upon the Land; and as many Venice's as there are Cities. For these Vessels
serve instead of Houses to them that are the Masters of them. There they dress
their Meat, there they are born, there they are bred, and there they dye; there
they have their Dogs and their Catts; there they breed their Pigs, their Ducks,
and their Geese. Their Vessels are some of good Burden, others less. Some
belong to the King, some to the Mandarins, some to the Merchants, and some to
the People. Among the King's Barks, those which are called So chuen, are
employed to carry the Mandarins to their several Governments, and to bring them
back upon their Returns. These are made like our Caravels, but high, and so
well Painted, especially the Cabin where the Mandarin lodges, that they
resemble Buildings erected for some public Solemnity, rather than ordinary
Hoy's. Those that are called Leam chuen; that is to say, such as are appointed
to carry Provisions from the Provinces to the Court, are about nine Thousand,
nine Hundred, fourscore and nineteen. I have often been Inquisitive to know why
they did not add one more to make up the number of ten Thousand; but all the
Inquisition I could make was still to no purpose, till at length, after several
years, and when I better understood the humor and customs of the Nation, I
made a shrewd Conjecture at the Reason. The number of Ten Thousand is expressed
by two Chinese Letters only, Y, and Van; which have nothing in them either of
Great or Magnificent, either in Writing or Pronunciation, and by Consequence
deserve not to be made use of to express the number of the Emperor's Barks. So
that they have taken one out of ten Thousand, to render the number more Pompous
and Majestic, and which was more proper to flatter their Vanity and Pride, by
saying, nine Hundred fourscore and nineteen, as running most upon their adored
number Nine. These Vessels are somewhat less then the former; Nevertheless they
have their Fore-Castles and Quarter-Decks, and a Cabin or Hall in the middle,
like those of the Mandarins. The third sort of the Emperor's Barks are called
Lum y chuen, that is to say, the Vessels that bring the Emperor's Habits, his
Pieces of Silk and Tissue to the Court. Of these there are as many as there are
days in the Year, or three hundred sixty five: For in regard the Emperor is
styled the Sun of Heaven, there is nothing that appertains to him, to which the
Chinese do not ascribe some relation to the Celestial Beings, as the Heavens,
the Sun, the Moon, the Planets, and the Stars. Thus Lum y, signifies the Habits
of the Dragon; for that the Imprese and Arms of the King of China are composed
of Dragons, with five Claws: and for that reason, his Habits and his
Movables, of necessity must be adorned with Dragons, either in Painting or
Embroidery. So that when you say Lum yen, the Eyes of the Dragon, or Lum y, the
habits of the Dragon, all the Chinese understand that you mean the Emperor's
Eyes, or the Emperor's Garments; and so of the rest. Lastly there are other
Vessels called Lam chuen, very light and small in Comparison of the others, and
which are almost as broad as they are long. These are for the use of the Men of
Learning, and other wealthy Persons and People of Quality, that go and come to
and from the Court. They have belonging to them a fair Cabin, a Bed, a Table
and Chairs, where you may sleep, eat, study, write, and receive Visits, with
the same Convenience as if you were at home in your House. The Prow belongs to
the Mariners and Watermen, and the Master of the Boat lives in the Poop with
his Wife and Children, where also the Victuals are dressed for him that hires the
Bark. These last Vessels, with several others of several Forms, belong to
particular Persons, and are almost Innumerable. And I my self in the Year 1656,
by the Emperor's command, went by water from Pe kim to Macao upon the grand
Canal and several other Rivers, for above six hundred Leagues, without going by
Land but only one days Journey, to cross a Mountain which divides the Province
of Kiam si, from (...) of Quam tum.

Certainly there is no Kingdom in the World so vast as this is, that enjoys the
like advantage. Nevertheless what I am now going to relate, will seem to be yet
more incredible; and indeed, I should hardly have believed it my self, had I
not seen it my self. The fourth of May, in the year 1642. I departed from the
City of Ham cheu Capital of the Province of Che Kiam, and the twenty eighth of
August of the same year, I arrived at Chim tu, the Capital of the Province of
Su chuen. During these four Months, I made four Hundred Leagues, all the way by
Water, counting the windings and turnings of the Rivers; yet so that for a
whole Month I sailed upon two different Streams, tho during all the other three
Months, I kept upon the grand River of Kiam, which is called the Son of the
Sea. During this tedious Journey by Water, I met with every Day such vast
quantities of Timber Trees tied one to another of all sorts of Wood, which if
they were fastened together, would make a Bridge of several days Journey. I
sailed by some of these that were fastened to the Shore, above an hour, and
sometimes for half a days swimming with the Stream. Now the most wealthy
Merchants of China are they that trade in Salt and Wood, there being no other
Commodities for which they have a more considerable Vent. This Wood therefore
is cut down in the Mountains of the Province of Suchuen, upon the Frontiers of
China, to the West: and after they have caused it to be carried to the Banks of
the River Kiam, which about those Parts falls into this Empire, they Saw it
into Boards, and with little Expense carry it into most parts of the Provinces,
where they make a very great Profit by the Sale of it. The Breadth of these
Trains of Timber is about ten Foot, and the Length either longer or shorter,
according to the Merchant's Stock, but the longest are sometimes about half a
League. They rise above the Water four or five Foot, and they are made after
this manner. They take as much Wood as is requisite for the height or thickness
of four or five Foot, and breadth of ten. Then they make holes at the Ends of
the pieces of wood, through which they put wreaths of Reeds or twisted Osiers,
to which they fasten other pieces of Wood, suffering the Float to fall down
with the stream, till the whole Train be as long as they desire. All the parts
of the Float being thus contrived, move and yield to the Water, as necessity
requires, as pliably as the Links of a Chain. Only upon the forepart of the
Float they set four or five Men with Oars or Poles to guide the Float, and make
it swim where they please. Upon these Floats at such and such distances, they
build little wooden Cottages, which they sell whole, as they are, at the
several places where they stop during their Journey. Here the Merchants Sleep
and shelter themselves, as in their Houses, dress their Meat and Eat it, and
put their furniture and utensils therein. The same Merchants also bring from
the Mountains and Forests, where they cut their Wood, several sorts of
Medicinal Herbs, Parrots, Monkeys, and other things, which they sell in the
Cities and other places through which they pass, to other Merchants that vend
them over all the Provinces of the Empire. Great Quantities of this Wood are
brought to Pekim, though it be distant above seven hundred Portugueze Leagues
from the Mountains where the Wood is cut down. And thus a Man may easily judge
by what I say, that there is no Kingdom in the World that can compare with
China, for the Benefit of going and trading by Water.

CHAP. X. Of the great Plenty of all things in China.
MOST certain it is, that the two Fountains of Trade, are Navigation and
Plenty, in a Kingdom stored with all sorts of Commodities. China enjoys both
these Advantages to that degree that no Kingdom exceeds it. The great quantity
of Gold which is found in all the Mountains is such, that instead of Coining it
into Money, to buy Necessaries; it is it self a Commodity. Whence comes that
Proverb among the Chinese so often repeated at Macao, Money is the Blood, but
Gold is Merchandise. As for Money, it is now above four thousand five hundred
Years that this Empire has lasted; nor has their Coveteousness of Money, nor
their Industry to get it been less ancient. So that the quantity which the
Chinese have rammas'd together, must needs be immense and incredible; so much
the rather for that whatever enters once, is never carried out again, in regard
the Laws so strictly forbid it. You shall rarely hear in Europe of Presents
made of five Hundred or a Thousand Crowns, but in China it is a usual thing to
make Presents, not only of a Thousand, but ten, twenty, thirty, forty thousand
Crowns. And certain it is, that through the whole Empire, but more especially
at Court, several Millions are expended in Presents and Entertainments, and
that the same thing is there every day to be seen which was anciently said of
Rome: all things are there put to sale. There is not any Employment of
Governor of a City or Town, which does not cost the Person who is preferred to
it, several Thousands of Crowns; sometimes twenty, sometimes thirty, and so
proportionably for all other Offices great and small. To be a Viceroy or
Governor of a Province, before a Man can have his Commission sealed, will cost
him twenty, thirty, forty, and sometimes threescore, sometimes seventy Thousand
Crowns. And yet so far is the King from receiving a Farthing of this Money,
that he knows nothing of the Abuse. Only the Grand Ministers of the Empire, the
Colao's, or Counselors of State, and the six Supreme Tribunals of the Court,
are they that privately sell all Offices and Employments, to the Viceroys and
great Mandarins of the Provinces. On the other side, they to satisfy their
Avarice, and to reimburse themselves of the Money laid out for their
Preferments, extort Presents from the Presidents of Territories and Cities, who
repay themselves upon the Governors of Towns and Buroughs, and they, or rather
all together, make themselves whole again, and replenish their Purses at the
Expense of the Miserable People. So that it is a common Proverb in China, that
the King unwittingly lets loose so many Hang-Men, Murderers, hungry Dogs and
Wolves to ruin and devour the Poor People, when he Creates new Mandarins to
Govern them. In short there is not any Viceroy, Visitor of a Province, or any
such like Officer, who at the end of Three years of his being employed, that
does not return with Six or Seven hundred Thousand, and sometimes a Million of
Crowns. From whence I draw one Conclusion, which to me seems undeniable, that
if we consider the natural Inclination, and insatiable avarice of the Chinese,
there is very little Money in China; but if we consider the Riches which She
possesses within Her self, there is not any Kingdom that may compare with it.

There is in China a vast Quantity of Copper, Iron, Tin, and all other sorts of
Metals; especially Copper and Lattin, of which they make their Great Guns, an
infinite number of Idols and Statues, and several sorts of Dishes and Cups of
various forms, and of a Price and value extraordinary. There are some of these
Vessels, which either for their Antiquity, or because they were made in such a
King's Reign, or by such a Workman, though otherwise very ordinary and clownish,
are valued at several Hundreds of Crowns, nay sometimes a Thousand and more.
And indeed the City of Macao affords us an evident proof of the great plenty of
these Metals. For that in that one City there are cast such numbers of great
Guns to be admired for their goodness, their bigness, and their Workmanship,
which not only serve for the use of that City, but to supply several places in
the Indies, and even Portugal it self. Moreover, a Man may judge of the Great
Plenty of Copper and Tin in China, by the great quantity of Copper and Tin
Money that is made over all the Empire. These pieces of Money have square holes
in the Middle, and so are threaded upon Strings, which contain every one a
Thousand Deniers. And generally you exchange a String of a Thousand Deniers for
one Crown, or Chinese Tael; and this exchange is made in Banks and public
places appointed for the same purpose.

By the way we are here to take notice, that there is not any Memorial extant
in China, neither do we meet with any Record in their Histories or any other o^
their Books, that ever they made use o^ Paper-Money in that Kingdom, as M. Polo
tells us in his second Book, Chapter eighteenth. But in regard that M. Polo is
an Author of good Reputation, I will here unfold the Reason that made him
commit that mistake. The Copper Money of China is round, and generally about
the bigness of a Portuguese Real and a half. It has Letters stamped upon it,
which on the one side declare the Name of the Reigning Prince; on the other,
the Name of the Tribunal that caused it to be Covn'd. The Pieces of Gold and
Silver are not Coined, but cast into Lingots in the form of a small Boat, which
at Macao are called Paes, or Loaves of Gold or Silver. Both the one and the
other are of a different value. The Loaves of Gold are of the value of one,
two, ten, and twenty Crowns. Those of Silver, of the value of half a Crown, one
Crown, Ten, Twenty, Fifty, and sometimes a Hundred, and three Hundred Crowns.
These they cut with Steel Scizars, which the people carry about them for that
purpose, and divide them into pieces, bigger or lesser, according to the value
of the purchased Commodity. This being granted, you are to take notice, that
the first and fifteenth day of every Month, and at all times that the Chinese
carry their Dead to Enterrment, they burn a great quantity of Money and Loaves
made of Pastboard, covered over with Leaf-Tin, and gilded over with Leaf-Gold,
Varnished with Yellow. Now these Pastboard Figures are so like the real Tin
Money, and Loaves of Gold and Silver, that Foreigners who are not well
instructed in the Customs and Superstitions of this Nation, may easily be
deceived. So much the rather, because they see in the Streets and Piazza's at
every turn, Men laden, and Shops full of this Counterfeit Money. Now the
Chinese burn them, because they believe the Ashes turn to Copper Money, and
Loaves of Gold and Silver, which their deceased Parents make use of in the
other World to hire Houses, and to buy Clothes and Victuals, and to purchase
the Favor of the King of Hell, his Ministers and his Executioners; to the end
they may use them with less severity, and be more remiss in their torments; as
also to oblige them not to delay, but rather to hasten the time of their
Transmigration or Metempsycosis, by translating their Souls not into the Bodies
of Beasts, but into the Bodies of Men considerable for their Learning, their
Honors, and their Wealth; such is the extraordinary ignorance and blindness of
these Infidels. We are also farther to observe, that Anciently, when the Kings
of China wanted Money, they gave to the Mandarins and Soldiers in part of
their Pay, certain Tickets signed and sealed with the King's Seal. Which
Tickets were made of Past-board, about the bigness of half a sheet of Paper,
with their Price or Value written upon them. Thus when any Person was to
receive a Hundred Crowns, they paid him Fifty in ready Money and the other
Fifty in these sort of Tickets: which are called Chao, whence the word Chao fu
is derived. But because the People scrupled to recieve these Billets instead of
Money, the King ordered that an Employment should be given to him that should
take up these Billets and bring a Hundred back into the Royal Treasury; and a
more considerable Employment to him that should bring in a Thousand, and so
proportionably for a greater Number. Which as it was a great advantage to the
King, so was it no less gainful to the wealthier sort, for that they got
Employments, which they could never have obtained but by that means; and
wherein that Nation places their chiefest glory and felicity. However this
expedient could not satisfy the Generality, who were unwilling and grumbl'd to
part with their Commodities and Provisions for a piece of Past-board; which was
the occasion of many Quarrels and Disputes; so that at last the Court was
obliged to suppress these Billets, to avoid those Inconveniences, and many
others, which they every day foresaw. So that after some few Ages, those
Pastboards were no longer in use. However, there is no question to be made, but
that these were the Reasons that induced M. Polo to assert in several Parts of
his History, that the Chinese made use of Pastboard or Paper Money.

The white Silk and Wax of China, are things that are worthy to be taken notice
of. The first is the best in the World; and the second is not only the best,
but that which is singular, and no where else to be found but in this Kingdom.
All Men know the great plenty and goodness of the Silk which is made over all
China. The Ancients had the Knowledge of it, in regard they call China the
Kingdom of Silk; and the Moderns know it by Experience, in regard that many
Nations both of Asia and Europe load out several Caravans, and great Numbers of
Ships, with Chinese Silk, both wrought and raw. And this same vast Plenty of
Silk appears yet more, by the incredible Number of Silk Stuffs both plain and
intermixed with Gold and Silver, which are worn over all the Kingdom. The petty
Kings, the Princes, the Grandees and their Servants, the Eunuchs, the
Mandarins, the Men of Learning, the wealthy Burgesses, also all the Women, and
a fourth part of the Men, wear Silk Garments, as well upper as undermost. Nay,
it is so common at Court, that the very Footmen that run by their Masters
Horses, are clad in Satin and Damask. But lastly, a man may be convinced of
this inexhaustible Plenty of Silk, by the Three hundred sixty five Barks of
which we have already spoken, which the Provinces of Nam kin and Che kiam
alone, send every year to the Court, laden not only with Pieces of Tissue,
Damask, Sattins and Velvets of different Shapes and Colors, but rich and
costly Garments for the King, the Queen, the Princes their Children, and all
the Ladies of the Court. To which we may add the Hundreds of thousand Pounds of
raw and wrought Silk, which the other Provinces Pay by way of Tribute to the
King; of which I shall presently give an Account. So that of necessity China
must have an undrainable plenty of Silk, since the Tribute which it pays is so
great.

The Wax is the most beautiful, the clearest Europe; however there is enough to
serve the King, and all that belong to the Palace; for the Grandees, the Lords,
and all the Mandarins that are in actual Employment, for all the Learned and
rich People. It is found in several of the Provinces, but in greatest Abundance
in the Province of Hu quam, and the most excellent for whiteness and Beauty. It
comes from certain Trees, which in the Province of Xan tu^m are but small, but
in that of Hu quam are as large as the Pagod Trees in the East Indies, or the
Chestnut Trees in Europe: however it does not sweat out of the Tree, like Rosin
out of the Pine Tree, but is produced by a particular Industry of Nature. There
is in these Provinces a small Animal no bigger than a Flea, but so restless, so
active and vigorous, so quick at biting and penetrating, that it pierces with
an extraordinary swiftness, not only the Skins of Men and Beasts, but the
Branches and Bodies of Trees. The most esteemed are those of the Province of
Xan tu^m, where the Inhabitants pick the Eggs of these Animals out of the
Trees, and hoard them up. These Eggs in the Spring turn to little Worms, with
which they fill the hollownesses of large Canes, and carry them into the
Province of Hu quam to sell. At the beginning of the Spring they lay these
Worms at the roots of the Trees; where they are no sooner laid, but with an
incredible swiftness they run up the Bodies of the Trees, and take possession
of the Branches and Boughs as it were by a kind of natural Instinct; where
being always in motion with a wonderful Activity, they bite, pierce, and
penetrate to the very pith, which by a peculiar property that God has given
them, they prepare, purify and turn to Wax as white as Snow. Afterward they
thrust it up through the holes which they have made to the Superficies, where
by means of the Wind and the Cold, it congeals and hangs like so many drops or
Isicles. And then the Owners of the Trees come and gather it, and make it into
Cakes like our Cakes of Wax, and then Sell it all over the Kingdom.

It Is true that there is not in any part of this Empire any Woollen Cloth
comparable to the Cloth which we make use of in Europe; nevertheless there are
several sorts of Serges, and those very fine, and very costly, of an Ashie or
Cinnamon Color, which are worn by Old People and Persons of Quality in the
Winter. The Country People, and Meaner sort, make their Garments of Cotton
Cloth, of which there is such an extraordinary plenty, and of so many several
Colors, that it is scarce possible to express it. But much more impossible to
express the Value, Richness, Beauty, Plenty, and Variety of the Furrs in this
Nation, which are worn in all the Northern Provinces, especially at the Court
at Pe-kim. I shall only make this Observation, for the better confirmation of
the Truth of what I say, that when the King appears publicly in his Royal Room
of State, which he does Four Times in a Month, the Four Thousand Mandarins that
come to pay him their Homages, are all covered from Head to Foot with Sables of
an extraordinary Value. The Women also are Clad with the same sort; and the
Chinese not only Line their Buskins and their Bonnets, but Face the Saddles of
their Horses with several sorts of Furrs; nay, they Line their Seats their
Chairs, and the inside of their Tents with Furrs. Among the Common People, the
more Wealthy sort, wear Lambskins; the Poorer sort wrap themselves in
Sheepskins. So that in (...) Winter time there is not any Person that is no
(...) up in the Skins and Furrs of several (...)* as Sables, Martins, Foxes,
Wolves, (...) several others, of which I do not know the Names in Portuguese:
and some of these Skins are so high-priz'd, that a Garment will cost a Hundred,
Three Hundred, and Four Hundred Crowns.

As for Flesh, Fish, Fruit, and other Provisions, it is enough to say, that
they have all which we have in Europe, and many more Varieties that we have
not; the Cheapness of which sufficiently demonstrates their Plenty. Now as the
Chinese Language is very Laconick and short, so is their Writing, which is the
reason that they express all these things with Six Letters or Syllables. The
Two first are, u co, which signify, that there are Five Principal sorts of
Grain; Rice, Wheat, Oats, Millet, Pease, and Beans. The other Two are Lo trio,
signifying that there are Six sorts of the Flesh of Tame Animals; Horses, Cows,
Pork, Dogs, Mules, and Goats. The Two last, Pe quo, signify that there are a
Hundred sorts of Fruits; as Pears, Apples, Peaches, Grapes, Oranges, Walnuts,
Chestnuts, Pomegranates, Citrons, and several other sorts, which we have also
in Europe, except Three, which we have not. The first of the Three is called
Su^ su, and at Macao Figs of China, not that they resemble Figs in shape, but
because the Taste of Figs is somewhat like to the Taste of this Fruit, which is
so Delicious, that it may well be called a Lump of Sugar. The largest and the
best are about the bigness of a Quince, but somewhat flatter, or a little more
seemingly crushed. The Color of it is a lively deep Yellow, truly resembling
the true Golden Apple. The second sort is called Li chi, and the third Lum yen,
and at Macao, Lichia, and Longans. These two Fruits, whether Eaten newly
gathered, or dried, are of a most Exquisite Taste. It may be objected perhaps,
that in lieu of these we have Quinces, Medlers, and Services: but beside that
those Fruits are also to be met with in the Province of Xan si, there is no
comparison between the Taste of the one and the other, especially the Two
latter; which are not to be Eaten neither, but when they are Rotten.

All manner of Game is also there so plentiful, that during the Three Months of
Winter, you shall see in several places appointed for the sport of Hunting,
several Nets of one or two Musket Shot in length, spread forth upon Tacks, and
heaps of several sorts of Land and Water Fowl, hardened and set upon their
Legs, Chinese call Gin hium, or Men-Bears; Keu Hium, or Dog-Bears, and Chiu
Hium, or Pig-Bears; because of their several Resemblances, especially in the
Head and Paws. The Paws of Bears well boiled, are highly esteemed in the
Banquets of the Chinese, and their Fat is a great Entertainment for the
Tartars, who eat it raw, tempered with Honey. Nevertheless these Bears are very
rare, and consequently very dear. But there are such vast Numbers of all other
sorts of Creatures, as Deer of several Kinds, wild Boars, Ellands, Hares,
Conies, wild Cats and Rats, Geese, Ducks, all manner of Wood Fowl, Partridges,
Quails of different sorts and shapes, which we have not in Europe, and all so
cheap, that I could never have believed it, had I not been convinced by my own
Experience for Two and twenty years together that I lived at Court.

Notes upon the Tenth Chapter.
A. P. 139. The Wax is the fairest, etc.
OTher Relations speak of this Wax produced out of Trees, but not with so many
curious Circumstances. Father Trigaut says, that the flame of it is very clear,
and that it is whiter and not so unctuous as ordinary Wax. Another Author
writes that it is Transparent, and that you may see the Week through it. Father
Trigaut says moreover, That the Chinese make another sort of very white Wax
drawn from a Tree, but that it does not give so clear a Light as the first.
Another Relation gives this Description of the Tree and the Fruit of it.

There is in the Province of To Kien, a fair Tree, large and well tufted with
Boughs called Ku ei Xu, which grows by the River side. In December it produces
a Fruit of a dark Green color, as big as a Hazel Nut; the green Peel of which
dryes up of it self, and sheds off by degrees, and then appears a certain
Substance as white as Snow, like to Suet exactly tried. This the People gather
at the End of December, or Beginning of January; afterward they melt it, and
make Candles of it, which are like to white Wax, and yield no ill smell. They
make use of these Candles all the Year, tho they last much longer in the Summer
than in the Winter, and cost not above Fourteen pence the Pound. Out of the
Dregs and Lees of this Fruit, they press out an Oil which serves for Lamps.
This Fru^ is very Extraordinary, and shows us how Heaven h^ favored China
above other Countries.

B. P. 143. Fixed upon their Legs, and as it were Embalmed from Corruption by
the vehemence of the Cold, etc.
This by no means ought to be looked upon as a thing incredible; since it is
the ordinary Effect of Cold. All the Spanish Histories report, That in the
Voyage that Diego d' Almagro made to the Country of Chili, several of his Men
crossing the high Mountains of Andes, growing numm and stiff with cold, were
frozen to Death either upon their Horses backs, or standing upon their legs and
leaning against the Rocks. In which Postures they were found a long time after
without any Corruption. The Relation also of Muscovy, which I have already
quoted once before, tells us that there is, every Winter, a great quantity of
Sturgeon of Astracan sold in the Market at Mosco, stiffen'd and preserved sweet
and wholesome by the vehemence of the Cold; as also whole heaps of other Fish
covered over with Snow.

CHAP. XI. Of the Nobility of the Empire.
IF this word Nobility be taken in general for the Nobility of the Kingdom it
self, which is no more then an Illustrious Grandeur, that has continued all
along for several Ages; since it began not above Two hundred years after the
Flood; and has flourished ever since to this present time, for about Four
thousand five hundred thirty two years; certain it is, that never any Empire
was ever more Illustrious than that of China. But if we restrain the
Signification of the word to the Nobility only of particular Families, we must
confess, that there are very few noble Descents in the Kingdom, for the
following Reason. For all the Great Lords, which are as it were so many Petty
Kings, Dukes, Marquisses, Counts, etc. never last any longer than the Reigning
Family; with which they perish all together. Because the Family which is
advanced in the room of the the other puts them all to Death, as we have seen by
Experience in our Time. For this reason it is that the most Noble House that
ever was in this Empire, is the Family of Cheu, which has lasted Eight hundred
seventy five* years; and expired about Two thousand two hundred years ago. No
Family since that, having been able to attain to a Continuance of Three hundred
years.

However what we have hitherto said, extends it self only to that Nobility,
which is acquired by Arms. For as to that which has been acquired by
Employments of the long Robe, the continuance of it is very inconsiderable. And
therefore tho a Man should be Xam xu, which is the first Dignity, in the
Supreme Tribunals of the Court, or Co lao, that is to say, Prime Minister of
State, which is the Highest degree of Honor and Riches, to which Fortune can
raise a Subject in this Empire, generally his Grandchild shall be reduced to
great Poverty, and shall be constrained to follow Merchandise, or to trade by
Retail, or to be an ordinary Man of Letters, as his Great Grandfather was
before him. In short there was never any Descent of the Gownmen, that ever
lasted so long as the Reigning Family. I was acquainted, under the Family that
reigned before the Conquest of the Tartars, with several P^tty Kings, Dukes,
and other great Lords, who because they were of the Blood Royal, or descended
from Valiant Captains, who had been assisting in the Conquest of the Empire,
claimed a Nobility as ancient as the Royal Family, and which expired as
unfortunately with it: but I never saw or heard of any Family of the Gown-men
that ever lasted so long. However that which is but a usual Misfortune which
attends the latter, is an Effect of the Cruelty of their Enemies in regard of
the first; of which there are several, which had they not been destroyed by
Massacres, might have continued their Luster and Grandeur as long as the Empire
it self. And yet there is still one Family remaining, which not only has
preserved its Luster, but is honored at present by the Kings, the Grandees and
People with equal Veneration, and has flourished for above these Twenty Ages:
so that it may be truly said to be the most Ancient Family in the Universe.
This is the House of that famous Confu ci us, who was born under the Third
Imperial Family called Cheu, Five hundred and fifty one years before the Birth
of Christ; and so his Family may be said to have lasted Two thousand two
hundred and nineteen years, reckoning to this present year 1668. The Ancient
Kings gave to his Descendants the Title of Que cum, which is the same with that
of Duke or Count. And this Family claims to it is self a kind of Sovereignty,
and an Exemption from Paying Tribute in the Province of Xan tum, and the City
of Kio feu, where Cum fuci us was Born, without ever having been molested, or
having suffered any Alteration, tho the Empire and the Reigning Houses have
been several times ranvers'd. The Chinese also bestow upon this Philosopher
Names and Titles very Honorable, of which the Chiefest are, Cum su, Cum fu su,
and Xim gin. The two first signify Doctor or Master, as we say Doctor or
Master Scotus. The third signifies a Holy Man. For that when they say, The
Saint, by way of Excellency, they mean Cum fu ci us, which among the Chinese,
signifies a Person of extraordinary and heroic Wisdom. For this Nation has so
high a Veneration for that Philosopher, that although they do not Worship him as
one of their Deities, yet they honor him with more Ceremonies than their Idols
or Pagods; tho they cannot endure to hear him called their Idol or Pagod; but
on the other side, would take it for a very great affront. I could add several
other things, which that Nation affirms of this Philosopher, who in reality was
a Learned Person, and endowed with several Natural Virtues. It shall therefore
suffice to say, that they liberally bestow upon him now he is dead, that
Affection, that Veneration, and those Titles of Honor, which he could never
obtain while he lived: and therefore it is that they call him Su vam, that is
to say, a King without Command, without a Scepter, without a Crown and Jewels;
only Naked, and without Luster. By which they would have us to understand, that
he was furnished with all the qualities and virtues requisite to have made him
a King or an Emperor; but that Destiny and Heaven were not so favorable to him.

CHAP. XII. Of the wonderful Government of this Empire; of the Distinctions
between the Mandarins, and of the Council of State.
IF China be to be valued and admired for those things which we have already
related, it merits certainly a far greater reputation for the excellency of its
Government. But before we proceed any farther upon that Subject, it will be
necessary to unfold what the learned say of their Kings, and the form of their
Government. Among all the Three Laws which are observed in this Empire, that
which they call the Law of the Learned, is the principal and most ancient. The
chief end of it is the good Government of the Kingdom, upon which they have
composed so many Treatises and Commentaries that it is a thing to be admired.
Anciently Cum fu sius wrote a Tractate upon this Subject, which he entitled
Chum Yum, that is to say, The Golden Mediocrity, wherein he teaches, that a
virtuous Prince ought to have nine Qualities, or to do nine things. First of
all to accomplish and govern himself well, to the end he may show himself a
Guide and example to all his Subjects. Secondly, to honor and cherish men of
Learning and Virtue, and frequently to converse with and consult them upon the
affairs of his Empire. Thirdly, to love his Uncles, his Cousins, and all the
rest of the Princes of the Blood; to grant them those favors and rewards which
they deserve, and to let them see that he respects and values them, and prefers
them before all other persons within his Dominions. Fourthly, to be respectfull
and courteous to all his Nobility which are not of the Blood Royal, advancing
them to wealth and honor, that all the world may see how much he values and
considers them above the common sort. Fifthly, to incorporate himself, as I may
so say, with the rest of his Subjects, to equalize and unite his heart to
theirs, and to regard and esteem them as his own proper substance and Person.
Sixthly, to love his people with a true affection, to rejoice in their welfare
and their joy, and to be afflicted at their calamity and sadness; so that the
meanest person in his Kingdom may be ^ully persuaded that the King loves him as
one of his Children. Seventhly, to invite to his Court all sorts of Workmen and
Artists, for the quick dispatch of all public and private business. Eighthly,
to caress and treat with all imaginable civility and liberality all Foreign
Ambassadors, letting them see in deeds as well as words the effects of a Royal
and Generous Soul, and taking such order, that upon their departure they may
return into their Country with all security and satisfaction. Ninthly, to
cherish and embrace all the Lords of the Empire, and to treat them in such a
manner, that they may be so far from admitting the least thought of Revolt to
slide into their hearts, as rather to be the Bulwarks and Fortresses of his
Kingdom. These were the Nine Rules or Maxims of Cum fu sius. What follows is
the Exposition of a Commentatour.

If the King, says he, puts in practice these nine Rules he may immortallize
his Reign, and not only acquire great Renown, but attain the end for which
Heaven has advanced him to so high a degree of Dignity. For if a Prince govern
himself well, at the same time he shall also obtain that sovereign perfection
and universal virtue of Golden Mediocrity. He shall be a crystal mirror
wherein his Subjects may behold themselves, and a living Rule and enliven*d
Model for them to imirate. If he esteem and honor men of Learning and Virtue,
with equal complacency they will discover to him the method and maxims of good
Government. He will every day become more and more enlightened, and acquire
Prudence, Judgment, Experience and Knowledge how to govern himself and his
people; and he will find himself from moment to moment less uncertain and less
entangled in the conduct of affairs both of his House and Kingdom. If he love
his Uncles, Brothers, and the rest of his Kindred, they will live together with
him and serve him with concord and satisfaction. If he favor and cherish his
Grandees, they will be faithful and diligent, they will serve him as
Instruments to increase his power; they will act sincerely and justly in all
affairs of importance. In a word, they will be a help and assistance to him in
all things; nor shall he ever be exposed, while he makes use of their counsel,
to be without a Guide, and hazard his Dominion by the rash errors of his
Government. If he consider his Subjects as his own members they will do their
utmost to serve him, with all the marks of entire sidelity, in return of their
Prince*s esteem and favor. If he love his people as his Children, he will fill
their hearts with joy and affection, while they on the other side prostrate
themselves at his feet ens^am'd with love and veneration for their King, their
Parent and their Master. If he invite to his Court Artificers and Artists of
all sorts, they will make it their business to settle or improve Commerce,
Agriculture, and all such Trades and Arts to which they have been bred. Thus
the Kingdom will be enriched, and by that means the people, the whole Empire
and the King himself will live in plenty, and enjoy an abounding and durable
peace. If he be courteous and liberal to Ambassadors and other Foreigners* the
fame of his Virtues will spread it self to all parts of the Earth and distant
Nations will glory to be under his subjection. If he cherish in his bosom the
great Lords of his Kingdom, he will excite them to all the heroic and
illustrious actions of which their Quality and Nobility renders them capable;
and all with a respectfull awe and ardent affection for their Prince will
embrace virtue, and be Guards to the Emperor, and Bulwarks to the Empire.
These are the Reflections of the Commentator upon the Nine Rules of good
Government. I translated them out of Chinese into Portugueze, to the end that
by this Essay, men might be able to judge of their Sentiments upon this
Subject, and the Reader more clearly understand the rest that follows.

The Mandarins of the whole Kingdom are distinguished into nine Orders, and
every Order is divided into two Degrees. For example: It is said, such a one is
a Mandarin of the second degree of the first, second or third Order; or else,
he is a Mandarin of the first degree, of the first, second or third Order. This
Division signifies no more, than only the particular Titles which the King
gives them without any respect to their Employments. For though usually the
Mandarins are of an Order Superior or Inferior according to the Dignity of
their Employments, nevertheless that is no general Rule; because sometimes is
happens that to recompense the merits of a person whose Office has been usually
enjoyed by a Mandarin of the inferior Order, the King may give him the Title
of a Mandarin of the first or second Order. And on the other side, to punish a
person whose Office belongs to the superior Mandarins, he debases him to the
title of Mandarin of the inferior Orders. And the knowledge, distinction and
subordination of these Orders is so perfect and exact, the veneration and
submission of the latter toward the former is so great, and lastly the
sovereign power of the Prince over the one and the other so absolute, that I
never met with any thing that could compare with it among all the searches I
have made into any of our Governments whether Temporal or Ecclesiastical.

The Mandarins of the first Order, are Counselors of the King's Council of
State, which is the greatest Honor and the highest Dignity to which a Learned
man can arrive in this Empire. They have several Names and several Titles both
ancient and modern annexed to their Offices, of which the most common are Nui
Co, Co Lao, Cai Siam, Siam Cum, Siam Que; yet all these with little difference
signify no more than Assistants, Judges Lateral, and supreme Counselors to
the King. There are also several Halls in the King's Palace, magnificent as
well for their Architecture, as for their Spaciousness and Furniture; which are
distinguished into inferior or superior according to the business therein
transacted. For when the King would bestow any great favor upon some one of
his Counselors, he gives him the name of one of those Halls, as Chum chie
tien, that is to say, Supreme Royal Hall of the Middle, and then he adds this
new Title to his usual Name. The King also gives them other Titles by which
they acquire an extraordinary same and honor, when they merit those Titles by
any glorious Action; as Que chu, which signifies the Pillar that supports the
Empire.

Of these Counselors there is no determined number, being sometimes more
sometimes fewer, as it pleases the Emperor, who chooses them at his own
pleasure out of the Mandarins of other Tribunals. Nevertheless there is always
one, called Neu Siam who is their President, and as it were the Emperor's
prime Minister and Favorite. The Tribunal of these Counselors as it is the
highest of all that belongs to the Empire, so it is also placed in the King's
Palace on the left hand of the supreme Royal Hall, where the King gives
Audience and receives the Homages of the Mandarins when he goes abroad. And
here we must observe by the way that among the Chinese, the left hand is the
place of Honor. This Tribunal is called Nui Yuen, or the Tribunal within the
King's Palace. It is composed of three Orders of Mandarins: The first, are the
King's Counselors, of whom we have already spoken. These are to view, examine
and judge of all the Memorials which the six chief Tribunals, of which more in
due place, present to the King, upon all important affairs of the Empire,
whether they relate to Peace or War, or whether to Causes Civil or Criminal.
When they have determined them, they communicate their judgments to the King in
a very short Extract, who either ratisies or cancel^ them as he pleases; and
then overlooking the Memorials at large himself, gives his own decision, as he
thinks the Cause deserves.

They that compose the second Classis, are as it were Assistants and Assessors
to the King's Counselors, and are very powerful and much dreaded and
respected. They are usually of the second or third Order of Mandarins, and are
many times preferred to be Counselors to the King, Viceroys of Provinces, and
to the principal Offices of the six supreme Tribunals Their usual Title is Ta
hion su, or the Learned in great knowledge. This Title is also given to the
King's Counselors; besides which, the King also consers other very honorable
Titles upon the Mandarins of these two Classe's, according to their deserts; as
Tai cu Tai, or chief Governor of the Prince Heir of the Crown. Tai cu Tai su,
Grand Master to the same Prince; Ho tien ta trion su, Chief Lettered of the
Hall of Concord, and the like.

The Mandarins of the third Classis of this Tribunal are called Chum xu co,
that is to say, the Classis or School of the Mandarins. Their business it is to
write or cause to be written out the Affairs of this Tribunal; and the King
gives them Titles answerable to the Place and Halls where they exercise their
Functions They are usually of the fourth, fifth or sixth Order of tho
Mandarins. But they are much more dreaded than those of the two preceding
Classe's, for that upon them solely it is, that the good or ill success of
Affairs in a great measure depends; for that by altering, adding or leaving out
a Letter they may cause either the gaining or losing of a Suit. Insomuch that
many times through their wilful mistakes the most innocent lose their Estates,
their Reputation and their Lives. So great a power has Corruption and Avarice
over that Nation* and such an Energy of Expression and Nicety of Equivocal
Interpretation lies in the Chinese Letters. Moreover, besides these three
Classe's there belongs to this Tribunal an infinite number of Scriveners,
Procters, Rev^sers and other Officers.

CHAP. XIII. Of the eleven Supreme Tribunals, or of the six Tribunals of the
Mandarins for Letters, and the five Tribunals of the Mandarins for Military
Affairs.
BEsides the Supreme Tribunal, of which we have spoken in the foregoing
Chapter, there are yet eleven Chief Tribunals more, between which the King of
China two thousand years before the coming of CHRIST, shared all the affairs of
the Empire, and which remain to this present day. That is to say, six of
Learned Mandarins, which they call Lo pu; and five of Military Mandarins, that
are called u fu, and of which we shall speak hereafter. The first of the six
Tribunals of the Learned is called Li pu, whose business it is to take care of
all the Manderins of the Empire, and has power to confer or deprive them of
their Employments. The second, Hu pu, has the Superintendence over all the
Impositions and Revenues of the King* The third Li pu, has the management and
ordering of all the Rites and Ceremonies. The fourth Pim pu, takes care of all
the Arms, Captains and Soldiers throughout the whole Empire. The fifth Him pu,
takes cognizance of all Crimes, and the punishments of all Offenders in the
Kingdom. The sixth Cum pu, has the overseeing of all the King's Works and
Buildings. These six Tribunals have a Jurisdiction over almost all those that
belong to the Court, but are absolute over all in the Provinces, by whom they
are dreaded and obeyed, though at never so great a distance, as if they were
under their Eye. But in regard their power is so large and of so great an
Extent, for fear lest any one among them should make use of his authority to
raise Sedition, and lay hold of any opportunity to revolt; their Employments
are regulated in such a manner, that there is not one of these Tribunals that
can determine the business with which they are entrusted, without the
interposition and approbation of the rest, as we see every day, and have found
true by woeful experience in the time of our Persecution, during which, we were
sent to all these Tribunals for the determination of several circumstances. In
the Palaces belonging to every one of these six Tribunals, there is always a
Hall and an Apartment for one Mandarin called Co li, or Overseer, who examins
either publicly or privately all that is done in his Tribunal; and if he finds
any disorder, or any injustice, he presently gives notice thereof to the King.
Which Mandarin is neither subject nor superior to his Tribunal, but only an
Overseer or Controller as we have said before.

The Chief Presidents of these six Tribunals, by reason of their Office are of
the first degree of the second Order of Mandarins. They are called Xam xu: for
example: Li pu Xam xu, that is, Chief President of the Tribunal of Ceremonies.
H^ pu Xam xu, Chief President of the Tribunal of the King's Revenue. Every one
of these Presidents has two Assessors, of which the first is called Tso xi lam,
or President of the Left Hand. The other Yeu xi lam, or President of the Right
Hand. Which Assessors are of the first degree of the second Order. All these
three Presidents have several other Titles beside; for example; the first is
called Ta tam, the great or first Hall; the second, the Hall on the Left Hand;
the third, the Hall on the Right Hand.

These Six Tribunals are planted according to their rank close by the King's
Palace, on the east side, in large magnificent square Structures, the sides of
which are every way a musket shot and a half in length. These Structures have
every one three divisions of Doors, Courts and Appartments. The first President
possesses that in the middle; which begins at the Street, with a Portal that
has three doors, and runs along through other doors, portals and courts,
beautified with portico's, and galleries supported by fair pillars, till you
come to a spacious hall, where the first President sits with his Assessors, and
many other Mandarins, who have their particular titles, but are generally
called Mandarins of the great Hall. Beyond this Hall there is another Court,
and beyond that another lesser Hall, where the first President withdraws with
his Assessors, when he is to examine any private business, or any affairs of
extraordinary moment. On both sides, and beyond this Hall, there are several
Chambers and other Halls. The Chambers are for the use of the President, his
Assessors and the rest of the Mandarins to take their repose, and to eat their
Meat, which the King gives them, to the end, that having no occasion to go to
their own Houses, they may spend the more time in the dispatch of Business. The
Halls are for the Pronotaries and Clerks, and other inferior Officers. The two
other Divisions of Rooms and Courts one within another, belong to the inferior
Tribunals, which are subordinate to the Supreme Tribunal, for which the Palace
was designed. These petty Tribunals are more or less numerous, according to the
business that comes under their cognizance, as we shall show in due time.

The manner of proceeding in these six Tribunals is this. When a man has any
business, he sets it down in a paper of such a form and largeness as the
custom allows. Then he goes to the Palace of the Tribunal, and beats upon a
Drum which he finds at the second Gate, and then falling upon his knees, he
raises his Petition with both his hands as high as his head, at what time the
Officer appointed for that employment, takes his Paper from him. He, carries it
to the Mandarins of the great Hall, who gives it to the first President, or in
his absence, to his Assessors, who having read it, either admit or reject it.
If they do not ad mit it, they send the Petitioner his Paper again* and many
times order him to be soundly whipped* for troubling the Court with a causeless
Suit, or for any other sufficient reasons of their dislike* If the Paper be
admitted, the first President sends it to the inferior Tribunal, to whom this
sort of Business belongs, to examine the cause, and give their opinions. After
this Tribunal has examined the matter, and given their judgment, they send it
back to the Chief President, who then gives Sentence, either adding,
moderating, or confirming without any alteration the sentence of the lower
Court. If the business be of great concernment, he orders the same Tribunal to
draw up the case in writing, which having read together with his Assessors, he
sends it to the Mandarin Controler, and he to the Supreme Tribunal of the
Counselors of State, that are lodged in the King's Palace* This Tribunal
examines the cause, and informs his Majesty, who most commonly orders the
Tribunal to re-examine it. Then the Counselors of State send back the Case to
the Controller, who after he has seen the King's Order, sends it to the chief
President, who causes it once more to be examined, and then sends it back to
the Controller, the Controller to the Counselors of State, and they to the
Emperor, who then gives his definitive Sentence. That Sentence returns the
same way to the first President, who gives notice of it to both parties, and so
the Suit is ended. If it be a business which the Provincial Tribunals send to
the Court, the Case is sealed up and directed to the King's Controller; the
Controller opens and reads it, and then sends it to the Chief President, who
proceeds as before is recited.

Would but the Mandarins in their judicial proceedings act conformable to the
Laws, and the intention of their Prince, China would be the most happy and best
governed Country in the world. But as exact as they are in the outward
observance of their Formalities, as hypocritical, as wicked, and cruel are they
in their hearts. Their tricks and cheats are so numerous, that a large volume
would not suffice to contain them. I shall therefore say no more than only
this; that it is a rare thing to meet with a Mandarin that is free from avarice
and corruption. They never consider the justice or injustice of a cause, but
those that give most money, or send most presents. So that whether Life,
Estate, or Honourly at stake, those insatiable and sanguinary Judges have no
regard to either, but only like so many ravenous Wolves to gorge their
Sacrilegious Avarice. And what we have hitherto said, is common to all the six
Tribunals. But now to speak of every one in particular.

The first of these six Tribunals is called Li Pu, whose business it is, to
furnish the Empire with superior and inferior Mandarins, to examine their
merits and miscarriages, and to inform the King, to the end he may either
prefer or disgrace them; reward or punish them. In the Palace belonging to this
Tribunal are four other inferior Tribunals. The first of which is called Ven
Sinen Su, or the Tribunal which makes choice of such persons as are quallified
with knowledge and other endowments requisite to fit them for the Honor of
being Mandarins. The second Cao cum su, which examines the good or bad
behavior and conduct of the said Mandarins. The third Nien fum su, whose
business it is to seal Judicial Acts, to give the Seals to every Mandarin; and
to examine whether the Seals which are brought to Court or sent away are true
or counterfeit. The fourth Ki hium su, or the Tribunal, whose business it is to
examine the merits of the great Lords, as the Petty Kings of the Blood Royal,
the Dukes, Marquesses and the like, which the Chinese call Hiun chin, or
ancient Vassals, who have performed great services in the Wars, when the
Reigning Family conquered the Empire.

The second superior Tribunal is called Hu pu,* which signifies the King's Lord
High Treasurer. This Tribunal oversees the Treasures, the Receipts and
Expenses, the Revenues and Tributes of the King: distributes the Pensions, and
the quantity of Rice, the pieces of Silk and the Money which the King gives to
all the Petty Princes, and other Grandees, and to all the Mandarins of the
Empire. This Tribunal keeps the Roll or Catalogue, which is made every Year
with great exactness, of all the Families, of all the Men, the Measures of
Land, and Duties which they are obliged to pay, and of the public Magazines.
Here for the better understanding of that which follows; we are to understand,
that although there are fifteen Provinces in China; yet in the public
Registers, and according to the usual manner of speaking, they say fourteen
Provinces and a Court. For, say the Chinese, the Province where the Court
resides, is not in subjection, but commands; and therefore they never reckon it
in the number of the other Provinces. And therefore it is, that in the six
Superior Tribunals, there is not any Inferior Tribunal appointed for the
Affairs of Pekim. But the chief President sends them to one or two of the
inferior Tribunals appointed for other Provinces as he thinks ^it. This being
thus promised, the Superior Tribunal of the Exchequer has on both sides of the
Palace belonging to it, fourteen inferior Tribunals which bear the name of the
Province to which it belongs. As for example: The Tribunal of the Province of
Ho nan, the Tribunal of the Province of Can ton, and so of the rest. During the
Reign of the preceding Family they reckoned but thirteen Provinces and two
Courts; for that the City of Nan k^ was a Royal Court as well as Pe kim; and
had also six superior Tribunals, and all the rest subordinate to them as now
at Pe kim. But the Tartars deprived it of the Title of Court, put down all the
Tribunals, and altered the name of the City, calling it Kiam nim, and the
Province Kiam n^n, which are the Names that they had in former times.

The third superior Tribunal is called Li pu, which has the oversight and
ordering of Rites and Ceremonies, Arts and Sciences. This Tribunal takes care
of the Royal Music, to examine the Students, and to give them power to be
admitted to the Examination of the Learned: give their advice in reference to
the Titles and Honors which the King vouchsases to bestow upon the deserving;
what Temples and Sacrifices the King ought to erect and make to the Heaven and
the Earth, to the Sun, the Moon and his own Ancestors. They order the Banquets
when the King feasts his Subjects or Foreigners: They receive, entertain and
discharge the King's Guests, and all Ambassadors: They take care of the
Liberal and Mechanic Arts: And lastly, of the three Laws or Religions which
are observed throughout the Empire, of which the first is that of the Learned;
the second, that of the Tao su, or the Married Bonzes; and the third, of the
Batchelour Bonzes. It Is in the power of this Tribunal to apprehend, whip and
punish them all; and in this very Tribunal it was that we were all of us
imprisoned for two months during the Persecution, and bound every one with nine
chains; that is to say, the Fathers John Adam, Lewis Buglio, Ferdinand
Verbiest, and Gabriel Magaillans, and afterward delivered over to the Secular
power. On each side of this Tribunal stand four other inferior Tribunals,
among which the care of those things already mentioned is divided. The first is
called Ychi su, or the Tribunal of Important Affairs, as of the Titles of Petty
Princes, Dukes, Great Mandarins, etc. The second Su ci su, which takes care of
the King's Sacrifices, the Temples, the Mathematics, the three Laws, etc. The
third Chu ke su, which takes care to entertain and dispatch the King's Guests,
whether Natives or Foreigners. The fourth Cim xen xu, which has the ordering of
the Banquets which are prepared for the King, or for those upon whom the King
is pleased to bestow that favor. When the Chinese were Masters of their own
Country, none but Doctors, and those two only, such as were of most repute
for their knowledge and merit were admitted into this Tribunal. So that they
were the most esteemed, and such as stood the fairest for preferment: for out
of their number it was that the King made choice of the Colao and his
Counselors of State. But now Tartars are put in, who dispose of all things at
their own pleasure, while the Mandarins signify no more among them than only
dumb Statues: and so it is in the rest of the Tribunals. So truly may we
believe it to have been the will of God, to chastise and bring down the
incredible pride of this Nation, by subduing and subjecting them to a small
handful of poor, ignorant, rustic Barbarians; as if God for the punishment of
Europe, should deliver it over into the power of the Cafers of Angola or
Mozambique.

But though the name of this Tribunal be altogether like that of the former,
nevertheless there is a great difference in the Chinese Language: for the
Characters of the first Syllable Li, are nothing alike, and the pronunciation
also is very different; the first is pronounced by shrilling and raising the
voice which we therefore mark with an accute accent, Li. On the contrary, the
second is pronounced by falling the voice, and therefore marked with a grave
accent Li. Thus according to the first signification Li signifies Mandarins,
and Pu, Tribunal; and both together the Tribunal of the Mandarins, according to
the second pronunciation. Li signifies Rites or Ceremonies, and joined with Pu,
the Tribunal of Ceremonies. This Equivocal Signification is no where to be met
with among the Tartars, who call the first Tribunal Hafan xurgan, or the
Tribunal of the Mandarins. For that Hafan signifies a Tribunal, and Xurgan
Mandarins: and the second Toro Xurgan, or the Tribunal of Ceremonies.

The fourth superior Tribunal is called Pim pu, which has the ordering of War
and Military affairs over the whole Empire. This chooses and advances all the
Officers; disposes of their Commands in the Armies; in the Garrisons upon the
Frontiers; in the Inland Fortresses, and in all parts of China. This orders the
Levy's and Exercises of the Soldiers; Replenishes the Grand Arsenals, and a
great number of Magazins with Arms offensive and defensive, with Ammunition and
Provisions, and all things necessary for the defense of the Empire. And to the
Palace of this Tribunal belong four more that are inferior. The first is
called Vu siven su, and takes care to make choice, and to confer upon the
Military Mandarins their Commands, and to cause them to exercise their
Soldiers. The second is called Che fam su, and takes care to distribute the
Soldiers and Military Officers into all the Places and Posts of the Empire,
for the pursuit of Robbers, and to prevent the disturbance of the public
Peace. The third is called Che Kia su, and takes care of the King's Horses, as
well those that are upon the Frontiers, and in Places of importance, as those
that are appointed for Postage, and the service of the Royal Inns.

They have also the ordering of the Wagons and Boats, which serve for the
Transportations of Provisions and Soldiers. The fourth is called Vu cu su, and
takes care for the making of all sorts of Arms, offensive and defensive, and
that they be kept in good order, and fit for service in all the Magazins and
Arsenals of the Empire.

The fifth superior Tribunal is called Him pu, like the Tournelle, or
Parliamental Criminal Court in France, and extends its power over the whole
Empire They examine, try, and punish all Criminals according to the Laws of the
Empire: which are almost all of them very just and conformable to reason So
that if the Mandarins of this Tribunal, and consequently of all the rest did
but rightly observe them, there would not be those acts of injustice and
tyranny which are committed every day. For now there is hardly a Cause that is
tried according to reason and justice. He that gives money is always in the
right, till another gives more, and then he has more Right on his side. Gold,
Silver, pieces of Silk and other Presents govern there instead of Laws: Reason
and Justice are there put to sale as in an open Market, by Portsale or outcry
who gives most. This Nation suffering themselves to be so blinded by their
Avarice, that they cannot be diverted from it by all the rigorous punishments,
which the King sometimes orders to be inflicted upon those that are convicted
of their Corruption and Extortion. All the Tribunals of this Court take
cognizance of all the Crimes and Offenses of such as are under their
Jurisdiction by reason of their Employments. However, when the Crimes deserve
more than ordinary severity of Punishment, as Confiscation of Goods,
Banishment, or Death, then after they have informed the King, they send back
the Indictment and the Person indicted to this Tribunal, where after another re
examination of the cause, the definitive sentence is pronounced. To the Palace
appointed for this Tribunal, belong fourteen more inferior Courts or
Tribunals, for the fourteen Provinces of the Kingdom, as we have already
observed in the description of the second Tribunal. The Torments also and
Executions which this Court inflicts upon Criminals are of various sorts; which
I omit for fear of being too tedious. I shall only observe one custom among
the Chinese, quite contrary to what is usual in Europe, where Noble men are
beheaded, and ordinary offenders are hanged: whereas in China the greatest
ignominy that can befall a man is to have his head cut off. And therefore when
the King would show an extraordinary favor to a great Lord or Mandarin
condem'nd to dye, he sends him a very soft piece of Silk to be hanged in,
instead of a Halter. And the reason which the Chinese give to justify this
conceit of theirs is this; because they say that of necessity such as are
beheaded, must have been disobedient to their Parents, who gave them sound and
perfect Bodies, till they by their disobedience and their crimes made a
separation and disfigurement of the members. And they are so possessed with this
Opinion, that the Chinese will buy of the Hangman the Bodies of the
Malefactors executed, if they were their Parents, for five, ten or twenty
Crowns, nay sometimes they will not spare for hundreds and thousands of Crowns,
according to their wealth or poverty, and then they sow the head to the body
again with a world of lamentation and showers of tears, to satisfy in some
measure for their disobedience. They report that the original of this Ceremony
proceeded from a Disciple of Cum fu cius, called Tsem ^su: This Philosopher
lying at the point of death sent for his Children and Disciples, and after he
had shown them his head, his arms and his feet, he took his last farewell of
them in these words: Children, said he, learn of your Father and your Master,
to be as obedient as I have been to them who gave me my being in this world,
and brought me up with so much care, since by that means I have preserved
entire and perfect the body which they bestowed upon me.

I said but now that the Chinese purchased the bodies of Parents at great
rates, which is true; for they that are condemned to be beheaded, are also
sentenced to be deprived of common burial; which is a most terrible infamy
among them. For this reason the hangman is obliged after he has stripped the
body, to throw it into the next Ditch: and in selling the body he exposes
himself to the hazard of being severely punished, or at least to give the
Mandarin or the informer that discovers the sale a good part of the money which
he received; and therefore he must sell dear that he may give the more. Among
the rest of the Laws there is one observed by this Tribunal which was enacted
by one of the Ancient Kings, of which I cannot omit the rehearsal; that when
any criminal either for his good qualities, or for any other reason deserves to
be pitied, whether he be condemned in the Spring, the Winter or the Summer, he
shall be reprieved till the end of the next Autumn following. For that it is an
ancient custom among the Chinese, upon the Birth or Marriage of a Prince, or
upon any other cause of public rejoicing, or after an Earthquake, or upon any
extraordinary alteration of the Seasons or Elements to release all sorts of
Prisoners, except some few that are excepted, and by that means those that are
reprieved are set at liberty, or at least live in fair hopes for some months.

The sixth and last superior Tribunal is called Cum Pu, or the Tribunal of the
public Works. This Tribunal takes care to build and repair the King's Palaces,
their Sepulchers and Temples, wherein they honor their Predecessors, or where
they adore their Deities, the Sun, Moon, Heaven and Earth, etc. as also the
Palaces of all the Tribunals throughout the Empire, and those of the great
Lords. They are also the Surveyors and Overseers of all the Towers, Bridges,
Damms, Rivers, Lakes, and of all things requisite to render Rivers navigable,
as Highways, Wagons, Barks, Boats and the like. To this Palace belong four
more inferior Courts. The first is called Vin Xen Su, which examines and draws
the Designs of all the works that are to be done. The Second You hem su, which
has the ordering of all the Workhouses and Shops in all the Cities of the
Kingdom for the making of warlike Arms and Weapons. The third Tum Xui su, takes
care to make the Rivers and Lakes Navigable, to level the High Ways, to build
and repair Bridges, and for the making of Wagons and Boats, and other things
necessary for the convenience of commerce. The fourth Ce Tien su, are the
Overseers of the King's Houses and Lands which he lets out to hire, and of
which he has both the Rent and the Fruits of the Harvest.

By what has been said, it appears that the six superior Tribunals have under
them four and forty inferior Courts, which have their peculiar Palaces within
the circuit of the Palace of that Tribunal to which they belong; with Halls,
Chambers and other conveniences. Every one of these forty four Courts has also
a President, and twelve Counselors; four of which are of the first degree of
the fifth Order of Mandarins; four of the second degree of the fifth, and the
other four of the sixth Order. In the Tribunals of the Exchequer, and the
Criminal Tribunal, the number of Judges is double, where all the inferior
Tribunals have a President and twenty four Counselors.

But besides these graduated Mandarins there are some employed who are under no
degree, and yet are Mandarins for all that: however after some years service,
the King advances them to the Ninth and eighth Order of Mandarins. Moreover all
these Tribunals have a great number of Prothonotarys, Registers, Clerks,
Controllers, Merchants, Ushers, Porters, Messengers, Attendants and Servants,
Jailors, Provosts, Sergeants, Bailiffs, Beadles to whip and punish Offenders:
Sweepers, Cooks to dress their Viands, people to lay the Cloth, and wait at
Table, and all at the King's charges. Observe by the way however, that what we
have said as to the number of Mandarins, relates only to the reign of the
preceding Family, for at present their number is double in all the Courts. For
example, the lower Court which consisted of no more than twelve Mandarins, has
now twenty four, that is to say, twelve Tartars, and twelve Chinese.

These are the six Tribunals that govern all China, and which are so famous
over all the Kingdom However, that neither the one nor the other should grow
too powerful, the Ancient Kings that established and confirmed them, shared
their Employments, and regulated their Functions with so much prudence, that
there is not one which is so absolute in the Affairs which are under their
jurisdiction, but they depend one upon another. For Example, the first
President of the fourth Tribunal, which is that of War, had it an independent
Authority, had an easy opportunity to rebel, because all the Forces of the
Kingdom are at their disposal But they want money, and therefore of necessity
they must have the King's leave and order to require it from the Tribunal of
the Exchequer. The Pioneers, Barques, Boats, Wagons, Tents and other
instruments of War, belong to the sixth Tribunal, to which the fourth must
address themselves: besides that the Horses are under the jurisdiction of a
petty separate Tribunal, of which we shall speak hereafter.

The Military Mandarins make five Tribunals, which are called U Fu, or five
Casses. Their Palaces are placed Westward, on the right hand of the Palace
Royal and are thus distinguished by their Names. The first is called Heu Fu, or
the Rereguard. The second Tso Su, or the Left Wing: The third Yeu Fu, or the
Right Wing. The fourth Chum Fu, or the Main Battle: and the fifth Lien Fu, or
the Vanguard. The five Tribunals are governed by fifteen great Lords, as
Marquisses, Counts, etc. three in each Tribunal, of which the one is President,
and the other two his Assessors. They are all fifteen of the first Order of the
Mandarins; but the Presidents are of the first degree of that Order, and the
Assessors of the second; all the Officers and Soldiers of the Court being
under their care.

These five Tribunals have one superior Tribunal above them, which is called
Ium chim fu, that is to say, the Supreme Tribunal of War; the President of
which is always one of the greatest Lords in the Kingdom. The Authority of this
Tribunal extends it self over all these five Tribunals, and over all the
Officers and Soldiers of the Empire. But to prevent their abusing so large a
power, they are curbed by an Assessor set over them, who is a Mandarin of
learning, with the Title of Supreme Regent of Arms, and two Royal Controllers,
who are equally concerned in the management of Affairs. Under the Reign of the
preceding Family these Tribunals had a very great Authority, and were much more
highly honored and esteemed: nevertheless they had much more reputation than
real power; in regard the Execution of Business belonged to the superior
Tribunal of Arms called Pim pu. It may be objected perhaps that these five
Tribunals were superfluous, because they depended upon the fourth of the six
superior Courts: But in answer to this it is to be observed, that there were
at Court at that time a great number of Lords which the Chinese call Hium
Chin, or Vassals of great merit, whose Ancestors had assisted the first King
of the preceding Race to make himself Master of the Empire. Besides it is most
certain that there is no Passion so prevailing over the Chinese as the violent
ambition of Rule and Command; as being that wherein they place all their
chiefest glory and happiness; as may appear by the Answer which a Mandarin made
to Father Matthew Ricci. For that same Father discoursing of our Holy Law, and
of that Eternal Felicity which they who embraced it enjoyed hereafter; Come,
come, said the Mandarin, hold your tongue, and lay aside these idle conceits,
your greatest glory and happiness as a Stranger, it is to abide in this Kingdom
and this Court. And for my own part, all my glory and happiness consists in
this same Girdle and Habit of a Mandarin, all the rest is nothing but fables
and words which the wind blows away; mere stories of things invisible or rather
never to be seen. That which is visible, is to command others; Gold and Silver,
Wives and Concubines, and multitudes of Servants of both sexes, these are
visible; Noble Houses, great Wealth, Banquets, Divertisements, these are to be
seen. In a word, Estate, Honor and Glory are the consequences of being a
Mandarin. This is all the felicity which we desire and enjoy in this large
Empire, and not your vain felicity, which is as unprofitable as it is invisible
and impossible to obtain. These are the carnal sentiments of men no less blind,
than proud and haughty: which being so, the Kings, who understand the humor of
that Nation, especially of the Grandees, for their satisfaction, be thought
themselves of these Tribunals, which they erected and regulated in such a
manner that they gave them an opportunity to satisfy their Ambition, with the
Honors and Profits belonging to their Offices, and prevented them from doing
mischief by the small authority which they had allowed them. Now as there are
some Mandarins who are not of any of the Nine Orders, which are called Vi jo
Lieu, or Men not settled, there are others which are called Vu Pin, or such for
whom there is no degree high enough, or such whose Merits are so great, that
they are above all Orders and Degrees. These are the Petty Kings, Dukes,
Marquisses, etc. which govern the two Tribunals of Arms. But though they are
honored with Titles, and some small authority which they enjoy by virtue of
their Quality of Mandarins, nevertheless, the dignity of Dukes and Marquisses
which their great Services have purchased is far more valued and esteemed. And
thus much for the Eleven Superior Courts or Tribunals: we shall now briefly
give you a Prospect of the other Tribunals of the Court and whole Empire.

CHAP. XIV. Of several other Tribunals at Pekim.
THE Licentiates of all the Kingdom, whom the Chinese call Kiu Gin, or men
famous, for Learning, meet together every three years at the Court at Pekim,
and are there examind for thirteen days together. A month after, the degree of
Doctor is given to three hundred and sixty six, who have displayed the most
pregnant of Parts and Ingenuity in their Compositions. Out of these young
Doctors the King makes choice of the youngest and most ingenious, and prefers
them to a Tribunal called Han Len Iven, that is to say, a Garden or Wood
flourishing in Learning and Knowledge. This Tribunal contains a great number of
Mandarins, all very learned and the most sprightly Wits of the Empire; which
are divided into five Classes, and compose five Tribunals, with the Names and
Employments of which I shall not trouble the Reader for fear of being tedious,
but only give a general account of their Functions. They are Tutors to the
Prince who is Heir to the Empire, whom they instruct in Virtue, Civility, and
the Liberal Sciences. By degrees also, as he grows in years, they teach him the
true arts of Governing, and the methods of good Conduct. They set down all the
remarkable accidents that happen either at Court or throughout the whole
Empire, and which most deserve to be delivered to Posterity. They compile the
general History of the Kingdom: they are always at their Studies, and write
Books upon several Subjects. They are properly the King's Learned People, who
frequently discourses with them upon several Sciences, and makes choice of
several of them to be his Colao, or Counselors, or for his other Tribunals:
and generally he commits to their care the Execution of all affairs that
require Secrecy and Fidelity. In short, this Tribunal is a Royal Academy, or as
I may so say, a Royal Magazine furnished with Men of Wit and Learning always
ready to serve the State, and the Emperor. They that belong to the first
Tribunal are of the third order of Mandarins: they of the second, of the fourth
Order; and they that belong to the other three, are of the fifth Order. Yet
though they are of those inferior Orders, nevertheless they are very much
esteemed, respected and dreaded.

The Tribunal called Gue Thu Kien, is as it were the Royal School or University
of the whole Empire, and it has two sorts of Employments: The first is that
when the King makes any Sacrifice to the Heaven, the Earth, the Sun or Moon, or
to any one of his Subjects deceased, to recompense his great Services, the
Mandarins of this Tribunal present the Wine, which is done with a great deal of
ceremony. Their next business is to take care of all the Licentiates and
Undergraduates of the Kingdom, and of all the Students, to whom for some
particular reason the King is pleased to confer Titles and Dignities which
equal them in some measure with the Batchelour Graduates. These Students are of
eight sorts. The first are called Cum Sem, who being Batchellors of Art and
learned, are of an age not to be examined, or who having been examined had not
the good fortune to come off with applause, and therefore to make them amends
the King gives them a Pension as long as they live. The second, called Quen
Sem, are the Sons of great Mandarins, upon whom, by reason of the eminent
Services of their Parents the King confers employments, without suffering them
to undergo the rigor of Examinations. The third sort called Ngen Sem, are
certain Students whom the King makes Mandarins at his coming to the Crown, or
upon the Birth or Marriage of the Prince his eldest Son. The fourth is called
Cum Sem, are Students upon whom the King bestows his Favors, and advances them
to Dignities by reason of their great personal merits, or the great Services of
their Ancestors. The fifth sort, called Kien Sem, comprehends all those who
having been Batchellors for some time, and after their Examinations not being
able to merit the degree of Licentiates, or else fearing to lose their degree
of Batchelour, give the King a Sum of Money, for which he grants them the Title
of Kien Sem, which confirms them for ever into their Batchelour's degree, and
makes them capable of being elected Mandarins. The sixth is composed of
Students that learn foreign Languages, that they may be able to interpret when
Strangers come to Court. To whom the King for their encouragement gives this
Title with Revenues proportionable, and after they have served for some years,
they may be made Mandarins without any Examination. The seventh consists of the
Sons of great Lords, who in this Tribunal learn Virtue, Civility, and the
Liberal Sciences, and when they are of age to be Mandarins, the King prefers
them to some Employment or other. The eighth is accidental and of a peculiar
sort; for when the Emperor has any Daughters that are called Ladies of the
Palace or Cum Chu, and that he has an intention to marry them, he makes choice
at Pekim of several young Lads, hopeful for their parts, handsome, and between
fourteen and seventeen years of age, whether they be the Sons of Mandarins,
Tradesmen or poor people. Out of these the Tribunal of Ceremonies chooses the
most accomplished for Beauty and Wit, and presents them to the King, who culls
out one that pleases him most and sends the rest back to their Parents, after
he has given to every one a sum of Money and a piece of Silk. But as for those
who are thus made choice of to be his Sons in Law, he sets over them a Mandarin
of the Tribunal of Ceremonies, and places him in that College to be instructed.
The President of this College is of the fourth Order of Mandarins; and his
Assessors, who are Regents in the College, are of the fifth Order.

The Mandarins that compose the Tribunal called Tu Cha Yuen are Controllers of
the Court, and of all the Empire. The President is equal in dignity to the
President of the six superior Tribunals, so that he is a Mandarin of the
second degree. His first Assessor is of the third: and his second Assistant of
the fourth, and all the rest of the Mandarins which are very numerous, and of
great authority, are of the seventh Order. Their employment is to take care
both at Court and over all the Empire, that the Laws and good Customs be
strictly observed, and put in execution, that the Mandarins perform their
Functions justly and truly, and that the people do their duties. They punish
slight faults in their own Tribunals, and inform the King of great offenses.
Every three years they make a general Visitation, sending fourteen Visitors
abroad, that is, one for every Province* So soon as the Visitors enter the
Province, they are superior to the Viceroys and other Mandarins, as well the
great as the petty ones, and they control them with so much majesty, authority
and rigor, that the dread wherein the Mandarins stand of them has given
occasion to this usual proverb among the Chinese, Lao xu Kien mao, that is to
say, The Rat has seen the Cat. Nor is it without reason that they stand in so
much awe of them, in regard it is in their power to take away their
Employments, and ruin their persons The Visitation being finished, they return
to Court, generally laden with four or five hundred thousand Crowns, more or
less, which the Mandarins give them. For they that are guilty will bleed very
freely for fear they should be accused to the King. Others are more sparing,
but give however, to prevent the inventing of accusations against them. At
their return they divide their spoils, with the first President and his
Assistants, and after that give both them and the King an account of their
visitation* Generally they never impeach any one of the Mandarins but such
whose injustice and tyrannies are so public, that it is impossible to conceal
them; or such who through their virtue or their poverty are not able to
gratify their avarice. This Visitation is called Ta Chai, or the great and
General Visitation. The second Tribunal makes a second Tribunal every year,
which is called Chum Chai, or the middle Super-Visor. This Tribunal also sends
visitors to nine Quarters of the Frontiers, on that side which is next the vast
Walls that separate China from Tartary. They send other Visitors to the Salt
Pits, which yield the King a great Revenue: and if the general Visitors greatly
enrich themselves by their spoils and robberies of the Mandarins and people;
these latter commit much greater robberies upon the Farmers, who distribute the
Salt into the Provinces, and who are the Richest men in China, as being
commonly worth four or five hundred thousand Crowns a man. The third Visitation
is called Siao Chai or the Petty Visit: this Visitation is made every three
months, by sending Visitors frequently unknown and in disguise, sometimes to
one Province or City, sometimes to another, that he may be able to give true
information against some Mandarin famous for his Tyranny and Extortion. Besides
these Visitations, this Tribunal sends into every Province every three years, a
certain Visitor called Hio Yuen, and to every City another called Ti Trio, to
examine the Batchelours of Art, and suppress the violences, which confiding in
their privileges, they act upon the people. These have power to apprehend, to
condemn all such Offenders to the Whip; and when they prove incorrigible, they
degrade and punish them with an extraordinary severity. Lastly, this Tribunal
sends forth whenever it is thought requisite a Visitor called Siun Ho to
survey the famous Canal, of which we have already spoken, and to take care of
the Barks which are employed therein. By means of which Visitation he reaps
more honor and profit than all the other Visitors, which this Visitation sends
forth.

The Judges of this Tribunal are lodged in a vast Palace, where they have under
them five and twenty inferior Tribunals, divided into five classes, of which
every one has five Tribunals, with five Presidents, and many Assessors and
inferior Officers. The five of the first Classis are called Uchin Chayuen, or
Visitors of the five Qurters of Pe Kim. The first is the Visitor of the South
Walls and that Quarter of the City next adjoining. The second visits the Walls
on the North side; the third, the Walls on the East, the fourth the Walls on
the West side; and the fifth the Walls in the middle. The Authority of these
Mandarins is very great, for they have power to try and punish the misdemanours
of the people and the Domestic Servants of the Mandarins and great Lords. But
if the Offender deserve Death, Confiscation of Estate or Banishment, then they
send him to the Criminal Tribunal.

Those of the Second Classis are called U Chin Pim Ma Su, or Grand Provosts of
the Five Quarters. Those of the third Classis are called Tam quen; or inferior
Provosts of the five Quarters. The two latter Classes make it their business to
apprehend Theives and Robbers, Malefactors* Gamesters, Vagabonds and the like;
and to detain them in Prison till they resign them to the Superior Robbers. It
is likewise their business to keep watch and ward in the day time, to go the
Rounds in the Night, and to set Sentinels to give notice when any fire happens
in any house. The Captains of the Watch are also subordinate to these two
Classes. For to every ten houses there belongs a Captain called Pai; and every
Pai teu have another Captain called Stum Kia, who is obliged to inform the
Tribunal of what is done, in his District, contrary to the Laws and good
Customs of the City; when any Strangers come to Town, or of any other Novelty.
He is also obliged to exhort the several private Families by singing with a
loud voice at the beginning of every night a Song consisting of five verses,
containing the most necessary Precepts of Morality in these words.

Hiao xum, fu mu, Tsum Kim cham xam, Ho mo Hian Li, Kiao tzu Sun. Mon tzo vi.

That is to say, Obey your Parents, reverence old Men, and your Superiors,
live together in Unity, instruct your Children, and do no acts of Injustice.

In petty Towns where there are no Mandarins, the care of this duty is
committed to four or five of the honestest old Men, called Lao gen, who have a
Captain called Hiam yo, or Ti fam. This person also sings the same Song every
Night; and the first and fifth of every month assembles the Inhabitants, and
explains the meaning of those Instructions by Similes and Examples. Of which I
thought it not amiss to relate some few to let the Reader see the virtuous
disposition, wit, and good government of this Nation. Obey your Parents as
Lambs obey their Ews, as they teach us by their extraordinary humility in
kneeling when they suck, and submitting to them exactly in acknowledgment of
the nourishment which they receive from them. Reverence the Aged and your
Superiors, in imitation of wild Geese, who by the Order which they observe in
their flight, show plainly the respect which is to be given to Seniority. Live
together in peace, in imitation of that Love and Unity which is observed among
Deer; for when any one of them has met with a good piece of Pasturage, he will
not feed by himself, till he has called together the rest of the Herd to take
their share. Instruct your Children like that ancient Matron called Tuen Ki,
who being a Widow, every day whipped the only Son that she had till she
dispossessed him of all his evil inclinations, so that at length being renowned
for his knowledge and his virtues he came to be Chuam Yuen, or chief of the
Doctors of the Empire, and afterward for his Virtue and Heroic Actions was
advanced to be Co Lao, or Chief Minister of State to the Emperor. Commit no
acts of Injustice, like that same wicked and disobedient Heu ci, who out of his
extraordinary Ingratitude, designing to kill his Father in Law that reproved
him for his Misdemeanors, killed his own Mother unexpectedly, whose Indulgence
had been the Perdition of her Son, by supplying him with Money, which he spent
in all manner of debauchery; and by concealing the early lewdness of his Life.
But Heaven to make him an Example to all as wicked as himself, and to deter
others, crushed him to the Earth, and cleft him in sunder with a Thunderbolt.

The Tribunal called Iu Hio, is a mixed Tribunal, which takes care of
Batchelours of Arts, and Military Probationers. Two Presidents belong to it, of
which the one has the oversight of the first, the other of the latter. These
exercise themselves in making Discourses upon the means of preserving the
Estate and governing the People. The other discourse of Warlike Discipline,
when to give Battle, how to attack and defend Fortified places, and other
matters of the same nature. The Mandarins of this Tribunal who are dispersed
over all the Provinces and Cities, give them frequent occasions to exercise
their wits upon these Subjects; and those Mandarins are respected by those
Batchelours and Probationers, rather as Professors than Magistrates. The two
Presidents which reside at Court are Doctors both, the one of Civil Learning,
the other in Military Discipline. The other Officers are such out of whose
number the King makes Mandarins out of his mere Grace and Favor, or by reason
of the Merits of their Ancestors.

The Tribunal called Co Tao, or Co Li, is that of the Inspecters or Overseers,
of which we have already spoken, which are divided into six Classes, like the
six superior Tribunals, from whence they take their name and distinction. For
example; the first is called Li Co, or Inspecters of the superior Tribunal of
the Mandarins. The second, Hu Co, or Inspecters of the superior Tribunal of
the Exchequer; and so of the rest. Every Classis is composed of several
Mandarins all of the seventh Order, and all equal, so that there is not one,
no, not so much as he that keeps the Seal of the Tribunal, who has any
superiority over the rest of his Brethren. Their business is to reprehend the
King himself for any miscarriages of his Government: and there are some so
resolute and undaunted that they will rather expose themselves to Death and
Banishment than forbear when they have Truth on their side, which they will
tell him sometimes to his face, and sometimes in writing without any mincing of
the matter. And of this freedom as we meet at present with several examples, so
is there a far greater number to be seen in the Chinese Histories. Many times
also it happens that the Kings will amend their defects, and magnificently
reward those that have been so liberal of their Reproofs. They are also
entrusted to inspect the Disorders of the six superior Tribunals, and to
inform the King by private Memorials. The King likewise makes choice of the
Mandarins of this Tribunal for the execution of several Orders of Importance
that require Secrecy. And every year he culls out three to be Visitors. The
first of which is called Siun Cim, who visits all the Merchants of the Court,
or in the City of Pe Kim, and takes notice of all Merchandise that is either
sophisticated or prohibited. The second is called Sium Came, who visits the
Burners of the King's Lime. The third, who is called Sium xi nim ym, is present
at all the General Musters. The Mandarins of this Tribunal are only of the
seventh Order, however their Authority and Power is very large.

The Tribunal, called Him gin su, consists of several Mandarins, all Doctors,
all equal, and all of the seventh Order, like those of the preceding Tribunal.
Their Employment is to be sent abroad, either as Envoys or Ambassadors, either
to distant parts of the Empire or to Foreign States. As when the King sends
them to carry Titles of Honor to the Mother or Wise of a Mandarin slain in the
Wars; or after he has done the King and Kingdom eminent Service in the
discharge of his Employment. Or when the Emperor is pleased to confer or
confirm the Title of King to the Prince of Corea, or any other neighboring
Sovereign. These Embassies are very honorable, and sometimes no less gainful.

The Tribunal of Tai li su, i. e. of Supreme Reason and Justice, is so called,
because they are entrusted to examine all doubtful and intricate Causes, and
to confirm or annihilate the Sentences of other Tribunals, especially in
reference to Crimes that concern the Estates, the Honor and Life of the King's
Subjects. The President of this Tribunal is of the third Order: his two Lateral
Judges or Assessors, of the fourth; and the other inferior Mandarins, of which
there are a great number, of the fifth and sixth. When the Tribunal of Crimes
condemns to death any person of Quality or other person of mean condition, and
that the King finds the reason of the Sentence dubious, he refers it always to
San fa su, which is* as it were his Council of Conscience. Then three Tribunals
assemble together, the Tai li su, the Tu li yuen, or the superior Tribunal of
Visitors, and the Tribunal of Crimes. All these together re examine the Process
in the presence of the Accusers and the Party accused, and many times revoke
the Sentence. For that the Prosecutor not having gained the Tribunal of Crimes,
nor having Money nor cunning enough to corrupt the other two, they judge
according to Reason and Justice, and generally the King confirms the Decision
of those three Tribunals.

The Tribunal Tum chim su, takes care to have the King's Orders and Commands
proclaimed at Court, and diligently to inform themselves of the calamities,
oppressions and necessities of the People, and exactly and privately to inform
the Emperor. They are likewise entrusted to send to the King, or else to bury
in silence, as they shall deem most proper, all the Memorials of the Mi^itary
Mandarins, and the Letters of the fourteen Provinces of the Veteran Mandarins,
who are dispensed with from all manner of Employments; of the People,
Soldiers, and Strangers that come from Foreign Countries. The Mandarins of the
Province of Pekim present their Memorials immediately to the King himself,
never taking notice of this Tribunal; the President of which is of the third
Order of Mandarins; his first Assessor of the fourth, his second Assessor of
the fifth, and the rest of the inferior Mandarins of the sixth and seventh
Order.

The Tribunal Tai cham su, is as it were an Associate and Assistant to the
supreme Tribunal of Ceremonies. The President is of the third Order, his
Assessors of the fourth, and the rest of the Mandarins, of which there are a
great number, of the fifth and sixth Orders. They take particular care of the
King's Music and Sacrifices: and in regard these Sacrifices are performed in
the Temples dedicated to the Heavens, the Earth, the Sun and Moon, to Rivers
and Mountains: this Tribunal takes care of all those Piles, which are very vast
and magnificent: They also take care of the married Bonzes, who are generally
Alchymists and Fortune Tellers. Two of these Mandarins are appointed to give
orders for the Reception and Lodging of Strangers that come to Court. Lastly,
they have the oversight of the public Courtesans, of the places of their
Habitation, and of those that govern and direct them in their infamous Trade.
The Chinese, to show their aversion to those miserable Creatures call them ^am
^a, that is to say, Men that have utterly buried in oblivion eight Virtues,
viz. Obedience to the^ Fathers and Mothers, Affection for their Brethren and
other Kindred, Fidelity toward their Prince, Sincerity, Honesty, Justice,
Modesty, Chastity, and all manner of laudable Sciences and Custom^* This is the
signification of those two words, which the Chinese mark with only two
letters, by which it is easy to see the Force of their Language, and the
esteem which they have for Virtue, though for the most part they follow their
own depraved Inclinations that carry them headlong into vice.

The Tribunal Quan lo su, or of the Royal Inns, takes care for the provision of
Wine, Cattle, and all other things necessary for the King's Sacrifices,
Banquets, and for the entertainment of such as are treated at the King's
charges whether Chinese or Foreigners. This Tribunal is an Associate to that
of the Ceremonies. The President is of the third Order; his Assistants, one of
the fourth, the other of the fifth, and all the rest of the Mandarins, which
are very numerous, of the seventh Order.

The Mandarins of the Tribunal Tai po su, are of the same Orders with those
before mentioned. Their business it is to take care of the Horses, as well for
the King's service, as for the Wars. To which purpose they send their Agents
and their Messengers to buy up such numbers as are necessary, which they send
afterward to the Tribunal of War, to which this Tribunal is an Assistant, who
distributes them to the Commanders, and into the Fortresses of the Frontiers.
During the Government of the Chinese, those Horses were all bought up in the
several Provinces; but now, the Western Tarters bring them to the Court: and
the Emperor buys every year seventy thousand, besides what the great Lords,
the Commanders, the Soldiers, the learned Mandarins and the people buy, which
amount to double or treble the number. By which a man may judge of the vast
number of Horses at the Court, which I dare not presume to mention, for fear it
should be thought incredible.

Kin Tien Kien is the Tribunal of the Mathematics. The President of which is
of the fifth Order; his two Assessors of the sixth, and the rest of the
Mandarins of the seventh and eighth. They apply themselves to Astronomy; and it
is their business to give the King notice of the time and Day of the Eclipses
of the Sun and Moon, and whether total or in part; of which the Emperor sends
word to all the Tribunals of the Province, by the grand Tribunal of Ceremonies,
to the end they may prepare themselves for the performance of the usual
Ceremonies which consist in their beating of Drums during the Eclipse, the
Mandarins kneeling all the while, and fixing their eyes upon the Sky with a
most awful reverence. This Tribunal also composes the Calendar, which is
printed every year and distributed over all the Empire; neither is it lawful
to make any other, which is a thing forbidden under the for feiture of life.

The Tribunal called Tai Y Yuen, or the Tribunal of Physic, is composed of the
Kings, Queens and Prince's Physicians. They also take care of all others whom
the King out of his especial grace and favor orders them to visit, and prepare
the Medicines themselves. The Mandarins of this are of the same order as are
those of the preceding Tribunal, and both belong to the Grand Tribunal of
Ceremonies.

The Tribunal Hum Lu Su, supplies the Office of Groom Porter, and Master of the
Ceremonies, which are observed when the King gives audience, or when he comes
into the Royal Hall to receive the Homages of the Grandees and Mandarins. This
Tribunal is an assistant to that of the Ceremonies; the President being of the
fourth Order; the Assessors of the fifth and sixth, and the rest of the
Mandarins of the seventh and eighth.

The Tribunal called Xam len Yuen taken care of the Gardens, Orchards, and
Parks; as also of the breeding of the Cattle, Sheep, Pigs, Wild Ducks, Fowl,
and all sorts of Creatures which are made use of in the Royal Sacrifices,
Feasts, and Royal Inns. It is under the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal of
Ceremonies, and the Mandarins are of the same Order with those of the Tribunals
of the Mathematics and Physic.

The Tribunal Xam pao su, lodges in the Palace Royal. It takes care of the
Emperor's Seal, which is made of a most excellent and precious Stone, as the
signification of the two Syllables Xam pao denotes. It is square, and almost a
hands breadth in Diameter. When any Tribunal has an occasion to make use of it,
this Tribunal is obliged to give notice to the King, and after it has been made
use of and is locked up again, they are bound to give the King notice of that
too. They are entrusted to have ready at all times the Seals of all the
Tribunals of the Court and Empire, and to order what Letters and Marks are to
be engraved upon them, when the King con^ers any new Title or any Employment upon
any person, or when upon some reason of State he is pleased to change the
Seals. When the Grand Tribunal of Mandarins has any occasion to confer Commands
and give Dispatches to the Mandarins of the Court or Provinces, they send for
them to this Tribunal after they have obtained leave of the Emperor. The
President of this Court has but one Assessor, but they are both Doctors and of
the fifth Order. The rest are of the number of those that have been made
Mandarins out of Favor, and are only of the seventh or eighth Order.

The Tribunal called Kin y guei, or of the Royal Guard, is composed of several
hundreds of Military Mandarins divided into four Classe's. They of the first
Classis are of the second Order of Mandarins; those of the second, of the
third; they of the third are of the fourth; and those of the fourth Classis,
are of the fifth Order. Their Employment is to guard the Person of the King
when he goes out of his Palace, or gives Audience to the Grandees and
Mandarins: and upon this Tribunal it is that he relies for the apprehending and
arresting of Persons considerable for their Birth or Dignity. They are
generally the Sons of great Mandarins, Brothers, or otherwise of kin to the
Queen, or Sons or Nephews of the King's Sons; or Sons or Nephews of the
Mandarins, who have performed great Services; in consideration of which the
King bestows that Favor upon them. They are never advanced to other Tribunals
like the rest of the Mandarins, who change continually from one Tribunal to
another. However, they are preferred in their own Tribunal, and frequently to
the dignity of Xam xu, which is the Title of the Presidents of the six
superior Tribunals; and many times to the dignity of Colao, or Counselors of
State. They are greatly feared and respected by reason of their Employments,
and their Nobility, and for that they are always near the Person of the King.
And though they are Military Mandarins they are exempt from the Jurisdiction of
the Pim pu, or supreme Tribunal of Arms, as being only subject to the King

To this Tribunal belong two inferior Tribunals that abide in particular
places. The first is called Nan Chin, or the Watch Tower of the South. The
second Pe chin, or Watch Tower of the North. The Presidents of these two
Tribunals are of the fifth Order; and the inferior Mandarins, which are very
numerous, are all of the seventh Order. The Employment of the Mandarins of the
first Tribunal is to attend those who are sent to apprehend any great Lords,
and of the second to receive and guard the Prisoners while in custody, till
they are released by the King's Order, or delivered over to the Tribunal of
Crimes.

The two Tribunals called Xui que su, are properly Directors of the Audits of
the Tolls, which all things pay that are brought to Pekim, and sold in the
City. The first, which is the more considerable, takes care to set Guards at
all the Gates of the City, to prevent the bringing in of any Goods, unless they
be first registered and pay the duties demanded. The second receives the duties
of all things that are bought and sold in the City, as Slaves, Horses, Camels,
Cattle, etc. The Presidents of these Tribunals are of the seventh Order, and
the inferior Mandarins of the eighth and ninth. These two Tribunals belong to
the grand Tribunal of the Exchequer.

Tu pu, is as it were the Tribunal of the ordinary Judge of the King's
Household: their Employment is twosold: the first is to arrest Robbers and
Malefactors, and to make out their Processes; and then if they happen to be
quitted they release them; if they are thought worthy of death, they deliver
them over to the Tribunal of Crimes. As for Cut* purses, for the first Offense
they brand them upon the left Arm with a red hot Iron: for the second Offense,
upon the right Arm; and for the third they deliver the Offenders over to the
Tribunal of Crimes. Their next Employment is to arrest Fugitive Slaves, which
they first cause to be punished with a hundred lashes of a Whip, and then to be
restored to their Masters. But of late years they are marked upon the left
Cheek, with two Tartar and two Chinese Characters. But a Chinese Mandarin, by a
Memorial, besought the King to consider that the punishment was too rigorous
for a crime that was rather the effect of desire of Liberty, so natural to all
Mankind, than any act of a wicked inclination, and that it was a thing no way
becoming the City of his Majesty's Residence, to behold the Streets so full of
those deformed objects of cruelty. Which counsel being approved by the King he
ordered for the future that the Letters should be branded upon the left Arm.
The President of this Tribunal is of the second Order; his Assistants are of
the third, and the rest of the Mandarins are of the seventh and eighth. To this
Tribunal there belongs a great number of Catch-poles and Thief takers, who with
an industry and cunning more than ordinary, discover and apprehend all manner
of Thieves, Robbers and Runaway Slaves.

The Tribunal called Fu in, is that of the two Governors of the City of Xun
tien Fu, or Pekim; but the first name is not in use, because Pekim signifies
properly the Court of the North. These Governors are above all the other
Governors of all the Cities of the Empire, and of the third Order of
Mandarins, and their Assessors of the fourth. The first has the oversight of
all the Students, and all the Men of Learning who are not yet Mandarins. The
second takes care to instruct the people, and to exhort them to live in peace
and union, and to inform themselves of their manner of living, to punish those
that introduce Novelties and Disorders, to cherish labor and industry, to
administer Justice equally to all men, to spare the people in the public
Works, to know the number of the Families and persons in the City, to watch day
and night in redressing the miseries of the people, to defend them against the
wealthy and potent, to comfort and ease the poor and afflicted, to recompense
the virtuous, relieve the innocent and punish the guilty: and lastly to prepare
the place and all things necessary for the public Sacrifices. Such Functions
as these are easy demonstrations, that it is not without reason that the
Chinese call the Governors of Cities Fu mu, that is to say, the Father and
Mother of the People.

There are yet two Tribunals more called Tai Him Hien, and Von Pin Hien, whose
employment is the same with that of the Tribunal of the Governors of the City
upon which they depend, and are as it were the Officers belonging to it. They
are two, because that Pe Kim is divided into two Cities, according to the
Custom of the Empire, where the Cities are said to be double or single,
according to the largeness and extent of their Territory. The Presidents of
these Tribunals in Cities where the Court is kept are of the sixth order; and
in the Cities of the Provinces, of the seventh order; and the four inferior
Mandarins are of the seventh, eighth and ninth order.

T^um Gin Fu, is the Tribunal of the Grandees, that descend from Father to Son,
of the Royal Family. The President is one of those that enjoy the Title of
King, and is always a person venerable for his Age and his Virtues. He is of
none of the nine orders, because his dignity advances him above all the orders
of the Mandarins. His Assessors also are always 2 dignified Lords of the Royal
Blood, who are of no Order for the same reason. All these officers take care to
distribute the Pensions which are paid to the Kings kindred of the Male Line;
who whether they be great Lords or poor, and at least fifteen or sixteen
Generations distant in Blood, have nevertheless some Pension, all of them more
or less according to their dignities and proximity of Alliance. They have all
the privilege to paint their houses and their furniture with red. But in regard
the preceding family had reigned for two hundred seventy seven years, the
descendents from it were multiplied to that degree and spread to such a
distance from the source of the Pedigree, and their divided revenues
consequently so small that several of them were reduced to follow trades for
their subsistence. So that when I entered first into the Empire, I met with one
in the Capital of the Province of Kiam Si, that was a common Porter, and to
distinguish himself from the rest of his Companions, carried the instruments of
his profession, at his back, very bright, and varnished over with red. There
were an infinite number of them, in the reign of the preceding Family,
dispersed all over the Empire, who abusing the privileges of their Birth
committed a thousand insolences, and extortions upon the poor people: but they
have been all since utterly extirpated together with the Family from whence
they descended. At present, the Kindred of the King of Tartary that now reigns
are all great Lords, and live at Court: but if their Dominion long endures,
they will multiply, and their numbers become no less burdensome than the
former. This Tribunal is also entrusted to determine all Differences, and
processes as well civil as criminal between the Princes of the Blood, to give
sentence according to the penalties which they deserve, and to order execution,
after they have first informed the King of their proceedings.

Hoam cin is the Tribunal of the King's Female Kindred which are of two sorts.
The first are they who descend from the King's Daughters, married to young
Gentlemen called and chosen for those matches, and are called Tu ma. These
according to the custom of China, are not looked upon as Princes of the Blood,
nor as the King's Kindred, nor have they any Right of succession to the Crown,
though they should have several heirs males; which custom is also observed
among the people. For in China to marry a Daughter is to exclude her for ever
from her Fathers Family, and graft her into the Family of her Husband, whose
Sir Name she assumes at the same time instead of her own. Thence it comes to
pass, that the Chinese, when they would say that a Maid is allied to the
Family of her Husband, never make use of the word Kin, to go, but of the word
Quei, to return: as much as to say, she is not gone, but is returned to her
Family. Thus they explain themselves also when they speak of the dead: for they
do not say, such a one is dead; but such a one is returned to the earth. By the
same reason, when a Grandfather speaks of the Children of his Son, he calls
them barely Sun Su, my Grand Children: but when he speaks of his Daughters
Children, he calls them Vai Sun Su, my Grand Children without: for they look
upon them to be of the Son in Laws Family.

The second sort of the King's Kindred by the Female side, are the Fathers,
Brothers, Uncles and other Kindred of the Queen, the King's Sons in Law, their
Fathers, Brothers, Uncles, and other Kindred. Out of these two sorts the King
makes choice of some of the most considerable to compose this Tribunal and to
act the same things as the Officers of the Tribunal of the Royal Blood. They
differ only in this, that the latter are of none of the nine Orders, the
former are Mandarins of the first and second Order. Though they esteem much
more honorable the Titles of Hoam Cin, and Fu Ma, or the King's Kindred, than
that of Mandarin, though of the first order: But this second sort of Kindred
was also extirpated by the Tartars with the preceding Family. Thus far
concerning the Tribunals of the Mandarins and of the Government of the Court.
We are now to give a short account of the Tribunals of the Provinces.

Notes upon the fourteenth Chapter.
He causes a choice to be made at Pe Kim of several young Gentlemen, etc.
Here we are to observe, that in this place the Author only Page 221.
speaks of what was practiced in the time of the Chinese Emperors, for the
Tartar Emperors have altered this Custom, and never marry their Daughters but
to Kings, Princes or Great Lords, as our Author himself acknowledges a little
lower.

CHAP. XV.
TO every one of the fifteen Provinces there belongs a supreme Tribunal, which
has the oversight of all the rest. The President bears the Titles of Tu Tam,
Kiun Muen, Tu Yuen, Siun Fu, with several other names, which all signify no
more than Governor of a Province or Viceroy, with us. These Presidents are of
the first, second or third order, according as the King is pleased to regulate
them, when he sends them into the Provinces. They are entrusted with the whole
Government, as well in times of Peace as in War, and with the command of the
People and Soldiers as well in civil as criminal matters. They give notice to
the King and the six superior Tribunals of all matters of importance. On the
other side all the Kings orders, and dispatches with those of the Superior
Tribunals are directed to this Tribunal, and all the Mandarins of the Province
are bound to repair to this Tribunal in all affairs of moment. There are other
Viceroys, that govern two, three or four Provinces, and are called Tsum To, as
Leam Quam Tsum To, or Viceroy of the Provinces of Quam Tum and Quam Si. Quam
Tum signifies the Province extended toward the East, and Quam si, the Province
extended toward the West. There are other such like Viceroys in China as in the
Provinces bordering upon Tartary, and other places of importance. And besides
the Viceroy there is in every Province a Visiter called Ngan Tai, or Ngan Yuen,
of which we have spoken formerly. Lastly, there is a third considerable Officer
called Tsum pim, who commands all the Forces of the Province, and is of the
first Order of Mandarins. These three supreme Presidents of the Tribunals of
the Provinces have under them several inferior Mandarins, who assist them in
the dispatch of business; and though these three Tribunals general have their
Palaces in the Capital City, nevertheless they are not always resident there,
but keep their Circuits from place to place as business requires. But for the
particular Tribunals of the Capital Cities they are these that follow.

Every Capital City has two Tribunals, in which properly consists the whole
Government of the Province; the one for Civil the other for criminal affairs.
The first is called Pu chim su, the President of which is a Mandarin of the
first degree of the second Order. The Palace belonging to this Tribunal, like
those at the Court, contains on both sides, two other Tribunals, which are not
inferior but Assistants to the first Tribunal. That on the left hand is the
most considerable and is called Tsan chim: having two Presidents, both of the
second degree of the third Order. The other on the right hand is called Tsan y;
the Presidents of which are both equal, and of the second degree of the fourth
Order. To all these three Tribunals belong a great number of inferior
Mandarins, called Xeu lien quen, whose business it is to decide all Civil
matters, and to pay and receive all the Revenues of the Province.

The Criminal Tribunal is called Nghan cha su, and the President who is of the
third Order has no Assessors, but two Classes of Mandarins under him. Those of
the first Classis, who are called To su, are of the fourth Order. They of the
second Classis, who are called Cien su, are of the fifth Order; and the
Mandarins of these two Classes are called Tao li, or Tao tus^* These Tao li are
the Visiters of all the Quarters of the Province in which they have their
Tribunals. Some of them take care of the Post Horses, the Royal Inns, and the
King's Barks, so far as their Jurisdiction reaches, and are called Ye chuen
tao* Others that are called Pim pi tao, are entrusted to inspect the several
Troops and Companies of the Province; others to drain the Lands and level the
Highways, who are called Tun tien tao. This Tribunal has power to punish
Criminals by banishment, as also by confiscation of Goods and lo^s of Life. And
if there be no Visiter in the Province, it has an eye over all the other
Mandarins, and gives notice to the King of what passes in the Province, when
business requires their information* In a word, these two Tribunals do the
Office of the six supreme Tribunals of the Court, and are as it were their
Substitutes.

Every Province is divided into Districts, and to every District belongs a
Mandarin called Tao ^i, who is as it were a Visiter, or Inspe^er into the
manners and behavior of the Officers within his Jurisdiction. He takes care to
solicit the Governors of the Towns and Cities to make quick payments of their
duties to the King* There are some also that take no less care of the Rivers
and Sea Coasts in their Quarters. They that look after the Rivers are called Ho
tao, and the Surveyors of the Sea Coasts H^ tao. All these Mandarins belong to
the Tribunal of Inspecters or Overseers called Co tao, of which we have already
spoken.

All the Cities of the first rank whether Capital or no, have a Tribunal where
the Governor of the City or Territory presides, who is a Mandarin of the
fourth Order, and is called Chi fu. He has three Assessors, the first called
Tum chi, the second Tum pu^n, and the third Chui Quen, who are of the sixth and
seventh Order. They are also called second, third and fourth Lord, of the
second, third or fourth Chair, or of the second, third or fourth City; in
regard the President is called the first Lord, the first Chair, and the first
City.

There are four other inferior Mandarins called Kim lie chu su, Chao mo, and
Kim k^ao, which are only of the seventh, eighth or ninth Order. The Employment
of this Tribunal is the same with that of the Governor of Pe Kim. All the
Cities of the Empire are provided with such Mandarins as these. But if it be a
place of great trade, or that the Territory be of a large extent, then the
number of these Mandarins is doubled.

The Cities of the second rank called Cheu are of two sorts* Those of the first
sort are subject to the Capitals only, as the Cities of the first Rank, and
have Cities which depend upon them. Those of the second sort are subject to the
Cities of the first Order, whether they have Cities depending upon them or no.
The President of these Cities is called Chi cheu. He is of the second degree of
the fifth Order, and has two Assessors; of which the first is called Cheu ^um,
and the second Cheu poon, who are of the second degree of the sixth and second
Order* He has under him also a third Mandarin called L^ mo, of the second
degree of the ninth Order. The people call this Governor Tai Ye, or the great
or first Lord; the other three the second, third or fourth Lord. Their
Employment is the same with the Governors of the Cities of the first Rank.

All the other Cities of the Empire have a Tribunal, of which the President is
called Chi hien, and is of the first degree of the seventh Order. He has also
two Assessors, of which the first is called Hien chim, of the eighth Order; and
the second who is of the Ninth is called Chu pu. He has also a third under him
who is called Tien su, who is of no Order, but if he acquit himself well of his
employment for three years, the Governor of the City gives him a Certificate to
the Governor of the Superior City, and the Governor of that City to the
Governor of the Capital. The last Governor certifies to the two grand
Tribunals of the Capital City, and they to the Viceroy. The Viceroy writes to
the grand Tribunal of the Mandarins, and they to the Counselors of State, who
inform the King: and by him generally he is made a Mandarin of the eighth or
ninth Order. This is the Road which the Mandarins observe for their promotion
to new dignities. But this good Fortune never befalls them, if they do not
purchase it by Presents proportionable to what they may squeeze out of their
Employments; and this kind of trade is driven as openly as if it were an
established Law among them. This is the reason that Justice and Employments are
sold as at an outry, all over the Empire, but more especially at Court; so that
there is no body but the King who can be properly said to mind the public
good, all the rest regarding nothing but their private interests. And of this
manner of proceeding I will bring ye one example, of which I my self was an eye
witness.

There was a young Gentleman whose name was Simon, a very good Christian, who
was a Mandarin of a City of the second Rank, by a particular favor which the
Emperor showed him, in regard his Father, Viceroy of the Province of ^n si*
was slain fighting against an Army of Robbers that had raised a Rebellion in
the Province. The three years of his Employment being expired, he was advanced
to be Mandarin of a City of the first Rank, and after the expiration of that
Employment he repaired to Court, according to the custom, in hopes to be
preferred to another City yet more considerable for the recompense of his
Services duly performed. The King referred his Petition to the Tribunal of the
(...). Presently Letters were sent him from that Tribunal to le^ him know, that
if he would deposite in a third hand fourteen V^n of Silver, which amounts to
about a hundred thousand Crowns, they would give him the Government of the City
of ^un ^m in the Province of Xan si; which is one of the best peopled, the most
remarkable for Trade, and the richest Cities of the whole Empire. To which this
virtuous Christian returned for answer, that if he had such a sum by him, nay
though it were far less, he would never go about to move for any more
employment, in regard a smaller sum than that would suffice him to live at his
ease. Nor did he think it convenient to take up so large a sum at great
interest, as others did; by which they were forced for satisfaction of their
Creditors, and to glut their insatiate avarice, to turn real Tyrants and greedy
Wolves, that devoured the Cities, and oppressed the miserable people wherever
they came, which they were otherwise bound to protect and defend. So that they
might dispose of that Employment to him that was able to purchase it; but that
for his part he would be contented with what sell to his ^t Now it is the
custom to write as many (...) as there are Mandarins that stand (...), upon
little thin boards, which are thrown into a Vessel, and every one is Governor
of that City of which he draws the Name. Nevertheless when a man has agreed
with the Tribunal, the Tablets are so ordered that the Person draws the City
which he desires. However this Artifice failed a Mandarin in the year 1669, who
had given a good Sum to a Prothonotary, who had promised him the ready draught
of a City of great Trade, and not far distant. For he drew a miserable City in
the Province of Quei cheu, the most remote and the poorest in the whole Empire.
Thereupon the wretched and unfortunate Mandarin quite out of his wits at his
ill Success, without any respect to the Tribunal, or the presence of above
three hundred Mandarins, rose up all in a rage (for they draw upon their knees)
crying out with a loud voice he was undone, and throwing off his Robe and his
Cap, fell upon the Prothonotary, threw him upon the ground, and with his Foot
and Fist belabouring the poor Officer, cried out, K^ave and Impostor as thou
art, where is the money that I gave thee? where is the City of which thou gav'st
me a promise, with many other reproaches of the same Nature? Thereupon the
Tribunal broke up, and the Mandarin and the Prothonotary were both committed to
the Prison of the Criminal Tribunal, where they were both in great hazard of
being condemned to death. For such sort of merchandising is death by the Laws,
besides that the scandalous Circumstances of the Action rendered the Crime much
more enormous.

In all the Towns and Cities of the Empire there is a Tribunal composed of a
President, and at least two or three Assessours; which is called Kiao quon, or
Judges of the men of Letters. For, that their business is to take care of
Learning and Learned Men; and more especially to overlook the Batchelours of
Art, which are very numerous, and frequently very poor, yet trusting to their
Privileges, become bold and insolent, and practice many Acts of Violence and
Knavery to get Money from Poor and Rich, and many times throw off that respect
which is due to the Presidents and Governors. Therefore the Ancient Kings with
much prudence erected this Court to apprehend and punish them, either by
whipping or other penalties according to their demerits, and to degrade them if
incorrigible. Which is the reason that the Batchelours both fear and respect
those Mandarins after an extraordinary manner. This Court also has power to
assemble from time to time, all the Learned Men of the City; that is to say,
the Batchelours, Licentiates, Doctors and old Mandarins excused from Service
by reason of their Age, to treat of Sciences and Virtue. To which purpose they
give them Themes taken out of their Books, upon which they make several
Comments, which this Tribunal examines, and publicly either applaud or
discommends; so that these Officers are rather Professors than Mandarins.
Besides these Mandarins which are common to all the Empire, there are other
Tribunals appropriated to particular Places and Provinces: as the Mandarins of
the Salt; who take care to distribute it over all China by public undertakers,
and to prevent private Merchants from uttering any, to the prejudice of the
King's Revenue. Other Mandarins there are who are as it were Stewards of the
Rents belonging to the King and the great Lords, more especially in the
Provinces that lie upon the Sea. There is also another Tribunal called Ti Kin
Su, and by the Portugueses Tai qui si For indeed the Portugueses corrupt all
the Chinese words: For the City of Hiam Xan or the Mount of Odours, they call
Ham Sam. Ma Cao is called Ama gao. That is to say, the Bay or Gulf of the Idol
Ama. For Gao signifies a Bay; and Ama is the Name of an Idol, which is
worshipped in that Part.

These are the Tribunals of the Lettered Mandarins: Those of the Military
Mandarins are yet more numerous. For besides that they are in all Places where
the Tribunal of the Learned Mandarins are erected, they are also in several
important Places that separate the Provinces, in all Ports and Bays, and many
more upon the Frontiers next to Tartary. There is likewise sent from the Court
a Catalogue of all the Learned Mandarins which is printed and reprinted every
Season of the Year, wherein are set down the Names, the Titles, the Country
and the Time when every one received their Degrees. And such another Catalogue
is printed of the Military Mandarins. The Number of the Learned Mandarins over
all the Empire is thirteen Thousand six Hundred forty Seven, and that of the
Military Mandarins amounts to eighteen Thousand five hundred and twenty: in all
thirty two Thousand one hundred sixty seven Mandarins, which though it be most
certain may seem a thing incredible Though their Distribution, their
Distinction, and their Subordination as much surpasses belief: It seems as if
the Legislators had omitted nothing, and that they had foreseen all
Inconveniences that were to be feared. So that I am persuaded no Kingdom in the
World could be better governed or more happy, if the Conduct and Probity of the
Officers were but answerable to the Institution of the Government. But in
regard they have no knowledge of the True God, nor of the Eternal Rewards and
Punishments of the other World, they are subject to no remorses of Conscience;
they place all their happiness in Pleasure, in Dignity and Riches; and
therefore to obtain these fading Advantages they violate all the Laws of God
and Man; trampling under foot Religion, Reason, Justice, Honesty, and all the
Rights of Consanguinity and Friendship. The Inferior Officers mind nothing but
how to defraud the Superior Mandarins; they the Supreme Tribunals, and all
together how to cheat the King: Which they know how to do with so much cunning
and address, making use in their memorials of words and expressions so soft, so
honest, so resp^ (...), so humble and full of Adulation; and (...) so plausible
and seemingly disinteren (...) ^ded Prince frequently takes (...) for solemn
Truths. So that the (...) themselves continually oppressed and (...) ^tud,
without any reason, murmur and (...) ^ditions and Revolts; which have caused ^o
much ^ne and so many Changes in the Empire. Nevertheless there is no reason
that the Excellency and Perfection of the Laws of China should suffer for the
depravity and wickedness of the Magistrates.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Grandeur of the Emperor of China, and of his Revenues.
I Have observed in the third Chapter the three Opinions which the Chinese
have concerning the beginning of their Empire. Nor do they esteem their Kings
to be of less Antiquity, in regard their Government has been always Monarchical
and absolute without any mixture of Aristocracy. I have also observed that Cum
fu cius, and all the Learned Men reject the first Opinion as merely fabulous. I
shall therefore only add, that according to the second Opinion that the
Chinese were under the Government of Kings two thousand nine hundred fifty two
years before the Birth of Christ. King Fohi was the first of their Kings, and
the Founder of their Empite, which began in the Province of Xen si, the most
western part of China toward the North. The Chinese paint this King clothed
with the leaves of Trees, and all agree that his Kingdom was of no great extent
at first, nor his People very numerous. Their Histories relate, how that when
this King began to reign, the Chinese lived upon Herbs and wild Fruits* drank
the Blood of Beasts, and clad themselves in Skins. But that he taught them to
make Nets as well for Hunting as Fishing, and was the first inventer of the
Chinese Letters. All the Learned believed this Opinion probable, and some there
are that hold it for certain and unquestionable. In a word it seems very
probable, that Fohi might be the first King of China; in the regard that if we
set aside the Fables which the Chinese have added, and of which the Greeks and
Romans are no less guilty when they speak of their first Founders, the Sequel
of their Story and the successive Train of their Kings seems to have much of
Truth. For according to the Computation of their Histories and Chronologies, we
clearly find that the first King of China began to reign about two hundred
years after the Universal deluge according to the Version of the seventy
Interpreters. In which time the Descendants of Noah might well spread
themselves to the farther end of Asia; seeing that within the same space they
expanded themselves over all the Western Parts of Asia, into Africa and a good
part of Europe.

The third Opinion asserts that the first King of China was Yao, who according
to their Chronology began to reign four thousand and twenty five years ago.
Their Histories relate that in his time there were both Mathematicians and
Astrologers; that he caused great Ditches and Channels to be made for the
draining away of the Waters of the Grand Deluge, that till then covered the
Valleys and the Champaign Grounds. This King was a Prince illustrious for his
Virtues and his Transcendent parts, and is still honored as one of the wi sest
and most virtuous Princes of China: this Opi nion passes for current and
unquestionable among the Chinese. And all the Fathers that have had the
greatest Knowledge and Insight into their Books and Histories, hold this latter
Opinion for certain, and the second for probable. And because that according to
the Version of the Holy Scripture called the Vulgar, it would of necessity
follow that Fohi and Yao must have been born and reigned before the Deluge,
therefore we are forced in this Country to follow the Version of the Seventy.
Which being granted, the History of this Empire seems very probable, well
traced, and conformable not only to the Egyptian, Assyrian, Greek and Roman
Histories, but which is yet far more surprising, to the Chronology of Sacred
Scripture.

According to the second Opinion then which is most probable, from King Tohi,
who began to reign about two hundred years after the Deluge to the Emperor Came
Hi, who reigned in the year 1668. There have been two hundred thirty six Kings,
divided into twenty two sidifferent Families, who have governed this Empire for
the space of four thousand five hundred thirty four years. Which Families
endured for a longer or lesser time, according as they governed well or ill;
and till another revolting, put the King to death, routed out all the Princes
of his Family, and all the Nobility which he had raised, and made himself
Master of the Empire. At the beginning these Rebels were either Petty Kings or
Great Lords: But afterward they happened to be Men of low Birth and mean
Condition. The first King of the preceding Family, was a Person of very obscure
Parentage, whose Name was Chum. He was a long time a Servant among the Priests
of the Idols; after which, he betook himself to be a Robber upon the Highway.
Afterward being banished he put himself at the head of certain Free booters,
and after a great deal of prosperous Success made himself Master of the Empire.
At his Coronation he called himself Hum Vu, or the Valiant and Warlike: but
then the Learned Flatterers advanced his Titles, and called him Tai Mim, which
signifies a Reign of great Luster. His Posterity reigned in China two hundred
seventy six Years, and till the Year 1643, that the Tartars made themselves
Masters of the Empire, and destroyed the Royal Family. All those that revolt
pretend that it is by the decree of Heaven, that sent them to ease the People
oppressed by the Tyranny of their Governors: And this Opinion, or rather Vision
finds so much credit in the Priests of the Chinese, and is so deeply rooted in
their minds as if it were one of the greatest Truths in the World, insomuch
that there is hardly one among them that does not hope to be an Emperor at one
time or other: And this is the reason of those frequent Revolts which we find
in this Empire, to day in one Province, to morrow in another; nay many times
only in one City or in one Town. Many times you shall see a miserable Wretch
advanced to be a King, sometimes by a Troop of fifty Bandity, sometimes by a
hundred or two hundred Peasants, but more frequently by a certain Sect of
Idolaters, who make a Profession of creating new Kings, and establishing a new
Government in the Empire. It Is a wonderful thing to see the Comedies, or
rather Tragedies, which are acted every day upon the Theater of this Empire.
For he that but to day was but an ignominious Robber, and under that Notion
both dreaded and hated, let him but shift his Habit, and take upon him the
Crown, the Robes and Ornaments of a King, and the same Man to morrow shall be
beloved and respected by all the World, and though he is known to be of vile
and abject Birth, they shall presently call him the Son of Heaven, and Lord of
the Universe. For that the Chinese, as we have said, call their Kingdom Tien
Hia, that is to say, all that which is under the Heaven, or Su hai Chinun, that
is to say, all that is between the four Seas. Titles conformable to their Pride
and their Ignorance, and to their scorn of Strangers: So that it is the same
thing among them, to call a Man Master of all that is under the Heaven, or
between the four Seas, as to call him King of China.

The Chinese give their Emperor several losty and magnificent Titles. For
example, they call him Tien Hu, Son of Heaven; Xim Tien Hu, Holy Son of Heaven;
Hoam Ti, August and Great Emperor; Xim Xoam, Holy Emperor; Hoam Xam, August
Sovereign; Xim Kium, Holy Prince; Xim Xam, Holy Sovereignty; Que Chu, Lord of
the Kingdom; Chao Tim, Palace Royal; Van Sui, ten thousand years; with several
other Titles full of Grandeur and Majesty, which I omit for fear of being
tedious. So that it is the same thing to say Son of Heaven, or ten thousand
Years, or Palace Royal, as to say King or Emperor: Yet notwithstanding all
these idle flatteries, this Prince is far from being so vain as the King of
Monomotopa, who believes it to be in his Power to command the Sun, the Moon and
Stars; or so ambitiously Politic as the King of Siam, who knowing by
experience that the great River that crosses his Country overflows its banks
every year at a certain Season, and that it returns again by degrees within a
certain time, marches forth in great pomp out of his Palace, to command the
Waters to retire, and fall down into the Sea. For though the Chinese give
these great Titles to their King, and though he suffers them, yet neither he,
nor they, at least the learned and more prudent sort, are so unprovided of
reason, as to believe him to be the real Son of Heaven: but only that he is an
Adopted Son, whom Heaven has made choice of to be Lord of the Empire, for the
Government and Defense of the People. Nevertheless we cannot deny but that
these Titles demonstrate not a little presumption in those that ascribe, and in
him that assumes them. But it is in some measure excusable in a Pagan People,
and which inhabit an Empire so spacious, so puissant and so flourishing. So
much the rather, for that the King never makes use of them, when he speaks of
himself. For in private he only uses the word Ngo, or I, and which is common
to all his Subjects: and when he speaks in public seated upon his Throne he
uses the word Chin, which signifies the same, only with this difference, that
no other Person but himself can make use of it; wherein he is more modest than
many of our Princes, who are continually swelling out the Catalogues of their
affected Titles with new Additions.

The most part of sovereign Princes create Dukes, Marquisses, and other great
Lords, as well as the Emperor of China; but he outvies them in this, that of
late days he takes upon him a power of making Gods and Idols. It was formerly a
custom in this Empire, that when the King was desirous to recompense the
merits of any Illustrious person for the great Services which he had done the
Kingdom, he built him up after his death a magnificent Palace, where his name
was usually set up engraven in Gold, with Titles and Encomiums proportionable
to his Merits. For example; Somewhat above a thousand years ago, there was in
China a most renowned Captain, who for several years defended the Empire and
the People, and restored the King and Kingdom to its ancient luster, after he
had wone several famous Victories, with vast labor and toils, with great
expense of Blood, and at length the loss of his own Blood, while bravely
fighting against the Rebels of his King and Country. Therefore in
acknowledgment of so much fidelity and so many heroic actions, the Emperor
resolved after his death to keep up that honor which he had so well preserved
in his lifetime. To which purpose he built him a magnificent Temple, wherein
he put his Statue, and declared him Emperor of all China. This valiant Captain
and several others of equal virtue are now adored, as Pagods or Deities, by the
King and all the Chinese, who forgetting that the Intention of their
Ancestors was only to honor virtuous persons, and to excite and encourage
others by their example to be valiant and faithful, lost by degrees the
knowledge of what they formerly had obtained, that there was but one only God,
and plunged themselves headlong into Idolatry. At present the Kings assume to
themselves a privilege to deisie whom they please, as it was anciently the
custom of the Senate of Rome; of which I shall here produce two instances that
merit observation. When Father Matthew Ricci first entered into China, it was
governed by the Emperor Van Lie, whose Reign which lasted eight and forty
years was no less happy for the Kingdom, which he all along maintained in peace
and plenty, than he himself was unfortunate in the Government of his Family.
For he made choice for Tutor to the Prince who was heir to the Crown, of a
Colao or Counselor of State* a person of great Policy and great Learning,
whose name was Ch^ K^ Che^. This person abusing the easy freedom which he had
of entering into the Palace, which his great Reputation and Dignity allowed him,
insinuated himself into that Familiarity with the Emperor's Mother, that she
abandoned her self entirely to the lust of that great Officer; which when the
Emperor came to understand, he forthwith put him to death. As for the Lady,
she laying deeply to heart the asfront, and death of the Colao, and fearing the
same destiny her self, within a few days fell sick and died. But then the
Emperor in some measure to repair the Reputation of his Mother by giving her
Honors more than ordinary, solemnly declared that she was Kieu Lien pu sa,
that is to say, a Goddess of nine Flowers; and erected her Temples over the
whole Empire, where she is adored under this Title, as the Curtisan Flora was
honored among the Romans for the Goddess of Flowers. After the death of this
Colao, the Mandarins advised the Emperor to burn the Commentaries which he had
made upon the Books composed by Cum su sius: but he answered them with his
wonted prudence, that he only punished his evil deeds, and not the good Works
which he had made for the Instruction of the Prince and the whole Empire. In
short, that Commentary is the most excellent Piece which the Chinese have upon
that Subject. It is full of Moral Discourses well handled; full of solid Maxims
and Arguments; and of clear and true Decisions of many difficult Controversies:
and for those reasons it is a Book which our Fathers who have acquired the
Knowledge of the Language study very much.

It is about four hundred years ago, that a Bonze of the Sect of those that
never shave their heads, yet marry, by the Chinese called Tao Su, so
insinuated himself into the Affection of the Prince then reigning, by means of
his Skill in Chemistry, and after that by his Magic Arts, and other Diabolical
Inventions, that he not only esteemed him as one that was more than a Man
during his life, but also after his Death declared him God and Lord of Heaven,
of the Sun, the Moon and Stars. By these two examples it is evident, how great
the Ignorance of the People is, to believe that the Emperor has a power to
make an Almighty God of a feeble miserable Man; and to what an excess the
Flattery of the Learned extends it self, who not only approve, but persuade the
King to Actions so contrary to all manner of Reason. Which gives us an
opportunity to convince them with the greatest ease in the World by this
Dilemma. Either the King is more powerful than this Pagod, or this Deity; or
this Pagod is more powerful than the King. If they say that the King is more
powerful, How comes it then to pass, say we, that the King throws himself upon
his Knees before the Pagod, and adores him by bowing his head to the Earth? Why
does he offer him Incense? Why does he implore of him long life for himself,
and peace for his Kingdom, with several other blessings? I^ they say, as
usualthey do, that the Pagod is more powerful, then we answer them thus. This
Power cannot proceed from any other reason, but only that he is a Pagod. Now
it is the King that makes the Pagod; and therefore the King is more powerful
than He. And to let them see that the Pagod has no Power, we ask them whether
the King can grant them* long Life, Health, Children, etc. They answer that he
is so far from being able to grant these blessings to them, that he cannot
bestow them upon himself. Which being really so, we reply, that seeing the
Pagod derives all the Power he has from the King, and that the King cannot give
him that Power which he has not himself, as you your selves confess; it follows
evidently that the Pagod has no Power at all. They understand the force of
reason well enough, and some of them abandon their Errors to embrace the
Truth* but for the most part they answer with a great deal of Civility; Tsai
lai lim Kiao, we will return another time to hear your Doctrine: Which is the
very same answer which the Ar^opagites made St. Paul.

We now come to the Revenues of this puissant Monarch, which are paid into his
Treasures and Magazines every *year. There are paved into the Treasury every
year, eighteen Millions and six hundr'd thousand Crowns in Silver, not
including his Tolls and Customs upon what are bought and sold over the whole
Empire, nor the profit of some Millions which the King lends at excessive
Interest, nor the Revenues of his Crown Lands, his Woods and Gardens which are
very great. Nor the Money which comes by Con^scations which happen every day in
that Court, and the Sales of Goods immovable consiscated for High Treason, and
leavy'd upon the Estates of Rebels, Robbers of the King's Money, or that robb
the People of a thousand Crowns and upward, or that are convicted of heinous
Crimes, or commit great Miscarriages in the Exercise of their Trusts; or in
several other Cases where the Avarice of the Chief Ministers resolve to have a
pretense to despoyle their Inferiors. There are paid into the Treasury under
the Name of the Queens Revenues, eighteen hundred twenty three thousand nine
hundred sixty two Crowns.

Into the Magazines of the Court are carried every year, forty three Millions
three hundred twenty eight thousand eight hundred thirty four Sacks of Rice
and Wheat. 2. Thirteen hundred and fifteen thousand nine hundred thirty seven
Loaves of Salt; each Loaf weighing fifty Pound. 3. Two hundred fifty eight
Pound of very ^ine Vermillion. 4. Fourscore and fourteen thousand seven
hundred thirty seven Pound of Varnish. 5. Thirty eight thousand five hundred
and fifty Pound of dried Fruits, as Raisons, Figgs, Wallnuts, Chestnuts, etc.
Into the King's Wardrobes are brought sixteen hundred fifty five thousand
four hundred thirty two Pounds of Pieces of Silk of several Colors, as
Velvets, Sattins, Damasks and other sorts, not including the Royal habits which
are brought in the Barks of which we have already spoken. 2. Four hundred
seventy six thousand two hundred and seventy Pieces of slight Silks, such as
the Chinese wear in Summer. 3. Two hundred seventy two thousand nine hundred
and three Pounds of Raw Silk. 4. Three hundred fourscore and sixteen thousand
four hundred and fourscore Pieces of Cotton Cloth. 5. Four hundred sixty
four thousand two hundred and seventeen Pounds of Cotton. 6. Fifty sixty
thousand two hundred and fourscore Pieces of ^axen Cloth. Lastly, Twenty one
thousand four hundred and seventy Sacks of Beans for the King's Horses instead
of Oats. And two Millions five hundred fourscore and eighteen thousand, five
hundred fourscore and three Bottles of Straw, every Bottle weighing fifteen
Pound. These two last Proportions were so ordered under the Chinese Kings, but
at present they are advanced to treble, nay quadruple the Quantity, by reason
of the great Number of Horses which the Tartars keep*
Besides these things which I took out of the Chinese Author already quoted,
there are several other sorts of Provision brought to Court, as the Particular
duty's of Tenants and Proprietours of Lands; as Oxen, Sheep, Pigs, Geese,
Ducks, Hens and other Domestic Fowl: Also Venison o^ wild Flesh, as Bears,
Deer, Hares, Rabbets, Pheasants, Partridges, with other land and water Fowl:
Fish, as Barbels, Trouts very large, and several other sorts, all excellent in
their Kinds, of which I cannot give the Names in Portuguese. All sorts of
Garden herbs, as green and fresh in the middle of Winter, which is very sharp
in that Court, as in the midst of Spring. Wherein we must acknowledge the
wonderful Industry of that Nation: For they preserve all those sorts of Plants
in places prepared on purpose, or else by the means of subterraneal Ovens,
which they warm to what degree of heat they please: So that you cannot believe
it to be an Artificial heat unless you see it. They also bring Oil, Butter,
Vinegar, and all sorts of Spice; precious Wines from all parts and various
Compositions of Waters: Meal, Bread, March-panes, and Biskets of several sorts:
Together with all manner of Fruit which we have in Europe, Melons, Cucumbers,
Grapes, Cherries, Peaches, Pears, Apples, and many other sorts which we have
not. I cannot tell the precise quantity of these things, which are daily
brought to the Court; however I can safely say, there is such an abundance of
every thing that it is almost incredible, and would be more surprising, were I
able to give you a just Account. And therefore to give the Reader an Idea of
the Plenty I have seen, I shall only add this short Relation.

Upon the eighth of December 1669. the King ordered three Mandarins to come and
burn Incense before the Tomb of Father John Adam, on purpose to do him a
particular Honor; and farther ordered three hundred twenty five Crowns to be
given to the three Fathers then at Court of which I was one, to defray the
Charges of his Funeral. Several Mandarins that were our friends, and the
greatest part of the Christians of Pekim invited themselves to the Ceremony
which was very neat and exactly performed; but that is not to my purpose. The
next day we went according to Custom, to return our humble Thanks to the
Emperor for so extraordinary a favor. Which when we had done; his Majesty
sent a Messenger to us to bid us stay, for that he had something more to say to
us. We waited above an hour, and about three a Clock in the Afternoon we were
carried into the Royal Hall, where the Emperor was seated in his Throne, and
commanded us to seat our selves at the first Table of the third Rank on the
Right side. We obeyed; and then most of the Principal Officers that reside in
the Court, among which many were of the Blood Royal, took their places
according to their degrees. There were two hundred and fifty Tables, and upon
every one four and twenty Silver Plates about a hands breadth and a half in
Diameter, set one above another after the manner of the Tartars; that is to
say, one upon the Table, the rest at a distance one from another in the Air,
their Edges being supported by the Edges of the first; all full of Viands, and
several sorts of Fruits and Comfitures, but without any Potages. At the
beginning of the Feast the Emperor sent us from his own Table, two Plates of
Gold as big as the Silver ones, full of Preserves and excellently tasted
Fruits. About the middle of the Repast, he sent us another Plate of Gold,
wherein were twenty Apples of the largest and best in the Kingdom, called by
the Name of Pin quo. At the end of the Feast he sent us another Plate full of
Pears, and those Apples of Gold, of which we have spoken in another Place. The
favor which the Emperor did us at that time, seemed to us surprizingly
extraordinary; as it did to all those that heard the Relation of it: but it was
no more than what was usual, to all the rest that were invited; in regard they
are feasted by the King in the same manner every day. Not but that at other
times upon certain occasions of public rejoicing he treats much more
magnificently all the Great Lords and Mandarins of the Court, which are about
five thousand. By which the Reader may readily conjecture at the Grandeur and
Puissance of this Emperor; and that the abundance of Provisions which is
brought continually to the Court, is far beyond the Relation which I have made.

Notes upon the sixteenth Chapter.
Father Magaillans had already spoken of the three Opinions of the Chinese
Page 250.
concerning the Antiquity of China. And I make no question but that if he had
lived to finish this Work, he would have put all that he says of it in the same
Chapter. However I did not think it proper for me to pare off any thing from
this Chapter; as well for that I would not make an Alteration so considerable,
as for that the Author has inserted several new and (...) Circumstances, and
for that the matter is also of great moment. Besides that this Chapter being
composed in the year 1669. serves for a Confirmation of the third, which F.
Magaillans had written in the year before; as may be seen by the difference of
the dates which he sets down in this Work.

CHAP. XVII. A Desoription of the City of Pe Kim: Of the Walls that enclose the
Emperor's Palace: And the form of the principal Houses of China.
THE City or Court of Pe Kim is seated in a Plain. It forms a vast Square; each
of the Sides of which is twelve Chinese Furlongs in length, which make about
three Italian Miles, or near a Portugal League. It has nine Gates; three upon
the South Side, and two upon each of the other Sides: Not twelve Gates,
according to the Relation of F. Martini in his Atlas p. 29. wherein he seems to
have followed M. Polo. l. 2. c. 7. This City is now inhabited by the Tartars
and their Troops divided into eight Quarters or Banners, as they call 'em. But
in regard that under the preceding Kings the Inhabitants were so multiplied
that the Capital was not sufficient to contain them, nor the nine Suburbs
answering to the nine Gates; which if they are not every one a great City, are
at least as big as many great Boroughs; there was a new City built, of a square
form like the Old one; of which each of the Sides is six Chinese Furlongs, or
an Italian Mile and a half in length, having the North Side joining to the
South Side of the Old City. It has seven Gates and every one a Suburb well
peopled; more especially that which looks toward the West; for that is the Side
where all that come from all Parts of the Empire enter into the Capital City.
Both the one and the other City is divided into five Quarters, or
Jurisdictions, as we have said in the fourteenth Chapter. The principal
Streets, some run from the North to the South, others from the East to the
West. But they are all so straight, so long, so broad and so well proportioned,
that it is easy to see they were marked out with a line, and not built by hap
hazard, as in our Cities of Europe. The little Streets run all from the East to
the West, and divide all the Space between the great Streets into equal and
proportionable Islands. Both the one and the other are known by their
particular Names, as the Street of the King's Kindred, the White Tower-street,
the Iron Lyons-street, the Fish-street, the Aquavity-street, and so of the
rest. There is a Book to be sold that speaks of the Names and Situation of the
Streets, which serves for the use of the Lacquies that attend upon the
Mandarins in their Visits, and to their Tribunals, and carry their Presents,
their Letters, and their Orders to several Parts of the City and Empire. For
they are continually sending a great Number all over the Kingdom. Whence comes
that Proverb so often in the Mouths of the Chinese, that the Provinces send
Mandarins to Pe Kim, and Pe Kim in exchange sends them none but Lacquies and
Messengers. And indeed it is a rare thing to meet with a Mandarin who is a
Native of that City. The fairest of all the Streets is that which is called
Cham began kiai, or the Street of perpetual Repose. It runs from East to West,
bounded on the North side by the Walls of the King's Palace, and upon the South
side by several Tribunals, and Palaces of great Lords. It is so spacious, that
it is about thirty Fathoms broad; and so famously known, that the Learned in
their writings make use of it to signify the whole City, taking a part for the
whole. For it is the same thing to say, such a one lives in the Street of
perpetual repose, as to say he lives at Pe Kim. If the Houses were but high,
and built to the Street like ours, the City would show much more stately. But
they are all low Buildings, to show the respect which they have to the King's
Palace. Yet there are some Palaces that belong to the great Lords, which are
lofty and magnificent. But they are built backward, so that you see nothing to
the Street but a great Gate, which has houses on each Side, inhabited by their
Domestics or by Merchants and handycraft Tradesmen. However this is very
convenient for public convenience: For in our Cities a great part of the
Streets is taken up by Houses of Noble Men, so that the Inhabitants are forced
to go a great way to Market. Whereas at Pe Kim, and in all the other Cities of
China, there is every thing to be sold at your Door for entertainment,
subsistence or pleasure. For these little Houses are as so many Magazines or
Markets, Shops and Taverns. But for the Multitude of People, so numerous it is,
that I dare not presume to utter it, nor do I know how to make it understood.
All the Streets both of the old and new City are crowded with People, as well
the small Streets as the great, as well those at the farther ends as those in
the heart of the Place. The Throng is every where so great, that there is
nothing to compare with it but the Fairs and Processions of Europe.

The Emperor's Palace is seated in the midst of this great City, and fronts
toward the South, according to the Custom of that Empire, where you shall
rarely see a City, Palace or House of any great Person which does not face that
Point of the Compass* It is surrounded with a double enclosure of walls, one
within the other, in form of a long Square. The outward Enclosure is a Wall of
an extraordinary height and thickness, plastered both within and without with
red Mortar, and covered with a small Roof of varnished Bricks of a yellow Gold
Color, laid with great Art and Agreement. The length of it from the South to
the North Gate is eight Chinese Furlongs, or two Italian Miles. This Enclosure
has four Gates, one in the middle of each Side; and every Gate composed of
three Portals of which the middlemost is always kept shut, and never opened but
only for the King. The rest are always open to those that go in and out of the
Palace from break of day, till the Bell rings for clea^ing the Palace, except
the South Gates, which are never but half open, unless the King goes out or in.
In the time of the Chinese Kings, there was a guard of thirty Soldiers with
their Captain, and ten Eunuchs at each Portal; but at present, not above twenty
Tartars with their Officer. By which it is apparent that Alvaro Semedo and
Martini, who affirm the Guard of every Gate to consist of three thousand Men,
and five Elephants was a great Piece of Misinformation; while they took the
whole for a part. For there is indeed a Guard of three thousand Men in all,
which being distributed into Companys and Squadrons, in their turns and so many
days in a Month, guard the Gates of the City and of the Palace where there are
several others besides those we have mentioned, and several Towers that environ
the inner Wall. As for the Elephants, they never stand at the Gates, but in
their Stables or rather in their Palace. For they are lodged in a spacious
Court, in the middle of which there is a large and fair Room, where they are
kept in the Summer; but in the Winter they put them into little Stalls by
themselves, the Pavements of which are heated with Stoves: with which those
Creatures could never endure the Rigor of the Winter in that Climate, where
many times they die through the Negligence of those that look after them. Nor
are there above five or six which were brought from the Province of Tun nan.
They never bring them out of their Stables but when the King goes forth in
State in order to some public Solemnity, as to his Sacrifices or the like. All
manner of Entrance within these Gates is forbid to the Bonzes of Pagods, to the
Blind, the Lame, the Maimed, to Beggars, such as have Scars and Wens upon their
Faces, or have their Ears or Moses cut, and in a word to all those that have
any considerable Deformity.

The inner Wall which immediately encompasses the Palace is extremely high and
thick, built of large Brick all equal, and embollish'd with Battlements well
contrived. It extends from the North to the South six Furlongs or* an Italian
Mile and a half, a Furlong and a half in breadth, and fifteen Furlongs or five
Miles wanting a Quarter in Circumference. It has four Gates with large Vaults
and Arches; those to the South and North being threefold, like the Gates of the
first Enclosure, those upon the Sides single. Upon these Gates and upon the
four Angles of the Wall eight Towers, or rather eight Halls of an extraordinary
Bigness, and very good Workmanship, advance themsemselves, varnished within
with a very beautiful red, adorned with Flowers of Gold, and covered with
Tiles varnished with yellow* During the Reign of the Chinese Kings, twenty
Eunuchs kept guard at each of these Gates. But at present the Tartars have
placed in their Rooms forty Soldiers with two Officers. All the Mandarins of
the Tribunals within the Palace, and all the Officers of the King's Household
are allowed Entrance within this Wall. But all others are severely prohibited,
unless they show a little Table of Wood or Ivory, wherein their Names and the
Place where they serve be set down, with the Seal of the Mandarin to whom they
belong. This second Wall is environed with a deep and large Mote lined with
free Stone, and full of large and excellent Fish. Every Gate has a Drawbridge
to lay over the Mote, the South Gate excepted, where the Draw bridge lies only
over one Arch.

In the wide Space that separates the two Walls there are several separate
Palaces, some round, others square, which are all called by their proper Names
conformable to the uses and divertisements for which they were designed;
withal so spacious, so rich, and so magnificently adorned as might well beseem
not only many Princes but some Kings of Europe.

In the same Space, upon the Eastern side, and closely by the Wall, runs a
River, over which are built several Bridges, very fair Structures, and all of
Marble except the Arch in the middle* where there lies a Drawbridge: and all
the other Bridges, of which there are a great Number in the Palace, are no less
beautiful and built of the same Materials. On the West side where the Space is
much more large, there is a Lake very full of Fish, five Furlongs or an Italian
Mile and a quarter, and made in the form of a Base-viol. Where it is narrowest
it is to be crossed over a very beautiful Bridge which answers to the Gates of
the Walls, at the Ends of which stand two Triumphal Arches of three Arches a
Piece: high raised, majestic and most excellent Workmanship* This Lake of
which M. Polo makes mention, l. 2. c. 6. is environed with little Palaces or
Houses of Pleasure, built partly in the Water, and part up the Land. The middle
of the Lake being full of very beautiful Barges for the King's Use when he has
a mind to fish, or to be rowed about the Lake. The remainder of the two East
and West Spaces, which is not taken up by the Lake or the separate Palaces, is
divided into large and well proportioned Streets inhabited by the Officers, and
Artificers that belong to the King's Palace. In the times of the preceding
Kings those Streets cantain'd, besides, ten thousand Eunuchs; but they who
reign at present have put in their Rooms Tartars and Chinese of the Province
of Leao, who are look^ upon as Tartars by a peculiar favor. Thus much as to
the outside of the Palace; we are now to speak of the inside.

Therefore for the better understanding of that which follows, there are two
things to be observed. The first, that all the Cities and all the Palaces of
the King, the Great Lords, the Mandarins and wealthy Persons are so built, that
the Gates and Principal Apartments look toward the South. The second, that
whereas we build our Lodgings one Story above another, the Chinese build upon
the same Level one within another; so that we possess the Air and they the
Earth. For example, the great Gate that fronts the South, stands toward the
Street with little Houses on both sides, and this is the first Apartment. Then
you enter into a fine Court, and at the End of that stands another Gate, and
there is the second Apartment. Behind that lies a more spacious Court, joining
to a great Hall appointed for the reception of Strangers. Behind that lies a
third Court, at the End of which is a fourth Apartment, where the Master of the
House resides: behind which lies a fifth Court and a fifth Apartment, where the
Master lays his Jewels, his most costly Furniture and his Lumber. Beyond there
is a Garden, and at the End of that a sixth Apartment, with a little Door in
the Middle, which is never opened but upon occasion or necessity. Upon the East
and West sides of these Courts are buildings of meaner Value, which serve for
Cellars, Larders, Storehouses, and other Offices belonging to the Family: Only
in the Court adjoining to the great Gate, live the Domestic Servants with
their Wives and Children. Thus the Houses of the Mandarins and wealthy Persons
are usually contrived: But the Palaces of the great Lords take up more Ground,
and have more Rooms, larger and higher according to their Dignity: all things
being so well regulated in China, that neither the Mandarins nor great Lords
can build their Houses but conformable to what is ordained by the Law.

Notes upon the seventeenth Chapter.
This Chapter is so much the more curious, because it contains a very large
Description of the Capital City of China, and the spacious Palace of the
Emperor. All the other Relations without exception, speak very little of it,
and generally that very confusedly too* but that is not a thing to be wondered
at. For the Ambassadors live always retired in the Palaces appointed for their
Reception: and as for the Missionaries they never saw Pe kim, unless it were
only passing through it, or when they were carried Prisoners thither in the
last Persecution. So that unless it were Father Adam, Father Ferdinand,
Verbrest, and F. Magaillans, there were none that could instruct us perfectly
of the Particulars of this great City: and indeed the latter is the only
Person who has given us a Description of it, after a Residence in those parts
of near five and twenty years. Nevertheless, for the Readers better
satisfaction, and to furnish him with a more distinct Idea of the Place I
thought fit to add to the Description a Ground-plot or Draught of the City of
Pe kim and the Emperor's Palace; which I have drawn out with a great deal of
care and pains, not putting in any thing for which I had not a sufficient
warrant from the Relation of our Author, as may be seen by this Translation
and the following Notes. You will find also tha^ though this Description be
very curious, yet it would have been more perfect had it had a more exact
Draught of the City and Emperor's Palace in general, and more Draughts and
particular Designs of several Palaces, as w^ll belonging to the Emperor as to
the great Lords, as also of the Temples, Triumphal Arches and Bridges, etc. But
we may be well cement with this Relation till the (...) who are gone to China
by the King's Command, shall be able to send us something more complete. In the
mean time we have not marked down above seventy Streets, for that they being
all of one Form and Situation, are sufficient to give us an Idea of this
spacious City; besides that the Relation does not ascertain the Number; and for
that the smallness of the Draught would not allow us to set down any more.

Every side of the City is twelve Chinese Furlongs in Length, etc. Page 265.


Father Martini allows to the Walls of the City no more than the Compass of
forty Chinese Furlongs. But we are rather to believe Father Magaillans, who
could not choose but be better informed, and makes 'em forty eight Furlongs in
Circuit. Father Martini tells us also that the Walls were built by the
Directions of the Emperor Tai Sungus, the third of the Family of Tai mim, who
began his Reign in the year 1404. Father Couplet in his Chronology calls this
Emperor Chim Su, or Yum Io; and says moreover that he did not translate the
Seat of the Empire from Nam Kim to Pe kim till the seventh year of his Reign,
or the year, 1411.

It has nine Gates, and not twelve as Father Martini tells us. Page 265.


What our Author says here concerning the Number of the Gates is confirmed by
Peter Semedo, Father Adam Schall, and Father Couplet in his Chronolo^, who all
agree that there are but nine Gates belonging to the City of Pe kim

They built a new square City of which every Side is six Chinese Furlongs, Page
265.
etc.

It has seven Gates, and every Gate opens into a Suburb, etc.

Here I meet with three Difficulties that very much puzzle me; the first, as to
the Largeness of the new City; the second in reference to the Situation of the
Gates: and the third, as to the Number of the Suburbs of the two Cities.

Father Magaillans tells us that the new City is square, and that each side is
six Furlongs in length. Which if it were so, the new City would be twenty four
Chinese Furlongs in Circumference; and the Groundplot would be but a fourth
part in proportion to that of the other City; that is to say, that it would not
take up above a fourth part of the Ground which the Old City does, which to me
seems too small for two Reasons. The first, because that Father Adam tells us,
that after the Conquest of China, the Tartars reserved the old City for
themselves, and constrained all the Chinese to retire into the ne^* which
being so small could never be capable to contain them* (...) ^h the rather,
because he adds that it was in good pa^ inhabited in the Time of the Chinese
Emperors. Secondly, because the same Father positively tells us, that the new
City from the East to the (...) ^er by ^ur Furlongs than the old one: but that
(...) ^he North to the South it is not above half (...) ^ad as the (...) City
(...)* so it follows that the new City could not be above (...) Furlongs broad,
as F. Magaillans relates; but it would be sixteen Furlongs in length, and forty
four in circumference. Now Father Adam is a Testimony of great Authority, as
well as (...)* Magaillans* And therefore to reconcile them both together we
must of necessity conclude, that F. Magaillans speaks only of the breadth of
the new City or the sides that look toward the East and West, which are not
full out six Furlongs in length. Nevertheless, until we have better
Information, I do not think it behooves us to reject the Description, of F.
Magaillans, and therefore in the Draught I have made the new City perfectly
square, leaving to every Man his liberty to adhere to which Opinion he pleases,
According to these Measures the Circuit of the Ancient (...) Pe kim, of twelve
Furlongs to the League of twenty Leagues to the Degree ^ and not twelve and a
(...), as we have already agreed it) would amount (...) Leagues or forty eight
Furlongs; and the Ground (...) would (...) up a hundred forty four Furlongs*
And the new City according to F. Magaillans would ^ke up a fourth Part of the
old one, or thirty six square Furlongs, and both together a hundred and
fourscore square Furlongs.

According to Father Adam the new City would be (...) Furlongs in Circuit, the
Ground-pl^t fourscore (...) Furlongs, and both together a hundred (...)
Furlongs square.

(...) of the Holland Embassy, makes the (...) of both the Cities of Pe kim to
be five Leagues (...) to a Degree; which agrees with the Computa^ (...)
Magaillans, who allows the Circuit of both (...), but according to the Measures
of (...) Adam, (...) are sixty eight Furlongs in Circumfe^, (...) Leagues and
two thirds.

(...) we ^pare Pe kim with some other Cities, (...) both Cities taken
together, are much (...) (...) or Ki^m nan; though according to (...), (...)
and Trigaut they are much better (...) Semedo and Trigaut make Nan kim to be
(...)* (...), which amount to se^ty two Furlongs, and make an Area of three
hundred and fourscore Furlongs square; so that the two Cities of Pe kim,
according to the Opinion of Father Adam, not containing above two hundred and
forty Furlongs, by consequence take up not above three fourths of the Ground
enclosed within the first Circuit of Nan kim. For I do not speak of the second,
which by the report of Authors, does not form an entire Enclosure, but
consists only of some Entrenchments to secure the City where the avenues are
most easy of access.

The Second difficulty is about the Situation of the seven Gates which our
Author gives the new City. The Author of the Holland Embassy says, that when
you enter in at the South Gate, you are half an hour before you come to the
second Enclosure of the City, that is, to the South Walls of the Ancient City.
Which space of half an hour in crossing the new City, agrees with the breadth
which F Adam, and F. Magaillans allow it. He goes on, and says that the second
Enclosure is fortified with a broad M^e full of River Water. Which circumstance
sh^ws us, that the new City has no other Wall on the North side, the that of
the old City, from which it is only separated by a Mote. So that all the
Relations make (...) but of (...) Enclosures which you are to cross before you
come to the Palace. Whence that it seems the (...) Gates of the old City ought
to joy^ to the new City; which (...) is difficult to apprehend, considering the
length (...). Magaillans seems to g^ve it* but very easy to understand
according to F. Adam's Mea^ure. And therefore to avoid confusion, I have not
joined the new City immediately to the old one, as I am (...) to (...) ought to
have d^ne. Which being gran^d, my Opinion is, that it ought to have three Gates
(...) side to answer the three Gates of the old City; (...) the East side, and
another upon the (...), (...) Author in that Paragraph says, that every Gate
leads to a particular Suburb well peopled; more especially that which looks
toward the West. Now he had not explained himself right if there be more than
one Gate and one Suburb on the West side. And thus there remain but two Gates,
which I have placed on the South side; and I do not expect to meet with any
thing more exact, till we have further News from China.

The third thing that puzzles me is the great Number of Suburbs belonging to
the two Cities: Our Author says, that every Gate leads to its Suburb. So then
as there are sixteen Gates, nine in the old, and seven belonging to the new
City, there must also be sixteen Suburbs. But this seems to be impossible, by
reason that according to our Author and other Relations, the North side of the
new City joins to the South side of the old, and you enter out of the first
into the second at three Gates, as Father Adam says expressly in these words,
Tribus portis ab anteriorem Urbem est pervia. Consequently the southern Gates
of the old City can have no Suburbs, no more than the northern Gates of the
new, especially if they are only separated by a Mote. So then according to
this supposition the old City can have but four Suburbs, the new City but two,
and both together but six. Or if you will have the seven Gates of the new City
to be separated, and distant from the Gates of the old City, then there will be
thirteen Suburbs in all, and not sixteen. Which makes me think our Author
meant that every separate Gate that lead into the Country, had a Suburb.

Now in regard that neither our Author nor any Relation speaks exactly of the
Fortifications of this great City; it will not be amiss to set down here what I
have collected from Trigault, Semedo, Martini, Adam, and out of the Holland
Embassy. The old Town is environed with strong Walls, defended by several
Towers placed a Stones throw one from another. F. Adam numbers the Towers to be
three hundred and sixty, which make a hundred fourscore and two Foot of
Paris. He says moreover, that among these Towers, at the distance of every two
Furlongs, there is one of a larger Bulk, which might be easily made, a Bastion,
by adding the Point or two Faces of the Bastion, which are wanting. The whole
Circuit of the City is forty eight Furlongs; whence it follows, that there are
twenty four great Towers, which would make twenty four Bastions, which would be
distant one from the other about four hundred and fifty Fathoms, or five
hundred and forty Geometrical paces. The Wall is properly a Rampart consisting
of two Brick walls, the Bottom of which is of large free Stone, according to
Trigaut and Martini; and the Spaces between are filled up with Earth, after the
manner of our strong Forts in Europe. F. Adam says that the Rampart is fifty
Cubits or Chinese foot high; that is to say, seven Fathom, and seven and 7/24,
or forty three Foot and three Quarters: and that the thickness of it is twenty
four Cubits or Chinese Feet, that is to say, three Fathoms and a half, or
twenty one Foot. All the old Wall is surrounded with a deep and large Mote full
of Water; and the Rampart and Towers are furnished with all sorts of Arms
necessary for their defense according to the Custom of the Country. Moreover
the Relation of the Dutch Embassy, observes that there was a large Portcullis
belonging to the Gate, through which the Ambassadors entered.

It is so spacious that it is above thirty Fathom broad. Page 267.


It is in the Original, above twenty Lances, according to the Portugueze way of
speaking, but I have translated it twenty fathom, allowing nine foot to the
Spanish Lances which are somewhat longer than ours.

Notes for the better understanding the Plane or Draught of the City of Pe kim.
There are the same Marks upon the Draugh^*

A. The Walls of Pe kim which make a perfect Square of twelve Furlongs, or
about a League every way, and forty eight Furlongs, or near four Leagues in
Circumference. These Walls are double with a Platform of Earth between, and
form a Rampart of seven Fathom and near high* and three Fathom and a half thi^.
They are guarded by three hundred and (...) square Towers, and surrounded with
a Mote full of Water, which is not marked in the Draught because the (...) says
nothing of it. B The Gates of the City, nine in Number, three on the South, and
two on each of the other Sides. They are placed very near where they ought to
stand, because the Author d^s not say where they stand, but only in the
middle of the South side. C. The Streets of the City are all straight and drawn
^t by a li^e, with this difference, that those which run from North to South
are all very large; but those that run from East to West are all narrow. D a.
The first enclosure of the Palace, which forms (...) long Squ^ ^wo Miles in
length, a Mile broad, and six Miles (...) two Leagues of twenty to a Degree in
(...)* This (...) ^ll is very h^gh and very think. O^ (...) of the Wall runs a
Ri^er, which according to the (...)* makes sev^l Turnings and (...) the Palace.
But in regard they do not mark the C^urse of the stream, n^ more tha^ ^ur
(...), we have been forced to mark it (...) in a (...). On the West side there
(...) ^ (...) five Furlongs or a thousand one hundred thirty seven Fathoms and
a half in length, with a Bridge over the narrowest part. This Lake represents
the form of a Baseviol, which we have imitated as near as we could. D b. The
second Enclosure of the Palace, which contains several particular Palaces
belonging to the Emperor. D c. The third Enclosure of the Palace, which on two
Sides bounds the Row of several Apartments of the Emperor's grand Palace. The
Emperor's Apartments which the Author mentions to the Number of Twenty, and
which he describes beginning from the Meridional and Principal Gate of the
City. E. The Meridional and Principal Gate of the City, very large and
magnificent. F. The first Street you meet with as you enter the City at the
South Gate. G. A Square Piazza environed with a Balustrade Marble. H. The
second Street adorned with two Triumphal Arches, between which no Person is
permitted to pas^ either in a Sedan or Horseback, ^ut of respect to the
Emperor's Palace.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the twenty Apartments belonging to the Emperor's Palace.
TO the Emperor's Palace there belong twenty Apartments, which run on in a
stereight Line from North to South But for the better apprehending their
Situation, you are to understand, that between the outward Enclosure of the
Palace and the South Wall, where stands the Principal Gate of the City, there
is a large Space belonging to the Palace, and contrived after the following
manner. When you enter at the Gate of the City, you meet with a large and fair
Street, which extends it self the full length of the City Wall, which after you
have gone thorough, you enter into a square Piazza environed with a Balustrade
of Marble; beyond this there is a second Street adorned on each Side with two
Triumphal Arches, into which you are not permitted to go neither in a Sedan,
nor a Horseback; but you must alight at the first Triumphal Arch, and walk a
foot beyond the second. For to do otherwise would be a breach of that respect
which is due to the King's first Apartment, which stands on the other side of
the Street at an equal distance between the two Arches. This first Apartment is
called Tai cim muen, or the Portal of great Purity. It consists of three great
Gates with three Vaults very long and large, above which is a very fair Hall.
These Gates are never opened but when the King himself goes out of Town. Beyond
this first Apartment, there is a large and vast Court adorned on both sides
with Portico's and Columns supported by two hundred Pillars, which being seen
from the Gate afford a very large and pleasing Perspective. This Court is ^wo
Bow-shoots broad, and long above twice Musket Shot; and is bounded on the
North side by the famous Street of Perpetual Repose, which runs along athwart
the two Gates which are to be seen on both sides. These Gates derive their Name
from the Streets wherein they are built. For the first is called the Oriental
Gate of the Street of Perpetual Repose, and the other the Western Gate of the
same Street. All that I have hitherto described is without the two Enclosures
of the Palace, and only serves for a Portico or Avenue, but so majestical that
it challenges an awful respect. Thence going on from North to South, you see
in the middle of the Exterior wall, which as I have said, bounds the Street of
Perpetual Repose on the North side, the second Apartment and the second Portal,
which ought to be rather called the first, because all that go to the Palace
are obliged to go through it. It is composed of five Gates, three great ones
which never open but for the King, and two small ones on each side, advanced at
the bottom about the height of a step above the level Ground, through which all
that go in and out must pass, even the great Lords themselves. Above these
Gates, as above all the rest, stands a great Hall, adorned with a great Number
of Columns with Bases and Chapters gilded; and painted on the outside with
Vermillion Varnish, withinside with a Varnish of Gold and Azure. Behind this
Apartment lies a Court incomparably more spacious than the former, on the East
and West sides filled up with Halls and Chambers that have their Portico's and
Galleries, as have all the rest already mentioned. From hence you proceed to
the third Apartment, which is called the Portal of the Beginning. Behind which
there lies another Court, as behind all the rest, that joins to the fourth
Apartment, which they call the Tower or Portal of the South, and which is the
first within the inner Wall. This Apartment consists of three vast Arches, and
a Hall above them, the Architecture of which is like to that of the third; but
the Structure is larger, more lofty, and more majestic. On the two sides it
has two Walls built in the form of Galleries, that extend themselves toward the
South a full Musket Shot in length, and at both ends North and South are
bounded by four Pa^illions or Halls like those in the middle, but much le^s.
The Roofs are Hexagonal or sloping six ways, and are beautified at the Top with
D^ggs of Brass gilded. All which ^ive Buildings together beget a strange
Surprise, causing both Astonishment and Reverence, by means of their Grandeur
and their Riches. In the middle of this great middlemost Hall it is where the
Drum and the Bell hang up, of which we have spoken in the eighth Chapter.
Behind this, ^ies onother (...) like the former, and the first Apartment called
the supreme Porta^. To this Apartment belong five large and majestic Gates, to
which you ascend by five Pair of Stairs of thirty steps a piece. But before you
come at it, you must cross a deep Mo^e full of water over five Bridges that
answer to the five Pair of Stairs. Both the one and the other beautified with
Parapets Balusters, Columns, Pilasters and square Bases, with Lions and other
Ornaments, all of very fine and very white Marble. So that it is not without
good reason, that this Apartment cariers the Name of the Supreme Portal, as
being more magnificent and majestic than all the rest. Behind it lies another
very spacious Court, garnished on both sides with ^ortico's and Galleries,
Halls and other Rooms very Noble, Stately and Rich. This Court j^ns to a sixth
Apartment, called the supreme Imperial Hall. To which you ascend by five Pair
of Stairs; each pair of forty steps, all of very fine Marble and costly
Workmanship. The pair in the middle, which the King only ascends is of an
extraordinary breadth; the two pair on each side appointed for the great Lords
and Man. darins are not so broad; and the other two which are the narrowest,
serve for the Eunuchs and Officers of the King's Household. They tell us, that
under the Reign of the Chinese Kings, this Hall was one of the wonders of the
World for its beauty, riches and spaciousness; but that the Robbers that
rebelled during the last Revolutions, burnt it together with a great part of
the Palace, when they abandoned Pe kim, for fear of the Tartars, who like
Barbarians as they are, were contented that it should only in some measure
resemble what it was before; yet there is that in it still which serves to fill
the Imagination, and to display the Grandeur of the Emperor. In this Hall it
is, that the Prince being seated in his Throne, receives the Homages of all his
great Lords and all his Mandarins both Learned and Military. Which as it is a
very remarkable Ceremony, so it will not be from the purpose to give a Relation
of it with all its Circumstances.

So soon as any new Family obtains the Empire, the days are presently appointed
for all the Lords and Mandarins to attend and pay their Homages to the
Emperor. This new Family of the Tartars have made choice of the first, the
fifth, the fifteenth, and twenty fifth of every Moon. And so upon every one of
those days, all the great Lords and Mandarins of the Court, to the Number of
near five thousand, assemble together in the Halls, the Chambers and Portico's
on both sides the Court that lies before the South Gate. They have all Bonnets
upon their Heads, and are clad in Robes richly embroidered with Gold; yet so
distinguished however, that you may know one from another by the Variety of
Beas^ and Bi^ds embroidered, three ^orys one above another upon their Bonnets,
upon both sides of their Garments, and upon their Breasts, and the diversity of
the Figures and Colors of their precious Stones. By break of day the King
removes out of his 'leventh Apartment where he makes his Residence, carried in
a magnificent Sedan upon the Shoulders of sixteen Eunuchs, and surrounded with
several other Persons. Being come into the Hall, he seats himself in a costly
Throne raised in the middle between six high and massy Pillars, which appear
to be such, as they call them, Pillars of fine Gold, though they are only
richly guilt. Then an Eunuch falling upon his Knees before the Door, and
raising his voice as loud as he is able, with a slow yet vehement Tone cries
out, Ta lui, that is to say, let the Heaven let loose its Thunder. Upon which
presently they strike upon the Bell, and beat the great Palace Drum, and at the
same time the Kettle-drums, Trumpets, Hoeboys and Flutes making a confused
Noise, of a sudden all the Gates of the Palace are thrown open, except those of
the first Apartment or Portal. Then at the same time that this Confusion of
Harmony begins, the Lords and Mandarins prepare to march. First the petty
Kings, or great Lords of the Blood Royal, and the learned Mandarins from that
side next the East; and the Lords which are not of the Blood Royal, and the
military Mandarins from that side next the West. Thus they proceed on both
sides in good Order, with a slow and equal Pace through passages that lie in a
direct line paved with large Marble Stones, and through the lesser Gates that
are next the great ones. Then the great Lords ascend the Stairs, and place
themselves according to their Degrees, upon the Platform or open Walk before
the great Hall: and the Mandarins as they come forward take their stands in the
Court according to their several Ranks and Qualities, in the Places appointed
for every one of the nine Orders, which are marked and writ down at the Bottom
of certain little Pillars. When they are thus disposed on both sides the Court,
leaving a void space in the middle where the King uses to pass along, and which
is somewhat broader and higher raised than the rest of the Court, they turn
their Faces one toward another; that is to say, those on the East toward
those on the West, and they on the West side toward those on the East; and then
the Din of all the Instruments of Music ceases, and a profound silence
ensuing, they keep themselves in a posture of all the Respect and Modesty
imaginable. Then the Master of the Ceremonies being upon his Knees upon the
middle of the last Pair of Stairs, with a loud and harmonious Voice addresses
himself to the King in these words; Most Illustrious and most Puissant Prince,
our Sovereign Lord, all the Princes of the Blood and great Lords, and all the
Learned and Military Mandarins are come, and are ready to pay the Homages which
they owe to your Majesty. After that he rises, and standing upright upon the
West side of the Stairs, he raises his Voice again, and cries Pai pan, or set
your selves in Order; at what time they compose their Garments, their Feet,
their Hands and Eyes after their manner: then he goes on Cheuen Xin, turn your
selves; upon which they turn in a moment toward the Imperial Hall. Quei, fall
upon your Knees; which they presently do. Keu teu, touch the Earth with your
Heads: it is done as soon as said. Ki lai, rise, and then they all rise. After
that he cries Ye: By which he commands them to extend both their Arms like two
Bows, and joining both Hands together to lift them up above their Heads, and
then to bow down as low as their Knees: and that being done, to resume their
first Posture with a graceful behavior; for the single syllable Ye, commands
all this sort of Reverence. This Ceremony they perform three times together,
and then fall upon their Knees, at what time the Master of the Ceremonies cries
Keu teu, touch the Ground with your Heads, which they do. T^ai Keu teu, touch
the Ground a second Time: it is done a second Time. Yeu Keu teu, touch the
Ground a third Time: which is likewise done. Now when they knock the Ground the
two first times with their Foreheads, they utter with a low Voice van sui, that
is to say, Ten Thousand Years; but the third time they cry Van sui van van sui,
Ten thousand Years, ten Millions of Millions of Years. This last Prosternation
being over, the Master of the Ceremonies repeats Ki lai, rise; Cheuen Xin, turn
your selves; and then they turn one toward another, and lastly Quei pan, set
your selves in Order, and then they return to their places, putting themselves
into rank and file, as they were before. In the mean time the Master of the
Ceremonies falling again upon his Knees, with the same respectfull and sonorous
Voice cries aloud (...) pi, most Potent Lord, the Ceremonies of this Homage
which are due to thee are accomplished: and with that the Din of the loud
Instruments begins again, while the King descending from his Throne, descends
in the same manner as he came. The great Lords and Mandarins also retire into
the Halls and Chambers of the Court before the South Portal, where they repose
and change their Ceremony Hab^s, which are different from their usual Garments,
and much more sumptuous. Nevertheless there is not one of them that dares
presume to wear yellow, for fear of being severely punished. For the Chinese
say that yellow is the Queen of Colors, since Gold which all men grant to be
the Queen of Metals, is of the same Color, has preferred it before all others,
and therefore by consequence it ought to be reserved for the Emperor. In
short, he always appears in public in a long Robe down to the ground of that
Color, the ground of which is Velvet, embroidered with a great Number of
little Dragons with five Claws a piece all embossed Work, which covers the Robe
all over. Two large Dragons opposite one to the other, with their Bodies and
their Tails twined and twirling one within another, take up both the sides and
the forepart of the Breast, and seem as if they would seize with their Teeth
and Claws a very fair Pearl that seems to drop from the Skies, in allusion to
what the Chinese say, that Dragons play with the Clouds and with Pearls. His
Bonnet, his Buskins, his Girdle, and in a word all his Robes are very sumptuous
and magnificent, and are extraordinary Marks of Grandeur and Majesty.

Next to the Imperial Hall and the Court that lies behind it, stands the
seventh Apartment, which is called the High raised Hall, and next to the Court
behind this stands the eighth Apartment called the Supreme Hall in the middle:
The next Hall, having a Court before it likewise, is called the Hall of
Sovereign concord. To this Hall it is, and two more built of each side, that
the King comes twice a year, Morning and Afternoon to treat of the Affairs of
the whole Empire with his Colao or Counselors of State, and with the Mandarins
of the six supreme Tribunals. And for this reason it is, that at the East end
of this Hall, there is a very fair Palace for the Tribunal called Nui yuen, or
the Tribunal within, composed of Counselors of State, and above three hundred
Mandarins of all Degrees, and which is above all the other Tribunals of the
Empire. Behind another Court stands the tenth Apartment with a fair and very
high raised Portal, which is called the Portal of Heaven clear and without
blemish. There are three great Gates in the middle, to which you ascend by
three Pair of Stairs, each pair containing above forty steps, having two little
Doors on both sides, as have all that we have mentioned, and all that we shall
mention. After this, you enter into a spacious Court, bounded by the 'leventh
Apartment, which they call the Mansion of Heaven clear and without blemish, and
which is the richest, the highest raised and the most sumptuous of all. There
are five Ascents to this of very fine Marble, each Ascent containing five and
forty steps, adorned with Pillars, Parapets, Balusters, and several little
Lions, and at the Top on both sides with ten beautiful and large Lions of
gilded Brass, excellent Pieces of Workmanship. In the middle of the Court, at
a proportionable distance from the Stairs stands a Tower of gilded Brass,
round and ending in a Point at Top, and about fifteen Foot high with Doors and
Windows, and abundance of small Figures curiously engraven, and on each side
two large Chafers of gilded Brass and curiously wrought; where they burn
Incense Day and Night. In this sumptuous Apartment it is that the King resides
with his three Queens, the first of which who is called Hoam heu, or the Queen
or Empress, lives with him in the middle Quarter. The second called Tum cum,
has her Lodgings in the Oriental Quarter; and the third called Si cum, in the
Western Quarter, which as well as the Eastern joins to that of the middle. The
Sons of these three Queens are all Legitimate, with this difference only, that
the Sons of the First are preferred in the first place ^o succeed in the Empire.
In this Apartment also, and in the rest, of which we shall speak anon, there
are generally residing a thousand, sometimes two, and sometimes three thousand
Concubines according to the Emperor's pleasure. They are called Cum niu, or
Ladies of the Palace: but they for whom the King has the greatest Affection are
called Ti; or almost Queens. When he pleases, he bestows upon them Jewels which
they wear in their Heads, or upon their Breasts, and a piece of yellow Sat^in
or Damask which they hang before their Doors, and which causes them to be
respected above all the rest. These Ladies have also their particular Titles
and Dignities, and are divided into several Classes or Orders, distinguished by
their Habits and Dresses, and other Marks of their Degrees, like the Mandarins.
Their Sons, as also those of the half Queens, are looked upon as natural
Children. Now whatever concerned the Service of the King, the Queen, the
Concubines, together with the government of the Royal Household and the Palace,
was formerly all in the hands of Ten thousand Eunuchs, of whose Conduct,
Avarice, Pride, Wealth and Impurity, I could give an ample Account, were it no^
(...) from the business of this Relation. But so soon as the Tartars came to be
Masters of the Empire, they threw out Nine Thousand, and only reserved one
Thousand for the Service of the innermost Retirements of the Palace.
Nevertheless, taking their advantage of the youth of the deceased King, by
their Tricks and their Flatteries, they so insinuated themselves into his
Affection, that they recovered almost all their former Authority. However,
after the King's decease, the four Tartar Tutours or Regents again deprived
them of all their Credit, and reduced them to three hundred to serve the
Infant King, and the Queens his Mother and Grandmother, in the most vile and
meanest Drudgeries of the Family. But now this Prince begins to recall them to
his Favor, and indeed they know so well how to please and fit his humors,
that there is no small Probability, but they will come to be as great as ever
they were.

We are also to observe one thing more in reference to this Apartment, that as
the Houses, so are the Porcelams, the Movables, the Habits, and all other
things made use of for the Service of the King, painted, adorned and
embroidered with Dragons. In like manner all the Structures where he resides
have some resemblance to the Heaven, either in Name, in Number, or some other
way. Thus this last Apartment is called the ninth Heaven, and not the 'leventh;
in regard the Chinese never reck'n that which is without the outermost
Enclosure of the Palace; and for that they make but one of the Portal of Heaven
serene and without blemish, and this last Apartment; which for this reason is
said to be the 'leventh, and answers to the ninth Heaven In like manner, to
answer to the twelve Signs, the particular Palaces where the King resides are
to the number of twelve; three of which stand in a straight Line from North to
South; the rest stand upon the East and West side, and are so spacious and so
stately, that one single Apartment might suffice a King. Upon this Principle,
when the Chinese and particularly the Eunuchs speak of their King, they
express themselves in pompous and hyperbolical words, referring to Heaven, the
Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and the like. Thus they never say, sound the
Trumpets, beat the Drums, etc. but Ta lui, let the Heaven let loose its
Thunder. To let you understand the King is dead, they make use of the words Pim
tien, he is gone, a new Guest, into Heaven: Or of the word Pum, that is to say
a great Mountain is fallen. Instead of saying the Gates of the Palace, they
say, Kin muen, the Gates of Gold, and so of other things.

Here it will not be amiss to give an account of one of the Circumstances of
the Persecution raised against the Christian Religion in the year 1664, by some
Persons, but more especially by a Mandarin called Yam quam sien. One of the
great Crimes which this Miscreant laid to the Charge of F. John Adam, was that
in the Construction of a Celestial Globe, he omitted to mark out the North
Star, which the Chinese call Ti sim, or the Star which is the King of all the
other Stars. For that because it is immovable, they say that all the other
Stars turn about it, as the Subjects turn about the King to do him service:
and for that reason they pretend, that the King is the same upon Earth which
that Star is in Heaven. From all which this Impostour concluded, that Father
Adam had omitted to mark it down, because he would not acknowledge a King in
China, and that by consequence he was a Rebel and deserved death. The Judges
were ravished with this ridiculous Accusation, because that all the rest which
they had formed against our sacred Religion, had only served to make it break
forth with greater luster. Nevertheless their wicked Designs vanished all into
Smoke, and the Malice of this Impostour served only to make the Company sport.
The Fathers that accompanied F. Adam, who was fallen into a fit of an Apoplexy,
and for that reason could not speak for himself, desired in his behalf that the
Globe might be produced before the Assembly; where it appeared that it was not
finished, and that he had not marked down the Constellations but only from the
Equinoctial line to the Antartick Pole, which clearly overturned that Calumny,
and confounded the Accuser.

Behind this 'leventh Apartment lies another Court, and next to that stands the
twelfth Apartment or second Lodging of the King, which is called the noble and
beautiful middle Mansion. Behind which lies another Court and the thirteenth
Apartment or third Lodging of the Kings, which is called the Mansion that
entertains Heaven. Behind that you behold a most beautiful and spacious
Garden, which makes the fourteenth Apartment, and is called the Imperial
Garden. From thence after you have crossed several Courts and other large
spaces, you come to the last Portal of the innermost Enclosure, which makes the
fifteenth Apartment, and is called the Portal of Mysterious Valor. It consists
of three Gates and three great Arches which support a very high raised Hall,
painted and gilded, and crowned with several little Towers, and several
Ornaments at the Top of the Roof, with so much Symmetry and Proportion, that
the Prospect is no less majestic than beautiful. Going out of this Apartment
you cross the Mote over a fair and large Bridge, built all of large Marble
Stones; beyond which you come into a Street that runs from East to West; and
which is bounded to the North by the Mote, and to the South by several Palaces
and Tribunals. But in the middle and just against the Bridge there is a Portal
with three Gates, somewhat less than the preceding Portals, and this is the
sixteenth Apartment, called the high raised Portal of the South. Behind it lies
a Court or Platform thirty Fathoms broad from South to North, and a Chinese
Furlong in length from East to West. Here it is that the King exercises his
Horses and therefore it is not paved as the other Courts, Streets and Spaces
are, of which we have spoken; but only covered with Earth and Gravel, which is
watered when the King has a mind to ride. In the midst of the North wall of
this Platform, stands a large Portal with five Gates, altogether like the
former, which makes the seventeenth Apartment, and is called the Portal of Ten
Thousand Years, that is to say, the Emperor's Portal. A little farther you
meet with a spacious Park where the King keeps his wild Beasts, Bears, wild
Boars, Tigers and the like; every one in their particular stands large and
beautiful. In the midst of this Park are five Hillocks also of a moderate
height: of which the middlemost is the highest; the other four, which are
less, and placed two to the East, and two to the West, slope downward every way
with an equal Proportion. They were made by hand, of the Earth which was dug
out of the Mo^e, and the Lake of which we have spoken, and are covered with
Trees to the very Top planted with an exactness of Symmetry; with every one a
round or square Pedestal, wherein several holes are cut for the Rabbets to
borough and Hares to sit in, of which those little Hills are very full. Nor is
the same Enclosure without a great Number of Deer and Goats, nor the Trees less
frequented with several sorts of Birds both wild and tame. Which is the reason
that the King often visits this Place to hear the Music of the Birds, and to
see the Beasts run and skip up and down. Of these Hills M. Polo makes mention
in his second Book c. 16.

To the North and within two Musket shot of these Hills, stands a very thick
Wood, and at the End of the Wood, adjoining to the Wall of the Park, are to be
seen three Houses of Pleasure extraordinary for their Symmetry with lovely
Stairs and Terrasses to go from one to the other. This is a Structure truly
Royal, the Architecture being exquisite, and makes the eighteenth Apartment,
being called the Royal Palace of long Life. A little farther stands a Portal
like the former, which makes the nineteenth Apartment, and is called the high
raised Portal of the North. Out of this you come into a long and broad Street,
adorned on both sides with Palaces and Tribunals, beyond which stands a Portal
with three Gates, built within the outermost Enclosure, and is called the
Portal of the Repose of the North. This is the last and twentieth of these
Apartments that make up the King's Palace in a straight Line from North to
South.

Notes upon the eighteenth Chapter.
I. The first Apartment called Tai cim muen, or the Portal of great Purity. It
consists of three great Gates and three Vaults, that support a lovely Hall.
Behind lies a spacious Court of a greater length than breadth, garnished on
both sides with Portico's and Galleric^, supported by two hundred Columns.
This Court is bounded by the Street of Perpetual Repose, which is divided by
two Gates, one upon the West, the other upon the East side. We have placed them
at a venture, because their Situation is not marked down in the Relation. II.
The second Apartment, which ought to be called the first because it l^ads into
the outer Enclosure of the Palace. This Apartment or Portal is composed of five
Gates, three great ones in the middle, which never open but for the King
himself, and two lesser on each side, through which all People are permitted to
pass to and fro. There are also five great Vaults or Arches which support a
spacious Hall, adorned as our Author describes it; and beyond it a Court much
larger than the former; but in regard we had not any measure of the parts of
the Palace, I could not tell how to give it its due Proportion. This Court like
the rest is garnished on the right and left hand with Portico's, Galleries,
Halls and Chambers. III. The third Apartment called the Portal of the
Beginning, with its Court belonging to it like the former. IV. The fourth
Apartment, and first of the second Enclosure called the Tower or Portal of the
South. It has three Gates, three Vaults, and a Hall above, larger, higher
raised, and more majestic than the former. This Hall has on each side two
Galleries, that extend toward the South, bounded at both ends by two Pavillions
or lesser Halls, etc. In this Hall hangs the Bell and the Drum mentioned in the
eighth Chapter. V. The fifth Apartment called the Supreme Portal, with its
Court before it, formed of five great Gates with an ascent to it of five
magnificent Marble pair of Stairs. Before your come at it, you cross a great
Mote marked in the Draught over five Marble Bridges that answer to the five
pair of Stairs. VI. The sixth Apartment called the Supreme Imperial Hall. To
which you ascend by five pair of magnificent Marble Stairs, each pair of forty
two steps, etc. In this Hall the Emperor receives the Homages and Submissions
of the Princes, great Lords, Mandarins* etc. which our Author describes so
exactly that there is nothing more to be added, only what Semedo, and some
other Authors relate; that the same Days the same Ceremonies are performed in
all the Cities of the Kingdom, where all the Mandarins meet at the Governors
Palace before a Throne, upon which are erected the Royal Ensigns, where they
use the same Ceremonies and Reverences as before the Emperor, already related
by our Author.

Father Magaillans tells us, that as fast as the Mandarins come to the place,
they take their stands according to their Rank and Qualitiy, in places
appointed for every one of the nine Orders, which are marked and writ down at
the Bottom of little Pillars. Father Adam, says these Pillars are of Brass and
square. He also gives us an account of the Distinctions of the nine Orders of
Mandarins, which I never read in any other Author, and therefore it may not be
amiss to insert them here.

The Mandarins of the first Order wear at the Top of their Cap or Bonnet which
ends in a very flat Cone, a Carbuncle enchac'd in Gold, and a Pearl at the
Bottom before. Upon their Girdles also glitter four Stones highly esteemed in
China, enchac'd in Gold and cut into long Squares, three Fingers broad and four
in length. This stone called by the Chinese, Yusce, is brought from the
Kingdom of Cascar by the Mohammedan Merchants, that come from thence to China
every three years under pretense of an Embassy. It is somewhat greenish, and
resembles a Iaspar, only that it is harder, somewhat transparent, and
enclining to white. As for the great Lords who are above all the nine Orders of
Mandarins, they are distinguished from the first Order only by the Stones in
their Girdles, which are round, with a Saphyr in the middle. The petty Kings so
called, though they enjoy nothing of Sovereignty, instead of a Carbuncle, wear
at the Top of their Bonnets a Ruby adorned with several Pearls, with a Flower
of Gold fastened at the lower end of their Bonnets that come over their
Foreheads. The Emperor himself wears a Bonnet of the same form, and at the
point of it a Pearl as big as a Pigeons Egg, with several other lesser Pearls
dangling underneath; his Girdle also dazles the Eye with the precious Stones
and Pearls with which it is covered all over.

The Mandarins of the second Order wear at the Top of their Caps a large Ruby,
and another which is less at the Bottom. Their Girdles are adorned with demi
Globes of Gold embellished with Flowers of the same Metal, with a Carbuncle in
the middle. The Mandarins of the third Order at the point of their Caps, carry
a Carbuncle enchas'd in Gold, and a Saphyr at the Bottom, and upon their
Girdles demi Globes adorned with Flowers only. They of the fourth Order wear a
Saphyr, and at the Bottom another Saphyr which is less; having upon their
Girdles plain demi Globes of Gold only. The Mandarins of the fifth Order wear
only a Saphyr in their Caps, in other things like those of the fourth Order.
The Mandarins of the sixth Order at the Top of their Bonnets wear a Crystal
neatly shaped, and at the Bottom a Saphyr ^ Their Girdles being covered with
pieces of Rhino^s Horns set in Gold They of the seventh Order, have nothing but
an Ornament of Gold at the point of their Caps, with a Saphyr at the Bottom,
and their Girdles covered with Silver-plates. They of the eighth Order carry
also an Ornament of Gold, but without any Iew^ at the Bottom; having their
Girdles covered with thin pieces of Rhinoceros's Horn. The Mandarins of the
ninth Order wear a Bonnet of Satin purfl'd with Silver; and pieces of Bufola's
Horns inchas'd in Silver upon their Girdles. Besides these nine Orders the
Licentiates wear upon the Top of their Heads a Dove of Gold, or guilt upon a
Bodkin of the same Metal; with flat pieces of Rhinoceros's Horns upon their
Girdles. Lastly the Batchelers of Art wear the same Doves, but of Silver only,
and Plates of Bufola's Horns upon their Girdles.

Their Habits also serve to distinguish the various Orders of Mandarins. The
learned Mandarins of the three first Orders, and the Military Mandarins of the
four first Orders are distinguished from the Inferior Orders by their Garments
enricht with Figures of Dragons. They also wear a certain sort of Surcoat,
variegated with the Figures of Birds and Beasts in Embroidery, which serve also
to distinguish the various Orders of the Mandarins. But in regard they are not
bound to wear them regularly, especially in the Summer by reason of excessive
heats, they are no such certain Signs of Distinction between the Orders and
Degrees of the Mandarins, as those other which we have already mentioned. For
no man dares to quit them, or wear them indifferently as he pleases himself
without a breach of the Laws: and the same Laws have regulated the places which
every one ought to take when they meet in the Palace. The lettered Mandarins
stand upon the King's left hand, which in China is the most honorable place;
the Military Mandarins upon the Right, and the King himself always looks toward
the South, when he sits upon his Throne.

VII. The seventh Apartment called the high raised Hall with a Court before it.
VIII. The eighth Apartment called the Supreme Middle Hall. IX. The ninth
Apartment, called the Hall of Sovereign Concord. To this Hall are joy'nd two
others, one upon the West, and the other upon the East side: In this Hall it is
that the Emperor sits in Counsel Morning and Afternoon with his Colao's or
Counselors of State, and the Mandarins of the six Supreme Tribunals. Upon the
East side of this Apartment stands the Palace of the Supreme Council composed
of Colao's and above three hundred Mandarins. X. The tenth Apartment, called
the Portal of Heaven clear and without blemish. It has sive Gates like the
rest, and you ascend to the middlemost by three pair of stairs, each pair of
above forty steps a piece. XI. The 'leventh Apartment called the Mansion of
Heaven clear and without blemish, is the most beautiful of all, as you may see
by the Relation of our Author. I have observed in the Draught the Towers of
Brass, and the great Chafers which he speaks of. In this Apartment the Emperor
resides with his three Queens and his Concubines. The Chinese will have this
Apartment to be no more than the ninth; for that they never reckoned the first
which is without the outward Enclosure to be one, and besides they make but one
Apartment of this, of that before it, and the next that follows it, which
serves to explain the meaning of the Chinese, when they say that the King
sleeps within nine Walls, which some Relations misunderstanding have ill
explained the sense of the Words. XII. The twelfth Apartment, called the fair
and beautiful Middle-House, the King's second Logding. XIII. The thirteenth
Apartment, and the King's third Lodging called the House which entertains
Heaven. XIV. The fourteenth Apartment which cousists in a great Garden, several
Courts and other void Spaces, which the Author does not particularly describe,
and which the smallness of the Plate would not have permitted me to
distinguish, though they had been described. XV. The fifteenth Apartment called
the Portal of mysterious Valor, and the last of the innermost Enclosure. After
that, you cross the Mote over a fair Marble Bridge, and after that a Street
which runs from East to West. XVI. The sixteenth Apartment called the high
raised Portal of the South. Which has three Gates and a Court where the King
manages his great Horses, 30 Fathom broad, and 230 in length. XVII. The
seventeenth Apartment, called the Portal of ten thousand Years. Which has five
Gates, and leads into a magnificent Park, full of wild Beasts, Hills and Woods.
Other Relations say that the Hills were made of the Earth, dug out of the
Lake when it was first made. XVIII. The eighteenth consists of three beautiful
Summer-Houses, and is called the Royal Palace of long Life. XIX. The nineteenth
Apartment is called the high raised Portal of the North; and leads into a large
and long Street. XX. The twentieth Apartment seated beyond that street in the
outtermost Enclosure; which has but three Gates, and is called the Portal of
the Repose of the North. Here I must inform the Reader, that the five last
Apartments do not seem to be sufficiently distinguished; especially the
nineteenth, and the great Street which is next to it. But I could do no better,
notwithstanding all the pains that I took. For I found that the Ground between
the two Enclosures was too narrow for so many Apartments, for a place to ride
the great Horse, a spacious Park and Streets, etc. Now some Relations say, that
the Emperor's Palace extends to the Wall of the City on the North side, which
would have afforded me space enough and to spare. But I durst not vary from my
Author, who clearly seems to say the contrary, and who would not have failed
to have marked the place where these Apartments had crossed the exterior
Enclosure, which he never sets down till at last. So that we must be forced to
stay for a new Relation to unfold these Difficulties.
CHAP. XIX. A Description of twenty particular Palaces contained in the inner
Enclosure of the Emperor's Palace.
BEsides the Palace designed for the Emperor's Person, there are erected on
the other side several particular Palaces, many of which for their Beauty,
Splendor and Largeness might well serve for the Mansions of great Princes. But
for the better apprehending of their Situation, it is to be observed that the
Space which the inner Wall encloses is divided into three distinct Parts, by
two great and high Walls that run from the South to the North. These Walls have
no Battlements, but are covered with Tiles varnished over with yellow, and the
Top is raised and trimmed with a thousand Designs and Figures all of the same
Materials and the same Color. The Eves of this little Roof end in Dragons in
Demy-Relief, which hang down on both sides. The rest of the Wall is covered
with square Tiles, green, yellow and blew, which are so ranged as to represent
Beasts, Flowers and Horns in abundance. This being supposed, the Palace takes
up the space or part in the middle, and the other parts are for the collateral
Palaces which we are going to describe, and by consequence stand within the
innermost Enclosure.

The first is called Ven hoa tien, or the Palace of flourishing Learning. It
serves the King for two Uses; first, for his Retirement, when he has a mind to
discourse of Sciences, or any important Affairs of the Empire. Secondly for his
more strict observance of the Fasts that are most usual among the Chinese;
which they observe four times a year, and are generally answerable to our four
Seasons. For when they design to perform their solemn Sacrifices, they fast the
three preceding days. And lastly when they would implore the Favor and Mercy
of Heaven in any public Calamity, as in the time of Famine, Pestilence,
Earthquakes, or extraordinary Inundations. During these days the Mandarins live
apart from their Wives, and remain Day and Night in their Tribunals, never eat
any Flesh, nor drink Wine, nor discourse of any Business, especially in
criminal Matters. The Emperor also keeps himself solitary in his Palace, upon
the East side of the Supreme Imperial Hall.

The second Palace is just over against the former, on the West side of the
same Imperial Hall, and is called vu im tien, or the Palace of the Council of
War. Thither the King retires to Consultation when the Kingdom is alarmed by
any Revolt, or by Pirates, or the Inrodes of the Tartars upon the Frontiers.
These two Palaces have every one four Apartments, with their Courts, and a
Royal Hall in the middle with Stairs, and an open Walk or Gallery round about;
of white Marble, wrought after the same manner as are those of the principal
Palace, but much less. The Courts are garnished on each side with Halls and
Chambers, the Architecture of which is very exquisite, and painted within side
with Vermillion Varnish, intermixed with Gold and Azure. And what we say of
these two Palaces is to be understood likewise of those that follow.

The third or second on the East side is called Tum sien tien, or the Palace
where honor is paid to the deceased Kings of the Royal Family that actually
Reigns. Those Kings are seated upon their Royal Thrones in a magnificent Hall
adorned with Stairs and Galleries, and all other conveniences like the rest
before mentioned. Their Images are made of Eagle-wood, Saunders, or some other
odoriferous and precious Wood, and adorned with sumptuous Habits. Before the
Images are placed sumptuous Tables, with Candlesticks, Chafers, and other
costly Ornaments. And upon the day of the Ceremony, there is an Offering made
them of several Tables covered with a great Quantity of Exquisit Viands.

The fourth Palace or second on the West side is called Gin chi tien, or the
Palace of Mercy and Prudence. So soon as the King is dead, they set him in a
rich Chair which is ready prepared, and which sixteen Eunuchs carry into the
Middle of the Royal Hall of this Palace, where there is an Estrade, and a rich
Bed upon which they lay the Body. Soon after, with a world of Ceremonies and
funeral Music they put him into a Coffin, which costs no less than two or
three thousand Crowns. It is made of a certain Wood that grows in the Province
of Su chuen, called cum cio mo, or Peacock-wood, in regard the Lines and Veins
of it form certain Figures that represent the Eyes in a Peacock's Tail. The
Chinese affirm, that this Wood, which is certainly very curious and precious,
preserves dead Bodies from corrupting, for many years afterward. The funeral
Pomp is performed in this Palace, with so many Ceremonies and with so much
cost, that it would be the Subject of a long and curious Relation. The
Chinese, after they have stopped up all the seams and joyntures of the Coffin
with Bitumen, to prevent the Exhalation of any offensive Smell, usually leave
the Body for several Months, and sometimes for several Years, in the same
place; especially if it be the Corpse of a Father or Mother, for whom they wear
Mourning for three Years; because say they, they cannot endure to part with
them. As for the King, after the funeral Obsequies are performed with a
Magnificence incredible, and befitting so great a Monarch, they carry him to be
interred in the Imperial Wood. For so they call the place where the Royal
Sepulchers are; of which I shall say no more, but that the Grandeur of it, the
Palaces, the Wealth and Ornaments that belong to it, the Walls that environ it,
the Mandarins and other Servants that are employed in continual Attendance, and
the Soldiers that guard it would well deserve a particular Relation.

The fifth Palace or third on the East side is called Tsu him cum, or the
Palace of Compassion and Joy. Here the Prince who is Heir to the Empire, keeps
his Court till the Death of his Father.

The sixth and third on the West side is called Kim ho cum, or the Palace of
Union and Flourishing. This is the Residence of the second and third Son of the
Emperor before they are married; for when they are married they are usually
sent to the Capital, or some other principal Cities of the Provinces, where
they have Palaces built to receive them of an astonishing Magnificence. I have
seen three, several times, my self. The first in the City of Vu cham, Capital
of the Province of Hu cham. The second in the City of Chim tu, Capital of the
Province of Sucheuen; and the third in the City of Ham Chum, a famous City in
the Province of Xen si. There are others in the City of Si began, Capital of the
said Province of Xen si: In the City of Pien Leam Capital of the Province of
Honan: In Kim cheu, a considerable City in the Province of Hu quam: In Kien
cham, a remarkable City in the Province of Kiam si: In Nam cham, Capital of the
same Province and in several others. All these Palaces though much less than Pe
kim were very vast, beautiful, rich and magnificent. They contained some ten,
some twelve, some more Apartments with separate Palaces on each side, and a
double Enclosure of Walls. When the Emperor sent his second or third Son to
one of these Palaces, he gave him the Title of King. For example, he gave the
Title of Cho vam, or King of Cho, to him whom he sent to the City of Chim tu,
Metropolis of the Province of Su chuen, because this Province was anciently
called Cho. Every one of these Kings had a thousand Eunuchs to serve and attend
them, to take care of their Affairs and receive their Revenues. But these Kings
had nothing to do in the public Affairs of the Province. Nevertheless the
Mandarins were obliged to come four times a year to the young King's Palace to
pay their Homage to him in the same manner as they do to the King at Pe kim,
only with this difference, that they give the Emperor the Title of Van sui,
or ten thousand years, but to these Princes they give no more than the Title of
Cien sui, or a thousand years.

The seventh or fourth Oriental Palace is called Yuen hoen iten, or the Palace
of the Royal Nuptials. When the King or the Heir of the Crown are pleased to
marry, the Tribunal of Ceremonies makes choice of the most beautiful and most
accomplished Virgins that are to be found, whether they be the Daughters of
great Lords, or but of mean descent they value not. To this purpose the
Tribunal employs Women that are well in years, and of good Reputation, who make
choice of twenty which they deem the most accomplished. The Tribunal being
informed of this choice, order the young Virgins to be carried in close Sedans
to the Palace, where for some days they are examined by the Queen Mother; or if
there be no such Person living, by the principal Lady Lady of the Court, who
visits them, and orders them to run, on purpose to find out whether they have
any ill smell or defect about them. After several Trials, she makes choice of
one whom she sends to the King or Prince with a great deal of Ceremony,
accompanied with Feasts and Banquets, distribution of Favors, and a general
pardon for all Criminals of the Empire, unless Rebels and Robbers upon the
Highway. After this she is crowned with a splendid Pomp, and at the same time
she has bestowed upon her many Titles and large Revenues. As for the nineteen
Virgins to whom Fortune was not so favorable, the King marrys them to the Sons
of great Lords; of which if there be not anow to serve them all, he sends the
remainder back to their Parents with dowries sufficient to marry them
advantageously. This was the Custom of the Kings of China. But at present the
Tartar Emperors make choice of the Daughters of some great Lords, who are not
of the Blood Royal, or of the Daughters of some one of the Kings of the Western
Tartars for their Wives and Queens

The eighth or fourth occidental Palace is called Tzu nen cum, or the Palace of
Piety; and serves for the Residence of the Queen Mother, and her Damsels and
Ladies of Honor.

The ninth or fifth oriental Palace is called chum cui cum, or the Palace of
Beauty; and the tenth or fifteenth on the West side is called Ki fiam cum, or
the happy Palace. These two Palaces are appointed for the Daughters and Sisters
of the King before they are married. For which purpose, during the Reigns of
the Chinese Kings, the Tribunal of Ceremonies picked out certain young
Gentlemen, handsome and ingenious, and fourteen or fifteen years old. Out of
which the King chose one for his Daughter or his Sister, to whom he gave a vast
Dowry in Lands and Jewels. These were called ^u m^, or the Emperor's Kindred
by his Wives. They could not be (...). However they became very powerful, and
were great Oppressors of the People. Bef^ the^ had any Children, they were
obliged every (...) and Evening to fall upon them Knees (...) their Wives, and
knock their Heads thr^ (...) against the Ground. But so soon as they (...)
Children, they were no longer engaged to that Ceremony. At present the Tartar
King marrys his Sisters and his Daughters to the Sons of great Lords who are
not of the Blood Royal, or with the Sons of the petty Kings of the Western
Tartars.

The 'leventh or sixth Palace to the East is called Y hao tien, or the Palace
of due Title; and the twelfth or sixth Palace to the West, is called Siam nim
cum, or the Palace of Felicity. The thirteenth or seventh Eastern Palace is
called Gin xeu cum, or the Palace of long Life: and the fourteenth or seventh
Western Palace is called Kien nim cum, or the Palace of Celestial Repose. All
which four Palaces were the Habitations of the second and third Queen, and the
Concubines and several other Ladies belonging to the deceased King, whom the
King never sees, nor ever enters into their Palaces; such is their respect and
veneration for their Predecessors.

The fifteenth or eighth Palace to the East is called Kiao ta tien, or the
Palace of great Friendship.

The sixteenth or eighth to the West is called Quen nim cum, or the Palace of
the place of Repose; to either of which the King retires, when he has a mind to
be private with his Queen.

The seventeenth or ninth to the East, is called Chim chien cum, or the Palace
which receives Heaven: and the eighteenth, which is opposite to it, ^ quen cum,
or the Palace of the elevated Earth. These two Palaces serve for the King's
divertisement with his other two Queens: to the first of which he goes with his
second, and to the second with the third of his Wives.

The nineteenth or tenth to the East is called Hum te tien, or the Palace of
abundant Virtue.

The twentieth or tenth to the West is called Kiu en sin tien, or the Palace
that envelops the heart. In these two Palaces are kept the King's Jewels and
Rarities of an inestimable Value. And sometimes he goes himself to visit his
Treasure, which perhaps is the largest and the richest in the World, in regard
that for four thousand twenty five years the Chinese Kings have been always
adding to it without taking any thing out of it. For though the Reigning
Families have so often altered, yet none of them ever touched this Treasure,
nor those of which we shall give an account hereafter; because of the rigorous
Punishments which the new Kings would have inflicted upon those that should
have attempted such a Sacrilege, and all their Family. Now though the Names of
all these Palaces seem very mean and ordinary in our Language, certain it is
however, that in the Chinese Language they are very significative and
mysterious, as being invented on purpose by their Men of Learning, conformable
to their Structure, their Situation and their Use.

Notes upon the nineteenth Chapter.
THESE Palaces are large and magnificent, and seated in the spaces between the
twenty Apartment*s of the Emperor's Palace, and the two Walls of the Inner
Enclosure, which are described by our Author in this nineteenth Chapter.

I. The first Palace called Ven hoa tien, or the Palace of flourishing
Learning. Hither the King retires when he has a mind to discourse with his Men
of Learning, or to consult about his most important Affairs, or to keep the
Fasts most usually observed in China. It is placed on the East side of the
sixth Apartment called the supreme Imperial Hall. II. The second Palace over
against the foregoing, to the West of the sixth Apartment, called Vu im tien,
or the Palace of the Council of War. III. The third Palace, or second on the
East side, as you go to the North, called Tum sien tien, or the Palace where
Honors are paid to the deceased Kings of the Royal Family. IV. The fourth
Palace on the West side, called Gin chi tien, or the Palace of Mercy and
Prudence, where the funeral Honors are paid to the King after his Decease. V.
The fifth Palace on the East side, called Tzu kim cum, or the Palace of
Compassion and Joy, where the Heir to the Crown resides till the Death of his
Father. VI. The sixth Palace, on the West side, called Kim ho cum, or the
Palace of Union and Flourishing. Here the second and third Sons of the
Emperor, reside till they marry. VII. The seventh Palace or fourth on the West
side, called Yuen hoen tien, or the Palace of the Royal Nuptials, because the
Nuptials of the King, and the Heir to the Crown are there solemnized. VIII. The
eighth Palace or fourth on the West side, called Tsu nim cum, or the Palace of
Piety, being the Residence of the Queen Mother, and her Maids of Honor. IX.
The ninth Palace or fifth to the East, called Chum cui cum, or the Palace of
Beauty. X. The tenth Palace or fifth to the West, called Kia ^iam cum, or the
happy Palace, appointed for the Sisters and Daughters of the King before they
are married. XI. The 'leventh or sixth to the East, called Y hao tien, or the
Palace of due Title. XII. The twelfth or sixth Palace to the West, called Siam
nim cum, or the Palace of Felicity. XIII. The thirteenth or seventh Palace to
the East, called Gin chu cum, or the Palace of long Life. XIV. The fourteenth
or seventh Palace to the West, called Kien nim cum, or the Palace of Celestial
Repose. In this Palace the second and third Queen keep their Courts, together
with the Concubines and other Ladies of the deceased King. So that this Palace
serves for the same use, as the old Seraglio at Constantinople. XV. The
fifteenth, or eighth to the East, called Kiao ta tien, or the Palace of great
Friendship. XVI. The sixteenth, or eighth to the West, called Guen nim cum, or
the Palace of the place of Repose. To these Palaces the King retires when he
has a mind to be private with his first Queen. XVII. The seventeenth Palace, or
ninth to the East, called Chim kien cum, or the Palace that receives Heaven
XVIII. The eighteenth Palace, or ninth to the West, called Y xuen cum, or the
Palace of the elevated Earth. To the first of these two Palaces the King
retires with his second Queen, and to the second with his third. XIX. The
nineteenth, Palace or tenth to the East, called Lum te tien, or Palace of
abounding Virtue. XX The twentieth or tenth Palace to the West, called Kiun sin
tien, or the Palace that envelops the Heart. In these two Palaces are kept the
King's Jewels and Rarities of an inestimable Price. Our Author tells us, that
this Treasure has been filling for these four thousand and twenty five Years,
and that in all that time nothing has been taken out of it. But this is to be
understood, unless there happen any sudden Conflagration; or that the City had
not been taken and plundered by the Enemy, who never trouble themselves to
observe the Laws of China in that particular. For example, all the Relations
that mention the Wars of the Tartars, among the rest Martini and Couplet tell
us, that in the year 1644. the Rebel Li or Li cum, not daring to abide the
coming of the Tartars to Pe kim, spent eight Days in removing all that there
was of precious and valuable in the Palace.
To every one of the Palaces belong twenty four separate Apartments, with a
Royal Hall in the middle. I have placed them as they stand in the Draught: for
a Man may easily believe that the last where the Women reside, and where the
Treasure lies, ought to be most remote from the principal Gate.

CHAP. XX. Of several other Palaces, and some Temples erected within the same
Enclosures.
ALL these Palaces which we have hitherto mentioned, are seated within the
innermost Enclosure of the Palace, from which they are separated by two Walls,
and divided one from another by other Walls of the same Fabric* Those that
follow are seated between the two Enclosures.

The first is called Chum hoa tien, or the Palace of the doubled Flower. Now to
understand this Name, you are to take notice, that about two hundred years ago
one of the Chinese Kings, contrary to the Advice of his Grandees and People,
would needs go and fight the Western Tartars, who took several places and laid
waste the Province of Pe kim: but he was overthrown, taken and carried into
Tartary, where the Chinese believed him to be dead, and therefore set up his
Brother in his place. Some Months after, Ambassadors came from the Tartars,
who brought news that he was alive, and demanded a Ransom both for him and the
rest of the Prisoners. So soon as the new King received this Intelligence, he
gave Order to Commissioners to treat about his Brother's Enlargement, and
appointed a magnificent Palace to be built, whither he intended to retire upon
his Brother's Return. The Palace being finished, and the Treaty concluded, the
Prisoner was brought to the Frontiers, where the Tartars received a great Sum
of Money, great Quantities of Silk and Cotton, and all that they demanded*
Thereupon the King returning to Pe kim, the new King would have resigned the
Scepter into his hands, but the old King would not accept it, but retired to
the Palace which his Brother had prepared for himself, without ever offering to
moddle any more with the Affairs of the Government. Three years after that, the
new King died, and then the old King accepting the Crown, was crowned a second
time; and then the Learned Men, according to the Custom gave him another Name,
calling him, Tien xum, or the King who followed the Will of Heaven. They also
gave a new Name to the Palace where he had lived three years retired, calling
it Chum hoa tien, or the Palace of the doubled Flower, alluding to the double
Coronation of the King. The Bridge over which they cross the Mote that
surrounds this Palace is a wonderful piece of Workmanship. It is a Dragon of
an extraordinary Bulk, whose fore and hind-feet standing in the water supply
the place of Pillars; and whose Body, Dolphin like, makes the middle Arch; and
two more, the one with his Tail, the other with his Head and Neck. The whole is
made of black Jasper stone, so well closed and so well wrought, that it seems
not only to be of one piece, but represents a Dragon to the life. It is called
Ti kiam, or the flying Bridge. For the Chinese report, that this Dragon flew
through the Air from a Kingdom in the East Indies, which they call Tien cho, or
the Kingdom of Bamboos, whence they also pretend that their Pagod and their Law
was brought in former times. They also tell a hundred idle Stories of this
Dragon and this Bridge, which I omit as not becomeing this Relation. This
Palace takes up in length two Furlongs of China, or half an Italian Mile.

The second is called Hien yam tien, or the Palace of the Rising Sun. A
Structure beautiful and magnificent for the Architecture, and environd with
nine very high Towers all of different Workmanship. These nine Towers signify
the first nine Days of the Moon which are very great Holy Days, especially the
ninth, among the Chinese. They marry their Children during these Holy Days;
and among the several Dishes of the Feast, they never fail of one which
represents the Tower with nine Stories, every one of which answers to one of
the nine Days. For say they, the Number of Nine includes within it self those
properties, which make it more excellent than all the rest of the Numbers, and
render it fortunate by the Augmentation of Life, Honor and Riches. For this
reason, all the Chinese Rich and Poor get up that day upon Terrasses and
Towers in the Cities, and in the Country upon Mountains and Hills, or at least
upon Damms and other high raised places, where they feast with their Relations
and Friends. But in regard the Kings of China seldom go out of their Palaces
they caused these nine Towers to be built, that upon the Top of them they might
Celebrate this Festival, so generally solemnized over the whole Empire.

The third Palace is called Van xeu tien, or the Palace of ten thousand Lives*
Now you are to understand, that about a hundred and forty years ago King Kia
cim, that is to say, a King neat and precious, began his Reign. This Prince
maintained Peace and Justice in the Empire: but in regard he was flexible and
superstitious, one of the married Bonzes beguiled his Credulity, and made him
believe, that he would so order it that he should live eternally, or at least
for several Ages, by virtue of his Chemistry. To bring this to pass he advised
him to build this Palace near the Lake, which we have already mentioned. It Is
very true, it is less than the rest; but what it wants in bigness, it has in
beauty. It is environed with a high Wall with Battlements, and perfectly round;
all the Halls and Chambers a so are round, Hexagons or Octagons, and the
Architecture is most beautiful and magnificent. Hither then the King retired
to distill the Water of Immortality. But his toil and pains were recompensed
with a Success quite contrary to his Expectations; for that instead of
prolonging, they shortened his Life. For the Fire in the Furnaces having dried
up his Bowels, he fell sick in a Month or six Weeks after, and died within a
few Days; after he had reigned five and forty years. The Emperor Van lie his
Grandchild reigned eight and forty; and both their Reigns are remarkable, as
well for the peace and prosperity which the People enjoyed all that time, as
for that the Apostle of the Indians, the Holy Francis Xavier arrived in China,
and died upon the Frontiers, during the Reign of Kia cim, a little before the
Portugueses built the City of Macao; as also for that in the Eleventh year of
the Emperor Van lie, the famous Father Matthew Ricci, so universally esteemed
to this day by the Chiueses for his Learning and his Virtue, first set footing
in the Empire.

The fourth is called Cim hiu tien, or the Palace of perfect purity, and was
built upon this occasion. The fifteenth Day of the eighth Moon, is solemnized
by the Chinese with great feasting and rejoicing. For from the setting of the
Sun, and rising of the Moon till Midnight, they are all abroad with their
Friends and Kindred in the Streets, in the Piazza's, in their Gardens, and upon
the Terrasses, feasting and watching to see the Hare which that Night appears
in the Moon. To this purpose, the preceding Days they send to one another
Presents of little Loaves and Sugar-Cakes, which they call Yue Pim, or
Moon-Cakes. They are round, but the biggest, which are about two hands breadth
in diameter, and represent the Full Moon, have every one a Hare in the middle
made of a Past of Walnuts, Almonds, Pine-Apple-Kernels and other Indgredients.
These they eat by the Light of the Moon; the Richer sort having their Music
also playing about 'em, which is very good. But the poor, in the midst of the
ruder Noise of Drums, Fifes and Basins loudly knocked upon with Sticks. And for
the solemnizing of this Feast it was, that the Ancient Kings erected this
Palace, not very big, but wonderfully delightful; more especially for its
Situation upon a Mountain made by hands, which is called Tulh Xan, or the
Mountain of the Hare. Our Europeans perhaps will laugh at the Chinese, for
imagining the Spots in the Body of the Moon to be a Hare. But beside that among
us the People are no less fond of many idle Opinions, no less ridiculous, let
me tell our Europeans that the Chinese laugh as much at us, when they find in
our Books, that we paint the Sun and Moon with humane Faces.

The fifth Palace is called Ym Tai Tien, or the Palace of the Flourishing
Tower. It is built upon the brink of the Lake among a great number of Trees
which afford both shade and coolness. So that the Emperor makes it his
chiefest residence during the excessive heat, which the want of cooling Breezes
renders almost insupportable: the City of Pe Kim being equally subject to the
inconveniences of heat and cold.

The sixth is called Van Yeu Tien, or the Palace of ten thousand sports and
pleasures. It is seated upon the Bank of the Lake on the north side; and serves
for the King to repose in when he goes a fishing, or to delight himself by
Water in his Pleasure Boats, which are made either to sail or row, all very
lovely and very richly adorned. There is one which is made like one of our
Brigandines, by the directions of Father John Adam, which pleases the Emperor
extremely, and wherein he always goes a fishing, or to behold the Sea Fights,
which are many times represented upon the Lake.

The Seventh is a great Platform encompassed with a square of high walls, in
the middle of which is a beautiful Palace called Hu Chim Tien, or the Palace
of the walls of the Tiger. The Royal Hall belonging to it is round, very high
and Majestic. Upon the top of it appear two Cupola's of of Brass gilded, one
above another at the distance of the length of a lance; the one very large, the
other less, in the form of a great Gourd, which together with the roof covered
over with Tiles varnished with Azure, and embellished with Flowers, Grotesco
Borderings, and other Ornaments, yield a very pleasant prospect. From this Hall
and the Balconies belonging to it the King delights himself with the sight of
the Beasts that are bread in the enclosure, as Tigers, Bears, Leopards, Wolves,
Monkeys of several sorts, Musc-Cats, and several other Kinds; and with them the
intermixture of Birds, no less remarkable for the colors of their feathers
than for their bigness; as Peacocks, Eagles, Swans, Cranes; green, red and
white Parrats, and several others, the names of which I cannot tell. Among the
rest there was one which was called La cui, or the Bird with a Bill of Wax, by
reason the Bill is of the color of Wax. It was as big as a Blackbird, but the
feathers of an Ash color. This bird learns whatever is taught her with that
docility that she does things incredible; for all alone she will act a Comedy.
She will put on a Vizor, handle a Sword, a Lance, or Ensign made on purpose for
her. She plays at Chess, and performs several actions and motions with such a
lively grace as charms the spectatours. So that it is hard to say which is most
worthy of admiration, the natural instinct of the Bird, or the industry of him
that taught her.

The eighth is seated at the end of a vast Platform, and is called the mansion
of the Fortress of the middle. The Kings of China were wont to go to the Royal
Hall of this Palace, to see three thousand Eunuchs armed at all points, perform
their military exercises, and make a show of their pretended valor. But the
Tartars have suppressed this ridiculous divertisement.

Besides these Palaces, there are within the two enclosures a great number of
Temples dedicated to Idols; of which there are four more famous than the rest,
and which are also called Palaces, by reason of their largeness, the multitude
of their Appartments, and the beauty of the Architecture. The first is called
Tai Quam mim, or the Palace of great light. It is dedicated to the Stars, which
we call North Stars, and the Chinese, Pe Teu. They believe that constellation
to be a God, and that it has power to grant them long life; and therefore it is
that the Kings, Queens and Princes offer their Oblations in this Temple where
there is no Idol to be seen, but only a Cartridge or Linen Roll, surrounded
with a sumptuous square Border with this inscription. To the Spirit and the God
Pe Teu. This Temple stands within the inner wall. The other three are seated
between the two Enclosures.

The Second is called Tai Cao Tien. Or the Palace of the most illustrious and
Sovereign Emperor. This is the Temple dedicated to that famous and loyal
Deify'd Captain, of whom we have formerly spoken, who was called Quan Ti. Of
him they implore long life, Children, Honor, Riches and all the Blessings of
this life, not minding or dreaming of any other; for that the Chinese place
all their happiness and final end, in sensible objects and pleasures.

But for the better understanding of what we have to say concerning the two
next, we are to premise, that to the north-west of the Province of Xen Si, the
most western part of China, there lies a Kingdom, called by the Indians Tibet,
and by the western Tartars Tumet, where Father Anthony Andrada traveled about
forty five years agone. The King of this Country takes upon him to perform
alike both Functions, as well of King as of High Priest, and by virtue of that
Dignity, he orders all things in matters of Religion, and is perpetual and
absolute Superior over all the Lama or Idolatrous Priests of that Country.
These Lama are usually clad in red and yellow habits, which hang down to the
ground with straight sleeves and a Mantle of the same color, one side of which
they fling under their Right Arms, and throw it back upon the left shoulder,
much after the same manner as the Apostles are painted, as if they had imitated
in that the Apostle St. Thomas, who according to all probability came into
China, and resided there for some time. For the Histories and Chronicles of
China relate that during the reign of the Family Han, what time our Savior was
both born and died, there came from the Indies into this Empire a certain holy
man, whose name was Tamo, who preached and taught a holy Law; that the Bonzes
opposed it and prosecuted the holy Man in such a manner, that finding he could
do no good he returned into India. That he carried a staff in his hand, and
went bareheaded; and that one day designing to cross the Great River of Kiam or
Sun of the Sea, and finding that no body would receive him into a Boat, by
reason that all people had a prejudice against him at the instigation of the
Bonzes, he walked over the River without wetting his feet. Many other Miracles
and wonderful actions of the same Saint are to be read in the same Story.

Nor ought it to seem strange that the Chinese call him Tamo instead of Tomas.
For as we pronounce the Chinese words, so do they mistake and altar the words
of other Nations; insomuch, that sometimes it is impossible to know them again.
And I dare affirm that they are not able to pronounce any strange name, more
especially such words as are spelt with the Letter R. or any words consisting
of several Syllables; and hence it is that they have so misplaced the Vowels,
placing a in the first Syllable, whereas they should have put it in the last.
Nay the Portugueses do worse than they, in Saying Tome, and substituting e in
the place of a. F. Anthony Andrada also has made the same mistake in his
relation of the Kingdom of Tibet, where he writes Lamba instead of Lama,
meaning the Idolatrous Priests before mentioned. There are a great number of
these Lama at Pe Kim, but they are not esteemed either by the Chinese or the
Eastern Tartars, who are Lords of China, because they are acquainted with their
wicked manners and the impertinency of the Law which they teach, and the
ridiculousness of their Idols. For though the Emperor permits them to reside
at Court, and some few years since ordered two Temples to be erected for the
exercise of their Idolatrous worship, he did not do it out of any Kindness
which he had for them, but out of mere reason of state, to prevent by means of
their credit, the Eastern Tartars from enterprizing any thing against them. For
though these two sorts of Tartars, are equally valiant, yet the Eastern Tartars
who are not very numerous are afraid of the Western, whose multitudes are
infinite. Besides the esteem and veneration which the latter have for the Lama
is almost incredible. For they no sooner behold these Priests at a distance,
but they are presently seized with fear and compunction; but so soon as they
meet, the Tartar alights from his horse, throws away his Bonnet, and falling
upon his knees, embraces the Lama's feet, and kisses the lower hemm of his
Garment, with a zeal and devotion unexpressible; which he shows by the motions
of his countenance, his hands, and his whole body. In the mean time the Lama
with a formal gravity reaches his hand to the top of the Tartra's head, and
drawing the figure of a Lozange upon his Crown, mutters over him certain
prayers according to the usual manner. These things being thus premised;

The Third Palace or Temple is called Macala Tien. For Tien in the Chinese
Language signifies a Royal Palace; and Macala in the language of the Lama
signifies the head of an Ox with the horns on: because the Idol which is
worshipped in that Temple is the horned head of an Ox. Which shows the blindness
of man, whom the Chinese call Van Vo Chi Vam, or King and Lord of all things,
and Van Vo Chi Tim, or the most understanding of all Creatures, which
nevertheless adores the work of his own hands, Beasts that are created for his
service, and which seems more incredible, the Carcass of the head of an Ox.

The Fourth Palace is called Lama Tien or the Palace or Temple of the Lama. It
is seated upon the East side of the Lake of which we have spoken, upon a
Mountain made with hands like a Sugarloaf environed with Rocks which were
brought thither in former times from the Sea side, though far remote, with
great labor and expense. These Rocks are for the most part full of holes and
hollownesses, occasioned by the continual dashing of the waves; the Chinsees
taking great delight to behold those unpolished works of nature. And they are
so disposed as to counterfeit the high out-juttings, and steep and rugged
Precipices of Rocks; so that at a moderate distance the whole seems to
represent some craggy wild Mountain, the first work of Nature. At the top
appears a round Tower of twelve stories, well proportioned and of an
Extraordinary height. Round about the upper Story hang fifty Bells, that jangle
day and night, with the motion of the wind. The Temple which is large and
magnificent, is seated in the middle of the descent, on the South side; and the
Cloisters and Cells of the Lama, extend themselves to the East and West. The
Idol stands upon an Altar within the Temple all naked, and in a filthy Posture
like the Roman Priapus. Neither is it adored but by the Lama and the Western
Tartars, for the Eastern and the Chinese abhor it, as an infamous and obscene
Monster. The deceased King, Father of the reigning Emperor, erected these two
Temples for reasons of State, and to please his Mother, Daughter of a petty
King of the Western Tartars; that Princess being greatly devoted to the Lama,
whom she maintains in Pe kim at vast Expenses. But there is great probability,
that so soon as she is dead, those abominable Temples will be shut up.

Moreover between the two Enclosures, there are four and twenty beautiful
Palaces besides, which serve instead of four and twenty Tribunals: the
Mandarins of which are as it were the Emperor's Stewards, and are no way
subject to the other Tribunals and Mandarins of the Empire. They are the
Overseers of the Palace, of the Servants, of the Cellars, Offices, Treasuries,
and the like; they punish or reward, according to the King's Order, such as
belong to the Household. And in the time of the Chinese Emperors, all these
Tribunals were under the Government of Eunuchs; but at present they are
governed by seventy two Tartar Lords bred up in the Palace* Three of these
belong to every Tribunal, who have under them a great Number of inferior
Officers, all employed in their several Stations to expedite the business with
which they are entrusted. And thus we have given an Account of the principal
Structures of the Emperor's Palace. For we should never have done, should we
undertake a particular description of all those other Places and Buildings
which are therein enclosed, as the Houses of Pleasure, the Libraries, the
Magazines, the Treasuries, the Stables, and such like meaner edisices. But by
what we have already described, a Man may readily conjecture what farther
remains to be said.

All the Structures which we have already described, are covered with large
thick Tiles, varnished with yellow, green and blew, and fastened with Nails to
withstand the fury of the Winds, which are very high at Pe kim. The Ridges
which always run from East to West, rise above the Roof about the height of a
Lance. The Extremities are terminated with the Bodies and Heads of Dragons,
Tigers, Lions and other Beasts, that wind about and extend themselves all the
length of the ridges. A vast variety of Flowers, and Grotesco-work, and other
delightful Ornaments, issuing as it were out of their Mouths and Ears, or else
being fastened to their Horns. And in regard that all that you see of these
Palaces is varnished over with the Colors before mentioned, you would think at
a distance, when the Sun rises, as I have many times observed, that they were
all made or at least covered with pure Gold enameled with Azure and Green,
which yields a most delightful, magnificent and majestic Prospect.

Notes upon the twentieth Chapter.
Of some other Palaces, and certain Temples seated between the two Enclosures.

K. The first Palace seated to the East between the two Enclosures, and upon
the South side, as it is in the Plane, and as F. Couplet places it, speaking of
the Emperor who caused it to be built. This Prince was called Ym sum, or Kim
tum, and his Brother Kim ti, he began his Reign in the year 1436. he was taken
by the Tartars in the year 1650. and set at Liberty some time after. His
Brother Kim ti died in the year 1457. and this Emperor reassumed the
Government the same year, and died 1464. The Bridge which our Author
describes, is a piece of Workmanship altogether extraordinary, and is enough of
it self to make us admire the Wit and Industry of the Chinese. L. The second
Palace seated between the two Enclosures, as are the six that immediately
follow. It is called Hien yam tien, or the Palace of the Rising Sun. Therein
are solemnized the Festivals of the first Day of the Moon. M. The third Palace
called Van xeu tien, or the Palace of ten thousand Lives. It is marked near the
Lake by our Author. That Emperor Kia cim, was otherwise called Xi sum He
began his Reign 1522. The Holy Francis Xavier arrived in China 1522. and died
in the Island of Su chuen in the Province of Quam tum, the second of December
of the same year. The Emperor Kia cim, or Xi sum reigned till 1567. his Son Mo
sum, or Lum kim died 1573 and his Grandchild Van lie, or Xin cum died in the
year 1620. King Kia cim built this Palace to practice Chemistry, and get the
Balsom of Immortality. N. The fourth Palace called, Cim hieu tien, or the
Palace of great Purity; I have placed it upon a Mountain conformable to our
Author's description. Therein the Feast of the fifteenth Day of the Moon is
solemnized. O. The fifth Palace, called Ym tai tien, or the Palace of the
flourishing Tower. It stands near the Lake among the Trees, as our Author
describes it. There the Emperor abides during the excessive Heats. P. The
sixth Palace Van yeu tien, or the Palace of ^en thousand Sports and Pleasures.
It stands by the Lake on the North side: for so we have placed it according to
our Author's description. There the King reposes when he goes a Fishing, or to
take his pleasure by water. Q. The seventh Palace called Hu chim tien, or the
Palace of the Tiger Walls. There the King breeds up wild Beasts of several
sorts, and goes to see them himself. The situation of this place is not
particularly set down by our Author. I have placed it in that part which I
thought to be the most spacious, and most proper between the two Walls. R. The
eighth Palace, called the Mansion of Fortress of the Middle, appointed for
exercising the Eunuchs. The situation is not mentioned by the Author, only he
places it between the two Enclosures as well as the other six. S. The first
Temple of the four most considerable in the Palace; it is called Tai quam mim,
or the Palace of great Light, and dedicated to the Bear-stars: It stands within
the inner Enclosure; and I have placed it on the left side as the most
honorable place: as being upon the left hand of the Emperor. T. The second
Temple called Tai cao tien, or the Temple of the most Illustrious and Sovereign
Emperor. This Temple is dedicated to that famous deify'd Captain mentioned in
the sixteenth Chapter, whose Name I could never find, nor the precise time of
his death. I have placed the Temple at a venture upon the West side of the
Lake; because our Author says no more but only that it stands between the two
Enclosures. V. The third Temple called Macala tien, or the Palace of the Oxe's
Head: But our Author does not precisely mark down the situation of it. X. The
fourth Temple, Lama tien, the Palace or Temple belonging to the Lama. It stands
in the Plane, as our Author places it; in the Middle of a Rocky Mountain, made
with hands like a Sugar Loaf, with a Tower at the Top. Y. Twenty four Palaces
for the Mandarins, High Stewards of the Emperor's Household. I have placed them
on the East side between the two Enclosures, where our Author places them, who
makes no particular description of them, no more than he does of the other
Edifices; as Houses of Pleasure, Libraries, Magazines, Offices, Stables, etc.
Which makes the curious more desirous of compleater descriptions, and more
perfect draughts.
CHAP. XXI. Of the Emperor's Temples seated in Pe kim, and of the manner how
the King goes abroad to perform public Duties.
BEsides the Temples which stand in the Palace, the Emperor has seven more, in
each of which he sacrifices once a year. Five in the new City, and two in the
old one.

The first of these is called Tien tam, or the Temple of Heaven, seated two
Chinese Furlongs from the principal Gate of the City, a little to the East, and
encompassed with a round Wall three furlongs in compass. One part of this Area
is taken up with very beautiful Buildings. The rest with a green and very
thick Grove, whose Trees are of an extraordinary height; and render the place
no less melancholy and gloomy to us, than it seems devout and venerable to the
Insidels. It has five doors on the South side, three in the middle, like the
Palace which are never opened but when the King comes to sacrifice, and two of
each side always open, for admittance of all that go to the Temple. On the
South and North side, there are seven separate Apartments: Six of which are
Halls and Portals, as large and magnificent as those of the King's Palace. The
seventh is a vast and high round Hall which represents Heaven, supported by
fourscore and two Columns; the whole painted within side with Azure and Gold,
and covered with Tiles varnshi'd with blew. In this Temple it is that the King
sacrifices to Heaven upon the day, and at the very moment that the Sun comes to
the Winter Solstice, attended by all the great Lords and Mandarins of the
Court: and as for the Victims he offers, they are Oxen, Hogs, Goats and Sheep.
Great preparations are made for the performance of this Ceremony, which is very
solemn, and the Solemnity carried on with no less respect and humility. For
then the Emperor lays aside his Gold, his precious Stones and yellow Robes;
appearing only decently habited in a plain of Vestment of black or sky Color
Damask.

The second Temple is call'g Ti tam, or the Temple of the Earth. It stands
toward the West at a distance answerable to that of the first; from which it
differs nothing but only that it is covered with Tiles varnished with green.
When the King is Crowned, before he takes possession of the Empire, he goes to
this Temple where he sacrifices to the God of the Earth. Afterward he puts on
the Habit of a Ploughman, and with two Oxen with gilded Horns, and a Plough
varnished with Vermillion and Streaks of Gold, he sets himself to plough a
little piece of Ground that lies within the Enclosure of the Temple. While he
is busy at his Labor, the Queen with her Ladies in another part dress him a
poor and homely Dinner, which she brings him, and which they eat together. The
ancient Chinese instituted this Ceremony, to the End their Kings might
remember, that their Revenues came from the Labor and Heat of the Peoples
Brows; and therefore ought to be employed in necessary Expenses and for the
good of the Kingdom, not in useless Buildings, exorbitant Sports and Pleasures,
or superfluous Riot.

To the North of these two Temples, stand three more distant, two Chinese
Furlongs from the Gates, and from the Walls on the North, East and West sides,
and which are altogether like the two former. That on the North side is called
Pe tien tan, or the North Temple of Heaven. Here the King sacrifices at the
time of the Summer Solstice: and at the time of the Vernal Equinox he
sacrifices in the Eastern Temple, called Ge tam, or the Temple of the Sun; and
to the Autumnal Equinox in the Western Temple, which is called Yue tam, or the
Temple of the Moon. But before the performance of these Sacrifices, the King
commands a Fast for three Days to be observed in Pe kim, during which time they
are forbid to eat either Flesh or Fish: Nor are the Tribunals, especially the
Criminal to do any business: Which somewhat resembles our Fast of Ember-weeks.
I asked a learned Man one day what benefit they hoped to obtain by these Fasts
and Sacrifices, and how they durst affirm that their King nor Queen ever
sacrificed publicly to Idols, since the Heaven, the Earth, the Sun and Moon
were all inanimate Bodies, that no way merited Divine Honors and Sacrifices,
which belonged only to God by whom they were created. To which he replied that
the word Heaven had two significations By the first was meant the material
Heaven called Yeu him chi tien, which is that which we see, and of which we
feel the effects, as we do also of the Sun, Moon and Stars: but the second
signification intended the immaterial Heaven, called Yeu vu him chi tien, which
has no shape or figure, and which is nothing but the Creator and Principle of
all things. This is the Heaven, added he, to which the Ancient Chinese
addressed their Sacrifices and their Fasts, to appease his wrath, and return
him thanks for the Benefits which continually they receive from him all the
four Seasons of the year. But afterward as men are naturally blockish and
carnal minded, they forgot the true Lord of all things, and minded only the
material visible Heaven: Nevertheless, said he, when the King sacrificed in the
Temples of Heaven, or Earth, the Sun or Moon, whose Names were only used to
distinguish the Sacrifices and the Seasons, he did not sacrifice to those
Creatures as the People imagined, but to the spiritual Heaven.

The sixth Temple, standing in the old City, is called Ti vam miao, or the
Temple of all the past Kings. This is a large and magnificent Palace, with many
Apartments, Portals, Courts, and Halls, of which the last is as fair, as
spacious, and as well adorned as those of the King's Palace. There you behold
on rich Thrones, the Statues of all the Kings of China, good and bad, for four
thousand five hundred twenty five years together, from the first King named To
hi, to the last called Xum chi the Father of the present Prince. This Temple
stands in the middle of one of the fairest Streets of the City. Which Street is
filled up in two places by two Triumphal Arches with three Gates, high raised,
majestic and worthy to be admired. All People that pass thorough this Street,
of what quality so ever, alight and walk a foot when they come to these Arches,
till they are past the Front of the Temple. Here the King performs his Annual
Ceremonies to his Predecessors once a year. But the Ceremonies which are
observed both in this and all other Solemnities are so numerous, and of such
various and different Sorts, that we should never make an end, should we go
about to give a full account of them all. But the Reader may make an easy
judgment of their Splendor, by what we have related*

The seventh is called Chim hoam miao; or the Temple of the Spirit that guards
the Walls. It stands within the City near the Walls, on the West side. The King
never sacrifices in this Temple, but the Mandarins only. Nevertheless this
Ceremony is accounted among the Royal Sacrifices, as well for that the King is
at the Charge, as because that he is the Man who names the Persons that are to
sacrifice in this place. Moreover all the Cities of the Empire have such a
Temple as this, and seated as this is; consecrated to the Spirit that guards
the Walls, as if we should say, dedicated to the Tutelary Angel of every City.
Thus much for the Emperor's Temples. We are now to give an account of the Pomp
and Magnificence of his Retinue, when he stirs out of his Palace.

There are two occasions that carry the Emperor abroad out of his Palace. The
first, when he goes a hunting, or to take the Air; which is looked upon only as
a private Action; and then he is attended only by his Guard, the Princes of
the Blood, and other great Lords, who ride before, behind or on each side,
according to their Degrees and Pre-eminency. This train does not consist of
above two thousand Men, all on Horseback, sumptuous in their Habits, their
Arms, and the trappings of their Horses; at what time you behold nothing but
Silks, and Embroideries of Gold and Silver glittering with precious Stones.
Certainly, if a Man do but consider it well, I question whether any Prince upon
the Earth ever appeared in his common Cavalcades with a Pomp parallel to what
we see at this Court, when the Emperor comes forth out of his Palace only to
divertise himself in his Parks and Gardens, or only to hunt for his pleasure
in the Country.

The scond occasion is when the Emperor comes forth to perform any Sacrifice,
or any public Duty: and then his Procession is after this Manner.

First, appear twenty four Men with large Drums, in two rows or files of twelve
a piece; as do all the rest that follow. Secondly, twenty four Trumpets, twelve
in a row. These Instruments are made of a certain Wood called V tum xu, highly
valued by the Chinese, who say, that when the Bird of the Sun is desirous of
repose, she pearches upon the Boughs of this Tree. These Trumpets are about
three foot in length, and almost a hands breadth diameter at the Mouth. They
are shaped like a Bell, adorned with Circles of Gold, and pleasingly accord
with the noise and beat of the Drums. Thirdly, twenty four men with long
staves, twelve in a row: which staves are seven or eight foot in length
varnished with red, and from one end to the other adorned with guilt Foliage.
Fourthly, a hundred Halbardeers, fifty in a row, with the heads of their
Halbards in the form of a Crescent. Fifthly, a hundred Men carrying Maces of
guilt Wood, fifty in a row, with staves as long as a lance. Sixthly, two Royal
Poles called Cassi, varnished with red intermixed with Flowers and gilt at both
Ends. Seventhly, four hundred large Lanthorns richly adorned, and all curious
pieces of Workmanship. Eighthly, four hundred Flambeaux, delicately trimmed
and carved, and made of a certain sort of Wood, that gives a great light that
lasts long. Ninthly, two hundred Lances, adorned below the steel heads, some
with silk Fringes; others with the tails of Panthers, Wolves, Foxes, or other
Beasts. Tenthly, twenty four Banners, upon which are painted the twenty four
Signs of the Zodiac, which the Chinese divide into twenty four parts, whereas
we divide it into no more than twelve. 'Leventhly, fifty six Banners, wherein
are painted fifty six Constellations, under which the Chinese comprehend the
whole Number of the Stars. Twelfthly, two large Flabels, supported by long
Poles, gilded and painted with various Figures of the Sun, Dragons, Birds, and
other Creatures. Thirteenthly, twenty four Umbrello's richly adorned, and they
that carry them, two and two together, as I said before. Fourteenthly, eight
Sorts of Utensils, for the King's ordinary Use and Occasions, as a Table
Cloth, a Basin of Gold, and an Eure of the same Metal, with several other
things of the same Nature. Fifteenthly, ten Horses as white as Snow, with their
Saddles and Bridles adorned with Gold, Pearls, and precious Stones.
Sixteenthly, a hundred Lanciers, and on both sides within side of them, the
Pages of the Emperor's Chamber, and in the middle between them the Emperor
himself with an Air majestic and grave, mounted upon a lovely Steed, and
covered with a Parasol or Umbrello, beautiful and costly beyond the belief of
those that never beheld it; and so large that it shades both the Emperor and
his Horse. Seventeenthly, the Princes of the Blood, the petty Kings, and a
great Number of the most Eminent Lords, magnificently clad and ranged on both
sides, in ranks and files according to their Dignities. Eighteenthly, five
hundred young Gentlemen belonging to the Emperor, richly habited.
Nineteenthly, a thousand Men, five hundred in a Body, called Hiao guei, that
is to say, Footmen, clad in red Robes, embroidered with Flowers and Stars of
Gold and Silver, with long straight plumes of feathers in their Bonnets.
Twentiethly, an open Chair or Litter carried by thirty six Men; attended by
another close Litter, as big as a Chamber, and carried by a hundred and twenty
Men. One and twentiethly, two vast Chariots each of them drawn by two
Elephants. Two and twentiethly, a large Chariot drawn by eight Horses, and
another lesser, by four. All these Chariots are sumptuously lined, the
Elephants and Horses richly caparison'd, and the Governors and Coachmen in
costly Liveries, and every Litter and every Chariot is attended by a Captain
with fifty Soldiers. Three and twentiethly, two thousand learned Mandarins, a
thousand in a Body. Four and twentiethly, two thousand Military Mandarins, both
the one and the other gorgeously apparelled in their Ceremony-Robes: and these
last bring up the Emperor's Train, and conclude the Pomp.
Notes upon the twenty first Chapter.
And upon the Emperor's seven Temples standing in the two Cities.

Z. Five Temples seated in the new City. The first called Tien tam, or the
Temple of Heaven; standing as our Author says, two Chinese furlongs from the
Principal Gate of the City, that is to say, from the South Gate, a little
toward the East. It is encompassed with a round Wall, three furlongs in
Circumference: The rest is to be seen in the Plane. There the King sacrifices
to the Winter Solstice. The four other Temples are built altogether like the
first. The second called Ti tam, or Temple of the Earth, is seated toward the
West at a distance from the Principal Gate proportionable to that of the first.
Here the Emperor sacrifices to the God of the Earth upon the day of his
Coronation. The third is about two Furlongs distant from the North Gate, and is
called Pe tien tam, or the North Temple of Heaven. Here the King sacrifices to
the Summer Solstice. The fourth is about two Furlongs distant from the East
Gate; and is called Ge tam or the Temple of the Sun, where the King sacrifices
to the Vernal Equinox. The fifth is two Furlongs distant from the Western Gate,
and is called Yue tam, or the Temple of the Moon, where the King sacrifices to
the Autumnal Equinox. If we must allow sixteen Furlongs in length to the new
City, according to the Opinion of F. Adam, these two Temples ought to be placed
farther, to keep the same distance of two Furlongs from the East and West
Gates. 1. Two Temples standing on the old City. The first called Ti vam miao,
or the Temple of all the deceased Kings: This is a spacious and magnificent
Palace, in the chief great Room of State of which, are to be seen the Statues
of all the Kings of China, good and bad, from King Fo hi seated all upon
Thrones. Our Author mentioning the Situation of it, says no more, than only
this, that it stands in one of the fairest Streets of the City between two
Triumphal Arches, which are marked down in the Plane. So that this Temple must
not be placed to the South of the Palace; in regard that space is taken up with
the outermost Courts and first Apartments of the Palace. Nor did I think it
proper to place it toward the West, in regard the following Temple is placed
there; nor toward the North which among the Chinese is the meanest place in
the City, and therefore I have placed it toward the East, in the Street which
is next the East Gate of the Palace. 2. The second Temple is called Chim hoam
miao, or the Temple of the Spirit that guards the Walls. I have placed it
according to our Author within side, and near to the Walls. Here the King
never sacrifices himself, but only the Mandarins.
A A. The six supreme Tribunals of the Learned Mandarins, described by our
Author in Chap. 13. He says they are placed according to their Order, near the
King's Palace upon the East side, so many spacious square Edifices which have
every one three Divisions of Apartments, etc. I have very near represented them
in the same manner, placing the first near the inner Apartments of the Palace
where the Emperor himself resides. The first, Li pu, has the Oversight of all
the Mandarins of the Empire. Four inferior Tribunals belong to this, which
assemble together in the same Palace, in two Rows of Apartments, that are to be
seen upon the right and left hand; the middlemost being appointed for the
supreme Tribunal. And it is the same thing with the other five, where the
middlemost is still the supreme, and the inferior on each side. A A 2. The
second, Hu pu, has the Oversight of the Exchequer, with fourteen inferior
Tribunals; one for every one of the Provinces of China; that of Pe kim having
no particular Tribunal, by reason of the Dignity of that Province where the
Court resides. A A 3. The third Tribunal, Li pu, that has the ordering of
Ceremonies, Sciences, Arts, etc. with four inferior Tribunals. A A 4. The
fourth Tribunal, Pim pu, that has the Care of Warlike Arms and Provisions, with
four Tribunals under it. A A 5. The fifth Tribunal, Him pu, that judges without
appeal of all Crimes committed in the Empire, with fourteen Tribunals inferior
to it. A A 6. The sixth Tribunal, which has the Oversight of the public Works;
with four Tribunals inferior to it. B B. The five Tribunals of the Military
Mandarins, seated to the West of the Royal Palace. Our Author speaks nothing
particularly either of their situation or fabric: But it is very probable, they
are all built like the former. The first which we may suppose to stand most to
the North, Heu fu, or the Reregard. The second Tso fu, or the left Wing; the
third Yeu fu, or the right Wing. The fourth Chum fu, or the main Battle. The
fifth Cien fu, or the Vanguard.

Neither does F. Magaillans speak any thing of the situation of many other
Tribunals in Pe kim, of which he gives the Description. But most certainly they
stand in those places, where he says in general, that there are Palaces and
Tribunals in such Streets, as in the Street of Perpetual Repose, and in other
parts marked down in the Plane.

We have nothing to observe upon the Emperor's Pomp, when he stirs abroad out
of his Palace, but only this that the Description of Father Adam, is much
after the same Manner.


THE END.
An Aridgment of the Life and Death of F. Gabriel Magaillans, of the Society of
Jesus, Missionary into China, written by F. Lewis Buglio, his inseparable
Companion for six and thirty Years; and sent from Pe Kim in the Year 1677.
FATHER Gabriel de Magaillans, a Native of Portugal, was born in the year 1609.
He spent his first years in the House of one of his Uncles who was a Canon, and
who took care to educate him in Piety and the fear of God. Afterward he
studied in the Schools of the Society of Jesus, in the famous University of
Conimbre; where moved by the good example of those Fathers, he resolved to
forsake the world, and was received into the Society at seventeen years of age.
Being as yet but a Noviciate, he begged leave that he might be sent to the
Missions of the East Indies, which would not be granted him however, till he
had completed his Studies of Rhetoric and Philosophy. He arrived at Goa in
the year 1634, where he was immediately employed to teach Rhetoric to the
young Religious of the House. Two years afterward he earnestly desired that he
might be sent to the Mission of Iapan, which was with great reluctance at
length consented to, by his Superiors, in regard of the great progress which
their Scholars made under such a Master. When he arrived at Macao, the Father
Visiter ordered him to teach Philosophy, to which he thereupon began to settle
himself: but at the same time there came a Christian Mandarin, who discharged
him from that employment. And indeed the Father Visiter was willing to lay hold
of the opportunity of such an Officer, by his means to get the liberty of
sending a person of merit into China, to assist the Missionaries there. For at
that time there was no person in the whole College who was proper for that
Country. Which was the reason that F. Magaillans, observing so favorable a
conjuncture, earnestly begged the Employment, which was granted him as soon.
Thereupon he departed with the Mandarin, and arrived at the City of Han Cheu,
the Metropolis of the Province of Che Kiam, where the Vice Provincial then
resided. At the same time also there came Intelligence from the Province of Su
chuen, that Father Lewis Buglio, who was gone to lay the Foundations of a
Mission there, was fallen sick and wanted a Companion. Thereupon Father
Magaillans offered himself and obtained leave to go and assist him; and though
it were a Journey of above four months from Ham cheu, to the Capital City of
Suchuen, nevertheless he fortunately arrived there, and became a great help to
Father Buglio; and then it was that he applied himself with great Industry to
the study of the Chinese Language and Letters, which he learnt with an
extraordinary ease.

Two years after, there happened a violent Persecution against the Preachers of
the Gospel, raised by the Bonzes of that Province, who assembling together in
great numbers from the neighboring Cities, accused the Fathers of Rebellion in
all the Tribunals of that Metropolis. The chief Mandarin therefore of the
Tribunal of Crimes fearing a Revolt, at a time when the Kingdom was turmoil'd
with several Insurrections, ordered that the Fathers should be well drubb'd,
and then expelled out of the limits of the Province. But they putting their
confidence in God's assistance, and the protection of the Mandarins, of which
the greatest part were their Friends, would not forsake their Station.
Thereupon the Bonzes hung up Libels every day in the principal Quarters of the
City, against the Fathers; as also against the Mandarins. But one of the
Military Mandarins, who was a Christian, took care to have them pulled down by
the Soldiers. On the other side, the Fathers writ several Books, wherein they
explained and asserted the truth of their Faith, and refell'd the Impostures of
their Adversaries. This Persecution lasted three months; but then the Bonzes,
whether it were that they were afraid of the Mandarins who protected the
Fathers, or whether they wanted money to maintain them any longer in the
Capital City, retired home one after another; and then the Governor of the
City, who favored the Fathers, discharged the Superior of the Bonzes from his
Employment; which put all the rest to silence, and absolutely stifled that
uproar.

In a short time after, they were exposed to a Persecution much more formidable
than the former. For the Rebel Cham hien chum, followed by a numerous Army, and
filling all places where he came with fire and slaughter, advanced toward the
Capital to make himself Master of the place, and there take upon him the Title
of Emperor of China, as he really did. Upon this, a great number of people
fled for shelter to the Mountains, and the Fathers among the rest, with a
resolution to expect the issue of these disorders. In the mean time the Rebel
took the Capital City, where he made a bloody havoc; and three months after
understanding that great numbers of people were fled to the Mountains, and
among the rest the Fathers, he sent several Companies of Soldiers who brought
back a considerable part of the people, of which number were the Fathers. But
when they came into his presence he received them with extraordinary honors,
and promised them that as soon as he had secured himself in the quiet
possession of the Empire, he would erect magnificent Churches in honor of the
God of Heaven. In the mean time he gave them a magnificent House, where the
Fathers hung up the Picture of our Savior, and baptized several persons, and
among the rest the Tyrants Father in law. And indeed, during the three years
that he usurpt the Government, for the first year he behaved himself with much
Justice and Liberality. But being provoked by several Insurrections in several
parts, he resolved to subdue the Province of Xen si, the Inhabitants of which
are a warlike sort of people, and before his departure so to secure the
Province of Suchuen, that it should not be in a condition to revolt. In
pursuance of which cruel resolution, he put to death an infinite number of
people by all manner of Torments. Some were cut into quarters, others flead
alive, others were cut in pieces by bits, and others were mangled, but not
suffered to dye. A hundred and forty thousand Soldiers also of the Province of
Suchuen he caused to be massaker'd, so that the Province was almost
depopulated. Thereupon the Fathers observing these horrid Butcheries, and
despairing to make any farther progress under the Government of so barbarous a
Tyrant, presented a Petition to him, wherein they desired leave to retire till
the troubles that harrass'd the Kingdom were appeased. But the Tyrant was so
enraged at this Petition, that about two hours after he sent for the Domestic
Servants belonging to the Fathers, and ordered them to be flead alive; accusing
them that they had instilled those thoughts into their Masters heads. Presently
the Fathers hastened to save their lives, and told the Tyrant, which was no
more than the truth, that those poor people had not the least knowledge of
their design. However after some discourse, the Barbarian ordered the Fathers
to be laid hold of, and carried to the place of execution and there to be cut
in pieces. Which had been executed, if his Chief General, who was his adopted
Son, had not, while they were leading to the place of torment, by his Arguments
and his Intercessions obtained their pardon. Thereupon the Tyrant sent away
with all speed to have them brought back again into his presence, where after
he had loaded them with ill language and Reproaches, he committed them to the
custody of certain Soldiers, with orders to guard them day and night. In which
condition they remained for a whole month, at the end of which he sent for them
one morning into his presence. They found him then very bloodily employed in
giving Orders for the putting to death a great number of persons, and verily
believed that their last hour had been at hand. But at the same time it was the
will of God, that the Scouts came in one after another, bringing intelligence
that some of the avaunt Couriers of the Tartars Vanguard were at hand. But the
Tyrant, not giving credit to their Intelligence, would needs mount without his
Arms, and attended only by some of his most faithful Friends, rode forth to
make a farther discovery of the Enemy himself, at what time being forced to a
Skirmish, he was at the beginning of the Fight shot through the Heart with an
Arrow. Thus the Fathers finding themselves at liberty by the death of the
Tyrant, resolved to retire to their House. But by the way they met a Troop of
Tartars that shot several Arrows at them, insomuch that F. Magaillans was shot
quite through the Arm, and F. Buglio into the Thigh, where the head of the
Arrow stuck very deep in the Flesh: so that although F. Magaillans made use of
his Teeth to pull it out he could not. Till looking about him in that
extremity, he spied at last a pair of Pincers lying in a blind place to which
they had retired for shelter, by the help of which he drew the Arrow out of the
wound, not without great loss of blood.

The same Evening they were presented to the Prince who commanded the Army, who
being informed what they were, entertained them with an extraordinary civility,
and ordered two Lords to take care to furnish them with all things necessary*
However, The Fathers underwent great hardships, for above a year together that
they followed the Army, till they came to Pe Kim, more especially for want of
Victuals, of which there was great scarcity in the Army for some time: so that
F. Magaillans was constrained for three months to live upon a small quantity of
Rice only boiled in fair water. But upon their arrival at Court, the Tribunal
of Ceremonies, which takes care of all Strangers, caused them to be lodged in
the Royal Hostery, with a large allowance of Provision for their entertainment.
There they resided two years, which being expired, a Person of Quality was
commanded to take care of their Entertainment. During all which time they
employed themselves in preaching the Gospel, and baptized several persons. They
continued seven years at Court, before they were known to the King. But then
the Prince understanding who they were, was extremely joyful at their
preservation, and gave them a House, a Church, Revenues, and Money to buy them
Vestments. Thereupon F. Magaillans, in testimony of his Gratitude to the King
for so many Favors, employed himself day and night in making several curious
and ingenious pieces of Art to please him; yet not so, but that he was no less
diligent in the Conversion of Souls, as well by preaching as by writing. He
also wrote several Relations, and translated the Book of St. Thomas Aquinas
concerning the Resurrection of the Body, which was received with great applause.

After a Reign of eight years the King died; and because his Son, who is the
present Emperor, was very young, he appointed four Protectors to govern the
Empire during the Son's minority. Now at the beginning of their Regency, some
Footmen belonging to a Christian Mandarin, to revenge themselves upon their
Master, against whom they were highly incensed, falsely accused F. Magaillans to
have given Presents in favor of that Mandarin, who was put out of his
Employment; which is a great Crime in China. Thereupon the Father was carried
before the Criminal Tribunal, where he was put to the Rack two times, by the
squeezing of both his Feet in a Press, which though it were a hideous Pain, yet
the Father endured it with a constant Resolution, nor would be brought to
confess a thing of which he was not guilty. Nevertheless the Judges contrary to
all Justice, condemned him to be strangled, and sent their sentence, according
to custom, to the four Regents. But they, as well for that he was a stranger,
as because they were satisfied of his Innocence, acquitted him, and restored
him to his Liberty.

Three years after, in the Persecution which all the Fathers suffered for
Religion, he was apprehended with others, and laden for four whole months
together with nine Chains, three about his Neck, three about his Arms, and
three about his Lggs: He was also condemned to have forty Lashes, and to be
banished out of Tartary as long as he lived. But a great Earth Quake that
happened at that time at Pekim, delivered both him and the rest of his
Companions. Afterward for several years together, he made it his business as
well to perform the actual Functions of the Mission, as to pleasure the
Reigning Prince, who had taken possession of the Government, with his ingenious
Inventions: laboring like an ordinary Mechanic, to the end that the favor of
the Prince might be a means to maintain and augment the Faith; which was the
Fathers only aim.

Three years before his Death, the wounds which he received in his Feet, when
he was put upon the Rack broke out again, which he endured with an
extraordinary Patience. Two Months before he died, these pains were accompanied
with defluxions that stopped his Respiration; so that he was constrained to sleep
sitting up in a Chair for fear of being choked; which was the reason that many
times he never shut his Eyes for several nights together. He wanted for nothing
during his Sickness, but no Remedies could surmount the force of the Distemper,
which daily increased; so that upon the sixth of May, in the year 1677, between
six and seven a Clock in the Evening, as he sat in his Chair, and the Distemper
urging still with more violence, he sent for the Fathers who gave him the
Viaticum and extreme Unction, after he had some days before made a general
Confession. And so about eight a Clock he placidly surrendered his Soul to his
Creator, in the presence of all the Fathers, the Servants, the Neighbors, and
several Christian Mandarins, who could not forbear weeping at his departure.
The next day F. Verbiest, now Vice Provincial of this Mission, went betimes in
the Morning to give notice to the King of the Death of the Father. The Prince
bid him return home, whither he in a very short time would send him his own
Orders what to do. Accordingly within half an hour, he sent three Persons the
most considerable in his Court, with an Elogy in honor of the Father, two
hundred Taels, or about fourscore pounds, and ten great pieces of Damask for
his Shroud, with command to perform all the customary Ceremonies before the
Corpse of the Deceased, and to bewail him after the usual manner, which the two
Messengers did, shedding a great number of Tears in the presence of the whole
Assembly.

The Elegy which the King gave the Father was in these words.

I understand that Nghan uen su (for by that Name they called the Father in
China) is dead of a Distemper. I make him this writing, in consideration that
while my Father lived who was the first Emperor of our Family, this same Holy
Person by his ingenious Pieces of Art delighted the genious and humor of my
Father; and for that after they were invented he took care to preserve them
with an extraordinary Industry, and beyond his Strength. But more especially
for that he came from a Region so far distant, and on the other side of the Sea
to abide several years in China. He was a Man truly sincere and of a solid Wit,
as he made appear during the whole Course of his Life. I was in good hopes his
Disease might have been overcome by Remedies. But contrary to my Expectation he
is removed for ever from us, to the great sorrow and sensible grief of my
heart. For that reason, I make him a Present of two hundred Crowns, and ten
large Pieces of Damask, to show that my design is never to forget our Vassals
that repair to us from Places so remote.

Below was written, the Emperor's words.

The sixtteenth year of the Emperor Came hi, the sixth day of the fourth Moon,
which answers to the seventh of May, in the year of Christ 1677. the next day
after the Father's death.

This Elogy was printed, as also an abstract of the Life of the Father, and
given about to all the Princes, great Lords, Mandarins, to our Friends, and all
that were Christians. Which was of great consequence and mainly contributory to
the Credit and Reputation of our sacred Law, when the World should understand
the high Esteem which the King had of the Preachers of the Gospel.

Two days after, the King sent again the three same Persons to weep before the
Corpse of the deceased, because he had ordered them to accompany it to the
Grave: which was an extraordinary Honor. However the Fathers had not as yet
given notice to their Friends of his death, for fear of the disturbance it
would be to their Minds: and yet there was a great Concourse of Friends and
Mandarins, who came with their Presents to perform the usual Ceremonies; while
others sent their Elogies and Encomiums upon the Father, written up on white
Satin.

Some days before he was buried, the same three Persons came to tell us, that
it was the King's pleasure, his Funeral should be very magnificent. So that the
Fathers as well to conform themselves to the Will of the Prince, as to show
their high value of the Elogy which the Prince had sent them, made more than
ordinary preparations.

Upon the day of the Funeral, the same three Persons came in very good time to
accompany the Corpse, according to the King's command. There came also a great
Number of Mandarins, Acquaintance and other Persons to pay the same respects.
And as for the Ceremony it was performed after the following Manner.

Ten Soldiers marched before with their Arms to clear the Streets; they were
followed by ten Ushers of several Tribunals, that carried Tablets, wherein was
written an Order of the Mandarins, to give way, under pain of punishment.
Twenty four Trumpeters and Hoeboys, with several Sorts of other Instruments
followed them, and preceded the King's Elogy that was written upon yellow
Satin, and carried in a Litter, surrounded with four and twenty Pieces of Satin
of various Colors. This Elogy was attended by several Christian Eunuchs, of
which there were some that waited upon the King's Person. Afterward appeared
three other Litters adorned with several Pieces of Silk. In the first was
carried the Cross, in the second the Picture of the Holy Virgin, and in the
third the Picture of St. Michael. These Litters observed a convenient distance
one from the other, and in the spaces between there went a great number of
Christians, of which some carried Lantherns, some Banners, and others Censors,
others carried wax Tapers, sweet Odours and other things. After that in another
Banner was carried the Portraiture of the Father surrounded with Pieces of
Silk, which the King had ordered to be drawn to the Life three years before,
together with the Pictures of all the rest of the Fathers, by a famous Painter
of the Palace. This Picture was attended by a great Multitude of Christians,
among which there were above threescore in Mourning. The Fathers came last and
just before the stately Coffin; which was ^t into an Hearse varnished over with
God and Vermillion, under a Canopy of a rich Piece of red Velvet, which was
environed with certain Pieces of white and blew Damask, and was the King's
gift. The Coffin was carried by seventy Men, who had every one a Mourning
Bonnet upon their Heads, and the number of those that followed the Coffin was
so great, that the Front was distant from the Rear above a Mile. When they came
to the place of Enterrment, the Responses were Sung, with other usual Prayers
and Ceremonies of the Christians. To which purpose eight Christian Mandarins in
Surplices assisted the Father that performed the Office. The Christians also
Sung with great Devotion, the Letanies of the Holy Virgin, and then the Body
was put into a Sepulcher made of Brick. So soon as the Ceremony was over, you
might hear the Lamentations and Moans of the whole Assembly accompanied with
Tears that showed the reality of their grief; the three Persons also sent from
the Emperor performed their parts. And three days after they returned by the
King's Order, and paid the same Funeral respects as upon the burial day.

Never was seen in this Court a Funeral so Magnificent, whether you consider
the Multitude of those that were at it, their Modesty, their Tears, and their
sincere sorrow, or the Honors done to the Party Deceased by the King, and the
Elogy which he gave him, contrary to the usual custom. So highly had this good
Father merited all a long the marks of esteem that were bestowed upon him, by
the Modesty which he showed in all his Actions, by his extreme charity for all
the World, and particularly toward the Poor, by his Affability to all sorts of
Persons, by the hardship which he suffered for the love of God ^d his Zeal for
the Advancement of the Christian Religion, though at the expense of his Life
and Reputation.

The King understanding by the Persons whom he had deputed to be present at the
Ceremony, the Solemnity of the Funeral, and with what Pomp and Decency it had
been performed, was extremely satisfied; so that when the Fathers went to
return their thanks to his Majesty, he made them approach very near his Person,
entertained them with a particular sweetness and favor, and cheered them for
their loss, with expressions full of goodness and sincerity.

FINIS.

