AN APOLOGY FOR THE Clergy of Scotland, Chiefly opposed to the Censures,
Calumnies, and Accusations OF A LATE Presbyterian Vindicator, In a LETTER to a
FRIEND. WHEREIN His Vanity, Partiality and Sophistry are modestly Reproved, And
the Legal Establishment of Episcopacy in that Kingdom, from the Beginning of
the Reformation, is made evident from History and the Records of Parliament.
Together with A POSTSCRIPT, relating to a Scandalous Pamphlet, Entitled, An
Answer to the Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence.

Quibus ego non sum tantum honorom habiturus, ut ad ea quae dixerint, certo
loco, aut singulatim unicuique respondeam. Sic breviter, quoniam non consulto,
sed casu, in eorum mentionem incidi, quasi praeteriens satisfaciam universis.
M. T. C Orat. in Q. Caecilium. Imprimatur.

Sept. 24. 1692. Edmund Bohun.



LONDON: Printed for Jos. Hindmarsh, at the Golden Ball over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. 1693.

THE CONTENTS.
A Short Introduction Page 1, 2 The Division p. 2 The first Plea discussed, and
the Cameronians proved not only to be Presbyterians, but the only true
Presbyterians p. 2, 3, 4, 5 The Villainies committed to be the result of an
Uniform Combination, and wicked Principles, and not the transient efforts of
Passion p. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 The second Plea of an Interregnum exposed p. 10 The
third Plea, that the People were injured by the Clergy disproved p. 11, 12, 13
The fourth Plea, from the Immoralities of the Clergy, Confuted and Retorted p.
14, 15, 16 The fifth Plea against the Clergy from their want of Popular
Election, unreasonable in it self, and retorted upon the Adversary p. 16, 17
The sixth Plea, that the Clergy peevishly and rigorously pressed Conformity,
examined ibid. The seventh Plea against the Clergy, that they are Heterodox,
found to be vain, foolish, and frivolous p. 18 The eighth Plea, that they are
Enemies to K. William and Q. Mary considered p. 19 The ninth, that they
Preached Non-Resistance, and Passive Obedience. This Doctrine proved to be
still reasonable and Christian p. 20 The tenth Plea against the Clergy, that
the Episcopal Church is remiss in Censuring scandalous Delinquents, bassled and
rejected p. 22 The second General Head, a Modest Censure of the Vindicator
taken from his own Book. p. 23 First, His avowed Partiality and Injustice ibid.
Secondly, His peremptory and Enthusiastic pretenses to a Jus Divinum p. 24
Thirdly, His rudeness and vanity p. 25 Fourthly, His Tergiversations and Lying
p. 26 Fifthly, His illnatured and uncharitable Insinuations p. 27, 28, 29, 30,
31 The third General Head. His Theological Reasonings, etc. p. 38 First, Of the
Observation of Christmas, and the Festivities of the Church p. 39, 40, 41, 42
Secondly, His Notion of Schism p. 43, 44, 45, 46 Thirdly, His Censure of the
Clergy for Preaching Morality p. 47, 48, 49, 50 Fourthly, Nis Notion of
Calvinism, and his way of explaining, and defending it p. 51, 52 Fifthly, His
pretenses to Antiquity, and the History of the Culdees p. 53, 54, 55 Sixthly,
His Clamor against Ceremonies of human Institution p. 56 The fourth General
Head, wherein the Legal Establishment of Episcopacy in Scotland, is proved from
the Records of Parliament p. 60, 61, 62, 63, 64 The Conclusion in several
instances from the foresaid History p. 66 The Protestation in the year 1651.
against the General Assembly p. 79 Postscript, Relating to a Scandalous
Pamphlet, Entitled, An Answer to the Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence p. 85, 86,
etc.
AN APOLOGY FOR THE Clergy of Scotland, etc.
SIR,
YOUR Friendship for me I look upon as a great Honor, and I value my self upon
it; and the sincerity, wherewith I endeavor to serve you, prompts me more to
undertake what you command, than any sense I can have of my own Skill or
Ability: and rather than oblige you to continue your importunities, I send you
here my thoughts of that Book you ordered me to Read. I undertook it with great
aversion; partly because such scurrilous Contentions are very Unchristian in
the first Original, scandalous in their Consequences, and very unedifying to
the Christian Church. Partly, Because I think the late Presbyterian Barbarities
and Cruelties toward the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland are sufficiently known
all Europe over, and therefore I was unwilling to undergo the Penance of
reading a Book, that provoked me in every other Line unto the undecencies of
Passion. It lay by me six months without ever opening it, until I was
overpowered by your Commands. Though, in the mean time I must tell you that
you never imposed a severer Task upon me. I have no inclination to Read such
Books, no more than I have to drink off a Potion of Physic every day to my
Breakfast: besides there are some men with whose Genius I am not well
acquainted, who cannot be silenced because they have made lies their Refuge.
The Truth, it self (if at any time it happened to be on their side,) does not
please them unless it be dressed up in all the Colors of Falsehood, and stripped
of its natural Beauty and Simplicity; who like Solomon's Whore, when they have
but newly committed their Abominations, defy all mankind to charge them with
the least Transgression. Men who Arm themselves with all degrees of Confidence
to run down the clearest Truths that truly represent or seem to disparage the
Faction in which they are engaged. If that Book of which you desire my Thoughts
were particularly answered, such a Reply could not but swell to a prodigious
Bulk, because to clear the Matter of Fact in so many particular Cases, obliges
men to turn over all the Pamphlets to which his Book is related. I did indeed
once Read his Book that he Entitles his Second Vindication, and I hope I shall
never be so destitute of good Books (though at present I have very few) as to
peruse it a second time. However I will briefly give you my thoughts of it, and
since the Book has no method, I may be allowed to put the Reflections I make
upon it in any order I please.

In the first place I will examine his General Apologies by which he thinks to
ward off the blame of the barbarous Rabblings of the Clergy from his Party.
Secondly, From the Book it self, I Will give you a natural Character of the
Author. Thirdly, I will shortly consider his Theological Reasonings, that
occasionally falls under his consideration, when he pleads for the Innocence of
Presbyterians. And lastly, I will consider the truth of that ordinary Objection
that the Presbyterians manage against the Episcopal Church of Scotland, when
they allege that Presbyterian Government was established in that Church from
the beginning of the Reformation.

And first, I take notice that all along he seem to disown the Cameronians as
Presbyterians, or as men not of their Communion. At other times he acknowledges
they are zealous godly men, and if he proves that the Barbarities committed
upon the Clergy were not committed by sober and intelligent Presbyterians, he
thinks the Presbyterians are sufficiently vindicated from all imputations of
Cruelty and Violence. And therefore unless we prove them sober and intelligent,
he thinks all our Complaints of the Outrage and Tumults of the Presbyterians
are vain and impertinent: But are not the Cameronians Presbyterians? To what
Communion then do they belong? Have they any Principles, Discipline, or
Worship, different from the Presbyterians? Were not their Leading Men lately
owned and received by the pretended General Assembly, without retracting any
Articles of Doctrine, or disowning any of their Practices that they so
zealously recommended to their Followers in the West? This is a very pleasant
Fancy, that the Author should endeavor to hide the Tumults and Insurrections of
that Party by changing the name of Presbyterian into Cameronian. The Donatists
in Africa (as readily all Schismatics do) split themselves into two great
Factions, viz. The Primianists and the Maximianists. What Sacrilegious
Villainies they committed (and all under the Pretext of Zeal and Reformation)
every body knows. But pray? What an impertinent Apology could it have been for
the Donatists to say that it was true indeed there were a great many
Barbarities committed upon the Clergy, their Families, Churches, Altars, and
Sacred Utensils; Vide Optatum, Milevit.
and upon the People adhereing to their Communion, but that such Indignities
were not committed by the sober intelligent Donatists, they intended no more
than the Reformation of Abuses by orderly and Imperial Edicts. Their Zeal
against the Traditores only put them upon extraordinary attempts of
Reformation. It could not be denied, but that the African Church and the
Catholic Clergy there were sadly oppressed and run down by a company of mad and
ungovernable Enthusiasts; but the sober and intelligent Donatists were not to
be blamed. They were either the Primianists, or the Maximianists, that
committed such Extravagancies, and disorders, or (which is most probable) they
were committed by the Circumcellians, a third Division of that unhappy Family.

Now the Author makes just such another Apology for the Presbyterians of
Scotland. He cannot deny but that the Orthodox Clergy in the Western Shires
were miserably harassed, but the sober and intelligent Presbyterians are not to
be blamed. We do easily grant him that the Presbyterians that were most
instrumental in the Disasters of the Clergy were not sober men, though the most
intelligent amongst them did contrive and manage the irregular Heats and
Motions of their own Partisans.

But to expose the vanity of this Apology a little more closely. We know no
Opinions that Mr. Cameron propagated or entertained that were peculiar to
himself. He followed most closely and ingenuously the Hypothesis of the old and
zealous Presbyterians; and the plain Truth is, Mr. Cameron was not a man very
proper to be the Founder of a new Sect. He built upon the Notions that he was
taught by his Brethren: and the Presbyterians are obliged for this word
Cameronian to the Episcopal Clergy, who mean no more by this word but a
Presbyterian whose Zeal for his Faction (after the Example of Mr. Cameron) over
drives him violently beyond all Bounds of discretion. And yet I cannot but
commend their Artifice in this. The word Presbyterian is known in England, but
the word Cameronian is not; and therefore this distinction (for distinctions
are of great use sometimes) of Presbyterian and Cameronian is a very plausible
Defense in England to disprove all the complaints made by the Episcopal Clergy.
As if the Cameronians were a new Species of Schismatics different from the
Presbyterians, and that we had three considerable divisions of Christians in
Scotland, the Episcopal Party, the Presbyterians and the Cameronians. Whereas
indeed, we know of none but two. And the Cameronians are those Presbyterians
that have studied their own Principles most accurately, and draw from those
Principles such practical Conclusions as they naturally and necessarily yield.
I know not how this Author can make his Peace with the Cameronians. For the
whole Nation knows that those Presbyterians whom he Nicknames Cameronians did
assert their Presbyterian Principles when others were very silent; and upon
this they value themselves as the most Pious, Active, and ingenuous of the
whole Party, who differ not from others in their Principles but do exceed some
of their Brethren in higher degrees of Zeal and Sincerity to promote the
Interest of their Combination. But pray? What is it that the Cameronians have
done that they might not have done upon Presbyterian Principles? For it is a
received Maxim amongst them That the people may, (especially in Conjunction
with their Pastors) reform the Church when the Magistrate is slack or remiss in
his duty, or opposite unto the designed Reformation. Now the removal of the
Episcopal Clergy upon their Hypothesis was a necessary mean to advance this
glorious Reformation. And what is there in the most Barbarous Rabbling of the
Clergy inconsistent with the Presbyterian Principles? Can Religion prosper in
our Nation unless the Bishops and their Adberents be extirpated? And is not
Presbyterian Government the immediate and express Institution of our Lord and
Savior? Is not the exercise of Presbyterian Discipline the Administration of
his Royal Kingdom and Scepter. And may we be less serious in asserting his
Kingly Office than in defending his Priestly and Prophetical Office? Did not
the Presbyterian Church of Scotland upon all Turns wrestle with Authority about
this great Truth? And does the Author think that they ought not to interpose in
so Critical a Juncture to rescue themselves from the Bondage of the
Antichristian Hierarchy? That their Squeamish Consciences groaned under for so
many years? If the Reformation of the Church from Episcopacy to Presbytery be
of this Consequence (As they Print and Preach every where.) What is there in
those last Tumultuous Rabblings that the Presbyterians can disown? Wherein are
the Cameronians to be blamed? Because forsooth this Author thinks that the
Actors of those Villainies we complain of were perhaps not so sober and
intelligent, that is to say, he rejoiced in what was done, but he wished it
might have been carried on with greater caution and secrecy, least the
Episcopal Clergy might take occasion to represent them and their proceedings in
their true and natural Colors.

I think the Author is to blame for saying the Cammeronians are not
intelligent. For certainly they took their Measures by the best directions that
could be had; for their Agents gave them exact intelligence of what they might
venture upon and when. Accordingly a company of wicked Incendiaries (who had
declared War against King Charles the Second, when he Governed the Nation by
those Laws that were made in times of Peace by the most unanimous and solemn
Parliaments that ever the Nation had, and who declared in their Seditious
Pamphlets and Papers that he had forfeited all Right to the Crown, because
forsooth, he had broke the Covenant) I say they, were the men who at the
beginning of this Revolution (as they were directed) fell violently upon the
Clergy and drove them from their Houses and Residence; to the scandal of
Christianity, and reproach of our Nation. And this is not at all to be imputed
to the casual efforts of Passion or Revenge, but to an uniform Combination of
the whole Society: and this appears, because the Clergy were not generally
Rabbled by their own Parishioners, but by those Firebrarnds who concerted their
Measures with their own Societies, and did nothing of that Nature without
Advice and Directions. The Confederacies against the Government were then
called Societies in the West of Scotland.
The Author thinks to excuse what was done against the Clergy, when he tells us
in some places of his Book, that their own Parishioners gave them no
disturbance: but this proves that the Cruelties they met with proceeded from a
League and Covenant amongst their Enemies since those mischiefs did not light
upon a few of the Clergy (who might possibly provoke their Parishoners by some
indiscretions) but upon the whole Order, even upon such, (who mistaking the
true Objects of Pity and Compassion) as had frequently interposed with their
Superiors to mitigate the Legal Penalties against Non-Conformists. Add to this
that severals of the Gentry in the West, who were better natured and had better
Principles than their Presbyterian Neighbors, were very forward to resent the
Affronts, and Indiguities done to the Clergy, until they understood that the
Tide was risen too high to be resisted: and that such of the Presbyterians as
were then out of the Nation, and directed the Methods that the Rabblers were to
take, would vigorously resent the least stop that was put to their carreer. For
it is observable of such men that they never forgive an Injury; and no Injuries
are more implacably resented than any the least Affront that is offered to
their Faction and Government. And it is no wonder for they never say the Lords
Prayer, and it is probable that their opposition to that Divine Composure, is
rather from its contradiction to their Nature, than from the strength of some
whiffling Enthusiastic Arguments invented against it. It is not possible to
oblige men of their Tempers by any Favors, and the Clergy upon the last
Revolution found such of them as they had done kindness to, most venomous and
irreconcilable: and generally the Body of the People in those Western Shires
are cunning, avaritious and dissembling beyond measure: and since the
Presbyterian Principles invaded their Honesty, it was never heard that any of
them heartily forgave an Injury, or what they sancied to be so.

But I return to what I intended, viz. That the Affronts done to the Clergy
were concerted by the Party: since it is evident from many of their Topics and
their avowed Principles, that there was nothing so rude or villainous in the
disasters that the Clergy met with but what they might venture upon by the
Maxims of their Moral Theology; so also it appears undeniably from this, that
the Leading Men of that Party who were at London upon the beginnig of the
Revolution, opposed with all Vigor and Impudence all the Evidences brought
from Scotland of the Sufferings of the Clergy. And though a Reverend person
brought with him Authentic Attestations of what the Clergy suffered; Dr. S --.
yet the leading Presbyterians boldly averred, that there was nothing in
Scotland but prosound Peace and Silence; that they had Letters from their
Factors and Chamberlains informing the contrary to what was alleged by the
Episcopal Party.

In the Confusion that Affairs then stood, it was easy for them to stop any
regular or legal Trial; and they had in that critical Juncture many Advantages
of their Neighbors. So their Emissaries in Scotland went on with all possible
License and Villainy. Jusque datum sceleri --
And it is very odd that this Author should undertake to vindicate the
Presbyterians from those Tumults, when the united force of the whole Party,
with all their Zeal and Strength, never yet appeared so unanimous and uniform
in any enterprise as at that time in their endeavors to pull down our National
Church, and so fond were they then of their Revenge, that they preferred their
Dagon of Presbytery to their being United to England. The Author thinks that
neither he nor his Party are obliged to vindicate any act of Cruelty that
proceeded from the Civil Authority against the Clergy. If they were the Patrons
of Presbytery (as he thanks God they were) certainly their Actings ought to
have been justified in the first place, but he tells us that if the Clergy have
suffered any thing that was hard and extraordinary, it ought not to be imputed
to his Party and Principles, but to the King and the Council, and the Rabble,
as he very mannerly expresses himself. Yet I must thank him for this
compendious Apology, since the Presbyterians under the late Reigns suffered
nothing but what was inflicted by Law. We need make no excuses for the Laws
made against Presbyterians, and those Laws more gravely consulted, than the
hasty and undigested resolutions of peevish and angry Outlaws. And such Laws
were made in times of Peace, and with all Solemnity and Deliberation, and were
absolutely necessary to maintain the Peace of the Nation, and the Kings legal
and just Prerogative against the Popular but pernicious Tenets of bigoted
Covenanters; now I hope you are sufficiently convinced that I need not
transcribe the History of the Tragical Rebellion in King Charles the First his
time, nor yet the many Protestations of the Covenanters at the Cross at
Edinburgh against the Kings most Just and Fatherly Proceedings. And to convince
you by one Instance that they love nothing but what they possess by Force and
Rebellion. When that most gracious King ordered the Covenant to be taken as it
was Enacted in King James the Sixth his time (thinking this might blunt the
edge of the Covenanters, and satisfy the deluded People) they Protest against
this his Proclamation. For you must think that in their Divinity, things Lawful
in their Nature, nay things Necessary, (for such they take the Covenant to be)
become unlawful when once required by lawful Authority. Vid. Kings large
Manifesto.
Does this Author think that the present Generation knows nothing of the
History of Presbyterians? That the British Tragedies from the year 1638. are
buried in eternal silence? That all the Monuments of their daring Insolence are
extinct? That the Acts of the General Assembly are quite lost? That the
Villainies of the Remonstrators are Recorded no where? Why then does he think to
impose upon the World by telling us that indeed they are very sorry for the
Tumults that happened in the West, but that the Presbyterians were no Actors in
those disorders. They would gladly see things done more regularly and orderly;
They (forsooth) love no such Methods: and yet the present Ministers of the
Presbyterian Church cannot instance any one thing that the Cameronians did upon
this late Revolution, but what is justifiable from Presbyterian Principles; and
though they could not be justified from their former Principles, why may not
the present Presbyterians improve the Principles of their Predecessors Who of
the old Presbyterians ever Preached against the use of the Lords Prayer or
Doxology?
As all Sectaries do who grow worse and worse until they are given up of God
unto a Reprobate mind. And indeed if I had any Books by me I could easily prove
(especially from their own Calderwood) that the Presbyterians did nothing
toward the Clergy in the West of Scotland upon the late Revolution, but what
they ought to have done upon their Principles and former Practices. It is very
pleasant to observe what different Batteries the Presbyterians in Scotland, and
the Dissenters in England raise against Episcopacy. The Presbyterians in
Scotland plead for their National, Classical, Spiritual Power, independent upon
Kings: the Dissenters in England plead that such a Spiritual Union amongst
Clergymen is too powerful a Faction, and may easily endanger the Safety and
Peace of the Nation. Letters of a Dissenter to the truly Learned Dr. Burscough.
The Reason is, the Presbyterians are in possession of such an Union in
Scotland, and the Dissenters in England have no legal Cement to unite them
together. And therefore every thing that they are not in Possession of at
present, is wicked and dangerous: but if they could grasp it, it might become a
very useful Engine to Propogate the Covenant all Europe over. For they find
that men are naturally averse to the Power and Authority of their Discipline,
and therefore it were necessary to support it by all the strength of Laws and
Edicts, and by the Inquisition it self, if the Eyes of Princes could be so far
opened as to see that there is no true Reformation wrought but by the Conduct
and direction of Presbyterians. I have insisted the longer upon this general
Topic because most of his Book is built upon this Subterfuge alone, that
Cameronians are no Presbyterians, though they can be reduced to no other
Schismatics; and that what they did was disowned by the Presbyterians though
he himself knows the contrary, and the whole Party magnified these Heroes; and
when it was doing it was said to be nothing less than the Cause and Work of God.

But I leave this general Head when I give you an account of one remarkable
piece of Sophistry and tergiversation, that he makes use of to palliate the
Crimes of his Party; and it is so much the more material, since if he fails in
this he shakes the Foundation of all his Apologies, by which he would make us
believe that the wise and leading Men of his Party had no hand in any Tumults,
no not in that at Edinburgh in December 1688. His words are, Page 35. Edinburgh
Edition.
For the Tumults at Edinburgh, we know of none but what was made by the
Students at the College there in burning the Pope in Effigy. And a little
alter, That any Presbyterians who then or since had Authority in the State or
Church did assist in contrivance or management of this matter we do utterly
deny. I have faithfully transcribed his own words, because this is a
considerable passage which flies in the Face of all Evidence, and contradicts
the Conviction of all the Inhabitants at Edinburgh. Then, if the barbarous
Tumult at Edinburgh was managed and contrived by the Leading Men of his Party,
who then and since have had Authority in the State, in that case all his
Apologies for the Presbyterians fall to the ground. And from this one single
Instance his Book is ruined and his Authority baffled, Crimine ab uno disie
omnes.
and the next General Assembly will order him to be more cautious, and quietly
tell him, it had been better he had not ventured upon this unfortunate Sally
against his Adversaries. For there is nothing more easily made out than that
the Leading Men of the Presbyterians were the sole Actors and Contrivers of
this hideous Tumult. To make you sensible of this, let me observe first, That
he shussles and confounds two very different Stories into one, viz. The
Tumultuous desaceing of the Kings Chapel, and the burning of the Pope in
Effigy: for the last was near a fortnight after the other without any Tumult or
disorder. The Students had made a mock Effigies of the Pope, and carried it
from the place that it was made to the College, and from thence to the Cross
at Edinburgh. All of them in the mean time walking orderly in their Ranks, and
the College Mace carried before them by one of the Public Servants, this
could not be obtained without the Masters Permission. So there was no Tumult
nor no disorder intended. A great many of the Nobility, and most of the
Citizens of best quality were looking on, and when this foolish Ceremony was
over, they retired to their Lodgings without any Tumult or Extravagance. But
the defacing the Chapel at Holyrude House was a Tumult indeed, and a very
tragical one too, in all its beginnings and Consequences. This fell out upon
the 10. day of December, 1688. The Presbyterian Faction in Edinburgh, had
sometime before determined to Rifle the Kings House, particularly my Lord
Chancelor's Lodgings, to deface the Chapel, and to force the Guards, and in a
word, to make the most terrible and the most numerous show that they were able
to make. In order to this they gave out that the Papists intended a Massacre of
the Protestants, though there was not a Papist in Edinburgh to two thousand
Protestants: And in the Confusion that Men were then in, a great many unwary
people were frighted, and the Presbyterians concerted their Measures and slew
to their Arms, and the City for that night become a dismal habitation, carrying
all the marks of Hell and Confusion; nothing was to be heard but screeches,
lamentable howlings and shootings, and this was not managed by the Body of the
People (who were very a verse to such treacherous and unmanly adventures) but
by some of the Leading Presbyterians, who then and now have Authority in the
State, and might be known by their large Buff-Belt, and a Halbard upon their
Shoulder, running up and down in great fury to excite the People to this
Reformation. In this Scuffle, before they entered the Chapel, there were some
killed, and several wounded by the Guards that kept the King's House, and in
the mean time the Governors of this Tumult finding that the People were not so
forward to Pillage the King's House, went up and down and told them that their
own Children were killed, when those very Children were as Home and safe in
their Lodgings. And though many were wounded, and severals killed, yet not a
Student belonging to the College was hurt, for there were but very few of them
whose Youth and Levity had engaged them to be witnesses of this Tumult.

I believe the Ringleaders of the Presbyterians at Edinburgh will give the
Vindicator but little thanks for mentioning this Tumult that is openly avowed
by themselves And he may ask, not only the forementioned Gentleman, but also
the Master of F -- and several others (whose names are concealed, and may
continue so, unless the Vindicator, or some of his Associates, by their
indiscretions oblige me to be more particular) whether they were there, and
what a glorious Figure they made. If it be unpleasant to name particular
Gentlemen, they may thank their Vindicator who obtrudes such fulsome Lies upon
the World, when the Matter of Fact is so very recent, and known to all the
Inhabitants at Edinburgh; and the Leading Presbyterians are very loath to part
with the honor of this Achievement, so agreeable to their constant Genius and
former Practices; for one of their chief Advocates pleaded lately before the
Judges, in the Trial of Mr. Wallace, that they that Pillaged the Kings House
were a Company of Grave, Reasonable, Thinking Men, Commanded by a Lord of the
Sessions. We see then by this one single Instance the Spirit of Lies and Vanity
that runs through his Book. For if it be undeniable that this Rabble
Reformation was concerted by the Ringleaders of the Faction. Then he must own
that the Tumults were not the accidental Essorts of some angry inconsiderable
People but the united endeavors of the Presbyterians.

And indeed this Essay at Edinburgh was but the Preface to other marks of the
Kindness they intended the Clergy in that place; if their violence had not been
happily prevented by the Generous Resolution of that Learned and Illustrious
Society of the College of Justice: and it is very probable that the Vindicator
wrote down this Story carlesly and hand over head. For if he had advised with
his Friends at Edinburgh, George Stirling the Apothecary, and Mr. Menzies in
the Locken buiths: they could not be so self-denyed as to be willingly deprived
of the honor they had in managing and contriving this Tumult. The very next
Lords day one of their Ministers in the Meeting House belonging to the Tron
Church Parish, December 17. thanked God for this Glorious Reformation, I
instance him not to exclude others, but because I can prove it.
It was a disparagement to their Zeal, and Activity, to be robbed of the Glory
they acquired in this Enterprise. I cannot but acknowledge that it is highly
indecent to name particular Men, but what shall we say when we have to do with
such Wasps and Hornets: you see then by the Reflections I have made of this
General Topic, what the Superstructure must be.

The next thing under which he endeavors to cover himself and his Party, is
his fancy of an Interregnum. He tells us gravely in many places of his Book,
that what was done against the Clergy was done in an Interregnum, and that the
People were highly provoked by the Clergy, that they were instrumental in the
Sufferings of the Non-Conformists. That the Clergy themselves were but
profligate and debauched, and that they are generally such as are unacquainted
with the operation of the Spirit of God upon their Hearts; and if this does not
excuse, yet it extenuates what those zealous Patriots did at that time to
advance the Glorious Reformation.

I cannot but take notice in the first place of his wild imagination of an
Interregnum, which cannot properly fall out in an Hereditary Monarchy; for the
King never dies. For, Though the Laws were not put in Execution in that
Interval of Confusion and uncertainty, yet they retained their Legal Force and
Authority. The Government was indeed in a Convulsive Motion, so that it could
not perform the ordinary Functions of Order and Justice; but does he think,
that because humane Laws were in that Interval hindered, that therefore the
Godly and Zealous Presbyterians were loosed from the Obligations of the Laws of
Nature and Religion? Is there no security against the violent hands of those
Saints, but the coercive power of Laws? How can they pretend to be better
Christians than the rest of their Neighbors when they venture upon the most
unchristian Practices? Which puts me in mind of the Character that Cornelius
Tacitus gives of the Jews, They were kind and affectionate to their own
Kindred, but they retained adversus omnes alios hostile odium. Juvenal gives
the same Character of them, but it is much more agreeable to the Presbyterians.
Does he think that the Notion of an Interregnum can justify what modest Men
are ashamed to own? Non monstrare vias eadem nisi sacra colenti.
And is it for the honor of his Party that he should proclaim to the World
that they stand not in awe of the Divine Laws, unless they are restrained by
the terror of Humane Laws? Why do they pretend to be acquainted with the
Gospel, when they openly and jointly contomn its most essential Precepts? But
he says the People were much injured and provoked by the Clergy. What the
Clergy in the West of Scotland did, I know not, if I make an estimate of their
proceedings against Non-Conformists, from the practice of our Clergymen in
other parts of the Nation, I declare sincerely to you I never knew one of them
that prosecuted the Dissenters without great reluctance, nay I knew many of
them that interposed with sincere kindness and vigor for their Parishioners,
frequently and with success too, when they were obnoxious to the Laws.

But let us suppose that the Clergy did prosecute the Dissenters according to
Law, they did nothing in this but what they were obliged to do, the Peace of
the Nation was endangered, the Legal and Lineal Monarchy was undermined; and
the Government, by such frequent shakings, most likely to relapse into its
former state of Civil War and Confusion; and the souls of the People committed
to their Care were poisoned with dark and Enthusiastic Principles: Speaking
evil of Dignities took place of the Ten Commandments, and a Schism unreasonable
in its beginnings, and disowned by all Protestant Churches, and the learnedest
Presbyterians Bochart. Phaleg. Edit. 3. Lugd. Batav. page 989. Cavendum igitur
ne Scyllae fuga in hanc Charybdim incidamus, neve rigor nimius, and plusquam
Vatinianum in Episcopos odium, eo imprudentes adigat, ut Veteri Ecclesie dicam
scribamus, and al ejus communione ipsi nos arceamus. A quibus Extremis
Gallicanas Ecclesias semper abhorruisse libri a Gallis scripti palam indicant,
and Nostrorum perpetua praxis.

Idem ibid. Interim Episcopale regimen esse antiquissimum, and paulo post
Apostolos per Universam Ecclesiam magno cum fructu obtinuisse, est mihi
compertissimum.


, was propagated in all corners of the Nation with all vigor and diligence; and
ought the Clergy to look on and continue idle Spectators when the Peace and
Safety of their Country Spiritual and Temporal was so daringly and factiously
invaded? Were they not obliged by the Laws of God and Man to stop this Career
of Insolence and Villainy, and though they ought to undeceive the poor deluded
People by all the soft Methods of tenderness and meekness, yet the Boutefeu's
and Incendiaries were to be chastised and lashed with greater severities, and
our Governors did nothing then but what they ought to have done in their own
defense, unless they had resolved to Sacrifice the Fundamental Constitution of
the Monarchy and their own Honors, Dignities, and Estates unto the Caprice and
Ambition of some bigoted Covenanters.

But I would ask the Vindicator whether they of the Clergy that never
prosecuted any of the Dissenters were the more kindly treated upon this last
Revolution. I know severals of them who have been most spitefully used by the
Presbyterians, though formerly they did them all the good Offices that lay in
their power. The Clergy, as well as the Laity, were obliged by the Laws of the
Land, and by the Fundamental Laws of Humane Society, to crush, and extirpate
the beginnings of Rebellion, and the attempts of such as preached the most
pernicious Principles, until at last the Rebels justified in their Books and
Sermons open and avowed Murders. And that by the most natural Consequences
from their own Principles, when the wickedness of the Party appeared thus
terrible to the Peace of the Nation, was it to be expected that our Governors
should look on and suffer their own Throats to be cut, their Families to be
forfeited, their King to be dethroned, their Church Polity to be pulled down,
and the entire Scheme of their Government to be defaced? And all this for no
other Reason, and upon no wiser Consideration, than because their Enemies
pretended Religion, and gave most sacred Names to the most abominable Crimes.
And now again that they are uppermost, they are very angry that men do not shut
their Eyes, and suffer their Follies and Tyranny to overspread the Nation
without Contradiction. But what was it, that their Ministers did suffer upon
the Restitution of King Charles the Second. Why they would not take
Presentations from the Patron, nor Collation from the Bishop: they would
possess their Benefices against the Law, and in defiance of Authority: but was
any of them turned out that did comply with the Law? Bishop Lighton.
So earnest were some of our Ecclesiastical Governors to keep them in their
Places, that they made such offers of Peace and Accommodation, as none could
refuse but sullen and desperate Incendiaries, nor was there any thing required
of them, but what the most rigid Presbyterians might comply with, if their Zeal
to support their Faction had not infatuated them as much against the Vow of
Baptism, as against the common Peace and Safety of their Country.

The Presbyterians in Scotland are generally blinded with this fatal prejudice
(an Evidence of their incurable Enthusiasm) they think that no man can act any
thing against the Presbyterians, but he immediately acts against the light of
his own Conscience. They take it for granted that their way is the only true
Religion, that it is plainly revealed, and that they give greater Evidences of
Piety, and Religion, than any other Society of Christians upon Earth, and if
you do not believe this presently, without Examination, you are far from the
Kingdom of God. Nay, you are alienated from the life of God. Hence it is that
the Presbyterians conclude that whatever is done against their Party, is done
rather against the Light and Conviction of their Enemies, than the petulance
and vanity of their own Fraternity: therefore they insinuate upon all
occasions, that all Reasonings against them proceed from Prophanity and
Atheism, or from men void of all Principles and Religion. You may as easily
reason a Bedlamite out of his fancied Honors and Principalities, as persuade
any of their deluded Disciples that they may be in an Error: and this they owe
to their cunning Teachers, who tyrannize over their Belief as imperiously as
the cruel Brach-mans do among the Indians.

But let me enquire in the next place calmly, did the meek Covenanters when
they got the ascendent in King Charles the First his time, treat their Opposite
with that gentleness and discretion, that condescension and longanimity, that
became the true Gospel of our Savior? But so very far from this temper, that
they prosecuted the Malignants with all Rage and Cruelty. And if there were not
another instance of their Cruelty, but the Sufferings of the excellent Bishop
Wishart, men might easily penetrate into the Genius and Spirit of the Party.
Then their Pulpits thundered against the Malignants all the Curses in the
Bible; and all were Malignants, in their Dialect, that were not Presbyterians.
Add to this the universal and restless endeavors of their Ministers to ruin
the Persons, Estates, and Families, of all that opposed their Designs: and
their Discipline was made an Engine to pry into the greatest Secrets of
Families, and the Presbyterian Chaplain, who was ordinarily the Ministers
Intelligencer, complained in his Prayers of what he thought amiss in the Family
or Neighborhood, nay the Soundest part of the Nation groaned under this
Tyrannical Pedantry, as the Israelites did under the Egyptians, when their
bloody Scaffolds stood erected for some whole weeks together. Then it was, that
their modest Ministers said that their Cause was like to prosper, when they
justified one Crime by the Commission of another, and the whole Scheme of their
Arbitrary Tyranny from their Success and Prosperity; when their Turkish
Argument of Force and Arms ran down the Doctrines of our Meek and Crucified
Savior. And now forsooth they must tell us, that the Episcopal Clergy were
rigid, and peevish, and severe, to their Parishioners; when perhaps they did
not represent to the Judges, in their several bounds, the tenth part of those
Crimes that were committed against the Church and State; and yet the Law did
oblige them to give up the names of Recusants. And do not we see, that the
Presbyterians since the late Revolution have out done the diligence of all men
against the Clergy and Laity of the Episcopal persuasion, for the whole Faction
applied their utmost force (since the Revolution) to ruin her Neighbors, and
possess themselves of all their Places, Civil, Military, and Ecclesiastical.

The truth is, there are no people upon Earth that value Government and
Sovereignty as the Presbyterians do. It is the Idol they bow to: there is
nothing gratifies their highest Passions so much as a power to tyrannize. If
the whole world were once under their Feet, they would look cheerful, their
Blood would Circulate more briskly; until this be obtained there is no rest
nor peace for mankind. The Discipline, the Sacred Discipline of Geneve, must
wrestle with all Authority until the Consumation of all things.

But if the former excuse did not serve his Design; yet it is often insinuated
all a long his Book that most of the Clergy were wicked men. But let me suppose
the truth of this infamous accusation; who made them Judges of the Scandalous
Clergy? Whose Delegats were they in the Execution of this Punishment? I have
told you before that I am acquainted with very few of the Clergy of the Western
Shires, but I am informed by judicious and intelligent Men, that generally the
Clergy in those Shires were Grave, Sober, and Assiduous in the work of the
Ministry. That most of them endeavored upon all occasions to gain those
Enthusiasts from their Schism and Delusion, and were very successful in this
Christian design, if a new Indulgence after the Defeat at Bothwel Bridge had
not buoyed up their Interest. As for the scandalous Aspersions cast upon the
Clergy by the Western Presbyterians, it is certain that by one of the
Vindicators own Rules we ought not to believe them; because they are all of
them of a Party, and indeed of such a Party, who from their first appearance in
the World placed much of their strength in reproaching the Clergy. If some of
the Ministers in the West did not live according to the Dignity of their
Character, we ought rather all of us (who have not renounced our Baptism) to
lament it, rather than insult and upbraid them with it. Indeed a Minister,
whose Employment is to fit other men for Eternal Life, and yet lives in open
and scandalous opposition to his Rule, is the most monstrous thing in Nature.
All the Satirical Writings of the Poets, and all the Invectives of Orators,
cannot furnish one word to give a true Idea of that loathsome Creature. But on
the other hand, If any of them be guilty, to upbraid them with their faults, is
not the way to reform them, for of all Advices those that are given to reform
the Clergy, should be managed most nicely and tenderly. And it is to be feared
that the Vindicator and his Associates are very glad when they can discover the
trippings of their Adversaries. If any of the Clergy be guilty of such things
as are clamorously alleged by Presbyterians; it is no Argument against the
common Cause of the Catholic Church, and the Apostolical Succession of that
Hierareby of Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon, continued from the days of the
Apostles until now. And therefore he may, if he will (as is threatened) employ
the people in the West to make and gather stories to the disadvantage of the
Episcopal Clergy, and it is an easy thing to swell that Volumn into a
prodigious Bulk, if their ignorant and implacable Enemies may be believed, it
is not possible for them not to accuse. But I think the Vindicator himself, is
not of so profligate a The Presbyterians in England libelled all kind of Crimes
against the Clergy before the Rump Parliament, and one of them was deprived for
drunkenness, who was so abstemious, that he never drank any thing in his life
but Milk and Water.
Conscience as to give Ear to such malicious Reports. We have had late
Instances of the Presbyterian activity against the Reputation of the Clergy, no
man could escape a Libel that enjoyed a comfortable Benefice. Nothing could
have made the Presbyterians more contemptible than this treacherous and
sneaking method of Libelling, when it was visible to all men that those
scurrilous Papers were intended for no more, than to ruin and disgrace the most
innocent and deserving men. And it is very odd that they could venture to
blindfold the Nation by this bassled and hypocritical Sham, and how comes it
that the Clergy in the West are represented as Criminals, when they dare not
attack the Clergy in the North? The reason is obvious, the People in the West
date their Conversion from the time that they forbear to hear the Curates, and
they think themselves obliged by all their ties and solemn Covenants, to ruin
and disparage those limbs of Antichrist. But the People in the North can
discover no such beauty in their Presbyterian Discipline: they love and honor
their own Ministers, they hear them Preach the Articles of Christian Faith, and
true and solid Morals, and so rough are those Infidels in the North, that they
never thought Sniveling necessary to make a great Saint. They love a plain and
unaffected Style, and they cannot be persuaded but that the Oracles of God may
be Preached without affectation, and yet with all requisite Gravity and
Recollection.

If there be so many Libels gathered by Presbyterians, it may provoke their
Enemies to recriminate, and if the Vindicator thinks that such scurrilous
writings can serve the common cause of Religion, I wish him more wisdom and
sobriety: I condemn all such methods in all Parties, and if the thing were
allowable, we could tell him that many of his Associates in the Ministry are
very scandalous, some of them Adulterers. some Fornicators, some Blasphemers;
some whole Presbyterian Families Incestuous,

-- Sed praestat motos componere fluctus. If I rejoiced in this Recrimination,
I were not a good Christian. But it is necessary to put those Proud and
Supercillous men in mind, that they are but ordinary Mortals, encompassed about
with the same Infirmities with other men, and that they should consult the
Scriptures, and the Fathers for Arguments, rather than the Cameronian Zealots
in the Western Shires; and if they beat the Clergy at those Weapons, they
deserve to be chastised; and for a conclusion to this Observation, I must tell
you that I know not a more unblamable Company of men upon Earth than the
Episcopal Clergy of Scotland. Nor do I know any five of them in the whole
Nation, who could not undergo the severest Examinations, used in the Christian
Church Preparatory to Ordination, I wish that they may make a Christian use of
their present Trials, and give the world a proof of that greatness of soul that
qualifies men for the Priesthood; that all round about them may be convinced
that he that is in them is greater than he that is in the World. Seneca John Ep.
tells us that to do good even when it is attended with infamy, is noble and
heroic: and a greater than Seneca tells us, that we must go thorough good
report and bad report; God will clear our Innocence as the Sun in his Meridian
Elevation, and I hope to the Conviction of our Enemies, that in the simplicity
of our souls we designed the Reformation of sinners, and that we look upon our
selves as Dedicated to the immediate Service of God, and the sooner we retire
into our own Consciences, and discover the secret Springs of our present
Calamity, the sooner will our heavenly Father remove the marks of his
Indignation. There is no Argument so proper to convince the Ignorance of
foolish men as by well doing: and though we should not be so succesful in
gaining Proselites in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation, yet we
fortify the Peace and Tranqulllity of our Consciences, we strengthen our
selves against those things that are most terrible to Flesh and Blood, we
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of Glory, in the midst of all Calamities
and Reproaches that are cast upon us. And let not them that are yet untouched
think that their Brethren, upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, are greater
sinners than their Neighbors.

I leave this, and I go forward to another Topic by which he endeavors to
vindicate the Presbyterians; and it is this that the Clergy of the Church of
Scotland did press the Consciences of the Presbyterians; and that the People
could not own them Vid. page 52. and page 87.
as their Ministers, because they were obtruded upon them, and not invited by
Popular Elections. But the Vindicator should consider, that if his Argument be
turned against his Party in the North of Scotland, it may be of dangerous
Consequence to the growth of Presbytery. For the bresbyterians there are not
likely to carry their Elections by plurality of Votes; but does not he remember
that severals of the Remonstrator Presbyterians have been inducted to their
Churches by some Troops of English Horse in the time of the late Civil Wars,
yet he does not think but that the People owed all Deference and Spiritual
Obedience to them; and if a His own word.
Pastoral Relation may be founded between a Minister and the People by
Cromwells Troopers, why not by King Charles the Second's Dragoons? But does not
the Vindicator remember that some have been obtruded on the old College of
Aberdeen, without the Regular and Collegiate Election, by the same very force
that had planted some Remonstrator Ministers, and that without any Trial or
Examination, when their more deserving Predecessors were most Tyrannically
removed.

But not to trifle with the Vindicator, The method of admitting Ministers in
the Church of Scotland, under the Episcopal Constitution, is the most just, and
the most unexceptionable that can be devised. For when the Candidate for any
Ecclesiastical Preferment receives Vid. Letters of the Persecution.
a Presentation from the Patron, he goes to the Bishop, and the Bishop sends
him to the Presbytery to undergo the ordinary trials of his Literature and
Sufficiency; and when the Bishop and his Presbyters with him are satisfied of
his Knowledge and Learning, then the Bishop serves a public ^dict at the
Church where the Candidate is to be preferred, inviting all the Parishioners to
come to the Cathedral Church against an appointed day, to see if they have any
reasonable exception against the Candidate; and this is not done in a hurry but
they have a competent time allowed them to gather all possible Informations
concerning him from all Quarters; and if they can object any thing against him
that is of any weight, they are heardand the Candidate is repulsed: now I would
gladly know what is it that the People can complain of in this Ecclesiastical
Polity? The Consusions of Elections that are solely left to the People are
innumerable, and though we had not famous and remarkable Instances in
Ecclesiastical History of the bloody and tragical Effects of such popular
Elections, our own Country might furnish us with very many sad Experiments,
Damasus and Urcisinus at Rome, Videtiam Ammianum Marcelinum.
when the Parishoners could not compromise the affair peaceably, they quickly
came to Blows, and in many places to Bloodshed, and Riots. These were all the
good effects we could discern of their popular Elections; it cannot be denied,
but that the method of electing the Clergy varied often and appeared under many
Figures in several Ages, and Countries, since the first Plantations of
Christianity: but I dare boldly say no Christian Church came nearer the
Apostolical Method, and more happily avoided both Extremes, than the Church of
Scotland under the Episcopal Constitution. But you may put the Vindicator in
mind Wherever they dare venture, they have no regard to the popular Call, as
lately appeared at Leith, the unanimous popular Election of Mr. George Gray was
refused, and one Wishart a Presbyterian thrust upon them.
that the Presbyterians themselves never thought the Call of the People so
essential a Constitution of that Pastoral Relation. For there is an Act of the
General Assembly, ordering the Presbytery to name a Minister to such Parishes
as were Malignant, that is, such as were of the Episcopal persuasion, so this
pretended popular Election, if at any time it prove unserviceable to advance
their Tyranny, is immediately rejected. For the Presbyterians do not at all
believe any such inherent Right in the People to choose their own Ministers; for
they think the Malignants have no Right to choose for themselves, this is the
sole privilege of the Godly. The Malignants are not at all to be consulted,
accordingly we see that though their Parliament Judged the power of Election in
the Heretors and Elders of each Parish, or in the major part of them, yet no
Elections are allowed by the Presbyteries, though never so unanimous and
universal, but such as are promoted by their own Factions, witness Musselburgh
and Tranent.

There is hardly any thing insisted upon by the Presbyterians more foolish and
inconsistent with common honesty than this Topic from popular Elections, and
to say the truth, the old Presbyterians never obtrude such a whimsey upon the
People: the Lay Patronages were not abolished in Scotland until the year 49.
when the Discipline was in its Zeaith when there was no sin Preached against
but Malignancy, and the King, Prerogative Royal was possessed by the Kirk.
Presbyterians in other Countries quietly submit to Lay Patrons: and indeed if
the Bishops take care that (...) but pious and virtuous Men be Ordained, what
harm can the Church (...) by such Presentations. May not the Clergy examine
such Candidates (...) offer themselves to the Ministry, accurately and
narrowly* It Is certain that the most tristing and supersicial Students do most
effectually recommend themselves to the People, nay there are so many mean and
abject Arts requisite to promote a Clergyman (if the Hypothesis of the popular
Election hold necessary) that an ingenuous man cannot proslitute himself to
such servile and popular methods. As for the grave and retired Clergyman, he
is sure never to be preferred; and if some judicious and discreet Patron does
not force him out of his Solitude, he is like to die amongst his Books, and the
Church has been served in all Ages to the best Advantages by such as least
understood the Arts of Insinuation, and it will continue so until the end of
all things.

In the next place I do not see why the Vindicator should say that the Clergy
pressed the Consciences of their Hearers: there was nothing in our worship, but
the use of the Lords Prayer, the Doxology, and the Apostolic Creed at Baptism,
that they themselves objected against, are not these mighty Grievances to
Tender Consciences? The Vindicator tells us that Presbyterians were not against
the use of those Forms but they would not use them as the Prelatists did. What
he means by this I cannot tell; but I can tell you that all the Presbyterians
before the year 1638. made use of them all. And that after the year 38. until
Cromwell's Army invaded our Nation they never left off the using of those
Catholic and Christian Forms. But such of the Remonstrators as were deeply in
the Interests of the Usurper, then left off the use of such Forms, drawing as
near as was possible to the Spiritual Heights, and pretended Purity of the
Independents in the Army. And the Christian Religion at that time in our Nation
varied in its outward Figure, and in their Notions about it as much as the
Philosophy of the Schools, and the wise Questions of Universale and Objectum
Attributionis logicae. The Vindicator is content to use such Forms, but not as
the Episcopal Church does command it. That is to say, he will do nothing in
Unity and Society with the Christian Church, and though the Vow of Baptism
oblige us, as we are Members of Christ's Mystical Body, to preserve and support
the Unity of the Christian Church, yet he thinks he may leave the Communion the
Church, without either fear or scruple, in those very things that are short
Abstracts of our Faith, and Symbols of our Profession. And yet no People are
now so violent as they in pressing Subscriptions to the Presbyterian Confession
at Westminster, and that without any exception, restriction, or explication, I
am of Opinion that Vid. Presbyterian Inquisition of the College of Edinburgh.
the Episcopal Clergy of Scotland have been from their Infancy taught in, (and
are firmly resolved to adhere to) the Protestant Religion, and is it not a
piece of extraordinary vanity in the Presbyterians to insinuate that they
themselves are the only men careful to preserve the purity of Doctrine? Did not
the Clergy that addressed to the pretended General Assembly, plainly declare
that they would subscribe the Westminster Confession, as it contained the
Fundamentals of Protestant Religion. But this the Vindicator thinks did not
sufficiently purge them from the suspicion of being Arminians. There are but
very few of the Clergy of Scotland that explain the Doctrine of Grace and
Freewill after the method of Arminius; and if any of them does not favor the
Calvinian Hypothesis they are very far from propagating their Opinions in a
factious manner, and not at all inclined to change the Pulpit into a
Metaphysical Chair. I think it is no disparagement to either of the Parties to
say that every one of them cannot state such controversial differences fairly,
and reason about them closely; nor is it necessary for every Country Minister
to read Alvarez and Dr. Tuisse, Arminius and Episcopius. Those questions have
been debated in all Ages of the Church, and if we understand so little of our
selves, of our own soul, and its union with the body, the method and manner of
its operations. How daring a thing is it to pretend to gr^sp the infinite Mind
that made Heaven and Earth, and to methodize the Acts of that eternal
Intellect, in whom we live, move, and have our Being? To read some of the Acts
17.
School men is enough to make a modest man tremble, when he considers that the
incomprehensible Deity is thought to be fettered by the Laws, Methods, and
confused Notions of our Mind, this is learned Ignorance, and the Presbyterians
may think they wonderfully reform the World when they oblige Ministers to Swear
their Systems of Metaphysics. It were infinitely better to leave them to their
Liberty in things that are disputable in their Nature, and past finding out
after all our Endeavors. Upon the whole matter, the Objections against the
Clergy from the Doctrine they Preach is vain and trifling, and serves no other
Design than to fill the Mouths of the People with words that they do not
understand, and yet have a mischievous influence upon their lives.

Another Topic by which he endeavors to provoke the present Powers against
the Episcopal Clergy, is, that Page 24. Edinb. Edit.
they are Enemies to King William and Queen Mary. I have no Commission to give
an account of particular men's Opinions in the Controversy that is now debated
in Britain, but I may observe that the Vindicator puts a mean Complement upon
King William, to tell the World in Print that the Interest of King Page ibid.
Edinb. Edit.
William, and that of the Presbyterians is embarked together; i. e. If King
William does not punctually observe For they fancy the Covenant to be the
tenure by which any King may hold his Crown.
the Original Contract, they know well enough what they owe all earthly Kings.
Again he tells us, that such of the Episcopal Clergy as addressed to King
William and Queen Mary; never thought of any such Address, until they had lost
all hopes of King James; and by this he thinks to disparage the Episcopal
Clergy wonderfully: whereas the Argument rightly turned is to their Advantage.
That they never treacherously betrayed King James when they were publicly
Praying for him, nor did they secretly undermine his Government when they were
giving public thanks for his Administrations, as the Presbyterians did, and
such of the Episcopal Clergy as came over to King William, ought to be treated
with Civility and Protection at least, if it were no more but that their
Principles of Government are more agreeable to Reason, and more favorable to
Monarchy in General, and the Common Peace of Mankind. I know no Notion the
Presbyterians can have of a King, but that he should be And therefore K.
William having not taken the Covenant, and being in League with bigot Papists,
and still Protecting the Church of England and its Hierarchy, should be
Excommunicated upon Presbyterian Principles, as at Sanghair lately it was
reasoned and determined, the 10th. of August.
Arch-Bedle to the Kirk, and that he ought to employ his Power and Authority to
execute their Decrees. The Vindicator remembers no doubt the Act of the West
Kirk. A Specimen of Presbyterian Loyalty to K. Willian and Q. Mary, we have
lately from the Provost of Rutherglin, who publicly owned that they would
indeed Arm so many Forces, and not Disband them until K. William had
Established Presbytery to their mind; and if he did not so settle it, they
would turn him out, and use him as they did K. Charles the First. But if the
Episcopal Clergy in the West of Scotland are enemies to the present Government,
they are obliged to continue in that opposition by the Vindicators Principles,
so unfortunate is he in his Endeavors to serve the present Government. For if
the Clergy in those Shires never met with any thing but Acts of Hostility,
without any Law, Trial, or so much as any the least Formality of Justice; pray,
let the Vindicator tell me what Allegiance do they owe upon such Principles, as
he and his Associates were wont to propagate under the Reign of K. Charles the
Second? And therefore he himself (not others) deserves to have his Neck
stretched for adhereing to such Principles, as necessarily overthrow in their
last consequence all Government and Order.

Another Topic upon which he and others found many of their Libels against the
Clergy, is, that they were subservient in the late Reigns to advance Arbitrary
Power by their Doctrine of Non-Resistance and Passive Obedience. -- Nunquamne
reponam
Vexatus toties. --

The Episcopal Clergy Preached no Doctrine but the true Christian Doctrine,
which can never be overthrown by all the Attempts of their Adversaries; they
Preached indeed that in every Government there was a Supreme Legal Tribunal,
from whose Decisions there lay no Appeal upon Earth. That this Supreme Tribunal
was not at all to be resisted, and therefore that the Insurrections in the
Western Shires against the King, Parliament, and Laws was Rebellion, in its
most rigorous Notion: this indeed they did Preach, and I hope they are not yet
so degenerate as to think or Preach otherwise: as for the other Branch of the
Controversy, whether the King of Scots may be resisted, I will tell the
Vindicator my Opinion when he and I stands upon a Level. For where the Supreme
Tribunal may be resisted, and counter acted, then there is something higher
than what is already granted to be Supreme; but the King and Parliament are
with us Supreme, and if they may be resisted, what is it that may not be
resisted? If Sentences interfere, there can be no Government, because no final
Decision of Controversies; therefore there can be no Appeal from the Supreme
Tribunal in any Nation; and into whatever Figure the Government is molded, some
such Supreme Independent Tribunal must be acknowledged, whence there is no
Appeal, and of which there is no resisting; unless you so order your Government
as to have one part of it fight perpetually against the other and Vitia
dominantium tolerare debemus sicut nimios imbres. Cornel. Tacit.
in that case our Savior tells us, That a House divided against it self cannot
stand. And do the Presbyterians think to recommend themselves by asserting such
Doctrines as necessarily overthrow all Government? And Blows up the
Foundations of all Humane Society? We have all the Governments in the World to
defend us upon this Head; for without this necessary truth no Notion can be
formed of what is Law, Government, or Society; do not we see every day such as
opposed the Government, any where, Fined, Confined, or Executed? And this
carries with it the Unanimous Sentence of all Judges upon Earth, declaring that
the Government is not to be Resisted in its first and Supreme Authority:
neither ought the Secrets of Government to be so profaned, as to be laid open
to the Censure and Objections of every petulant Medler. It is not our business,
who live in private Stations, to Canvass the Mysteries of State; God ordinarily
gives to such as are at the Helm of Government another Spirit, than that he
bestows upon private men, their care must extend far and near, we must not
upon all occasions publish our Comments upon their actions, far less ought we
to fly to Arms when our Caprice is not satisfied, nor when the Dreams and
Delusims of our particular Sect are discouraged. For, If men may run to Arms
upon every occasion, the Political World should quickly tumble into the
Original Chaos. Whatever Parties then there are that oppose the Doctrine of
Non-Resistance, thus stated, are Enemies to all Government, and when they
themselves are invested with Power and Authority, their Practice b^^^^^^ their
former Notions, and exposes sufficiently their Chimerical Ideas; and whatever
branches there may be of this Controversy, it must be agreed to on all hands,
that the Scots Presbyterians were Rebels under Charles I. and Charles II. in
all the Formalities of Rebellion.

The Vindicator himself thinks that the Authority of Page 96. and 97.
the Nation in the Convention or Parliament, may take away the Legal Right that
belongs to the Clergy. Had not the Clergy as good right to their bypast
Stipends as any man had to his private Estate? So it seems that in some cases
the Convention may invade the Property of private men, especially the Property
of the Episcopal Clergy, and this is no other stretch of Arbitrary Power, than
what was practiced formerly against the Lieges in the warmest weather of the
Covenant, when private men were compelled to lend their money to Levy an Army
against the King: yet since it was to advance the Covenant there was nothing
Arbitrary in it, and though it was open Robbery, and never practiced by any of
our Kings, yet we were forced to stoop to Ruin and Poverty, because the
Covenanters said that this was our Liberty and Property. So they that clamor
most against Arbitrary Power, practice it most when they dare venture.

Another Imputation whereby the Presbyterians endeavor to fully the Reputation
of the Episcopal Clergy is this, that the kindness that any have for Episcopacy
proceeds from the Espiscopal Clergy's indulging men in their sins and
immoralities. And Page 76. and page 166.
this is the old story, and contains nothing but their inveterate spite and
malice. What is it that the Episcopal Church teaches that indulges men in their
sins? What Doctrine is it, that is publicly owned or taught by the Episcopal
Church, that has the least tendency to the breach of any of Gods Commandments?
How long shall these Sons of Strife continue in their Impudence? Though this
Accusation be as senseless as it is indesinite, yet upon this occasion they
ordinarily magnify their discipline, as the most Sovereign Remedy against the
immoralities of the Age, much after the same manner that Montebanks do when
they set off their Drugs with vehement and zealous Harrangues; and if you have
the patience for a quarter of an hour you will hear all that they can say.
Whereas a grave experienced Physician, will make no such promises, but he will
calmly consider the present temper of your Body, the Causes of your Disease,
and proportion his Applications to your strength, and other Circumstances,
without noise or Ostentation.

I know no effect that ever the Presbyterian Discipline had toward Reforming
the World, unless you reckon that the murdering of Bastard Children was of
that Nature. It cannot be denied but that the Presbyterian Ministers use long
Discourses to the Whores that sit on the Stool of Repentance, but they cannot
name three of them that ever mounted that Public Seat but they became
Prostitutes, and when once they made Shipwreck of their Modesty, one may guess
what followed. And their public appearance in this manner made them impudent.
This is all the Reformation I know that their Discipline most eminently
promotes; its true indeed there was a very remakable Step toward the
Reformation made by Sir John Hall, and his Associates, the first year of the
Revolution, when the Wells were locked up, and none could have fresh Water upon
Sunday, yet as much Wine and Brandy was allowed as one was pleased to call for.
But if by their Discipline, they mean that endless and pragmatick inquisition
into all Actions, it is as impracticable, as it is burdensome; and though it
be a natural step to advance their Supremacy, Vid. Bramhal on the Scots
Discipline.
yet it is attended with so much confusion and animosities, that neither true
Religion nor Liberty can endure it. It is pleasant to hear them declaim against
the Tyranny of Papal Power, and yet meddle with all that ever he meddled Act of
General Assembly 49.
with.

We know what Profanations of the Name of God were occasioned by this
Discipline in the year 1648. when the best of the Nobility and Gentry, and
others were made to profess their Repentance for the Lawful Engagement. I do
not plead against Ecclesiastical Discipline; for it is absolutely necessary to
the order and Preservation of the Church, as it is a Society founded by our
Lord and Savior. But this new fantastic and apish imitation of strictness, is
inconsistent with reason, as it is indeed destructive to true and regular
Devotion. The Vindicator uses to refer his Readers to other Books, I cannot
condemn that practice, therefore I wish him to Read Bishop Bramhall's Treatise
of the new Discipline. There is nothing more desirable than to see the Ancient
Discipline revived, and all men ought to Pray that God would direct our
Ecclesiastical Governors, to restore the Primitive Discipline, so as the most
negligent may be awakened, directed, and encouraged to repent, and testify his
Repentance by the most unfeigned mortification, and Charity.

Thus I have run over some of the General Heads that are scattered up and down
his Vindication, and given you freely but very briefly my Opinion of them. The
next thing I undertook for your satisfaction was to enquire into the Spirit and
Genius of the Author, by the Characters that appear of him in his Vindication.
Not that I conclude him habitually such, for perhaps the paroxysms of his
Indignation are over, but this I may conclude that when this Book was written,
he was overdriven with his passion: I do not immediately conclude him to be of
the Seed of the Serpent, nor of the Race of Esau, nor a His own mannerly
expressions.
Villain, nor the Successor of Judas Iscariot, nor a Rabshakeh. Though he
opposes the Apostolical Government of Episcopacy, he is not of my Opinion; but
I do not think he deserves any Censure on that account that he is not of my
Persuasion. His Adversaries cannot drive him to a greater absurdity than if he
be made to vent his Passion in personal Reflections, and therefore I shall
endeavor to six nothing upon his person but what naturally follows from his
own words.

I charge him therefore in the first place with open and Page 94.
avowed Partiality. He rejects the Testimony of any man that is not of his
Party, so he rejects the Testimony of John Gibson, one of the Magistrates of
Glasgow because, says he, he was of a party, and made. Alderman.
a Bailiff by the Archbishop; and all knew the Prelates. Inclinations toward
the present Civil Government. His Argument may be reduced into form thus, the
Bishop was an enemy to the Civil Government, John Gibson was named a Bailiff by
the Bishop: Ergo the Testimony of John Gibson ought not to be received in a
Matter of Fact: this is very hard, how can a man at London be more credibly
informed of a Matter of Fact in Glasgow, than by the Authentic Testimonies of
the Magistrates of Glasgow, but he tells us the Magistrates were of a Party,
and what of that? By this method of reasoning what becomes of Calderwood's
History of the Presbyterians? Must not we believe him at all because he is of a
different persuasion? Just so our Author treats Mr. Morer, one of the
Prebendaries of Sarum, who wrote the first Letter of the Persecutions. The
Vindicator tells us it is one lie from the beginning to the end, and why all
this harshness and severity? Why? Because the Vindicator imagines him to be a
Jacobite, though he ventured his person in Ireland, and swore the Oath of
Allegiance to K. William and Q. Mary, and wrote this Letter to one of his
Ecclestastical Superiors in England, yet the account he gave of the Scots
Affairs did not please the Vindicator, and therefore he is immediately
transformed into a Jacobite. This is a very hard case, but why may not even the
Jacobites be received as Witnesses. The Jews when they swear upon the
Pentateuch are received as Witnesses before all Judicatures, and in all Courts
in Christendom; so are the Mahumetans when they swear upon the Alchoran, and
all Pagans if they swear by the Idol of their Country. But Mr. Morer is no
Presbyterian, and therefore his Testimony must be rejected; thus with one dash
of his Pen he overthrows all the Accounts that he himself had from the West, to
the Disparagement of the Episcopal Clergy, or in defense of their Enemies, for
they are all of them of a Party, and obliged by their Oaths to Page 85.
ruin Episcopacy. And again he rejects the Testimony of a great and an exact
Historian, because he was no Presbyterian. And again, The Testimony of a
Mininister, Page 88.
Witnessing the Persecution of another, must not Page 100.
be received. Page 109.


Another thing very remarkable in this Book, is the Author's peremptory and
dogmatick pretenses to the Jus Divinum of Presbytery, contrary to the Modesty,
or rather Caution of the first Presbyterians, who declared in their public
Consessions, that all Vid. Confession of Faith inserted in the Oath of the Test.
Church Polity was variable, and changeable; but the Scots Presbyterians, think
they cannot justify their Zeal for their now Polity, unless the People believe
it to be of Divine Right. But how to make up this Divine Right from the
Precepts of our Savior, or the practice of the Apostles, or the Succession of
the first Ages of Christianity, they know not; they are resolved to say it is
of Divine Right, and then they work hard for strained Consequences, and hence
it is that they are very angry if their intrinsic Ecclesiastical power lodged
in this parity be not obeyed, or questioned. So the Vindicator complains that
such of the Episcopal Clergy as addressed to them, did consider them no
otherwise than as a Company of men that derived all the Power they had from the
Convention, and was not this a mighty astront? They cannot endure that they
should be considered as Delegates of the State, when as yet all the Nation
knows, and common Sense must determine they could have no power over the
Episcopal Clergy, but what they derived from the State; and therefore all along
he asserts positively, that the Scots Presbytery is the immediate Institution
of Jesus Christ. But I must be so just to him as to acknowledge that most of
all his Brethren, are equally peremptory and dogmatick upon this Head, and
though Calvin acknowledges great honor and deference to be due to Prelates
etiam hoc nomine, if they should embrace the Reformation, yet his Disciples are
more improved, and cannot endure that any other Church Pollty sold prevail.
From this proceed the high and lofty Epithets they bestow upon Presbytery;
Christ's visible Kingdom upon Earth, his Royal Crown and Scepter, his express
Institution and Discipline. And upon this Hypothesis they become proud and
insolent, they despise all their opposites as men not acquainted with the
Spirit of Page 185.
God. and enemies to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ. Page 178.


Another thing I take notice of in his Writings, is, his rudeness and vanity.
He represents his Adversary as a Liar, and a Villain, though he cannot prove
that the Author of the History of the General Assembly wrote one Lie, from the
beginning to the end, if the Accounts he got from such as were present were not
so exact, he himself was not to be blamed; but the Vindicator cannot prove that
any information Page 123.
he got was false. Again, one of his Adversaries is represented as a Liar, and
a Slanderer, and tell us again that the Council appointed that no Decree
should pass in savor of the Episcopal Clergy, until the Parliament should
determine in that extraordinary case; where I take notice, that according to
the Vindicators present Doctrine, the Council may stop and disable the Laws,
especially when the the Episcopal Clergy Prosecute their Debitors before the
Ordinary Judge. and therefore the Council may invade any man's Legal Property,
contrary to the Law, and much more the Parliament; yet this is a stretch or
Arbitrary Power, never heard of in Scotland notwithstanding of all the hideous
Clamors of that restless Faction. He may if he will endeavor to justify that
Arbitrary stretch, but I think that they who were most active in it, do truly
think shame of it as a thing as much unprecedented and unwarrantable.

Again, He insinuates that the Clergy had Clubs for Page 55
thinking, and that it is an impudent falsehood that either Dr. R. or Mr.
Malcolm made application to the Presbyterians. As for the last whether he made
application, or after what manner, I neither know nor shall I ever enquire. As
for the first he is at his rest, and I will not rake into his Ashes; but this
is certainly known, although he had addressed unto the Presbyteries, he had
been rejected because he was one of the Ministers of Edinburgh; for his Party
had determined to break through all obstacles of Justice and Decency, rather
than suffer any of the Episcopal Clergy to continue within the City of
Edinburgh. Nay, no Presbyterian was allowed, if once he had made the least
Advances of Compliance with Episcopacy, as was then too visible in the Case of
Mr Wilky.

The Vindicator's clownish Buffoonry, and insulting over the afflicted, in the
4th. page, I omit. You will excuse me if I do not transcribe the most part of
his Book, the ordinary Epithets he bestows on his Adversaries are, that they
are impudent Slanderers and Villains; but when his Heroic Passion is put into a
higher ferment, they are Successors of Judas Iscariot, and Rabshakes. No doubt
the Sisters will think that the Vindicator is a precious convincing man, he
tramples upon the Episcopal Clergy as if they were below his notice, there is
no grapling with a Giant of so much strength and reason.

We must be taught better manners than to venture upon this man of Oak and
Forehead, poor Creatures! Have not we been taught better than to make public
the Secrets of the Faction? if this man write once again, he will ruin us for
ever.

Is not the World well mended by this Reformation? But I had rather prove the
Vindicator a Liar than call him so, and therefore you may ask him who gave him
information that my Lord Dundee had gathered together at Edinburgh two thousand
men of the Kings disbanded Forces, that with them he Page 40.
might surprise the Convention, when all the Nation knows that when he retired
from Edinburgh he had not above thirty or forty to attend his Person. Who saw
the two thousand? And how comes the Vindicator to six upon that precise number
twice? Where were they Mustered? And is it likely that my Lord Dundee at the
Head of two thousand well trained old Soldiers could be forced to retire from
Edinburgh by all the Vagabond Russians that came from the West. Let the
Vindicator recollect himself a little, and enquire where he had this
information. What my Lord Dundee intended is not the Subject of our present
enquiry, but I am very sure that if he had had the fourth part of that number
the Vindicator alleges, he could have quickly made the Convention at that time
retire: and this I confidently think, though the Vindicator Confutes this
probability by telling Mr. Morer Page 13.
that the Presbyterian Confidence is built on a better foundation than such as
Dundee was; and here I must take notice of this Gentleman's Charitable Temper
and Condescension. Mr. Morer, one of the Prebendaries of Sarum, wrote that none
doubted but that if my Lord Dundee had lived he would have changed at that time
the Face of Affairs in Scotland. From this the Vindicator concludes that the
Episcopal Party in Scotland placed their Confidence in none higher than my Lord
Dundee, how is it possible to shun those venomous darts of spite and ill
nature? So when ever you speak to a Presbyterian I advise you to take good heed
what you say, and how; if you do not say every thing that may be said, they are
sure to conclude, that what was left unsaid was not at all believed by you: so
when Mr. Morer writes again he must tell his Patron that though such a change
was probable according to the situation of Affairs at that time yet the
Episcopal Party placed their Confidence in God. For if his words are not thus
guarded the Presbyterians will immediately conclude that the Episcopal Party
are but a pack of Atheists that place no Confidence in God, but lean on the Arm
of Flesh.

I return from this Digression to that that I lately mentioned, viz. The
Vindicators story of two thousand disbanded Soldiers, which carries with it all
the marks by which a willful and deliberate lie, may be known from modest and
ingenuous Truth, and the reason why I instance in this particular is because
the Vindicator was at Edinburgh, or not far from it, about that time, and
therefore it is not probable but that he might have known the truth: and from
this I conclude that either he lies deliberately, and wilfully, or his
Informers are Liars, and idle talkers, or at best he himself, is guilty of
supine negligence, in gathering true Informations. For to do him Justice, I
promise to retract this publicly, if he get five or six men of any note even
amongst the Presbyterians in Edinburgh, who will declare it under their hands
that they knew that my Lord Dundee had gathered together two thousand Disbanded
Soldiers at Edinburgh, before he retired from the Convention. And the
Vindicator himself cannot deny but that this is an extraordinary piece of
Condescension, that I should leave it to be decided by the Testimony of
Presbyterians themselves, since he rejects all Episcopal Witnesses.

The next thing I instance, as to his Candor and Integrity, is this, that in
the third page of his Preface he Second Vindication. Edenb. Edit.
writes, that there was Advice written by Dr. Canaries to Mr. Lisk, to be
communicated to the Episcopal Party, That they should yield feigned Obedience
to the Presbyterians at present, and these words he caused to be Printed in a
different Character, that every one might conclude they were the words of Dr.
Canaries Letter; whereas the Doctor never wrote such a thing, nor any thing
that can yield any such Consequence. And it is yet more pleasant to read his
Letter that justifies this disingenuous usage, because forsooth feigned
Obedience was a Scriptural Phrase, and though the Doctor wrote no such thing,
yet he thinks he was allowed to Print this Relation of him, so as all the World
might conclude these words were the express words of Dr. Canarie's Letter, and
this Lie is more unpardonable than the former, because it is deliberate and
unrepented off. I shall mention one Instance more of his Candor and Integrity,
and it relates to Mr. Macmath, whom he injures most atrociously.

And because he raises all his Batteries against Mr. Macmath, the Minister of
Leswade, we need no other proof of the Vindicators ingenuity, nor no other
Character of his genius than to read that part of his Libel that relates to Mr.
Macmath. First, he charges him with Drunkenness, but the Vindicator knew no
such thing, only the barbarous Villains who wounded him upon the Road as he was
Traveling from Edinburgh to his own House, they would take care to transmit to
the Vindicator such stories as were most convenient for him to propagate, but
Mr. Macmath was that very night, before he came from Edinburgh, in the company
of two Gentlemen of Honor and Integrity, Mr. Riddel of Haysning in the Forest,
and Captain Straitone.
and appeals to them whether they could perceive in him either the first
beginnings, or the least appearance of any excess or disorder, and their
Testimony is of greater authority than all the stories that the Vindicacor can
patch together from such Villains as made an attempt upon his life.

Next he charges him with amorous, wanton, and lascivious behavior, and I am
glad the Vindicator mentions it, because in this very story we have a notorious
instance of their Villainy and Hypocrisy: there was a poor woman hired by the
Presbyterians to say that Mr. Macmath once made Love to her, and she was
prevailed with by her Brother, a Presbyterian, to say so, and when she was
encouraged by them again to adhere to what she said, she declined it, and told
them that she had said enough for any thing she had gotten. Her Brother, who
had taught her thus to accuse an innocent man, was smitten with such a remorse
(when he came to consider more narrowly what he had done) that he was in hazard
to destroy himself, and actually did so, when he removed to the next Parish, by
ripping up his own Belly. But it is no wonder to hear Mr. Machmath thus
calumniated, when they had the impudence to accuse Anno 38.
the Venerable Old Archbishop Spotswood of Incest with his own Niece of
fourteen years old. And to make an end of what concerns Mr. Macmath, let me
acquaint the Reader that such as were most active in his Trouble and
Persecution, very shortly after felt the severity of Gods just Judgment. John
Clark, who beat him with the great end of his Musket, was suddenly bruised to
death by the fall of a Tree in the Wood of Rosling, so that he never spoke
again: and for the other Mr. Borthwite, his Conscience did so check him, that
he had no peace until he ended his life in a most lamentable Distraction and
Madness. I am not so bold as to infer that the Persecuting of Mr. Macmath was
the only sin that drew upon them the visible and sudden marks of Gods heavy
displeasure, but I may very safely say that the Signatures of Gods anger are
frequently legible enough in the punishment of some men's sins, and that
Atheistical Hypocrites seldom escape his indignation even in this World.

As for the Vindicators Tattling of Mr. Finlasone, Mr. Finlasone himself denied
all when he was challenged. But, that I may no longer detain the Reader, nor
yet condemn my self to the drudgery of raking into that Puddle that is here
heaped together against Mr. Macmath, let him compare the following Authentic
Certificate in favors of Mr. Macmath, subscribed by the Gentlemen and others
of his own Parish, with all the little knavish and impudent Lies that the
Vindicator has gathered already, or may hereafter invent, and then let him Judge
as his discretion will lead him.

Leswade, August 10. 1689.
WE Subscibers, Heretors, or such as represent them, Elders, and others within
this Parish of Leswade, do hereby Declare and Testify that Mr. John Macmath,
present Minister there, has been above these twenty years bygone in the said
Ministry to our great satisfaction, and has Preached the Word of God
faithfully, and performed other Duties of his Ministerial Function diligently;
his Deportment and Behavior being suitable to his Doctrine and Sacred
Employment: wherefore we do own him as our lawful Minister, and are well
pleased that he be continued in the peaceable exercise of his Ministry amongst
us, as witness these presents subscribed with our hands. Sic Subscribitur.

Sir Will. Drummond of Hauthornden, Knight. William Drummond. Saintclare of
Rosline, Barronet. Jo. Saintclare. Lately one of the Magistrates of Edinburgh.
Jo. Johnstone. Representing the Barronry of Prestone. To. Preston. Nicolsone of
Trabrowne, one of the Magistrates of Edinburgh, as representing Leswade
Barronry. Ja. Nicolsone. Son to the L. Prestone. Alex. Prestone. Town Major of
Edinburgh, living in the Parish of Leswade. Major Will. Murray. Son to the L.
Prestone. Char. Prestone. Son to Major Murray. Pat. Murray. Elders Alex Lawder.
Ja. Chiseholme. Will. Dobie. Tho. Geddes. Archibald Johnstone. Jo. Mulckin.
Tho. Reok. Ad. Threplain. Will. Ramsey. Alex. Porteous. William Pouersell.
Masters of Families. John Reok. Franc. Scott. Pat Whytlaw. Ja. Morisone. Jo.
Mathre. Geo. Johnstone. Da. Mackall. Alex. White. And. Summer.
Again he tells us, that it is well known that the Episcopal Party made all the
essays they were capable Page 12.
of to carry the Elections for the Convention, when it is far better known,
that in several Shires the Episcopal Gentry declined industriously their being
chosen for that Convention, particularly in the Shire of Ross where the
Vindicator dare not say that the Presbyterians can carry the Elections. And let
me but once for all tell you, that the Presbyterians had many Advantages of
their Opposites at that time not to be named. To be short, his Book is every
where interspersed with the silliest shufflings and tergiversations: it is not
enough for him to say that he is not acquainted with the Matter of Fact, when
any thing is affirmed by his Adversary, that he is a stranger to, but instead
of this; he presently flies in his Face and gives him the Lie. I Will give you
one Instance of this rudeness, Mr. Morer wrote to his Patron, that there were
some that Sat in the late Convention, who were not infeft in their Estates,
and consequently were excluded by the Fundamental Laws of the Nation. This the
Vindicator denies, and tells us, his denial is a sufficient answer, and all
this because Mr. Morer did not name the Members of the Convention that were not
infeft in their Page 12.
Estates. Had it not been an extraordinary indiscretion to have named
particular Gentlemen, and to publish what might be so prejudicial to their
Interest amongst their Creditors and Acquaintances. And if the Vindicator will
generously conceal their names, he shall know them too when he pleases; and
when he thus contends for the honor of that Convention, he in the next Line
blunders most unhappily, and tells the World in Print that some Sat in that
Convention who were forfeit for High Treason by all the solemnities and forms
of Law, and that before the Sentence was Repealed by any Judicatory: and
therefore I advise the Vindicator not to bind up the Sovereign Powers of the
Earth to little Punctilio's and Forms of Law, but let him be a little more kind
to Arbitrary Power, and the extraordinary Exigences of State. And since he
thinks it very just that the Convention should allow such a procedure against
all the Forms of Law; why may not he allow the King and Council to put the very
Laws in Execution against Phanaticks, when the essentials of Government are
endangered by their Conspiracies and Insurrections. There are frequent
Instances of his Disingenuity and shifting, which no body expects should be
particularly refuted: because they engage ones enquiries into all those
Pamphlets he pretends to refute; and because the Book would swell to a
prodigious Bulk, and the Public is not at all concerned to know the
Circumstances of every particular Ministers Sufferings in the West of Scotland.

I could in the next place inform you of his Inconsistencies. He treats his
Adversaries as Brethren, yet in Page 10. Paragraph 6.
his Preface he insinuates that such Disputes with the Episcopal Party are but
the strugglings and oppositions between the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of
the Ibidem.
Serpent; and that there are but few Matters of Fact that he pretends to any
knowledge of himself. Yet in the next Line almost, he tells us that he does not
build on hearsay or common Talk; and yet the materials of his Book are but the
Testimonies of many who were Actors or Abettors of the Western Villainies: and
if he did not build on hearsay, how came he to Print that Mr. George Henry,
Minister at Carstarphin, meddled with a Brewery, which is notoriously false?
And though this be a trifling story, yet is it an undeniable Evidence that the
Vindicator was heedless and inconsiderate in gathering true Materials.

Again, The Vindicator tells us that they do not think K. William an Idolater
though he Communicate with Page 115.
the Church of England, yet when some of his Party mounts the Desk and declaims
their Maccaronicks, they positively conclude that the Church of England is
idolatrous. Again, he does not allow that the Clergy who Addressed the
Commission of the General Assembly had any measure of wit, yet their
Contrivances were founded on deep Consults. But let me tell the Vindicator,
that no man, or Society of men, has the Monopoly of Prudence, the most cautious
steps may be sometimes frustrated and the wisest men may sometimes widely
mistake their measure: and the Hearts of all Men, as well as the Hearts of
Kings and Princes, are in the hands of God, and their motions directed by his
Providence. And after all, let me tell the Vindicator once more, that that
little Contrivance and Formula of an Address blew up their pretended Assembly:
and let me tell him more, yet (tho I pretend to no acquaintance in Political
things) that it is very probable that those very Laws by which the Ringleaders
of Presbytery thought to secure their Tyranny for ever, will occasion its fall
and ruin, though they endeavor to support it by the Pens and Lungs of all its
Associates.

I could name many other Inconsistencies, I have no room for them: every other
Line is stuffed with such mean and scurrilous Railings that it is nauseous to
repeat them; yet I cannot but take notice of his Vanity. He treats his
Adversaries with scorn and contempt. The Author of the History of the General
Assembly he treats as a Sciolist, and as a Momus, and he is enraged that he
should presume Page 183. and Page 169.
to write that one of the Presbyterian Doctors could not speak Latin. Such an
Affront was not to Mr. Gilbert Rule.
be endured by a man that had signalized himself so much in Controversial
Feats, and therefore I advise you when you meddle with the Presbyterions, to
make your Approaches with all possible Caution and Reverence. A Presbyterian
had rather be accused of Adultery, Sodomy, or Incest, than to be thought
Ignorant, and this is the reason why the Author of that History is lashed with
all the severities of Satyr, and the Vindicator would have forgiven him any
thing rather than the least Insinuation of being ignorant. Alas! this was not
to be be endured that one of their Leaders, and who had made a remarkable
Figure, should be thus run down and exposed to laughter. For though the
Presbyterians look very demure and grave, you mistake them, if you think them
Stoics: If you venture to say any thing that may rob them of that pleasant
Imagination of their own Grandeur, that lovely idea that they have of
themselves, and their extraordinary performances.

But I must tell you what occasioned his heavy displeasure against the Author
of the History of the General Assembly, That Author gives one Instance why he
thought Mr. Gilbert Rule did not understand thoroughly the things that he wrote
of, because when he Cites the Epistle of St. Jerome to Evagrius, and from thence
Cites the Sentence you see in the Margin Sancti Hieron. Epist. ad Evagr. Quid
facit Episcopus quod non facit Presbyter excepta ordinatione.
he must needs force the word ordinatio in that Epistle to signify the
Ordering of the Meetings. This Exposition the Author of that History (such an
Infidel he is) thinks a little Paradoxical, if not downright Ignorance; because
no Ecclesiastical Writer in that, or any former Age understood any such thing
by that word so placed, as it is in that Epistle; besides there is no mention of
any meeting near that word, that determine it to that signification. And since
this Exposition was so very odd, the Author of that History did treat it and
the Inventer of it very familiarly. Besides, others do think that it this
Exposition be received, it will oblige us to understand St. Jerome, in many
places, in a Sense contrary to the Opinion of all former Ages.

Thus I find St. Jerome informs us that such and such a man was Ordinatus ab
Apostolis Episcopus of Catalogus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum.
such a place, therefore the meaning must be that such a man was appointed to
meet the Apostle at such a place. However the Vindicator treats him as a
Sciolist, a Momus, a poor sequacious Animal, that follows such as went before
him. But if he had been acquainted with the penetrating Genius of Mr. Rule and
others, he had no doubt understood the Fathers better. It is very difficult to
guess what to impute this extravagant Fancy to, he thought it dangerous to
allow that Ordinatio did signify the Imposition of Hands, at least he wished
such a power might not be granted to a Bishop, and therefore he will have
Ordinatio in that Epistle of St. Jerome to Evagrius, to signify the ordering of
something, though that thing be not named in St. Jreom; and if it signifies the
ordering of something (as the Vindicator profoundly Reasons,) why not the
ordering of a Meeting? And if it was the ordering of a Meeting? Why not the
ordering of an Ecclesiastical Meeting? Yet all this time it is not determined
whether this ordering of the Meeting be an Authoritative appointing of the time
when they should meet, and what they should treat of, or only presiding as
Moderator amongst them, when the Collective body themselves appointed the
meeting. Because, I say, this is left uncertain; perhaps the Vindicator will
judge it most convenient to adhere to the last. If he had said, that Ordinatio
signified the ordering of a Dromedary it had been more to his purpose, for
certainly the ordering of such an Animal made not so great a distinction
between a Bishop and Presbyter as the ordering of Ecclesiastical Meetings.

How contrary such a fancy is to the received exposition of that word, will
best appear when we consider other places in the works of S. Jerome, where the
word Ordinare is made use of, and let us suppose that the word must be
interpreted according to the new Critic. Thus we find St. Jerome, Comment. 1.
Epist. ad Timothe. Cap. 3. ab initio Primum laicos instituit de quibus optimi
quique in facordotium eliguntur and sic dicit quales debeant ordinari. Then the
meaning must be according to this late discovery, that the Apostle declared
such as were fit to be appointed to meet. Again, S. Jerome in his Comment on the
Epist. to Titus in those words: For this cause left I thee in Crete that thou
might ordain, He has these words, Quae desunt recto tenore corrige and tunc
demum presbyteros poteris ordinare, cum omnes in Ecclesia fuerint recti, when
all have been blameless in the Church, then thou may appoint Presbyters to
meet. And again, in his Catalogue Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum, speaking of S.
James the Brother of our Lord, Jacobus qui appellatur frater Domini cognomento
justus -- Post Passionem Domini statim ab Apostolis Hierosolymorum Episcopus
ordinatus, the meaning must be, that he was appointed by the Apostles to meet
at Jerusalem. And in the same Book it is said again, Timotheus autem Ephesiorum
Episcopus ordinatus a Beato Paulo, that is to say, Timothy the Bishop was
appointed by S. Paul to meet at Ephesus. Again, Polycarpus Joannis Apostoli
discipulus and ab eo Smyrnae Episcopus ordinatus, totius Asiae princeps fuit. I
need add no more testimonies to make this Critical observation more ridiculous,
and I defic all that ever looked into the Presbyterian Books to find any thing
so palpably ignorant and foolish, as this exposition of that passage in S.
Hierom, except it be the Vindicators Notion of decretum praedamnatum, which I
shall examine before I end this Letter, and yet I do not remember that ever I
read any Man more proud and supercilious; but Ignorance and Pride go ordinarily
together. I shall not contend with him about this nonsensical Whimsey, I wish
with all my heart he had writ a Book in Quarto of such Expositions of the most
difficult places in the Fathers* and I dare assure him such Books would be read
by the Youth in the Universities with far greater Delight than his Vindication
of the Kirk of Scotland. And I have a far greater Opinion of the knowledge of
most of his Brethren, than to think that there are two of them in the Nation
(except it be Mr. Russel and Mr. Gourlay) that can agree with him in this
Exposition; the reason why I mention it here is not to dispute with him any
farther concerning it, but to give you an Instance of his insufferable Pride
and Vanity that he resents the least Contradiction to his Nonsense with so much
bitterness and indignation Nulli patentius reprehenduntur, quam qui maxim
laudari merentur. Plin. Ep. 20. lib. 7.
.

Another Instance to the same purpose we have again p. 183. The Author of the
History of the General Page 183.
Assembly said, That such as were thrust into Universities and Colleges by the
Presbyterian Faction were short of their Predecessors. This nettles the
Vindicator, who, (if his Tacit. Convitia spreta exolescunt, si irascare agnita
videntur.
sufficiencies be such as he fancies) should have slighted it. And therefore he
compares the men of his way with their Predecessors, (I suppose he must mean
such as are lately promoted into the Seminaries of Learning) if the Vindicator
means Mr. Rules Predecessors in the College of Edinburgh that are already dead,
He is extravagantly impertinent; If he mean the Masters lately ejected, I
assure him, they never compared themselves nor their Sufficiencies with any
dead nor alive; the more any man knows the less he thinks of it; and though
Knowledge in it self be very valuable, yet such Thrasonical Boastings of it are
very opposite to the nature of it. It may be the Vindicator thinks that the
ejected Masters wrote so advantageously of themselves: but if that be his
mistake, I dare assure him they had no hand in any History of the Assembly, or
of any affairs relating As to the Characters given to some of them, neither
they nor the Author of that History was to be blamed for it.
to it. And if such as love these Masters speak kindly of them, when they are
expelled by a prevailing Faction, he need not take it ill, far less is there
any necessity to run them down with such loud and saucy Comparisons Tullius
Orat. in Caecil. Nam cum omnis arrogantia odiosa est, tum illa Ingenii atque
eloquentiae multo molestissima.
. He instances in four particulars, wherein he thinks the present Masters may
compare with their Predecessors, viz. The Knowledge of Books, useful Learning,
Prudence to direct the Studies of the Youth, Grammar, and the knowledge of the
learned Languages Nam levia ingenia quia nihil a-h bent nihil sibi detrabunt,
magno ingenio multaque nihilominus habituro convenit etiam simplex very erroris
confessio. Celsus de Medic. lib. 8.
. If it be so, it is still so much the better, but it is very difficult for any
man that was entirely a stranger to his Predecessors, to know what Books they
recommended or were themselves acquainted with. But the Author mentioning
casually Mr. Gilbert Rule's want of Latin, brought the Vindicator into this
lofty strain of Comparisons, no doubt it was to let the World see how well he
understood the Roman Authors, that he cites Plutarch and Simonides in Latin,
but a little Latin may go very far if it be dexterously managed, and it may be
worth his while to consider the direction Buchan. Francise. Novi ego qui tantum
tor quinq latina teneret
Verba, sed ingenii sic dexteritate valebat,
Ut quocunque loco, de re quacunque parata,
Semper and ad nutum posita in statione teneret.

Buchanan gave the Franciscans. But if he would be entreated to put on a more
cheerful humor, I would tell him freely my opinion on the whole matter; and
that is, that a man may be learned, and judicious, and know a great many
excellent Books, and reason closely and yet not speak the Latin readily; so
that there is no necessity to appear buffy and out of humor, tho it were said
that he did not speak Latin purely and fluently, that accomplishment depends
upon long practice and upon all Revolutions (and sometimes without them) the
public Schools have their Factions, and some are ready to censure what is not
justly censureable, and this might occasion the Boys to be a little more severe
than perhaps was allowable, when this Rabbi spoke something instead of Latin
that was neither Latin nor Scotch.

But I must tell him withal what I heard from eye and ear Witnesses in (and
this I have more credible Attestations than any of the Testimonies the
Vindicator brings to disparage the Clergy) That the said Mr. Rule did publicly
in his Prelections in plenis Academiae comiti is, say, That one that did so and
so, as the Church of England did, was guiltus Idolatriae; nor have I this from
the younger Boys of that House, but from such as need not be named and cannot
reasonably be suspected of lying. And I must tell Mr. Rule, tho such an unhappy
Trip would vilify him amongst the Students, yet it never lessens him in my
Opinion, because ones Imagination may be so fixed upon the thing, that he
forgets what Language he ought to speak. But I will tell you of another thing
that I think was yet worse.

At a public Commencement, apprehending that a Gentleman who was disputing
against the Praeses did bear too hard upon him; He got up very gravely, and
spoke to the Praeses thus, Domine Praeses, require illum ut proponat Argumentum
categorice. It is true, that require illum is Latin; for (if I remember right)
it may be met with in Eunuch. Terent. But in a sense vastly different from what
was intended by Mr. Rule. For the sense intended by Mr. Rule no doubt, was that
the Praeses would oblige the Opponent to be more methodical. and if that be the
meaning, it could not be more unhappily expressed, for requirere aliquem in true
Latin signifies to search for one again and again, to see where he may be
found. I shall give you one Instance more, It is this, Mr. Rule finding Mr.
Magnus Prince.
that one of the Students in a Harrangue, advanced some things that were
unagreeable to him, and favorable to some of the Masters that were lately
ejected, He got up and offered to silence the Youth, and said, That ille
diolamat contra starum Regni, He meant no doubt the late Convontion and
Parliament, and any thing against them in the old Latin was contra Ordines
Regni, how this ought to be expressed after the Reformation I know not. I can
make no Apology for keeping you so long to such Importinencies, but who can
help it: Why shall men give themselves the trouble to answer Books so
accurately as the Vindicator pretends to do, that there must not be a Cobweb in
all their foldings unswept. This put the Vindicator upon many impertinent
Essays, and if I had time to insist upon them I could furnish you with very
pleasant Instances out of his Answers to Mr. Morer's Letter. But the Vindicator
must refute accurately; and this obliges him to condescensions below Gravity
and Manhood. Every where we have visible marks of the Vindicators Genius, every
where he stoops so low when he has nothing to pick up but straws and broken
Pins, the Spirit of Contradiction eats out the vitals of his Soul, and ever and
anon puts him upon silly and extravagant importinencies: For to nothing else
can it be imputed than to his impardonable vanity -- his wishing this Sciolist
or some other would attempt the refuting his Books.

I must confess, I read his Vindications and his pretended Answer to the
Ironicum, and if he be not improved since he wrote those Tracts, he deserves no
particular Answer, for his Explication of S. Jerome's Epistle, and his Decretum
praedamnatum (of which hereafter) are Indications of his groundless and
illiterate Fopperies: if he had defended himself by the common Pleas of learned
Presbyterians, he ought to be treated with Civility and Discretion; but when he
presumes to dictate either blasphemous Nonsense, (such as his decretum
praedamnatum) or visionary and childish Romances (such as his fancy of the
meaning of Ordinatio in S. Jerome's Epistle) he should in this case be treated
according to his Character, for it is not possible that so much ignorance could
dwell but in the company of so much Pride, and therefore I appeal to all the
Scots Presbyterians, if ever they yet discovered any such monstrous Nonsense
written or said by any man that pretended to have read but one System in his
lifetime, and yet this Mormo of a Scholar must forsooth strat with so much
insolence and vanity, as if he were teaching some Americans, who were never
acquainted with the civilized part of Mankind. There have been many attempts
used by different Parties to expose one another for their Ignorance and
Immoralities, but I defy all men to name one Instance of greater Ignorance,
either before or after the Reformation than this one Notion of his Decretum
praedamnatum, and yet forsooth he must pretend to explain and defend the
Calvinian System, and takes occasion by an innocent Sentence or two, to thrust
himself into this Scuffle without considering whether he understood the
Controversy or not, but I leave him to the Chastisement of others.

Good Nature and Christian Modesty teach us to hide and extenuate the
weaknesses of others; but when those very men pretend to give Rules to all
mankind, they ought to be put in mind that it is not yet time for them to
appear so arrogant and presumptuous. Affectation is the meanest Vice, and an
intolerable piece of Hypocrisy; we are not so ugly by our natural defects, as
by the Accomplishments that we counterfeit, and this is the Hereditary
uncurable Disease of our Pedling little Reformers. They cannot endure to follow
the common Sentiments of Mankind, they are all for heights, and singularities.
He that walks not in the common Road, where the way is safe, must be silly, and
bypocondriack, or proud, and designing; and therefore the Spirit of
Christianity teaches us to believe and practice the indisputable Truths of our
Religion, more than the peculiar Opinions of broken Schismatics, and lesser
Fraternities. Sometimes I have had some kind Thoughts toward the Quakers; but
when I considered that they needlessly forsake the innocent Customs of Mankind,
the Universally acknowledged Rules of Decency, and the Universal Tradition of
the Church, I must think that they are led by a Spirit of Delusion and Pride.
Nothing recommends us to God more than true Humility, and it is an undeniable
proof of Integrity and Self denial to comply with the innocent Customs of the
World, and therefore our Savior left us an Example, by which we may in the
midst of all tentations live in the World, and yet continue unspotted by its
infection. I have digressed two far, not from what I designed, but from the
Vindicators account of things.

I am afraid I may get upon the Finger-ends, because I did not name my
Witnesses for the Latin Eleganeies that I lately mentioned; but if he waits to
the Bookseller whose name is prefixed, he shall know as many Witnesses as are
necessary, and forty more such Barbarisms.

To end, and to complete this Character of the Vindicator, I might mention his
apparent Shufflings and Tergiversations, for when the Outrages done to the
Clergy are open and notorious, then he extenuates it as no great Injury, when
some of them were beat upon the Head, and Legs, and others of them made to go
through deep waters in the midst of Winter.

But among all the Flights of his Invention there is none more remarkable than
this unwary concession, that Ecclesiastical Page 164.
Judicatories that enquire into Scandals are not obliged to follow the Forms of
other Courts. I thought that the Forms of Civil Courts were wisely appointed
partly to prevent our being surprised, partly to hinder (as far as humane
Prudence could prevent) all Forgeries, and Combinations, against the innocent,
and that the Forms were but the external Fences, that the Law invented to guard
Justice and Equity. But this Author tells us that its doubted (no doubt amongst
Learned Men) whether the Ecclesiastical Court be obliged to follow such Forms.
It is very odd that the Laity among the Scots Presbyterians, who pretend to be
at the greatest Remove from Popery, shall thus calmly stoop to the most
intolerable slavery of the Inquisition.

Next to this Concession is his fair Advertisement to the Church of England,
that indeed the Covenanters do not think themselves obliged to reform the
Church of Page
England, unless they are called to it; but if the Godly in England call them,
then all their Ammunition must be employed to serve their dear Brethren in
England.

Next to this, let me instance his shameful Shuffling about the Toleration
lately granted to Presbyterians in Scotland, he tells us, that they expressed
as much as Page 5.
they were capable their dislike of the Toleration given to the Papists for
their Herosies and Idolatry, yet their Agents, then at Court, wrote Books (such
as they were) Mr. J. S.
pleading that the Penal Laws ought to be Repealed; but withal the Vindicator
adds that they do not grudge Page 6.
Liberty to any others who can show as good a Warrant for their way of Worship
as they do, i. e. they have a Divine Right for their way, and none others can
have a Divine Right if they have it; because their way is different from all
others; and therefore at bottom they are against Toleration as the most
mischievous thing in the World: and in the time of the late Troubles they
exclaimed against it, as a thing worse than the Calves of Dan and Bethel. Now
you have no other Character of the Vindicator from me, than what I have
extracted from his Book, nor do I conclude him to be habitually guilty of such
shuffling and disingenuity; but single Acts may grow into rooted Habits. He is
so deeply tinctured with the fulleness of his Faction; that he will rather
question whether the Body of the Sun is luminous, than admit the least scruple
concerning the Divine Right of Presbytery.

The next thing I promised to Discourse of, was his Theological Reasonings that
occasionally falls under his Consideration, when he pleads the Innocence of the
Presbyterians.

It is true, the Vindicator does not designedly insist on those Theological
heads that I am shortly to speak of, but incidentally they fall in his way; but
he Page
cannot forbear his venomous Squibs, when he mentions the practice of the
Catholic Church, that mostly expose their Novelty and Enthusiasm. The first I
take notice of is his Censure of the Catholic Observation of Christmas; The
Author of the second Letter did very iudiciously observe how diametrically
opposite the Page 25.
western Phanaticks are to the spirit and practice of the Catholic Church,
That they should begin their Barbarities against the Clergy upon that very day
upon which the Church did celebrate the Nativity of our blessed Savior; and
which the Angelical Hosts of Heaven did magnify with triumphant Songs; the
Vindicator cannot let this Observation Page 25.
pass without his Theological Animadversions. And he tells us in the first
place, that the Author of that Letter valued himself upon this fine Notion,
certainly the Author could not value himself upon this Notion, but he had great
reason to value the universal practice of the Christian Church from the first
plantations of Christianity. Next the Vindicator tells us, that it is
ridiculous to assert that that day was celebrated by the Court of Heaven. What?
says he, Did the Court of Heaven keep the Anniversary day? This is profoundly
wise. There is no standing before the wit and smartness of such Repartees.
What, did not the Court of Heaven celebrate the birth of our blessed Savior?
And was not the Anniversary Solemnity of this Festival a just imitation of what
the Court of Heaven did? But he asks if the Court of Heaven did keep an
Anniversary? For the great Danger is in that word Anniversary. But might not
the Christian Church take care that this glorious Mystery should never be
forgotten? And was it not reasonable that our Posterity should remember it, as
well as they to whom it was first revealed? and could the Christian Church take
more effectual methods to preserve the memory of it than by appointing this
Anniversary Festival? He grants that the Institution is very ancient, but that
the Church did keep it in all Ages is said without book; If he means that there
are no Presbyterian Books that give Evidence for this Festival, we grant it;
but if he mean that the Church did not observe it from the very days of the
Apostles, we desire to know when it began? and in what Period of the Church it
was not observed? and then we may see more clearly into the Origin of this
Festival: And tho it had not been from the beginning the Christian Church may
continue the practice of it upon the best reasons. He asks again, If our
Savior was born upon the 25th day of December, but this is childish and
impertinent, when the Church did order the Commemoration of that Mystery on the
25. of December, she did not decide that Chronological Nicety, whether our
Savior was born on the 25. of December, nor was it needful to increase the
Devotions of the Church, that they should be performed with regard to one day
more than to another, as if they depended upon such a Critical Minute of time,
I hope the Vindicator knows that the 25. of December in France is not the 25.
of December in Britain; and yet the Christians of either communion celebrate
the Nativity of our blessed Savior with regard to the Calculations of the
Country in which they live, nay, he may know that there are Confiderable
Objections against the common Era of the Christians. But the Vindicator Vid.
Mr. Medes Discourse of Christmas.
thinks that such an Anniversary day is not to be kept by Gods Appointment. But
has not God appointed us to obey the Apostles and their Successors our lawful
Ecclesiastical Rulers to the end of the World: And may not they regulate the
public Solemnities and returns of Gods Worship? Is there any thing in this
Regulation but what has a natural tendency to preserve and propagate the great
truths of the New Testament? With what impudence then dare we refuse obedience
to the universal Church, when her Constitutions are so just, so wise and so
agreeable to the whole tenor of the Gospel? If all the Ecclesiastical
Constitutions from the days of the Apostles had been written in the Bible,
could one read it in a thousand years? There was a plain necessity in that case
to have continued the immediate inspiration in the Church until the
consummation of all things. Upon this their Hypothesis Reason becomes useless
to order the public Solemnities of the Church, the Christian Faith being once
revealed, they needed not the assistance of a new Revelation to order its
public Solemnities; For when the festivities and Fasts of the Church were only
conversant about the Articles of Faith already revealed, it is supposed that
common sense and discretion must cloth the great Mysteries of our Religion,
with such vehicles of time, place, and public Solemnity, as best preserve
their reverence, and transmit them to Posterity. But this is an unfortunate
mistake, an original Blunder of the whole Party; and as long as they keep to
this Maxim they must necessarily continue stubborn and ungovernable, and proof
against the wisest Constitutions of the Christian Church: for they must have
Scripture for such things as could not be contained in the Scripture; but he
fortifies this with a Latin Sentence, as if Nonsense could change its Nature
Quia scriptum non legimus ideo jussum non credimus.
by being put into Latin. For the Question is not of Articles of Faith, but
concerning the Constitutions of the universal Church. But perhaps the
Vindicator might yield to the Observations of Christmas, if the Observation of
it were not anniversary. There is some hidden dangerous Plot in that word
Anniversary, as if our Posterity were not to be educated in that Faith which we
believe. And so Enthusiastic our Presbyterians are become, that they broach
Principles unknown to all the subdivisions of Dissenters in England; and tho
more knowing and intelligent among them never scruple the observation of an
Anniversary day, since they yearly commemorate the dreadful Fire of London, by
Fasting and Prayers.

From all this I conclude, That it is very dangerous, if not impious, to
separate from the Church in those excellent Constitutions that have been
received from the beginning, and in all Countries where the name of Jesus has
been worshipped, such Constitutions and Solemnities have been derived from the
Apostles or Apostolic times.

When the World was enlightened by the knowledge of the Son of God, he did not
extinguish the light of Reason, but he supposes it, and reasons from it, and
strengthens it, and there is nothing more strongly inclined toward God, and
the Communications of his Spirit, than true and unbiassed Reason. Therefore
such Constitutions [as the reason of all Mankind is agreed in) have nothing in
them contrary to the purity of our Religion.

If Anniversary days and Festivals have been profaned among the Pagans to the
worship of Idols, why A short digression.
may they not be sanctified by the true Object of Worship, and the honor of
Jesus Christ? Public Solemnities have nothing in their own nature that is
reproveable no more than the motion of the Sun, or the vicissitude of Seasons,
if any part of our time be abused to excess or riot, or the worship of an Idol,
we are liable to the Justice of God.

But when we return from Idols to the true God, when we change our excess into
fasting, and prayer, and when the whole Scene is become pure, what is there in
all this that can be blamed? Do not we see all Nations agree in this, that
public Solemnities, and anniversary Festivals, and Fasts are necessary to the
being and beauty of Religion, even those Nations that are at the greatest
distance from our Customs, our Language, our Laws, and way of living, upon the
Conversion of Nations to the Christian Religion; some of the places where they
worshipped their Idols have been dedicated to the true God; and was it not a
happy Victory over the Kingdom of Darkness when the public Solemnities of
Idolatry, times and places, have changed their Objects, their Exercises, and
their End.

It is true, the great Anniversaries of the Jewish Religion were appointed
immediately by divine Authority. But had not they other Anniversaries not
immediately appointed by God, and do you read that ever the Prophets did
reprove the Jews for such Anniversaries. They did indeed reprove their
negligence and indevotion in them, but the thing it self was acknowledged
reasonable and prudent, and a very powerful instrument of true Religion when
managed with Contrition, true Simplicity and Piety. Zach. Did ye at all fast
unto me says the Lord. The Fasts mentioned here are of humane appointment, and
yet anniversary.

Our Savior was present at the Feast of the Dedication, for which there was
not any immediate Divine Institution; and though he had not been present, if it
had been superstitious he had certainly reproved it, and given directions
against such usages in the general. To shake off all the externals of Religion,
is as dangerous as the multiplying of them, the one is the Error of the
Romanists, and the other the superstition of the Dissenters. It is certain that
nothing preserves Knowledge of Christian Religion amongst the Body of the
People more than the Festivals of the Church; for it is not left to the
Arbitrary or Extemporary Fits of Devotion, but the Church by her excellent
Discipline orders the matter so, that it is not possible to forget the Faith
unto which we have been once Baptized: but amongst the Presbyterians in
Scotland, the People are taught by their Leaders to despise all Forms, such
great souls ought not to be fettered to the Rules and Methods of the Universal
Church, and therefore it is very rare to find a Child in the West of Scotland,
that can repeat the Commandments or the Creed (I mean the Children of
Presbyterian Parents) and by such Enthusiastic pretenses, Atheism is
insensibly promoted, and the Body of the People alienated from the simplicity
of Christian Religion, and scarcely will they allow any man to be acquainted
with true Religion that mentions those first Principles of it. It is not
possible to tell how much their opposition to Forms and Festivals of the Church
has infatuated their People, there is nothing can make a Clown in the West of
Scotland laugh so heartily, as when the Curate recommends to their Children the
Creed, the Lords Prayer, and Ten Commandments; and therefore they have no
opinion of any Man's understanding, unless he entertain them with Discourses of
Gods unsearchable decrees, of Justification before Conversion, and how the
Convictions of natural Conscience may be distnguished from the Convictions that
proceed from the Spirt of God: to observe the Festivals of the Church is but a
piece of antiquated Superstition. But we ought to remember that the stated
Festivals and Fasts of the Church do preserve, and increase true Devotion and
Mortification. Fasting is acknowledged a necessary Instrument of Religion by
all Nations who profess any Religion at all. It is not enjoined, but suposed by
our Savior: why may not then the Church regulate and direct the Public
Solemnities of Fasting, as well as of Prayer. There is nothing so proper to fix
our attention as Fasting, it delivers the Soul from the oppressions of the
Body, and restores it to its true and native Sovereignty over our Lusts and
Passions. The stated Periods of Fasting oblige the most stubborn and impenitent
to think of his Soul, and the visible Practice of the Church Preach Repentance
more effectually, and make more lasting Impressions than the loose and
indefinite Homilies of self-conceited men.

The External Solemnities of Religion may be abused (as the most excellent
things are) when they are left to the Conduct of humane weakness; but it is not
possible to preserve Religion among the Body of Mankind, without those Vehicles
of Form Vid. Dr. Gunning of the Lent-Fast.
and Order. Nothing hinders the Reformation of the Grecian Churches, from the
variety of their Errors and Superstitions, so much as the open neglect of
Fasting We may seek for rest in new ways, but we shall never find it but in the
old.
among the Protestants, and this Practice is not to be defended, but rather
lamented and amended. What a Cruelty is it in all the Sectaries to deprive the
People of the Public helps of Prayer and Fasting? Who can justify this, that
considers the many Encumbrances, Tentations, Weaknesses, that we daily
encounter? They that set up Methods of their own, in opposition to the Wisdom
of the Church, in all Ages may amuse the People for a while, but can produce
nothing that is solid or useful. It is certain that the Grecian Churches had,
long ere now, made an utter Apostasy from the Christian Religion, if the
ancient and fixed Discipline of the Church did not retain them in the Faith,
and when we consider how much the Religion that we are Baptized into, triumphs
over Sensualities and Concupiscence, we cannot but acknowledge the Wisdom and
Beauty of the ancient Discipline. The most useful things in Art or Nature, may
be sadly abused by Folly or Ignorance. We are not to separate from the Roman
Church, further than they have separated from the Wise and Primitive
Constitution of the first Ages of Christianity; and all the Protestants abroad
seem to agree in this Truth, for they Preach and Pray Publicly upon the great
Fasts and Festivals of the Church. The public Seasons of Devotion are the
Catechism of the People. It is true, when there is no day fixed for the Uniform
Celebration of such a Mystery it may be remembered by some; but it is not
credible that all the People will remember it; but when the day is fixed we
cannot forget it, and from our Infancy we are easily trained in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord, and in the simplicity of Christian Religion, free from
Jewish Superstition (touch not, taste not, handle not, with which all our
Sectaries are unhappily Leavened) as well as from giddiness and Enthusiasm.
Colloss.


The next thing that I mention, is his Accusation against the Episcopal Church,
that they were guilty of Schism: For, He tells us that he knows no Schism, but
such as was caused by his Opposites, and this is pleasant enough. There is a
Page
Company of men lately started up in the Christian Church, and if the Universal
Church does not immediately strike Sail to their Novelties, all must be
concluded Schismatics. By our Baptismal Vows we are obliged to preserve the
Unity of the Catholic Church, we are Members of that visible Body, that
worship the true God through Jesus Christ, and consequently we are obliged to
worship God in Unity and in Society, nor can we separate from any sound part of
the Catholic Church, that does not require unlawful Conditions of Communion,
and such as are forbidden by that God whom we Worship. Upon this Hypothesis, I
think it impossible for the Presbyterians of Scotland to defend themselves
against the Charge of Schism in its most rigorous and formal Notion.

First, Because they separate from all Churches Ancient and Modern, there is
not now a Church upon Earth with whom they think they may Communicate without
fear of being polluted. The Protestants of France observe the Festivals of the
Church, as also the Protestants of Geneve and Swisserland, and the Calvinists
in Germany do the same. As for the Lutherans of Germany, Denmark, and
Sweedland, we dare not so much as once name them, they have all of them
Liturgies and Festivals, and Organs, and Divine Hymns, distinct from the Psalms
of David. As for the Socinians of Poland, though they agree in some things with
them; yet they would no doubt refuse their Communion. They must refuse, upon
their Principles, the Communion of the Grecian Church, and all the Subdivisions
of it: and they cannot join with the Papists, nor yet with the Church of
England. And their Consciences could not endure to Communicate with the
Episcopal Church of Scotland, that was against their Covenants, and their
Obligations, as if a man could disingage himself from what he is obliged to, by
the Common Ties of Christianity, and the Vows of Baptism, by any Bond or
posterior Obligation of his own.

But if there be no visible Church with which they can Communicate, they are
certainly cut off from the visible Communion of Saints over the Habitable
World; and this Pharisaical singularity is so much the more hateful, that it is
abhorred by all Protestant Churches, and if the Vindicator will Read Durellus
only, he will easily see how opposite this peevishness is to the Sentiments and
Practice of all Reformed Churches. It is acknowledged by all sober men, that to
join with, or abet Schismatics, makes one guilty of Schism: and therefore the
Presbyterians can by no means require the Members of the Episcopal Church, to
join with them, who have wilfully and furiously cut themselves off from the
whole Body of Christians: but there is lately found out a wise Distinction to
save them from this blow, they can have occasional Communion with other
Churches, tho they cannot have a sixth Communion with them.

Before I consider this Distinction, let me inform you that the Ringleaders of
the former Presbyterians in Scotland never made use of any such Distinction,
they themselves reasoned against Separation upon such frivolous pretenses as
are now alleged by their Vid. Rutherford's Due right of Presbytery.
Successors; but the Presbyterians have borrowed this Distinction from English
Dissenters. And the former Presbyterians Collection of Cases against
Dissenters, by the Clergy of London.
did never separate from the Public Worship under the Episcopal Constitution;
nor did the latter Presbyterians after the Restoration, dream of it until the
year 1664. that some of the Western Bigots, as had fled to Holland, thought
that the Faction could not be supported unless People were taught that they
were obliged to leave the Communion of the Episcopal Church entirely. And
accordingly in Ann. 1664. there appeared a Seditious Pamphlet in Octavo,
Entitled, The Apologetical Relation of the Church of Scotland. And it is
impossible for any Presbyterian to name any one Book or Treatise before this
Pamphlet, that justified the Separation of Presbyterians from the Public
Reformed Worship under the Episcopal Constitution in the Church of Scotland. It
is a long time since I Read this Book, and therefore I cannot give a particular
account of it, though I remember that the Author when he comes to that
Conclusion, that the People were not to hear the Curates, he speaks with
diffidence and hesitation, and in some one place or other of that Dispute he
softens this wild and extravagant Paradox by some restrictions and limitations.
That they were not to hear them always nor constantly, but that they ought so
far to separate as to keep the Party from being swallowed up in the Communion
of the Church. Accordingly, their first Essays of Schism were but faint and
timorous, they were not in the beginning so well armed against the Remorse of
their own Consciences, for this was a Novelty, and they did not venture upon it
with that boldness and assurance that afterward appeared, to that degree that
our Governors were forced to make severe Laws against their Field Meetings,
which were justly termed by our Law the Rendezvouze of Rebellion. And though
the Bigots in the West had advanced this Paradox, Vid. Defense of King Charles
II. Government by S. G. M.
yet the Presbyterians of greatest Note and Learning took no notice of it, but
kept the Communion of the Church after the Restoration of Episcopacy as
punctually as any Mr. To. Douglas, Mr. Geo. Hutchinson, Mr. Sam. Rutherford,
Mr. J. W. and many others.
Church-malt. And it is very observable that all the Presbyterian Ministers in
Scotland, made use of the Christian Forms of the Lords Prayer, Creed, and
Doxology, until Olivers Army invaded Scotland, and the Independent Chaplains in
that Army thought their own Dispensation was above that of Geneva. Upon this,
such of the Presbyterians as would recommend themselves to the Usurper, and
such as had his Ear, forbore those Forms in the Public Worship, and by degrees
they fell into desitetude (for it was not Creditable to be out of the Fashion)
and yet they have the Confidence to justify their Separation from the
Episcopal Church, partly because such such Christian Forms are retained in the
Public Worship. And though they dispute against the use of Forms, yet Those
Christian Forms were rejected by Bastard Presbyterians that grew upon the
Independent Stock.
they pronounce the Apostolic Benediction after Sermon, as others do, except
some few who love rather to Paraphrase it, than keep to its Original
simplicity. The unhappy temper of Schismatics leads them to do every thing
against the Spirit and Practice of the Church; and though the Canonical and
Universal Methods of the Church are tempered with regard to our weakness and
infirmities, yet they love to fly in the Face of their Mother, when she
tenderly binds up their Wounds, and offers her Assistance to prevent their Ruin
and Danger.

I have almost forgot to enquire into the meaning of that distinction of
occasional and fixed Communion. Why may not one do that constantly (since the
Common Ties of Christianity oblige him) that he may do occasionally? But if the
meaning be that their Consciences allow them now and then to hear an Episcopal
Presbyter Preach, or Read, though they dare not venture upon the highest Acts
of Communion, such as receiving of the Lords Supper, at this rate they may have
this occasional Communion with Papists, Grecians, Jews, and Mahumetans, for
they all teach some great and common Truths which they dare not refuse.

But secondly, It is apparent that the Scots Presbyterians are Schismatics in
the strictest Sense, because by their Principles they must needs profess, that
if they had lived one hundred and fifty years before the first Council of Nice,
there was then a necessity to separate from the Unity of the Church. For then
all those things that they scruple at in the Public Worship were practiced by
the Universal Church, the Solemnities, and Festivities, the Public Fasts, the
Altars, the Hierarchy of Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon. Nay, the Dignity of
Metrapolitans is supposed as Ancient and Venerable by the first Council of
Nice. So upon the Presbyterian Hypothesis, they should have been obliged if
they had lived amongst the Ancients then, to keep up distinct and separate
Conventicles, when the Purity of their Lives, and the Glory of Martyrdom, and
Patience, made them shine to the Confusion of their Enemies, when their Zeal
for God made them victorious over all the Powers of Darkness, when by their
Fastings and their Prayers, they crucified the Flesh with all its Lusts and
Affections, when they taught the Gospel in its Majesty, and Simplicity, and
bafled the Objection of the Pagans by their heavenly Conversation. Let my Soul
be with those first Christians, I would choose their Company at all adventures,
without the least fear of either Christmas, Easter, or Good Friday.

But thirdly, The present Presbyterians must be Schismatics, by the Doctrine
and Practice of their Predecessors. This I have touched a little before.

Fourthly, I desire the Presbyterians to name some Schismatics in the Records
of Ecclesiastical History, that are now acknowledged by the common consent of
all Churches to be Schismatics, and then I enquire what it was that made them
such; and if this be not agreeable to the Presbyterians more eminently, than to
any rank of the ancient Schismatics, I am mistaken.

But fifthly, They themselves do not deny (nor can they) but that they are
Schismatics in St. Cyprian's Notion of Schism, since to separate from ones own
Bishop was a just and Apostolical Notion of Schism. And the Presbyterians of
Scotland are by so much the more inexcusable in that they have stubbornly and
factiously Conspired against the Apostolical Hierarchy of Bishop, Presbyter,
and Deacon.

The next thing that I remark, is his Censure of the I piscopal Clergy for
Preaching Morality, page 62. and 63. He tells us that the Author of the Second
Letter wrote, That the Episcopal Party understand the Christian Philosophy
better, and that it was never understood or preached better in Scotland, than
under Episcopacy. The Vindicator replies very wittily, That he thought the
Commendation of a Minister had been rather to understand Christian Divinity,
than Christian Philosophy. But softly, Sir, I do not see that nice distinction
between Christian Divinity, and Christian Philosophy; for if Philosophy be
truly Christian, it must be refined upon no lower Standard than the Morals
that our Savior practiced, and recommended; and is not this Christian Divinity
in it; Nature and Tendency? The Author of that Letter did not understand by
Philosophy, the lame and defective Systems of the Pagans, but rather that
Heavenly and Spiritual Rule delivered by our Savior. I hope he has not the
Impudence to accuse the Clergy that they recommended the Pagan Morals as a
perfect Rule of Life to their Hearers; or that they themselves did neither
believe nor exhort others to believe the Mysteries of Faith, the Credenda of
our Religion. It may be they did fortify some excellent Arguments among the
Philosophers with Christian Motives, and what the Philosophers (who spoke of
the Immortality of the Soul with dissidence and hesitation) could not recommend
but faintly: the Christian Preachers did assert boldly, since the Resurrection
of our Savior from the Dead, was an invincible and infallible Argument, not
only of our Resurrection, but of the Glory that shall afterward be revealed.
There is nothing truly excellent among the Pagan Writers, but what is in one
place or other for the Matter found in the New Testament, and purer Morals, and
greater heights than the Pagans could discern. Nor can I think but that the
Preachers of the Gospel may make very good use of Pagan Moralists. I always
thought Seneca a very excellent Book, but if Seneca be Christianised (as the
Vindicator speaks) I cannot see what fault the Vindicator can find with Seneca,
or Marcus Aurelius, or any of our Ancient Friends. For certainly Christian
Morality in its true extent and latitude, is nothing else but Evangelical
Obedience and Holiness, without which no man Heb.
shall see God. And I believe the Author of that Letter intended no more, than
that the Episcopal Clergy did plainly and seriously recommend to their Hearers
the Reformation of their (...) according to the Christian Standard. And truly,
Sir, notwithstanding the Vindicators Sarcastic Paraphrase, I think this is very
good Philosophy, nay more, I think Moral Philosophy never arrived at its true
Elevation and Meridian Purity, but by the Doctrine of our Savior and his
Apostles; and does the Vindicator know better Philosophy than what is taught in
the Sermon upon the Mount, and in the 12th. to the Romans, we Preach that the
Wisdom which is from above is pure, peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy, we Preach that a man endowed Jam. 3. 17.
with knowledge, should show out of a good Conversation, Jam. 1. 26.
his Works with meekness of Wisdom. We Preach That if any seem to be religious,
and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives his own heart, that this man's
Religion is vain, because true Religion, and undefiled before God and the
Father is this, to visit the Fatherless, and Widow, in their Afflictions, and
to keep himself unspotted from the world. We Preach that the Grace of God that
brings salvation, bath appeared to all men, teaching us, Tit. 2. 11, 12.
that denying ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly, in this present world. And truly, Sir, I think this
very good Morality, and the rather because we fortify our Exhortations, with
the same motives that the Apostles used, and with which the Pagan Philosophers
could not be acquainted. Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God and Tit. 2. 13, 14.
our Savior Jesus Christ who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
Works. It is very true that the Pagan Philosophers Preached against Lust and
Sensualities, and Uncleanness; but could they recommend Chastity by such
powerful and invincible motives as you meet with, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. What, know
you not that your bodies are the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you,
which ye have of God, and ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price;
therefore glorify God in your body and your spirit which are Gods. And without
all doubt S. Paul recommended to the Philippians the true use of the Moral
Philosophers, when he exhorts Phil. 4. 8. Finally Brethren whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these
things. Compare this with the place on the Margin, and hundreds of such places,
and from Galat. 5. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
them I conclude, that to Preach what the Moral Philosophers commended (though
we must Preach many things that they could not see) and to strengthen them by
Christian Motives is a thing very becoming the Ministers of the Gospel: because
it is indispensably necessary and agreeable to the Practice of our Savior, and
his Apostles. But the Vindicator tells us, Page 62. That this is the dialect of
men strongly inclined to Socinianism. I let go this mark of his spite and ill
nature, for we have no Socinians amongst the Episcopal Clergy of Scotland. And
if he understands the Socinians, they are not so very zealous for Celebrating
the Festival of Christ's Nativity and Incarnation; nor yet are they great
Enemies to Presbyterian Government, nor can they be thought zealous for any
particular Platform (were it never so agreeable to the Canons of the Ancient
Church) any further than their interest is involved. He tells us a little
after, that the preaching of some men is such morality, as Seneca and other
Heathens taught, only Christianised with some words; so the Vindicator thinks
that the morality they recommended to their Hearers was neither higher nor
purer than the Doctrines of Seneca and other Stoics; But it may be that they
have read Seneca with as much attention as he did, and can give as good an
account of the Defects of the Stoical Philosophy, and wherein it fell short of
the Christian Standard: One may easily guess whom he means, and intends to hit
by this waspish accusation. But to pursue him through all his hiding places, and
little Subterfuges, is as useless as it is wearisom. The reason why I kept you
so long on this Head, was to discover the Genius of the people we have to do
with. He tells us, this Philosophy was never much preached by the
Presbyterians: but the Philosophy that I have described was preached by S.
Paul, and consequently not opposito unto the Doctrine of Christ crucified (as
he fancies) 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24.
but rather subservient unto it, and a great confirmation of the truth and
divinity of it; It is very true, that the Princes of Philosophers understood
not the Revelations of the Gospel, but the true exercise of Reason is very
consistent with Revelation; and S. Paul's discourse to the Athenian Acts 17.
proves him a learned and solid Philosopher. And tho the Apostles were mean and
illiterate men, yet God did strengthen their Reason beyond the most accurate
Philosophers: And when he sent them forth to preach the Gospel, they became in
the strictest sense greater Philosophers than their Enomies. And tho the
Christian Religion in its beginnings appeared weak and foolish, yet when it was
narrowly enquired into, it was found to be the wisdom of God, and the power of
God: for the Apostles offered the best Reasons to convince both Jew and
Gentile, that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messins; and consequently, that there
was no other Acts. 2.
name under heaven known by which men might be saved but the name of JESUS.
They proved their Mission, and their Doctrine by their Miracles; and this was
an Argument divine, and a refragable in its nature; as it was obvious and plain
to the meanest Capacity, and therefore the Author to the Hebrews Hebr. 2. 3, 4.
concludes, that the damnation of Infidels is the most just and reasonable
thing, because infidelity it self is most inexcusable, since God did bear
witness to the Gospel by signs, and wonders, and diverse miracles and gifts of
the holy Ghost. True Philosophy Vid. Just in Mar. Dialog. cum tryph.
and Religion support one another. None can be truly religious but he that
exercises his Reason, and he that exercises his reason must of necessity be
religious. For the whole of our Religion is a reasonable (...)
service; God treats us as reasonable Creatures; he makes himself Master of our
Will, by methods suitable to his wisdom and our nature; when the light of the
Gospel enters the Soul and warms it by its direct beams and perpendicular rays,
she then chooses what is best with all her force and delight.

It is certain, that if the Moral Philosophers could lay aside their pride and
the interest of a Faction, they might be sooner gained to Christianity than
others, they could not but see the beauty and reasonableness of such excellent
Morals as were recommended in the Gospel, and were far above the lame and
defective systems of the Pagan Schools. There are no excellent Precepts amongst
the Pagans, but what are contained in the New Testament; and if we recommend
Christian virtue by Christian motives, I think the whole undertaking is very
commendable. Why the Vindicator should thus waspishly Comment on an innocent
Sentence or two of that Author, I cannot tell; but he may remember that when we
were Boys we were taught that Philosophy in its utmost extent and latitudo, was
the knowledge of divine and human things. And then Christian Philosophy is good
Christian Divinity and vice versa; but the Vindicator is afraid lest any one
may think him a stranger to Philosophy, and therefore tells us, that it may be
that they understand that as well as their Neighbors. And no doubt this
Paragraph of his, that I have examined, is a sufficient Evidence of his
Philosophical skill and knowledge.

Such another Specimen of his Candor and Ingenuity we meet with page 66. where
he again insinuates, that the Clergy are Socinians, etc. The Page 66.
Author of the second Letter had justly observed, that the Clergy could not be
erroneous, because they could sign the 39 Articles of the Church of England.
But the Vindicator replies, So can many do who every day preach against the
Doctrine contained in these Articles. And at this rate he may disprove all
external Evidences: there is no penetrating into the hearts of men, they are
only accessible to Omniscience to whom all things are naked and open. But the
Vindicator may remember, that the dissenting Ministes in and Article of a
Confession of Faith.
about London in their late agreement, require no more of any as marks of
Orthodoxy, than the subsoription of 36 Articles. The Vindicator insinuates,
that though the Clergy do subscribe them, yet they preach against them. This is
another stroke of his good Nature and Civility; and he may beconvinced long
e're now, that the Episcopal Clergy is not so very pliable to do any thing
against their Convictions in view of their worldly Interest, even when he and
his Party have been very active to reduce them to extraordinary straits and
difficulties; nay, if he will oblige me to be plain, I could tell him, where
some Ministers of that Faction were so villanously zealous against the Clergy,
that they did solicit Witnesses against them, where they themselves, or some
of their intimate Brethren were Judges. I am not to publish Names, but I can
prove this whenever it is found convenient. I know the Vindicator will be very
curious to know my Informers, but I am not obliged to be so particular, though
I am resolved by Gods assistance to perform all the promises I make to him and
his Associates.

But the next Censure that he bestows on the Clergy is of the same nature with
the former. The Author of the second Letter had said, that there were many
among the Clergy who were not inclined to be every day talking to the people of
Gods decrees and absolute reprobation, etc. Indeed, I think the Author gave a
just account of the prudence and modesty of his Brethren, but the Vindicator
lashes him here with great severity, and tells him that his discourse is
impertinent; for they do not require that one should talk always to the people
of Decrees and Reprobations. But here the Vindicator gives no great proof of
his Logic. For the phrase, every day did not imply a Metaphysical strictness,
as if the Presbyterians never preached on any other Subject but on the absolute
Decrees and Reprobation; but the plain and obvious meaning is, that
Presbyterians did frequently and indiscreetly handle such abstruse Subjects, as
neither they nor the people were able to fathom. And all such Phrases, though
they seem to imply a Logical universality must be interpreted, to intend no
more, than that such or such a thing frequently comes to pass.

The next Blow is more severe, and one had need Page 66.
to be armed Capa-pee to meet with it, But if he mean (as he must if he speak
to the purpose) that the absolute decrees of Electon and Reprobation, both
praeteritum as an act of Sovereignty, and praedamnatum as an act of Justice,
are not to be held forth or taught to the people; we abhor this as an unsound
Doctrine, and look on him as a pitiful Advocate for the Orthodoxy of the
Clergy. Thus the Vindicator is sufficiently revenged of his Adversary, who is
now more lamentably shattered than can be imagined; It is not generous in the
Vindicator thus to pursue his Victory; is it possible that such meek and calm
Saints shall thus openly expose the weakness of their Antagonists. But if the
Vindicator were out of his passion, I would entreat him to tell me in what
place of Saint Virg. Aeneid. 1. -- Tantaene animis coelestibus irae.
Paul's Epistles does he read of a Decretum praedamnatum, and what ever come of
the Calvinian or Arminian Hypothesis; I am afraid his Explication is both
conplicated Nonsense and Blasphemy. But he tells us, that he understands
Philosophy as well as his Neighbors; pray, let him tell us in which of the
Schoolmen or Protestant Calvinists did he ever read of a Decretum praedamnatum?
praeteritio and praedamnatio may be met with, but a Decretum praedamnatum is
the peculiar invention of this Tully de not. deorum, lib. 3. nihil tam absurdum
quod non dixerit aliquis philosophorum.
Philosopher. The Decree is the Act of God, and there is no act of his can be
condemned. Such an unfortunate Blunder as this is was never before seen in
print; and yet the Vindicator must tell us, that such things must be held forth
to the people, and in imitation of Saint Paul too. Truly, I think they had as
good not be held forth, but hid and laid up in the boundless Registers of
Chimera's, Nonentities, and Negations. I think this Deoretum praedamnatum may
keep company with such ancient Gentlemen of its own kindred and Family; and
ought not at all to be held forth to the people. And if you be acquainted with
the Vindicator, you may advise him to read the Calvinian Hypothesis before he
venture to explain it. And perhaps there are some about him who may expose his
explication of the decrees as much as they do his Latin reasonings against
Idolatry.

The next thing I take notice of is his historical Argument from the Culdees,
to prove that there was a Presbyterian Church in Scotland in the primitive Page:
times before Popery entered. And the plain truth is, this is the only thing
that he says, that deserves to be considered, not for any weight or historical
Truth that is in it, but because the learned Blondel made use of it to support
that imaginary Hypothesis from some Ancient Testimonies. He had met with it in
Buchanan's History, and that learned Historian took it unwarily from his
Contemporary Monks, Boctius and others, or such as were little removed from his
own Age; Blondel made use of it to serve the dissenting Apolog. pro sententia
Hieronym, p 315.
Interest in Britain. And to the end that he might make a great muster of
Testimonies, he must needs erect a Presbyterian Church in Scotland toward the
end of the second Century, or beginning of the third. If they can prove this, I
must confess it is of considerable weight; but the great misfortune is, there
are no Authors now extant upon whose Testimony an affair so distant from our
times can be reasonably founded. None within six hundred years of that Period
gives us the least evidence for it, when I say six hundred years, I do not
mean, that good Authors at the distance of seven or eight hundred years give
any Evidence for it more than their Predecessors; but when there is none to
vouch it within that Period, it is ridiculous to impose it as a piece of true
History. And our Vindicator tells us, that tho the Presbyterian Government Page
3. Vindicat. 1.
continue for some Ages in the Church of Scotland before they had Bishops: Can
he name any Church upon Earth that embraced the Christian Religion, and yet
none to write the affairs of their own time for some Ages together? But if the
writings of those ancient Presbyterians are lost; Are there no fragments of
them preserved in the writings of succeeding Ages? There were no people so
ignorant as the Monks for some Centuries before the Reformation; and yet there
was nothing that they were so ignorant in as true Ecclesiastical History. And
if they had been the most learned and accurate, what could they help themselves
in an affair of this nature when they had no certain Records The Antiquity of
our Nation does not depend on any such Monkish Legend, but may very well stand
on its former grounds, and such collateral proofs as may be borrowed from the
Roman Historians. Vid. Macken. Defense of the Royal Line.
by which they might transmit the knowledge of former times to Posterity. No
tradition of that Antiquity can be preserved without writing; why then do they
obtrude this fabulous Story, since it cannot be received by any known rules of
Credibility, we have no vestige of it from any Author that lived near those
times. The Vindicator uses to refer us in some Instances to his own little
Books, I do him a greater kindness when I refer him to the Learned Du Launoy,
and from several Treatises and Du Launoy.
reasonings of his (which now I have not at command) he may learn by what Rules
to distinguish fabulous Accounts from true and solid History, and not only from
him but from hundreds, if they do but argue from principles of common sense,
and the acknowledged rules of Logic. Logica Clerici part secunda de judici
is. Desicientibus omnibus historicis monumentis historia gentis alicujus
cognosci nequit, nec quidquam verum nisi casu de ca dici. Quot conjecturae
inanes cirea historiam sacram and Ecclesiast team, quasi certae affer^^^^^ quae
mu^^o majorem historiarum requirerent lucem, si de it is quidquam certi
slatuendum esse^?
Indeed, the Presbyterians might have given us some of the Acts of their
Assemblies, in that ancient Period, and the rules of Discipline, as well as
obtrude upon us this Romantic Account. And if I dare interpose my Opinion, I
think that the late illiterate Monks advanced this Fable to gratify the Pope's
design, of exempting the religious Orders from Episcopal Jurisdiction, by which
Engine the Bishops were kept low, and the Reformation hindered, and the
religious Orders encouraged, to check their Authority in all places. This is so
known, that it needs neither proof nor illustration; and this Fiction of the
Culdees governing a Church without the authority of a Bishop, invented in the
days of Barbarism and Superstition, seems naturally calculated to advance this
Design, and to depress the Episcopal Jurisdiction. For the Monks that
propagated this Story, were more conversant in little Legends, than the
Writings of the Ancients. And hardly is there any thing more opposite to the
Universal Testimony, and simplicity of those Ages, than this Monkish Fable of
Presbyterian Government, toward the end of the Second Century, or the
beginnings of the Third, when all the known Records of the Christian Church
unanimously declare for the Hierarchy of Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon, and the
Succession of Bishops from the Apostles. It is not possible to preserve the
memory of the greatest men Tullius pro Archia Poeta? Atque is tamen (Alexander)
cum in Sigaeo ad Achillis tumulum astitisset. O fortunate, inquit, adolescens
qui tuae virtutis Homerum praeconem inveneris! and vere, nam nisi Ili^s illa
extitisset idem tumulus qui corpus ejus contexerat nomen etiam obruisset.
, the greatest Conquests, or the most remarkable Actions, unless they are
timeously committed to writing. Unwritten Tradition goes but a short way, and
is not able to support it self with any certainty, for any number of years. Is
it likely that the Scottish Church had any other Ecclesiastical Government than
what was received in the Christian Church when they were converted to the
Faith? and is it not very sad that there are no parallel Instances of any other
Church from abroad? By whom were they Converted? And is it not reasonable to
think that such as were instrumental in their Conversion, would plant the
Ecclesiastical Government amongst them that they were acquainted with
themselves? And are there any footsteps of such a Government amongst the more
polite and learned Nations, who because they had the Advantages of learning,
might sooner transmit to Posterity the Knowledge of their Ecclesiastical
Affairs. And let me ask the Presbyterians, if they had all the Testimonies of
the Ancients in favors of their parity, and that we only had the Authority of
some fabulous Monks in some remote Corner of the World to support our
Hierarchy, and that in an Age of shameful Ignorance, and Darkness, when they
imposed upon mankind, and multiplied their visionary Legends. I ask, how the
Vindicator would treat us if we appeared with our Culdees against the undoubted
Records of the Fathers, the Universal Suffrages of Councels, the Succession of
the famous Sees, and the glorious Cloud of Witnesses, that by their Zeal and
Sufferings enlightened the World? I think he would treat us very huffingly, and
let us hear more than once his often repeated and beloved Metaphor of the Seed of
the Serpent, and the Seed of the woman. Would not he 1. Vindicat. Preface.
tell us of our bold and silly pretenses to Antiquity. However when the
Vindicator names good Authors foreign or domestic in the third, fourth, fifth,
sixth, or seventh Century (and this is more than by the Rules of Credibility or
History we need yield to him) then it is time to consider his Testimonies. Let
him Apoleg. pro Sentent. Hieron.
Read Blondel again, and see whether that great Antiquary can name any Ancient
Writer to uphold this Monastic Dream. But if I should grant that there had
been some Priests in Scotland before there were Bishops in it, there is nothing
in that Concession to favor Presbytery; for they had their Mission and
Ordination from Bishops in other places to whom they might give an account of
their Travels and Success, and this was ordinary before Nations were Converted.
But when they received the Faith, all Ecclesiastical Officers were then
encouraged to continue amongst them, and this is it that we confidently affirm,
that where there are any Records of Nations and Countries Converted to the
Faith, there do we meet with the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of Bishop, Presbyter,
and Deacon, over the whole Christian Church. The Primitive Confessors and
Martyrs Travailed the World over to gain Proselytes to Christianity, some
Bishops, some Presbyters, some Deacons, some Laymen; but wherever there was
any considerable number of Converts, then they became an Organical Church, and
had Bishops and Presbyters Constituted, until their sound went unto all the
earth, and their words unto the ends of the world. Romans 10. 18. Page 184.


He runs down the Author of the History of the General Assembly as one, not
acquainted with the Actings of Grace in the Soul, because forsooth he had not
spoke with reverence enough of Mr. Gray's Sermons, in that Page cited on Page
185.
the Margin.

The Vindicator discovers much of his own creeping Genius, when he discourses
of the Act of their Assembly against the private Administration of Baptism, nor
is it possible to pursue him in such a Wilderness of little impertinencies.

Their pretended Assembly would have done better if they had left the
Administration of Baptism to the discretion of Ministers in all places, it is
certainly much to be wished, that Baptism be Administered with all public
Solemnity, when there is not an apparent necessity to recede from so laudable a
Custom, but to make Discourses to the People on particular Texts of Scripture,
at the Administration of Baptism, is a thing in it self altogether new and
unnecessary. If the nature, use, and design of it, be seriously explained,
there needs no more. And to think a Sermon, in the modern and usual Notion,
necessary is as great Superstition, as that of theirs, who fancy that the
effects of it follow ex opere operato, which Phrase is very little understood
by the People, and perhaps others who should teach the People do not thoroughly
understand it neither.

Next I shall take notice of what we are told by the Vindicator Page 174. That
the Presbyterians could not comply with Human Ceremonies with a good Conscience
in the Worship of God But they refused to join in the Worship of God when there
were no Ceremonies appointed.
. It is true the Vindicator has not in this place any Discourse to prove this
unlawful, but I take notice of it as one of the Theological hints that are
interspersed in his Defamatory Libel, But may not Ceremonies of Human
Appointment (if they decently and gravely express our Affections) be used in
the Worship of God? Did not Solomon advise us to look to our Feet when we come
into the house of God, and the same Ceremony was practiced under the
Patriarchal Dispensation, viz. That of putting off our Shoes when we approach
the Holy Place: as Moses was enjoined by God himself, because the place he
stood upon was holy ground, and this was an Advertisement that he ought to do
what was ordinarily done by all the Eastern Nations when he approached the
place of Gods peculiar Residence. And pray, Was it not a significant Ceremony
expressive of their Reverence and adoration? In like manner, Sackcloth and
Ashes did amongst all Nations signify grief and sorrow, therefore in their
Humiliations they were used to express their Remorse and Contritions. The
Presbyterians fix upon a word, and pronounce it with disdain and contempt, they
repeat it with Indignation, and then their zealous Disciples when they hear
that word pronounced, presently let fly their thoughts to some monstrous thing
or other that is not at all signified by that word; yet the Idea of some such
ugly thing sticks to their Imagination, for no other reason but that Mas John
frowned when he heard that word pronounced. What other reason can we give why
the word (significant Ceremony) should disturb their Imaginations? Why may not
we express our Thoughts, Passions, and Affections by Ceremonies as well as by
words? Since both are innocent, and both serve the same design. But the
Covenanters themselves used significant Ceremonies, when they imposed the
Covenant: he that Swore was to lift up his right hand bare, you are to take
notice that it was the Right and not the Left, and it was lifted up and not
otherwise extended. It was bare, and not covered, and was not this a
significant Ceremony of Human Institution?

In the Worship of God, nature taught Mankind to approach God with all the
decent Marks of Distance and Adoration, and they that declaim most against
Ceremonies, do practice them frequently, only they do this more awkwardly, and
with a figure becoming their singularity; but this will never convince the
Intelligent part of Mankind that they are either wiser or better than any of
their Neighbors. True Religion obliges us to comply with the innocent
decencies of Mankind, and to affect nothing that is extraordinary or singular.
Our Savior left us this Example, he eat and drank with Publicans and Sinners,
and affected no Customs different from the Jews. If the Ceremonies be practiced
by the Nation amongst whom we live, if they decently express our Reverence, or
our Humiliation, I see no reason why they may not be used in the Service of
God, as well as words, especially when they are commanded by our lawful
Superiors as necessary Instruments of Public Order and Uniformity, nor can
they change their Nature by being commanded; for such and such Ceremonies are
in their Nature indifferent, yet some one or other must be used, and which of
them we shall use may very well be determined by our lawful Superiors. Sitting
(for any thing I know) was never looked upon as a Posture of Reverence, yet the
Presbyterians in Scotland, for the most part fit all of them in time of Public
Prayer, what they signify by it I know not, I am sure not that which becomes
Prayer, and the Worship of the most High God. We look upon the decent
Ceremonies of the Church as Appendages or Expressions, but not constituent
parts of Worship, as is foolishly and peevishly alleged by our Adversaries;
and I may put the Vindicator in mind, that the reason why some of the Clergy in
Scotland Read the Book of Common Prayer, is not what he suggests, according to
his wonted Candor and Ingenuity, but rather an open avowing of their
Principles, when it was visible to the World there was no possibility of
uniting with the Presbyterians.

Another thing I take notice of, is to be met with Page 196, 197. The Author of
that Epistle, that is subjoyned to the Vindicators Book, tells us, to the
reproach of our Bishops, that some of them upon the Restoration of the
Government submitted to reordination to the great scandal not only of this, but
other Reformed Churches. I know none were scandalized at it, but such as were
resolved to pick quarrels with every thing that the Bishops would do. It was no
scandal to the Foreign Churches or the French Divines. All of them the greatest
men among M. Alix, and many others.
them are reordained when they come to England, and they cheerfully submit to
it. And this was never condemned by any Public Act of the Gallican Church, nor
by none of their Eminent Divines. The Church of England does not absolutely
condemn their Ordinations in France, but rather waves the debate: but she is
determined to preserve an unquestionable succession of Priests within her own
Bounds.

As to the Matter of Fact narrated in Mr. Meldrum's Letter I know nothing of
it, and therefore I ought to say no more than I know. He tells us that he
subscribed a Paper, and that the Paper was drawn out of the Archbishops Letter
by a Friend of his, and that now he repents for Subscribing this Paper, and
that though he was in great Friendship afterward with Bishop Scougal, and did
what others in that Interval did, yet he thinks that by all this he paid no
formal Canonical Obedience. From all which I observe, that it is a very happy
thing to live in, or near an University as Mr. Meldrum did. Distinctions are
very useful things, one had better carry a good bundle of them about him than
all your famous Elixirs and Essences; one may pay material Canonical Obedience,
but it is dangerous to pay it formally: the great mischief is in the formality
of paying it, but for my part I have sworn Canonical Obedience formally, and I
have paid it materially, and shall never decline my Bishops Spiritual Authority
when ever there is occasion, and I think all the Presbyters of that National
Church are as much obliged to obey their Spiritual Governors, notwithstanding
of all that past in favors of the opposite Faction since the Revolution. And
now I think it high time to go forward to the fourth Particular that I
promised, viz.

To let you see the several Periods of Episcopacy and Presbytery in the Church
of Scotland since the Reformation. And I am the more confident to give you
satisfaction, because I had the happiness to peruse a Manuscript (written by a
person of great honor and true Learning) relating to this very affair; and it
is of so much the greater weight and Authority, that it is not only founded on
our best Historians, but on the authentic Records of Parliament; and it is
from that Manuscript that I copy the following Account: for it is apparent that
the Church was never governed by a Parity of Officers, but by different Orders
from the beginning of the Reformation. And in the entry to this Narration, Let
us remark, says my Author, That none of our Martyrs did ever impugn or oppose
imparity in the Church, or preach or write against it; you cannot name one
Testimony, unless you argue from their preaching against Popish Tyranny and
unwarrantable exercise of Ecclesiastical Power, to infer that they were for
(the then unheard of) Parity, and all who write of those Martyrs and first
Reformers, omit not to praise them for their dutiful submission to their
Bishops and Superiors. And it is very probable these Martyrs would have
pseached against Ecclesiastical Tyranny as well in a Company of Arbitrary
Presbyters, as they did when it was lodged in one or few; and that Presbyters
may be Tyrants, witness the Scots History from the year 1639 to 1652. At which
time Cromwell (tho no Friend to Episcopacy) was so wearied with the Insolences
and Confusions of Presbytery, that he dismissed it solemnly at Barrow-Moor. Let
us now come to positive Evidences. The very first established Reformation in
Scotland, was that which on the 6th of July 1560 (being the third day after the
pacification at Leith) was concluded on, betwixt the Lords and Ministers of the
Congregation assisted by the Queen of Englands General and Ambassader on the
one side. And the Queen Regent, the popish Lords, and Clergy, assisted by the
French Ambassador on the other side, in name of Francis and Mary their
Sovrreigns. Spotswood, Ann. 1560. page 149. and Knox in his Hist. 1560. page
264 sets down at length the form of Electing the Superintendents.
The Protestant Lords and Clergy did meet, at Edinburgh, the Protestants
preached in the Churches and in their Assembly they did distribute their
Preachers among the Chief Towns of the Nation, and did nominate five
Superintendents for the Dioceses, where the Bishops were popish. For there are
no Superintendents named then for Galloway and Argile, because the Bishops of
those Dioceses were Protestants.

By the said Treaty a Parliament was to hold in August following, wherein the
Confession of Faith drawn up by the Superintendents was given in to the Lords
of the Articles, prepared by them, and Voted in Parliament, where it was
carried in the Affirmative. In this Parliament the Bishops did sit as the first
Estate. The popish Bishops voted against the Confession, the Protestant
Bishops, viz. Galloway and Argile, and three Abbots voted for it. The Sederunt
of this Parliament is on Record with its Acts, and related by Spotswood, page
149.

In January thereafter, the Scottish Protestant Clergy offer a form of Church
Policy; one of its Heads is for Superintendents, whom they name, and appoint,
with distinct Dioceses for them, and to show that these Reformers did not treat
of Superintendents as a temporary Resolution for that time only; It is there
said, that the Election of Superintendents, in aftertimes should be stricter
than the present circumstances would allow; and the last Head of that Policy
prescribes some Conditions to be kept in future Elections of Superintendents.
Spotwood, page 150 and 160, and by the book of Policy, page 168. it is expressly
ordered, that Complaints against Ministers be notified to the Superintendents.
And the Petition presented to the Queen, related by Knox Hist. page 337. bears,
as the superscription of the Superintendents, Ministers of the whole Church of
Scotland, to the Queens Majesty, etc. And in the year 1563. John Knox and
others elected a Superintendent for Dumfries, and the Letter written from the
Assembly or Convention of the Scots Church at Edinburgh on the 27. of December,
1566. to the Church of England bears this Superscription. The Superintendents,
Ministers, and Commissioners of the Church within the Realm of Scotland to
their Brethren, the Bishops and Pastors of England. And at Queen Mary's first
arrival in Scotland from France, the Superintendents and Ministers did meet at
Edinburgh in an Assembly, Knox bist. page 318.

In January 1572. the Commission of the Assembly did meet at Leith, under the
Regents Government, and did agree on seven Articles of Policy. 1. That all
Bishoprics which were vacant (and those were only four; for where popish
Bishops were alive, the See's were not esteemed vacant, but supplied by
Protestant Superintendents) should be filled out of the ablest of the Ministry.
Secondly, That spiritual Jurisdiction should be exercised by Bishops in their
Dioceses; and the sixth Article is, that Ministers should receive Ordination
from the Bishops, and in Dioceses where no Bishops were, they should receive
Ordination from the Superintendents. And in August thereafter, the General
Assembly of the Church did meet at Perth, and approved of all these Articles;
and accordingly Mr. John Douglas, Mr. James B^yd, Mr. James Paton, and Mr.
Andrew Graham, were placed in the four vacant Bishoprics. It was Mr. Andrew
Melvil's misfortune that he was neglected, and therefore in the year 1575. he
stirred up one Mr. Dury to impugn the Episcopal Order, and all Imparity. This
is the first time that this debate was tossed in our Church; and on it, Church
and State immediately divided, and much Confusion, Rapine, Blood and other
mischiefs did follow, and then and since every fiery Faction did lay hold on
this Schism as a fund whereon to build all Rebellion and Treason. In
prosecution of this Schism Mr. Andrew (and some Ministers led by him) did in
the year 1578. draw a Book of Policy stuffed so with the spirit of Mr. Andrew
himself, that it was rather a Proposal for the overthrow of all just Authority
than an Establishment of a Religious Government: and therefore it could never
(no not in these distracted furious times (even when there was no King in our
Israel) obtain approbation from any Authority, but was looked on as a Rapsody
of groundless Assertions, and full of mischievous Novelties. Indeed, in the
year 1580. an Assembly met at Dundee, called by Mr. Andrew and his Associates
without a shadow of any permission from the Civil Authority; and they declared
that the Office of a Bishop (but with this restriction, as it was then used)
had neither foundation nor warrant in the Word of God. But let all serious
Christians consider, whether they will believe this famous Conventicle or the
plain Scriptures, the Doctrine of the Apostles, the primitive Fathers, and the
Canons of all Oecomenick Counsels, and the rule of Apostolic and primitive
Practice, and to help their choice, let them take notice of the pious Design of
this Assembly in casting off Bishops, by the very next clause in their Act,
viz. That their next Assembly should consider how to dispose of the Patrimony
and possessions of Bishops. This was the primitive Invasion of the Kings
Patronages and Regale of the Crown. Then Presbyterian Disciples began to
propagate their new Gospel very zealously; The first was one Montgomery, who at
Sterling proposed that all such as spoke for the Order of Bishops should be
censured; but this zealous Saint did most basely and simoniacally (shortly
thereafter) bargain with a Nobleman that he might be made Bishop of Glasgow,
and then his Co-Presbyters (who themselves were not so successful) handled him
to purpose; but with such indiscretion, that in pursuing him they trampled on
the King and all the Civil Authority, in so far, that when they were called to
answer for illegal Invasions on the Kings Authority, they did boldly protest,
that tho they compeared in civility to the King, yet that they did not
acknowledge the King (...) Councils Right in any Ecclesiastic matter. This was
on the 12th of April 1582. And shortly thereafter in one of their Assemblies
holden at St. Andrews, Mr. Andrew Melvil told the Master of Requests (who was
sent by the King to stop some of their illegal procedures) that they did not
meddle in Civil matters; but in Ecclesiastic matters they had sufficient
Authority to proceed, and did so.

The practice on these grounds did shortly follow, for on the 23d of August
1582. the King was made Prisoner by a Faction of Lords at the house of Ruthwen,
and on the 13th of October 1582. the Assembly of the Church at Edenburg, did by
an Act approve of that perduellion, and declared that it was good service to
God and his Chucrh. And in the beginning of January 1583. two Ambassadors came
from France, and one from England, to endeavor the Kings Liberty; the Assembly
ordered the Ministers to declaim against the impious Design of liberating the
King, and they did rail at the Ambassadors by name, and stirred up the Rabble
(their faithful Confederates on all occasions) not to suffer the Badge of the
French Order Du St. Esprit.
to be seen on their Streets, it being the mark of the Beast, a badge of
Antichrist, and to show their good Manners as well as their sound Doctrine, the
King having appointed the Magistrates of Edinburgh to entertain the Ambassadors
on the 16th of February 1583. The Ministers appointed a solemn Fast on that
very day, and civilly preached from morning till night, (a matter of no great
difficulty to such as preach for such ends, and with so little rule) cursing
the Magistrates, and their Company, and were with difficulty kept from
excommunicating them.

The King having delivered himself from his restraint, Mr. Dury and others of
the Ministry openly assert that there was no injury done to the King, and Mr.
Melvil declaimed frequently against the King, for which he was called before
the Council; but he boldly declined the King and Council as Judges in prima
Instantia of what is preached in the Pulpit, even tho it were high Treason, and
so he fled to England* from whence he kindled that Conspiracy, which shortly
thereafter brought the Earl of Gowry and others to the Scaffold. These
seditious doctrines and practices moved the whole Estates of the Kingdom in the
year 1584, on the 22d day of May in a Parliament at Edinburgh by a solemn Act,
to assert the Kings Sovereign Power over all persons, and in all causes as his
undoubted ancient Right; and that it was Treason to decline his Authority in
any matter, and discharging all Assemblies, Convocations, and all Jurisdictions
spiritual or temporal, not allowed by the King and Estates: and prohibiting all
factions and seditious Preachings, Sermons, and all slanderous Speeches against
the King. The Ministers declaimed against this and reproached this Act of
Parliament. Notwithstanding of all this, the King was prevailed with to allow
Mr. Melvil and his Accomplices to return to their Churches: but no sooner had
they this favor, than Mr. Andrew calls an Assembly to St. Andrews; it
consisted of Presbyters and Laics, and one Mr. Robert Wilky, a Regent
Professor, and Laick was chosen Moderator. There in a most ridiculous manner
they Cite the Archbishop of St. Andrews on twenty four hours to Compear before
them (and he not compearing) they caused a young indiscreet Fellow, called
Hunter, to Excommunicate him, for having accession to that Act of Parliament
lately mentioned, he being a Member of Parliament, and an Assembly meeting this
very year at Edinburgh, would have taken up this difference, and in order
thereto did Absolve the Archbishop from Excommunication; yet Mr. Andrew and his
adherents protested against the Assembly, and declared that notwithstanding of
their Absolution, yet the Archbishop should be still esteemed as one delivered
to Satan, until signs of true Repentance appeared. And though upon all
occasions they magnify their Assemblies, and their pretended parity, yet when
the far major number was against their humor, they regarded not their
plurality. For in Anno 1591. when the Synod of St. Andrews had determined to
constitute one Mr. Weems, Minister at Leuchars, Mr. Melvil, and some few more,
viz. six were for one Mr. Walace, and when the far major part would not submit
to his Opinion, (though they pretend that the Kingdom of Christ is invaded when
Bishops or Princes oppose the majority of a Synod) yet Mr. Melvil. and his six
withdraw to another place, and admitted Mr. Walace to the Ministry of Leuchars,
and the Synod did admit Mr. Weems. But this had almost engaged the Parishioners
in Blood, and the scussle could not be ended until Melvil's Faction prevailed
so far against the Synod, that neither of the two should be Minister at that
Church. The Reason why I insist on this, is, to let them of a contrary Opinion
see how justly our dislike of a parity in Church Offices is Founded, and that
there being no imaginable warrant for it from Scripture, Apostolic Practice,
Primitive Fathers, Councils, or any well Established Christian Church, and that
the best plea for it, seems to be the pretended parity that is alleged amongst
the first Reformers in Scotland, we judged it fit first to show that there was
an imparity then; and always thereafter in this Church, and that the design of
parity was always rejected by our Kings, Parliaments, and the most, and best of
our Clergy, and that the immoralities, and Seditions, of such as contended for
parity gives us no invitation to be amongst their Successors.

It is true, that the King in the year 1590. and 1591. and 1592. was so often
brought into danger, twice was he Captive, and constantly in great trouble by
the Seditions of Mr. Andrew Melvil, and his fiery accomplices, that in the year
1592. he did consent to grant a great deal of Jurisdiction to Presbyteries;
Synods, and General Assemblies by Act of Parliament; and this of necessity to
evite a threatened Rebellion, and that by the advice of Chancellor Maitland, who
in Council advised the King to give them much of their will, for that (...) the
short way to make them odious, as already they were troubleseme to the Nation,
and then they would be turned out by all. Yet there was never an Act or motion
of Abolishing Episcopacy; but on the contrary, they continued in their Dioceses
and Churches always thereafter, and in the very year 1594. Cunnigham Bishop of
Aberdeen did Babtize Prince Henry at Sterling; but the King was forced to
connive a while at at their Insolence, for they had preached the People into a
persuasion that the King was to betray his own Crown and Kingdoms to the King
of Spain. And when three Noblemen were brought to Trial before the Justice, the
Ministers would needs order the Process in October 1593, and to back them, they
stirred up multitudes of the Rabble to Arms, thereby to force Justice to decide
in their favor; nor would they disband or abstain from coming before the
Judges in armed Crowds, although the King and Council did by Proclamation
prohibit them. If this be Presbyterian Government, it must be confessed that
Anno 1590, 1591, 1592, and 1593. Presbyters had it solely. But all this time
Bishops did exist by Law, enjoyed their Rents, and preached in their Churches,
if you trust not us, Notice the most Authentic Records of the Kingdom.

By Act of Parliament 1. Jac. 6. Chap. 7. Ministers are ordered to be presented
by the Patrons to the Superintendent of the Diocese. Note, At this time most of
the Bishops were Popish, which occasioned the Protestants to appoint
Superintendents.

Anno 1572. Parl. 3. Jac. 6. Chap 45. The Government of the Church is declared
to be in the Archbishops, Bishops, and Superintendents. Note, Both Bishops, and
Superintendents, are contemporary then in the Church.

The like owned Chap. 46. 48. and 54. of that Parliament.

In the year 1573. The Authority of the Bishops is owned by the first Act of
the 4. Par. Jac. 6.

In the year 1578. the like by Act. 63. Parl. 5. Jac. 6.

In the year 1579. the like by Act. 71. Parliam. 6. Jac. 6.

In the year 1581. That the Bishops did continue in the Church appears from Act
100. Parl. 7. Jac. 6.

The like appears from the Acts 106, and 114, of that Parliament.

In the year 1584. The Bishops Authority fully owned Act. 132. Parl. 8. Jac. 6

In the year 1587. It appears that Prelacy existed then by Act 28. Parl. 11.
Jac. 6.

Also in that 11. Parl. It appears by the Act of Annexation, that Prelacy did
still exist by Law, even although their Temporalties were annexed to the Crown.
and by the 111. Act, of that 11. Parl.

In the year 1591, 1592, 1593, and 1594. The King, and Bishops, could not stop
the Insolence of Presbyters, nor their meeting in Synods and Assemblies,
without any interposition of the Royal Authority, but this hindered not but
that the Bishops did still exist by Law, and exerced some part of their Office,
and in all Parliaments and Conventions of Estates, the Prelates did did always
Sit and Vote as the first of the three Estates, as the Records and Sederunts of
all the Parliaments will prove.

In the year 1596. Leslie, Bishop of Ross, dying at Brussels, Mr. David Lindsey
was presented by the King to the Bishopric the very next year.

In the year 1598. there was a Conference appointed at Falkland betwixt the
Commissioners of the Assembly, and some appointed by the King to meet with
them, where they agreed on ten Articles or Propositions of Policy, for the
Church, relating chiefly to the Clergy's Votes in Parliament, and the Elections
of Bishops in the Dioceses; some of these Propositions were foolish, but it was
thought convenient that the King should comply with those Hot Heads in some
things; for at that time Severals began to debate his Right of Succession to
the Crown of England, and so he would have all quiet at Home, yet still this is
evident that Bishops did then exist by Law, and that although something concerning
them was debated, yet their Office and Order was not.

In the year 1600, these forementioned Articles were appoved in the Assembly at
Monross, March 28, 1600. and to that Assembly Mr. Dury (who was the chief Tool
with Mr. Melvil for parity) at his death did write an Exhortation disowning his
former Errors, and earnestly advising them to submit to the ancient Order, and
to choose good Bishops of the best of the Ministers.

In the year 1601. the King called an Assembly of the Church to meet at Brunt
Island, where many good things were Enacted, both for the true Liberty of the
Church, and for reclaiming the Popish Nobility from their Errors, which proved
more effectual and pacific than all the former furious Methods, which at that
time were promoted by a Hot Headed Man, called Davidson, who by a Letter to the
Assembly incited them to declare against the Kings Hypocrisy, and other
Errors. The Assembly would have proceeded to Censure him, but the King would
not allow it, saying, it was matter of Joy that these Hot Heads were reduced to
one, or some few.

In the year 1602. the King in an Assembly at Halyrood-House, did show great
Clemency to some fiery Ministers, whom the Assembly would have Censured: as also
he gave great Satisfaction to the whole Assembly and Nation; by his excellent
Proposals for establishing Provisions both for Bishops and Presbyters. And in
this Assembly of the Church was the fifth of August appointed an Anniversary
Thanksgiving for the Kings Delivery from Gowry's Conspiracy.

Before the Diet appointed for the next General Assembly, the Crown of England
did fall to the King by the Death of Queen Elizabeth; so there was no meeting
of Church General Assemblies for a while, but the few remaining Hot Headed
Presbyters were very busy on the Kings removal so far: and fearing the
excellent Order of the English Church (the great Safety and Peace of Britain
depending on an entire and full Concord of the Island) they were apprehensive
that upon such Considerations, the King would heartily promote a further
Establishment of Episcopal Jurisdiction in Scotland. The Presbyterians in this
Juncture did busily stir up Prejudices in the People against the Church of
England; tho undoubtedly the best Reformed Church and greatest Bulwark against
Popery. And though the King, for good Reasons, when he went to England,
Adjourned the General Assembly from July 1604, to July 1605. yet these Men
prevailed with Nine of the Fifty Presbyteries of Scotland to keep the Meeting
notwithstanding of the Kings Prorogation: where Thirteen Persons meeting did
most Seditiously run into such Declarations against the Statutes, and standing
Laws, as were by the Judicatures declared Treason, and for which Severals of
the Thirteen were Condemned before the Justices. For they could not be
persuaded either to acknowledge, or revoke their seditious Pasquils, but they
were afterward pardoned by the King, when they confessed that the Chancellor
encouraged their Meeting in July 1604. and proved it, which forced the
Chancellor to prove likewise that they promised to connive at his being a
Papist, and his Possession of what he had of the Church Lands, upon Condition
he should own them against Episcopacy, whereupon the King said that the
Presbyterians would betray the Protestant Religion in hatred to Episcopacy, and
the Chancellor would betray Episcopacy for greed of their Temporalties. So far
my Author.



And now from all this I infer, that the first Reformers of our Religion in
Scotland declaimed against the Tyranny, and encroachments of the Bishop of
Rome, but never against the Episcopal Jurisdiction as such. That Mr. Wisehart,
and some others of our most Eminent Reformers and Martyrs knew no other
Government of the Church but Episcopacy. The first being bred in the University
of Cambridge, and others, who were his Disciples, followed his Sentiments. And
that the first Reformers submitted to the Episcopal Jurisdiction of such of the
Bishops as Preached and promoted the Protestant Doctrine.

Secondly, That though the Episcopal Authority was frequently weakened, crushed
and interrupted, by the Popular Insurrections, and Conspiracies of Mr. Melvil's
Faction, yet it was never legally abolished, but rather continued in the
Church, secured, and defended by many Laws.

Thirdly, That the Presbyterians always watched the difficult Postures of the
King's Affairs, and whenever they found him at a disadvantage, then they made
him much more uneasy by Popular Tumults, and Insurrections.

Fourthly, That the Romish Clergy never pleaded their Exemptions from the
Secular Powers more violently and factiously, than the Melvilian Tribe in
Scotland.

Fifthly, That Episcopacy was not Abolished in that very year wherein they
pretend that Presbytery was Established, but that Episcopacy in Anno 1592. was
still retained in all its legal Rights, Privileges, and Authority. It is true
that the Insolence of Presbyters was not then to be resisted, but by granting
them great Liberties, and that this Liberty was granted by the necessitous
Circumstances that the King was in.

Sixthly, That the most violent of their Faction had not then the Impudence to
quarrel the Superiority of a Bishop above a Presbyter, as a thing unlawful in
it self; but that Mr. Melvil made his approaches to the ruin of Episcopacy by
plausible pretenses, viz. That it was abused, and that it was not exercised
according to its primitive designs and simplicity.

Seventhly, I observe that Episcopacy was never legally Abolished in Scotland,
until the Tragical Rebellion in King Charles the First his Reign broke forth,
and we need not inform the World how unwilling King Charles the Martyr was to
Abolish Episcopacy.

Eighthly, That the Royal Authority never gave way to their Rebellion, and
Insolence, when they could hinder it; but sometimes they were forced to yield
to grant them great Liberties to avoid the heavier Blows and Thunder Claps of
their Fury.

Ninthly, That we can have no better Evidence for any Matter of Fact than the
Public Records of Parliament.

Tenthly, We may clearly discern that the Vindicators Book in defense of his
Party, is one Hypocritical Shuffle from top to bottom. For if Mr. Melvil, the
Founder of Presbytery, and his Confederates, did affront the Kings Person, and
declined his Authority, and provoked the Rabble, and Excommunicated the
Archbishop, and was so rude to the Ambassadors of Foreign Princes, and
profanely appointed a Fast, with no other design than to bassle the King to his
Teeth. Then let me ask the Vindicator why all this Apology, to persuade the
World that Presbyterians are not capable of such Villainies as is the Rabbling
of the Clergy. Nay, I must tell him Presbyterians did nothing upon this last
Revolution, but what they Practiced when they had not such opportunities to to
vent their Malice. And by this unquestionable History he and all others may
see, to how little purpose his Distinction of sober Presbyterians, and
Cameronians will serve him; for the Cameronians have no Principles different
from Presbyterians, nor the Presbyterians from Cameronians, nor is it possible
to resute the Cameronians by Presbyterian Principles.

Eleventhly, We may gather from the preceding History, and the constant
Practice of Presbyterians, that they have no Principles of Unity amongst
themselves, for, the lesser number (if more Popular than their Brethren) may
remonstrate with that Insolence, and Fury, against the plurality as to stop the
whole course of Discipline, as in the forementioned case of Mr. Andrew Melvil.

Twelsthly, The Spirit of Presbytery, is a Spirit of Tyranny, and cannot endure
to Obey, and therefore such as are fully Poisoned with its Principles,
(whenever the Decisions of the Public contradict their own peculiar Plan and
Scheme) they immediately fly in the Face of that Authority, they formerly
pretended to support, and by general words, which at the bottom have no
particular signification, but what they please to put upon them, they pick
quarrels, and exceptions against all their own Judicatures, Governments Civil
and Ecclesiastical.

This is visible as from many instances, so from the famous Protestations of
several biggorted Incendiaries against the General Assembly of the
Presbyterians Anno 1651. because that General Assembly did promote the Public
Resolutions in order to the Restoring the King to the Exercise of his
Government, they pretend that the General Assembly was not rightly constituted,
that the generality of the Godly did adhere to the Protestors, that the Public
Resolutioners had made defection, because they were for bringing again into
Places of Power and Trust, such as would probably serve the King against the
Rebellion then on Foot, upon such pretenses they decline their Supreme National
Judicatory, and because that Print is known but to very few of the present
Generation, and since it is a Monument of their Villainy and Stubbornness, it
may be seen at the end of this Letter. I have no more to add, but that I wish
my Skill to serve you, were equal to my Zeal and Affection, for I am in all
sincerity

Your most obedient Servant.

The Protestation of diverse Ministers, against the Proceedings of the late
Commission of the Church of Scotland, as also against the lawfulness of the
present pretended Assembly.
Right Reverend,
HOW gracious God has been to the Church of Scotland, in giving her pure
Ordinances; we trust that while we live, it shall be acknowledged, with
thanfulness, by us unto the Most High, of whom we desire Mercy and Grace to
adhere unto the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government Established in
this Land, amongst the many sad Tokens of the Lords Indignation and Wrath
against this Kirk, the present Difference of his Servants in the Ministry, is
looked upon by us, and we believe by all the godly in the Land, as one of the
greatest. And as we hold it a Duty deeply to be humbled before the Lord in the
Sense thereof, and by all lawful and fair means, within the compass of our
power and station, to endeavor the remedy; so we do acknowledge a free General
Assembly, lawfully Called, and rightly Constituted, and proceeding with
Meekness and Love in the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, according to the Rule
of the Word, and the Acts and Constitutions of this Kirk, to be amongst the
first and most effectual means appointed of God for obtaining the same, and for
preserving Purity, and advancing the power of the Work of Reformation in this
Age, and transmitting the same unspotted to our Posterity, and to the Ages and
Generations that are to come: but that as the faithful Servants of Jesus Christ
in his Church in former times did by his good Hand on them in the right
Administration of free and lawful General Assemblies, bring the Work of
Reformation in Scotland unto a great Perfoction, and nigh Conformity with the
first Pattern: so unfaithful Men minding their own things more than things of
Christ, and Usurping over their Brethres, and the Lords Inheritance, did deface
the beauty thereof, first by encroaching upon the Liberty and Freedom of
Assemblies, afterward by taking away the very Assemblies themselves. Therefore
remembering and calling to mind the many Bonds and Obligations that lie upon us
from the Lord, and being desirous to be found faithful in this day of
Tentation, and to exonerate our Consciences as in his sight, and to avoid the
accession unto that guiltiness in which many have involved themselves. And
conceiving that this Meeting is not a lawful General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, in regard that the Election of Commissioners to the same, have been
limited and prejudiced in the due Liberty thereof, by a Letter and Act of their
Commissioners of the last Assembly sent to Presbyteries, appointing such
Brethren as after Conference remained unsatisfied with, and continued to oppose
the Public Resolutions, to be Cited to the General Assembly. And in regard the
Commission of many Burghs and Presbyteries are absent, as wanting free access,
by reason of the Motions of the Enemy: and in regard that many of the
Commissioners of the last General Assembly have carried on a course of
defection, contrary to the Trust committed to them, and to the Acts and
Constitutions of this Church: and who in their Remonstrances and Papers, have
stirred up the Civil Magistrate against such who are unsatisfied in their
Consciences with their Proceedings, and who have prelimited the Assembly, by
their Letter and Act formerly mentioned, are admitted to Sit, and Voted as
Members of the Assembly, and their Moderator chosen to be Moderator of the
Assembly, notwithstanding timous exception was made against them, that they
ought not to be admitted as Members of the Assembly, until their Proceedings
were first tried and approven by the Assembly: and in regard that his Majesty,
and his Majesty's Commissioners by his Speech, did incite too hard Courses
against these who are unsatisfied in their Consciences, with the Proceedings of
the Commissioners, before the trial and approbation of the Commission Book, or
any Act made by the Assembly for the approving their Proceedings; we do upon
these, and many others important grounds and reasons, to be proponed and given
in time and place convenient, in the name of the Church of Scotland, and in our
names, and in the name of all Ministers, Ruling Elders, and Professors of this
Kirk, who do, or shall adhere to us, Protest against the Validity and
Constitution of this Assembly, as not being free and lawful: and that they may
not assume unto themselves any Authority, nor exercise any Power or
Jurisdiction for determining of Controversies, making of Acts emitting of
Declarations, judging of Protestations or Appeals, or Proceedings of Synods, or
inferior Judicatories, or Censuring Persons or Papers, or issuing of
Commissions of whatsoever sort to any persons whatsoever, and in particular
Protests that they may not proceed unto the Approbation or Ratification of the
Proceedings of the former Commission, not only because of the want of just
Power and Authority so to do, but also because these Proceedings contain many
things contrary to the Trust committed to their Commissioners, especially their
allowing and carrying on a Conjunction with the Malignant Party, and bringing
them into Places of Power and Trust in the Judicatories and in the Army,
contrary to the Word of God, Solemn League and Covenant, the Solemn Confession
of Sins, and Engagement to Duties, the constant Tenor of Warnings,
Declarations, Remonstrances, Causes of Humiliations, Letters, Supplications,
Acts and Constitutions of this Kirk, and the laying a Foundation for the Civil
Magistrate, to meddle with these things which concern Ministers, their Doctrine
and Exercise of Ministerial Duties before they be Cited, Tried, and Censured by
the Judicatories of the Kirk. And we Protest that whatsoever Determinations,
Acts, Ratifications, Declarations, Censures, or Commissions that shall be made
or given by them, may be Void and Null, and may not be interpreted as binding
to the Kirk of Scotland; but that notwithstanding thereof, it may be free for
us, and such as adhere to us, to Exercise our Ministry and enjoy the due
Christian Liberty of our Consciences, according to the Word of God, National
Covenant, Solemn League and Covenant, the Confession of Sins, and Engagements
to Duties, and all the Acts and Constitutions of this Kirk, and that there may
be liberty to choose Commissioners, and to Convene a Free and Lawful General
Assembly, when there shall be need, and the Lord shall give opportunity, and to
add what further reasons shall have weight for strengthening this our
Protestation, and showing the nullity of this Assembly, and the
unwarrantableness of the Proceedings of the Commissioners of the former
Assembly; and that these presents may be put upon Record in the Registers of
the General Assembly to be extant ad futuram rei memoriam, and that we may have
a subscribed Extract under the Clerks hand.

Subscribed and presented at St. Andrews 20. July, 1651. by Mr. A. G. Moderator
of the last Assembly. Mr. Samuel Rutherford. Mr. James Guthery. Mr. Patrick
Gillespy. Mr. John Meinzies. Mr. Ephraim Melvin. Mr. John Carstaires. Mr.
William Adair. Mr. Thomas Wyllie. Mr. John Nevoy. Mr. James Simpson. Mr.
William Guthery. Mr. Alexander Moncreif. Mr. John Hamilton in Inderkip. Mr.
Robert Muire. Mr. John Heart. Mr. Andrew Donaldson. Mr. Robert Keith. And ten
other Ministers.


Right Reverend,
WE are constrained by many necessities, and by transferring of the Assembly,
to be absent from your subsequent meeting; and having laid to Heart what the
Lord requires of us in this day of so sad a Dispensation, and so sore a
Controversy against the Land. We think our selves bound in Conscience, to lay
open to you, that we are much unsatisfied with the Proceedings of the
Commissioners of the late General Assembly relating to the in-bringing and
in-trusting of the Malignant Party, with the Consequences thereof; there
issuing forth one Act with a Letter, to the prejudice, as we conceive, of the
Presbyteries Election of Commissioners to this Assembly, which has need to be
looked on, least the Freedom of this High Court of Jesus Christ, by such
preparatives, be infringed. We wish it be your Wisdoms care, that begun Evils
be remedied, our bleeding Wounds with tender Hands bound up, and that the
fierce Wrath of the Lord smoking in our Bowels may be quenched: and do in all
humility and reverence of your Wisdoms, and tenderness of respect to precious
Men, whom we much honor and love in the Lord, though in this matter we most
disser from them in Judgments; Protest that the foresaid Proceedings be not
Ratified and approven by you, and that we be not involved in the Guilt and
Consequences to the Ratifications thereof: and this we crave to be Recorded in
your Register for the Vindication of Truth, and exoneration of our Consciences.
The Lord give you wisdom in all things, and power out upon you a spirit of
Healing the backslidings of the Land, of building up our Breaches.

We rest Your Wisdoms loving Brethren and Servants in Christ.
Subscribed and sent from Pearth to Dundee (to which place the Assembly was
Adjourned from S. Andrews upon the 21. July 1651.) by M. Alexander Dunlap,
William Sumervell, John Mauld, James Donaldson, John Veatch, John Hammilton in
Carmichael, Alexander Barterem, Ministers; and William Brown of Dolphington, a
Ruling Elder.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHEN the Printer had cast off the former Sheets, there appeared here a
scurrilous Pamphlet, entitled an Answer to the Scots Presbyterian Eloquence in
three parts. If you would have a Character of the Author you must read the
Book, and perhaps by so doing, you may meet with something that is
extraordinary, and which cannot so easily fall under words; he appears with all
the storm and Thunder that passion and rage can furnish him with, he breaths
nothing but violence and indignation, and blusters with so much fury, that at
first view you may perceive him as great a Separatist from good nature and
modesty, as he is from the Christian Church and her Worship.

He divides his Pamphlet into three parts. In the first, he complains of cruel
Laws made against the Presbyterians in the former Reigns. In the second, he
meddles with the Author of the Scots Presbyterian Eloquence. In the third, he
assaults the Sermons and Lives of the Bishops and Clergy.

As to the first, King Charles II. and our subordinate Governors made no Laws
against the Presbyterians in Scotland, but what they were forced to make in
their own defense; when the King was restored to his hereditary right, and the
Nations delivered from their Egyptian bondage; the Parliament being called they
enacted such Laws as were absolutely necessary for preserving their Liberty and
sundamental Constitution: and because they had so sadly smarted under their
cruel Taskmasters (the Covenanters) in the late Civil Wars, they took care in
the first place, by gentle Laws both the reclaim the deluded, and secure their
own safety. The frequent attempts and insurrections of the Presbyterians
afterward obliged them to make more severe Laws, nor did ever any man in that
Period suffer capital punishment, but for high Treason against the King and
State. If their errors and delusions were purely speculative, and did not upon
all turns prompt them to overturn the Government and grasp the Sovereignty,
they might live in Scotland in all peace and tranquillity, as other Dissenters
did. But when the whole Vid. Hind let loose. Nepthali Jus populi.
Scheme of their Religion (as far as they differ from the Episcopal party) is
nothing in it self but ungovernable humor and Rebellion, and when their
insolence became so intolerable that they proclaimed open War against the King
in his own Dominions, and preached to their Hearers that they ought to kill his
Servants, and that he had no right to the Crown because he broke the Covenant;
what Apology needs there be made against the unreasonable clamours of such
desperate Incendiaries, especially when their cruelties toward the Episcopal
Church both Clergy and Laity after the Year 1637. were unparalled in History,
as they were diabolical in their nature. And their Oath of the Covenant imposed
upon all ranks and degrees of persons within the Nation, and (Children at the
Schools not excepted) with greater tyranny, malice and violence than the
Fathers of the Inquisition ever practiced.

What was it then that the King was to be blamed for, and his Ministers of
State? Why; they would not acknowledge that the King had lost his right to the
Crown, they defended his calm and obedient Subjects from the hands of these
religious Harpyes who would needs persuade the Nation, that there was no Sin so
much to be dreaded, as any the least transgression of the solemn League and
Covenant. The King and his Ministers of State might more plausibly be accused
of cruelty, if they had made severe Laws against the consequences of
Presbyterian Opinions, rather than against the open and avowed efforts of
treachery and Rebellion; Prudence and caution might arm them against the first,
but selfdefence, the Laws of nature and Nations, their own honor and safety,
must needs prompt them to the second.

In short, you will meet with nothing in the first part of this Pamphlet, but
an ill contrived abstract of the Hind let loose, and you know that the
Episcopalians took care to compendise that Book, and publish it of new, that
all men might see the principles, practices and humors of that Sect whom they
oppose: nor can there be a better defense of King Charles the seconds
Government, than the Hind let loose, if duly considered, and upon the whole
matter I will only say this, that if the Ministers of State under King Charles
II. in Scotland have done nothing against the Presbyterians, but what all wise,
great, and good Men have done in the like cases, then the Clamours of this
party against their Ministry are rather an honor to, than an accusation
against their proceedings. For as long as there are any Records of public
transactions preserved in our Nation, the Rebellions under King Charles I. and
II. and the principles by which they have been maintained, and the Vid. King's
large Manifesto.
Artifices, made use of to delude the people unto misery and Enthusiasm, can
never be forgotten: and if there was no other Book extant but the Acts of their
General Assemblies, they sufficiently vindicate King Charles II, and his
Ministers of State from any shadow of cruelty and rigor.

But all this and much more is made evident by the Learned and Loyal Sir George
Mackenzie.
Advocate in his short and accurate Defense of King Charles the 2ds.
Government, where he attacks, and baffles by Reason, Law, and the customs of
Nations, the little cavils and exceptions started against the administrations
of that wise and peaceable Monarch. A Book which shall never be answered, I do
not mean, that they shall not write against it, but that it is unanswerable,
and they may as wisely run a tilt against a Rock, as endeavor to shake any
part of its main design. The reasonings of it are so clear, the historical
retorsions so undeniable, and the villainies of their factions and combinations
so transparent, that to meddle with that Book will more and more discover their
folly, as well as renew their correction: and the publisher of it thinks still
he has done the Nation good service; and he is the more confirmed in his
Opinion, that he perceives, that the little and hidden Nurslings of Presbytery
are galled by it. Answer to the Scottish Presbyterian Eloquence, p. 27.
It is a Lie that Sir George Mackenzie pretended he would not publish it, tho
he would not allow a Copy surreptitiously procured to come abroad without his
immediate orders and directions; and when he saw it convenient, he recommended
it to his Friend to publish it; and it might have been printed a good while
before he died, if the publisher had not been diverted by many little
Occurrences. But let nor this Scribler, or any of his party, blame Sir George
Mackenzie, that their Covenants were added to the Treatise lately mentioned;
this is solely to be imputed to the Publisher, and he needs no Apology for the
doing of it, since they are undeniable monuments of their incurable
stubbornness and Rebellion: and the reasonings in the Treatise it self are
frequently related to, and illustrated by those wicked Papers, I mean the Bonds
and Covenants of that restless Faction. But to end this Paragraph, you may tell
this Accuser, that the original Copy written by Mr. Andrew Johastone (then
Amanuensis to Sir George Mackenzie) is full in the Publishers hands.

The Scribler unwarily does us a great deal of honor, when he Quis genus
Aeaeadum? -- Virg.
tells the World that the practices of Presbyterians under the Reign of King
Charles II. were prosecuted and opposed by such as the Duke of Queensberry,
Marquis of Athol, Earl of Linlithgow, Viscount of Tarbat, Lieutenant General
Drummond, and Sir George Mackenzie. If he understood the Laws of Consequence,
he might easily see that Men of their Quality, Sense and Interest are too great
a weight in the opposite Scale, and since we have just reason to glory in their
parts, honor and integrity, it is very odd that he should be so foolish, as to
own that we are favored by persons of their merit and virtue. It Is pleasant to
see with what rudeness and vanity this little Man assaults the memory of Sir
George Mackenzie; so have I seen sometimes when a generous Falcon drops dead to
the ground, the Kites, the Crows, and the Jackdaws gather about him, and
solemnize a Jubilee, and yet even when he lies dead they dare not touch one of
his feathers. He may remember the Fable, that when the Lion Phaedri Fabulae.
was expiring, the Ass amongst other Beasts kicked him, and insulted over him.
I do not mean by this, that Sir George Mackenzie, if he were alive, would have
taken notice of his bawling or buffoonry; but to let him see, that he is as
void of generosity and honor, as he is of common sense and modesty.

In this first Part he appears very uneasy, that the Episcopal Party are not
Persecuted to the utmost, and upbraids us ever and anon with the Lenity that we
meet with under the present Government, and again must needs persuade the
World, that our Principles of Passive Obedience are Page 26.
more dangerous to the present Government, than the Principles of the Covenant
were to the former. But if there be no more in the case than Passive Obedience,
I think the Government needs not be afraid; and if the Episcopal Party are not
so violently Persecuted now, if they do not feel those loads of Misery that
they groaned under from the year 1638. to 1649, (when the Covenanted Zealots
were uppermost) this is not at all to be imputed to the Lenity of
Presbyterians, but to the restraints that are laid upon them by the opposite
Biass of the Nobility and Gentry, and because their most terrible Weapon of
Excommunication is blunted (the Civil Penalties that formerly did attend it
being taken away) this is the true Reason why they do not Prosecute their
Antagonists with Excommunications, because such Censures now have no force; so
that notwithstanding of all his Panegyricks in commendation of their Meekness,
we look upon them still as Tigers Chained, not altered in their Nature, but
much more galled and irritated by their restraint. If the Scotch Episcopal
Party has any favor in England or in Scotland, they ought to thank God for it,
and his Instruments whom he directs, and employs to preserve them. I hope it is
visible to the World, with what Industry and Application, and by what Engines
and Means, Presbyterians are resolved to destroy them.

In the Second Part of his Pamphlet he falls foul upon the Author of the Scotch
Presbyterian Eloquence, in which Scuffle I am not at all concerned. I think the
Author of that Collection was to blame, that he did not more particularly
relate the times when, the persons, by whom, and places where, such Stuff was
Preached, and perhaps he has been unwary as to some Stories which need
Confirmation, but since there is such variety and multitude of true Stories of
that Nature, nothing should be advanced to their disadvantage that is not duly
attested. As for the Inconsistencies charged upon the Author of the Scotch
Presbyterian Eloquence, they are not worth your while to consider them, nor
have I any inclination to examine them, nor am I concerned to offer my
mediation between them; only let me inform you that the Book of which I send
you the General History, contains not one good Consequence from the beginning
to the end.

I have heard that the Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence has been much talked off,
and therefore I take the liberty to acquaint you with the Reasons that induce
me to believe, that there was no injury done the Scotch Presbyterians in the
publishing of that Book.

First, Because the Printed Accounts cited from their Books are equal to the
unprinted relations of their Sermons and Prayers. Mr. Rutherford's Letters
alone have in them many coarse and abusive Metaphors, and Applications that are
mean and loathsome; and though I do not at all in this Letter meddle with his
design and meaning, yet I think it but a modest Censure to say, that there was
in those Letters more Popularity than Piety. I know the Party do magnify him
highly, and it is no part of my business to lessen their Opinion of him; yet I
must tell you, that in the esteem of all impartial Men he must fall below the
Character they bestow upon him. He had Read Dr. Twisse, and others of his
Opinion, and if any Learning appear in his Books, it is but some of the
Metaphysics he had borrowed from Dr. Twisse, as Dr. Owen, in his Treatise De
Justitia Vindicativa, assures us. And he was so plunged in these Metaphysical
Whimsies, that none can make Sense of what he wrote. Let his Patrons consider
that Chapter in his Exercitationes Apologeticae pro Divina Gratia, wherein he
pretends to answer that Argument, Quod unusquisque tenetur credere, and then
tell me if they can boast of his Perspicuity and Solidity. Of the same Stamp
are his Metaphysical Dissertations annexed to his Book De Providentia, de Ente
Possibili: if I had the Book by me, I think I could give you Divertisement. I
know very well what our Adversaries will say, viz. that I do not understand
him, and I must sincerely acknowledge they are in the right of it.

But Secondly, The most blasphemous Stories in the Book called the Scotch
Presbyterian Eloquence, can be proved by the best and most undeniable Evidence,
viz. That of Mr. Urquhart's concerning the Lords Prayer, that of Mr. Kirkton's
concerning the Holy Ghost, and that he believed Abraham run out of the Land of
Caldea for debt. Now I agree with this angry Scribler, so far, that these are
horrid and blasphemous expressions, and I pitch upon them, because he himself
thinks that nothing can be worse, and that these Expressions alone (if falsely
alleged) disprove the whole Collection. Now we fairly offer to prove these
three, the first against Mr. Urquhart, the other two against Mr. Kirkton. This
is undeniably just by his own Concessions Page 61. and if such blasphemous
Stories are openly tolerated, what must we expect from that Society of Men, and
I have in the former Treatise given you two instances of greater Ignorance and
Nonsense in the Printed Books of Mr. Rule, than any that is to be found in the
Scotch Eloquence. As for the Stories cited from the Scotch Eloquence against
Mr. Rule, and mentioned by him in Page 61. I do not truly believe them, unless
I have better Authority for them.

Thirdly, suppose that one had a mind to make Stories to the disadvantage of
the Scotch Presbyterians, yet their jargon is so coarsly extravagant, that it
is not possible for any Man to speak their Language, unless he had been
Educated in their Gibberish, and the Harmony between their Printed Books, and
their unprinted Sermons is so exact, that none can doubt of the last who Read
the first. Let me but name one Man, it is Mr. J. K. his Fancy is so Comical, so
surprising, so unimitable, that it is not possible to say any thing as he says
it himself, nor yet to ascribe to another what is said by him; and this way of
Preaching is no new thing amongst the Presbyterians. They always accused the
Episcopalians that their Sermons were Cold, and Dry, and Moral Discourses, and
were not Calculated to the Capacities and Affections of the People as theirs
were, and therefore they complied so much with the Genius of the People that
they forgot the Majesty of Religion, and the distinction between things Sacred
and Profane.

Fourthly, There may be so many Stories added of their abusive Distorsions of
the Scripture with Authentic attestations, that it were their wisdom to let
this Debate fall. For Preaching after their way is become of late so trisling
an Exercise, that no Man could perform it to the satisfaction of their through
paced Disciples, but he that was either an extraordinary Hypocrite, or well
advanced in Madness, and whatever Men pretend that have considered the affair
but superficially, it is necessary to expose that absurd, sensual, and ludicrous
Sect, that Metamorphose Religion, and its Solemn Exercises unto Theatrical
Scenes. If the great things of Religion be true, if we have any thing that
distinguishes us from the Beasts that perish, if our Souls survive our Bodies,
and if our belief and hopes of invisible things, and the slate of Retribution
be not entirely a Dream: what greater affront can be done to the Majesty of
God, the dignity of Human Nature, and the Common Sense of Mankind, than thus by
mock Sermons to Lampoon the great Truths of the Gospel? Did not our meek and
blessed Savior chastise the Hypocrisy of the Pharisees with greater severity,
than the more open and undisguised lewdness of Publicans and Sinners? And St.
Paul treats them with no other Language, than that of dogs, evil workers, and
the concision; their Character is more at length in the Epistle of St. Jude;
such religious Scorners do in the most effectual manner promote Atheism, and
they that Act Devotion after the manner of a Farce, do expose it more than the
Wits, and the Philosophers.

Upon this consideration alone the Presbyterian Preachments do more harm to
Piety, than the most subtle Arguments of Ancient and Modern Atheists: we are
supported against Atheism by the strength of Natural Reason, when we are
attacked gravely by plausible appearances: but when we are surprised and
disarmed by the sudden insinuations of Raillery, we are quickly overcome, not
because we are weak, but because we do not resolutely encounter the Enemy. One
Sermon mixed with such fooleries, as give occasion to this Digression, do more
real hurt than can be imagined; and if it be a fault to Publish them, how
intolerable is it to Preach them, and to support Societies that seem to design
nothing less than to ridicule all Religion. But it is the just Judgment of God,
that they who have forsaken the Unity of the Church should be given up to
strong delusions.

In the third part of his Pamphlet, he heaps together some monstrous and
ridiculous Stories against the Clergy, and though one had sufficient strength
to grapple with a Scavenger and lay him in the Mire, yet methinks the
undertaking is neither generous nor decent. There are a great many of them that
he asperses that I know nothing off, so it is not reasonable to expect that I
should meddle in their affairs, and yet if they were the most arrant Villains
upon Earth, I am able to demonstrate, that his Testimony against them is not
Valid. And therefore I humbly beg of all disinterested Strangers to consider
but a few Particulars; and then let them judge whether the accusations of
Presbyterians against the Episcopal Church of Scotland are to be valued.

First, They may remember that this way of Libelling, is the true
Characteristick of the Party, and we need gather no other instances to prove
this, than the Practices of their General Assembly, Anno 1638. Who (when they
Sat) Libelled the Venerable Archbishop Spotswood, and all his Brethren of that
Order, of the most abominable Crimes, and charged them with the sins of
Habitual Lying, Swearing, Drunkenness, Adultery, Incest, Sodomy, and Sorcery,
with an etc. and they past their Censures upon them as guilty of these
Abominations, and inserted the names of particular Gentlemen as Witnesses, who
were never acquainted with this Contrivance: and ordered all the Ministers of
the Nation to Read all these Libels and Sentences from their Pulpits, as if the
whole Process had been fairly examined, and the Witnesses had appeared before
that Packt Jury of Mock Ecclesiastics.

Now this was the Solemn Act of the whole Party met in a General Assembly, who
concerted those Methods, when they were mutually conscious to the Knavery of
one another, and defying the Omniscience of Heaven, went on resolutely against
their own Convictions, as well as the Practice of all former Ages. It is but
ordinary for private Men to assault the Reputation of others, but what degrees
of wickedness must they arrive to, that Combine together, and own to one
another, that the plainest Laws of God might be trampled upon, rather than miss
their end. And this Villainy is still upon Record, and to their everlasting
disgrace undeniable, and will continue so, as long as there are any Monuments
of that Nation preserved.

Their Predecessors thus United, found Calumny the most proper Weapon, and
effectual Instrument to serve their Malice, and to disgrace amongst the deluded
People, Grave, Learned, Loyal, and Judicious Men; and the People were quickly
undeceived, when the Covenanters got into the Saddle: for from the year 1638.
to the year 1652. (when Oliver grew weary of their insolence) the Nation
groaned under the saddest and most unutterable Bondage. The Reader is therefore
desired to remember that no Man can continue a Presbyterian without the Arts of
Calumny. Omne imperium conservatur iisdem artibus quibus primo acquiritur: and
when the Varnish of Hypocrisy drops off, then the Tyranny supported by it must
sink. The Presbyterians began their Faction with Calumny, and they cannot now
(if they would) lay it aside. What could the Episcopal Clergy expect from their
present Persecutors, less than their Predecessors met with in that General
Assembly? Who stuck at nothing, how monstrous soever, to promote their end;
when they forbear to breath, then it is that they forbear to Slander and
Calumniate.

When upon the late Revolution the Presbyterians were empowered more plainly to
discover their Nature, the first thing they betook themselves to was that of
Libelling; and when they have now wearied themselves (if they can be wearied of
what is so natural to the Faction) and exposed their own Reputation by invading
that of other Men's, they must yet go on, not that they find this Method
successful, but because they cannot forbear; and it is enough for the Reader to
know that they cannot name three of the Clergy of Scotland justly deprived for
Immoralities, after all their Insidious Arts, Libellings, and Clamours since
the Revolution.

But to make the Villainy of that General Assembly, I lately named a little Anno
1638.
more conspicuous, I desire the Reader may remember a very memorable Story. It
is this, The Assembly pretended that the Bishops were proved guilty of all the
Crimes that were imputed to them, by sufficient Evidence; and therefore they
inserted the names of several Gentlemen, and others, in their Sentences, as
Witnesses of the Libels. And in their Sentence against the Archbishop
Spotswood, the Lord of Balfour, in Fife, was named as a Witness, whereas this
Honest Gentleman never knew any thing of the matter; and all the time of the
Sitting of that Mock Assembly, he had never been from his own House, which is
at least threescore Miles from Glasgow. But Mr. Colin Adam, Minister of
Anstruther-Easter, did Read the That you may be fully informed of the (...),
disingenuity, illegal Practices, and tumultuous Villainies of the Covenanters,
you are earnestly desired to Read King Charles I. large Declaration in Folio.
Land. Printed for R^b. Young, 1639.
Sentence against the Archbishop, from the Pulpit upon a Sunday, according to
the Assemblies appointment, the Lord of Balfour being in the Church, and
hearing his own name Read as a Witness of the Libel against the Archbishop,
went out of the Church, and immediately after Sermon called for the Minister,
and challenged him how he could Read His name in such a Villainous Paper, since
he himself knew that he had not been from Home all the time of the Assembly,
and so could not have been a Witness there. To which the Minister answered,
that he knew well enough he was not a Witness, but the Assembly had inserted
his name, and he durst not but Read as they had ordered. Now let the World
judge what an Assembly this was, and what Credit ought those Enemies of Mankind
and good Nature ever to have, after such a palpable Wickedness; that when they
had charged the Fathers of the Church with such Abominations, they should
presume to abuse the names of Particular Gentlemen, as Witnesses of their own
inventions.

After this piece of undeniable History, I would gladly know, whether any
Modest Man thinks it necessary, that a particular answer should be returned to
the odious Libel against the unstained Reputation of that Pious, Prudent,
Learned, and Loyal Martyr Archbishop Sharp, who cannot be named, but to the
disgrace of the Scotch Presbyterians. I need not upon this occasion run out
into Tragical Exclamations against their Impudence, the more they Lie, the more
true they are to the Spirit of the Party. They cannot be more kind to his
Reputation than they were to his Life, whom they barbarously murdered, and
whose Assassines were magnified in their Pamphlets. And Vide Hind let loose.
though this little unknown Accuser pretends that he was not Murdered by the
Presbyterians, because (forsooth) one of their Ministers in Holland refused the
Sacrament to one of the Murderers, yet it was undeniably the effect of their
united Combination, and justified in their Vide Hind let loose throughout.
Pamphlets, and attempted once, and threatened frequently before. We dare him,
and all his Associates, to answer what Mr. Sheilds has Written relating to this
Affair: my meaning is, that this effort of their Villainy was not the result of
private Passion, but the avowed and just Consequence of their Principles, and
then let their Patrons tell me if they meet with any thing worse in the Morals
of the Jesuits, that are every where so justly exposed. They agree in their
Notions, but exceed them far by their Bawling, Rudeness, and Buffoonry. The
Jesuit is Mannerly and Artificial, but the Scotch Presbyterian seems to act by
the mechanism of his Nature.

Slanders and Calumny, being thus Authorized by the Assembly, it was no wonder
to see their Leading Men Practice the same Villainies; therefore it is that you
find Mr. Rutherford, Gravely and Maliciously, accuse the Bishops of the same
Crimes, that the Assembly accused them of, in his Preface to Lex Rex, which I
cannot Cite more particularly, having no Books by me.

Secondly, Such as are Strangers to our affairs, must remember that this Trade
of Libelling the Clergy is no Reflection upon our Country. For the whole Body
of the Clergy of England Vid. Centuries of Scandalous Ministers complained of
to the Parliament, Anno 1646.
were thus maliciously assaulted, and all the Crimes Libelled against them,
that their Enemies could invent. And if such an illustrious Body of
Ecclesiastics were thus rudely treated, can the Clergy of Scotland, under
their present Miseries and Oppressions, expect fairer Quarters.

Thirdly, I desire the Reader to consider with how much Rudeness and Ignorance,
this unknown Lampooner bespatters the present Clergy of the Church of England,
and the Laity of her Communion. It is no part of my business to transcribe his
Characters You may meet with them at length Page 4. of his Pamphlet.
, if he had assaulted only some private Men, in some remote Corners of our
Country, he might be thought only to defend his own Party, but when he foams
nothing but Spite and Rancour, and Violence, against all Men of whatever Rank,
Nation, or Dignity, I again wish the unbyassed Reader to tell me if this Man
should be particularly answered. It is not possible for him to hide his Nature,
the paltry cruptions of his Choler are ungovernable. He seems to forget his own
design (which was to make the Scotch Clergy odious in England) he accuses them
before whom he Pleads, as much as those who were the first Objects of his
Indignation.

But this is not enough, he attacks not only our prime Nobility and Gentry, but
all our Kings since the Reformation. I am alraid I have troubled you too much,
and therefore I make haste in a word or two, to examine the Characters he gives
of particular men, as far as I know them.

Some he accuses as guilty of gross Immoralities, that were actually for such
Immoralities deposed and censured by their Ecclesiastic Superiors, such were
Dean Hamilton, Ninian Paterson, John Anderson of Terregles, and Kockburn of St.
Bothens. And is it not very strange that he should accuse the justice of our
Ecclesiastical Superiors, because of such vicious persons as were actually
censured by their Authority. So it seems in this man's Language they are
accountable for them whom they censure, as well as for others. Others he names
that are not at all of my acquaintance, and it is nothing but what I expected,
that the Agents of the party would employ their little Missionaries to gather
Stories from all corners of the Country amongst their Disciples.

The first that he endeavors to abuse, is Dr. Paterson Archbishop of Glasgow,
and that in a style becoming the true race of the Gnostics, I mean Scotch
Presbyterians, who have no other precedents in History, than these impure
Sectaries, whose lives were a disgrace to humane Nature, as well as a reproach
to Religion. The World is not yet so besotted as to think that the Archbishop
of Glasgow needs particular answers. Indeed, I must acknowledge that the Author
has pretty well secured himself against such Apologies: his accusations are so
obscene, that no Christian must name them; and therefore he has hid himself in
a Cloud of Forgeries, that none can repeat but a Devil, and none could invent
but the Author. The Archbishops Character, Merit and Parts, cannot but draw
upon him the Odium of the whole Party. And I wish with all my heart, they had
not tried his patience by more terrible methods, than those of Pasquils Vid.
Page 64.
and Calumnies.

The next of my Acquaintance is Mr. Brown Minister of Drysdale, and the foolish
Notes that he makes him to have preached, is a pure Forgery, a Lie in which
there is not any mixture of truth. His connivances of the Adultery of Lockerby
with Archbald Johnstone of Kirkburn's Wife, is of the same stamp with the
former, for he prosecuted the Adulterer so vigorously, that he got him
excommunicated, and continued so under the highest Censures of the Church,
until the evidences of his repentance obliged the Bishop to absolve him.

In the next Paragraph he mentions Mr. Cant, whom he names underling to Page 66.
Mr. Hamilton, and whom he rails at again. Mr. Andrew Cant was never underling
Page 71.
to any dead nor alive, though still subordinate to his Governors both Civil
and Ecclesiastical: the unaffected freedom of his temper makes him now and then
a scourge to Hypocrites, and he still preaches the Gospel to all that observe
him by his patience, as he did lately by his excellent Sermons: and the stories
forged of him are but the exhalations of the Libellers infectious breath.

In the next Paragraph to Mr. Cant, he mentions severals who had their Mission
and Education from the Presbyterians, and if they preached such things, we know
to whom they ow it; many of 'em are dead long since, and it was not possible
upon the restitution of the Government, Anno 1660, so speedily to recover the
Clergy from Presbyterian fooleries, for tho they complied with Episcopacy, such
as grew old under Presbytery, spoke still the Language of Ashdod: for being
enjoined under Presbytery to preach perpetually against Montrose, and the
Malignants: they stumbled now and then into their former blunderings; and it is
pleasant to see this Man accuse the Church for the sayings of Presbyterians,
who though they complied with Episcopacy upon the restoration of the
Government; yet still they wore the marks of their former slavery in their
Phrase as well as in their Faces, such are most of them he names, Page 66. 67.

But the most impetuous Efforts of his malice are levelled against Dr.
Canaries. The Doctor told me, That these were not the first Essays of their
Civility toward him; for he being employed by some of the Episcopal Clergy to
represent their grievances at Court, the Presbyterians from that very moment
fixed their Eye upon him, and prosecuted him with all the Calumnies that their
fury and common practices in such cases could suggest unto them. But still they
found the Doctor too hard for them, and the wise Men amongst them have
frequently owned to him, that as they hated such Methods, so they highly
disapproved the particular injustice that was done to the Doctor. Mr. Spalding
who was Clerk to the first pretended Assembly after the Revolution, and is now
one of the Preachers of Dundee, was put upon searching after such a Story; but
(as he confessed to Mr. Carstairs) he found there was nothing to be made of it.
And the Doctor appeals, both to Mr. Carstairs, and Mr. Spalding for the truth
of this, and he doubts not but that they will readily do him justice in it, and
and it is very odd that this Libeller should accuse him of new, when he stood
two Trials before the Privy Council, when it was highly Presbyterian, and
proceeded against the Episcopal Clergy with the greatest rigor: and another
before a Presbyterian Synod, in which all the Members except three Ministers,
and three ruling Elders, were mighty violent against him. And in both these
Trials he so baffled his Accusers, that the Judicatories treated him with
special Honor, and acquitted him from all the Calumnies that were charged upon
him, and reproved his Enemies for their malicious libelling of him. And this
Narrative the Doctor can prove by authentic Extracts, which he has in his own
hands. So that the underling Pedlars amongst the Presbyterians may write what
they please, it is not now in their power to hurt him. And the Doctor further
appeals to the Presbytery of Selkirk, when he was there, how readily they would
have received him into their Communion, such a particular esteem they had for
him. The Story that is metamorphos'd by this Accuser into a prodigious villainy
is no more than this, That the Doctor, when he was a Boy at the University,
fell into the Company of two other Young Gentlemen at Dundee, and they three
walking about the Fields in the Summertime, met in the Evening with some Women
that were watching in the Fields the Linen that they had washed, the other two
Gentlemen accosted some of these Women, by amorous and foolish Embraces, and
the Doctor over hearing one of them squeak, he called them back, and chid them
for what they had done, and told them if there was any noise made about it, he
would declare he had no accession to it. And when this trisling Story was
examined before the Presbytery of Dundee, both the Women, and the other two
Gentlemen acquitted the Doctor, and constantly owned that he had no share in it
at all. And this is remarkable, that there was no Circumstance relating to it,
but what was examined by Mr. Rate, then Minister of Dundee, an Indulged
Presbyterian. Nor did the Doctor go out of the Nation till two years after
that, upon occasion of his Fathers death. By this Story one may see the Malice,
and indefatigable Industry of that Sect, it was the Doctors early fate to be
accused by the Presbyterians; and though no part of the Story be within any
possible degrees of Truth: yet the Reader may see, how the Libeller Vapors, as
if he had the best and clearest Evidence. And since the Doctor has lived
eighteen or nineteen years beyond the reach of Calumny, blameless, to the
Conviction of his Enemies, how foolish, and how impious is it to accuse him.

As for his being Popish he has given an account of that in the Preface to his
Sermon Printed at London 1686; but that he was a Jesuit is a Lie, for he was
never of any Order in that Church, and his Zeal against Popery did sufficiently
appear, and all that know him, know his Innocence, as to all the malicious
Slanders invented against him.

The following Paragraph, page 72. mentions Mr. Monro, commonly called Doctor
Monro. I am sufficiently acquainted with the Doctor, and he says so little of
him, that I may be allowed to examine it particularly. First, He Is commonly
called Dr. Monro, and the meaning of this is one of two, either a Fanatic
Squeamishness that will not allow the Title of Doctor to any Clergy Man; or, an
insinuation that he was not graduated Doctor in the University. If the first be
intended, it is but a piece of Quakerism, the 4th. day of the Week commonly
called Wednesday. If the second be meant, he was not called Doctor until the
Month of February 1682, when he received his Degree in the Theological Schools
of the New College at St. Andrews from the Learned Doctor Comri, then Vice
Chancellor of the University.

Our Libeller adds that he is a mighty Agent for the Party. If he has any
qualities to recommend him, that of a good Agent is none of them. And again, he
is represented to be one of the Episcopal Pamphleteers. I do not know what he
means by this, unless he charges him with publishing the Presbyterian
Inquisition. It may be he was the Author of that Narrative, which he is ready
to justify if ever he is fairly tried (excepting still some Marginal Notes
relating to Mr. Rule, to which he had no accession) and this Pamphlet contains
so many steps of Presbyterian Knavery and disingenuity, that if he please he
may let it alone.

But the saddest blow against the Doctor is this, that it is well known that he
Page 72.
Rode for several years in the Pope's Guards, but I ask, to whom is this known?
To the Presbyterians only, who know all secrets, and discover Plots in the
World of the Moon? But I must tell you that for the time the Doctor was abroad,
he was never out of France, and the Confines of it, nor nearer to Rome than
about four hundred and eighty Italian Miles. It were more easy for this
Accuser to have Copyed the former Libel contained in the Presbyterian
Inquisition, than thus to trust to his own invention.

Mr. Gray comes next, if he mean Mr. James Gray, Minister of Kelso, he is
remarkable for his Modesty, Learning, Veracity, and Piety, and he is
Charactered in an opposite Style, by such as neither know him, nor the vertuos
that recommend him to his Brethren.

Mr. George Henry, Minister of Corstorphen, is a Man of Gravity and Prudence,
Page 78.
and his other qualifications are undeniable, and he is not capable of any such
extravagance of Passion as this common Accuser charges him with.

Mr. Alexander Ramsay, Minister of the Old Kirk of Edinburgh, was driven from
his Residence in the West by the Covenanted Zealots, and lived since in the Eye
of the Nation, beloved of all that know him, whether we consider his blamless
Life, or Ministerial Sufficiencies.

Dr. Annan Dean of Edinburgh was known all Scotland over, and there was
scarcely ever a more innocent Man in Britain, and he needs no Apology.

Now it is pleasant enough to observe, that in all this List he has not named
the Author of Scotch Presbyterian Eloquence, nor the Publisher.

I have given you a short account of such as I know, for such as I am not
acquainted with, I have no reason to believe this Libeller. For if they were
never so guilty, they must have other Accusers than Men of such Prostitute
Consciences. His Civility to the Church of Vide Page 4. throughout.
England alone, makes it appear how little he is to be regarded. He begins his
Book with a Printed for Tho. Anderson near Charing Cross. 1693.
Lie in the Title Page, that it might be all of a piece. As for any Shadows of
Argument that are here and there scattered, if they be of any weight they shall
be considered when the other Pamphlets, that are threatened by the Party, are
made public.

Farewell.
FINIS.

