A modest Vindication of the Earl of S(...)y: In a Letter to a Friend
concerning his being Elected King of Poland.
AT a time when the eyes of all Europe are directed toward the event of our
present Affairs; At such a time as this when the Balance of our public safety
seems so equally poised, that it is hard to guess in which Scale lies our
Happiness, or Ruin: I think it my duty, as an honest man, a true Subject to the
Government I live under, and a Friend to Truth; to give you (since you so
earnestly have requested it) my just and impartial Sentiments of our present
condition, as it particularly relates to the Lord of S -- y now under
Confinement in the Tower.

This Great Man, (I cannot but call him so) this immediate first mover (as some
would have it) of all the dreadful Revolutions that perhaps of late years have
seemed to threaten us, will nevertheless appear to you by the following
Relation which I am to give you of him, a Man as very Extraordinary in his
Abilities, so no less wonderful for his Virtue. Not to mention his unshaken
Obedience to every Government he has been concerned in, or lived under; his
steady adherence to every Religion that had but hopes to be established; his
unwearied endeavors for the Restoration of the public Peace in the time of
our late unhappy Troubles; his admirable Counsils all along for the Improvement
of the common Good of the Kingdom; the Honor and Safety of the Monarchy, the
Success of our Arms, and the Overthrow of our Enemies.

His Obedience to the Government is sufficiently evident, insomuch, that That
never changed, but He did: His endeavors for public Peace are eminently
notorious; For in the late Civil War (in spite of all Obligations of Honor
and Loyalty to the contrary,) he forsook the King, and carried over his
Regiment to the Parliament on purpose (as much as in him lay) to weaken the
Royal Cause, and by the ruin of that, to bring that War to an end, that no more
Rebel Blood might be shed, though the great Martyrs Veins were drein'd
afterward without Mercy.

So much he then acted for public Peace, but what he has advised for public
Good would fill a Volumn up: who can enough commemorate the shutting up of the
Exchequer to put the King out of Debt? The breaking of the Triple League to
prevent the growth of France, the dividing of the Fleet that we might be sure
to beat the Dutch, though in the end it cost us a Victory; yet certainly his
meaning and foresight in it, was to preserve the Shipping, and the tender Lives
of the Subject.

Then for the Honor and Safety of the Monarchy; none so sincere, so steady and
so faithful as he has been: for the Honor of the King, witness his late Speech
in Parliament, afterward printed, and burnt by the Common-Hangman for the
safety of the King; witness the cause of his present Imprisonment; But for the
public safety, what Honors he has despised, what promotions neglected, will
appear in the following relation, which certainly the World will never question
the truth of, since the main of it has been taken from his own mouth, that
perfect Index of his Heart, and Oracle of Truth.

In a late Paper, printed for the Vindication of this matchless Patriot, the
Reader will find many and extraordinary Instances of Preferments and Honors,
which this Noble Peer has waved and refused rather than suffer himself to be
bribed from the Interest of the common Good: But what he has merely lost in
tender pity and compassion this poor Kingdom of England, and it is true
Protestant Religion, ought to be remembered, as long as there is a Scepter
swayed in Poland, or the Turk unconverted.

I suppose there are very few in this Kingdom that do not very sensibly
^^member the late Inter-regnum in Poland: How many Illustrious Candidates stood
fair for the Election: Sobietski indeed had done great things for that People,
he had kept their Potent Enemy the Turk from entering any farther upon their
Frontiers; was great and popular in the esteem and love of the best Army that
perhaps they ever had, but that was by much too little to Entitle him to the
Succession on the Throne; it appearing absolutely the Interest of that Nation
that the Great Turk was not only to be beaten, he must in short too be
converted, and who so fit for such an Enterprise, as he that next should be
promoted to the Regal Authority? One that from the high place he was to
possess, might not only Administer Justice to them, but Salvation to the
greatest part of Asia.

To find out such a Spirit, one fit for so great and extraordinary an
undertaking, you may imagine the wise Diet omitted no diligence: the
Constitutions of all the Governments in Europe were looked into, as they stood
Qualified both in Church and State; and whence was it so proper to expect a
Lawgiver, such an Oracle as they then wanted, but from the best modeled
Government, and best Disciplined Church in the World? Therefore upon strict
enquiry, France appearing too Despotick, Spain too uncertain and irregular,
Holland absolutely Antimonarchical, and few or no Cheese-mongers in it fit to
make a Monarch of, Germany too near 'em; and that if once they ventured upon a
King from thence, The Emperor upon every like occasion might be imposing one
threadbare Prince or other upon them to ease his own People: For you must
note, that in Germany Princes are Quartered upon Provinces, as Regiments were
in England upon Corporations in the time of Rebellion, and are indeed the great
Grievance of the Country.

Upon these Considerations, you may imagine, Quickly the eyes of the whole Diet
were cast upon little England, and there, upon whom so soon as the little Lord
of S -- y? Polish Deputies were immediately sent Post incognito, with the
Imperial Crown and Scepter in a Cloak-bag to him. Old Blood smelt it from
Bishops-gate-street where they allighted to his Lodging; and had it not been
for an old Acquaintance and ancient Friendship between King Anthony the Elect
(for now I must call him so) and himself, I am credibly informed he had laid an
Ambush for it at the Cock Alehouse by Temple Bar, where some thirty indigent
Bullies were eating stuffed Beef Helter Skelter at his charge, on purpose to
stand by, and assist him in carrying off the Booty.

But Heaven (which I hope has ordained that no Crown shall ever suffer damage
for King Anthony's sake) took care to preserve this; For the sinister Designs
of the old Irish Crown-monger being yet to be doubted, this prudent Prince (as
I am told) having tried and fitted it to his Head, carefully sent it back again
by a trusty Messenger, concealed in the hulk or shell of a Holland Cheese,
taken asunder merely for that purpose, and cemented together again by an Art,
fit for no man to know but a King Presumptive of Poland.

All things thus prepared; his Election being carried in the Diet so
unanimously and so nemine contradicente, that no man to this hour ever heard of
it but himself; It is not to be imagined how this little Grigg was transported
with the thoughts of growing into a Leviathan he fancied himself the Picture
before Pobb's Commonwealth already, nay he stopped up his Tap (as I am told) on
purpose that his Dropsy might swell him bigg enough for His Majesty, and of a
sudden grew so utter an Enemy to all Republics and Antimonarchical
Constitutions, that from that hour he premeditated, and laid the foundation of
a worse Speech than that Famous one which he uttered once in our English
Senate, Entitled Delenda est Carthago.

But now upon deliberate and weighty consideration of the great Charge he was
to undertake, many difficulties and of an extraordinary nature seemed to arise.
A Protestant King being Elected to a Popish Kingdom, great were the Debates
within himself which way he was to steer his Course in the Administration of
his Government, so as to discharge his Conscience, as well in respect of the
Case incumbent upon him of the Souls of his People, as of the protection of
their Properties and Persons.

The Great Turk, you have heard before, was to be converted: Now to bring so
Mighty a Potentate over to the Church of Rome, seemed utterly destructive of
the Protestant Interest, which he has always been so violent a Champion for:
Therefore it is resolved, ( Protestant, and True Protestant) the Ottomon
Emperor must be, or nothing. But how (when that was done) to establish the
same Church in his own Dominions? there was the great Question. Whereupon,
after due Consideration, he resolved at his taking Possession of that Throne,
which stood gaping for him, to carry over from hence such Ministers, both of
Church and State, as might be proper to advise, assist and support him, in a
Design so pious, though so difficult.

Immediately therefore he proceeds to the drawing a Scheme of the whole
Ministry of his Government; and in a large Scrowl, whereon was indorsed in Text
Letters this Magnificent Title; Arcana Imperii Poloniensis sub Regno
Augustissimi Principis Anthonileski Ashleiski primi Dei Gratia istius Populi
Regis, etc. was contained a List of all the great Officers of the Crown, and of
his Household, which (according to the best light I could get into the matter)
was as follows:

Seignioro Roberto Howardensko Our Chancellor. -- Eskriekski, Our Treasurer.
Slabberigund Kentelaus, Tarsallan Huntingtonierkew, Jalouxion Grayoski,
Whiggund Arronowitz, Privy-Councellors, and Lords of our Bedchamber. Loyallin
Mordantaiko, Admiral of Our Fleet, at present under an Embargo. Braggardo
Maclesseildowski, and his two Sons, Generals of Our Army. Thomazo
Armstrongeyland, Captain of a Troop of tolerated Bandetti to raise Arbitrary
Contributions. Seigniori Newportoski, Comptroller of Our Household, and Master
of Our Ceremonies, to show his Civility on one hand, and his Justice on the
other. Fidelio Porterewski, First Groom of our Bedchamber, though we suspect
him for little better than a Spy to the Pope. Richaiski Coolaiski and his
Friend Willisko Herbertensko, Secretaries of State. Tom Merrayo, Clerk of the
Council. Suffolkin Feltona^ko, Grissinceper, surnamed the Clown, Masters of the
Horse and Dog-whippers by turns. Boobyan Bridgesmund, Slowchero Posleno^itz,
Concealed Politicians and Counselors under the Character and Livery of Our
Chair-men. Don Stephano Volponiester, Another under the disguise of a Footman,
but designed Paymaster of Our Army. Prince Prettyman Perkinoski, Our Adopted
Heir, because a little wiser than Our own Son, and designed to be offered to
the Diet for Our Successor; His present Employment (together with the
assistance of the Princess his Sister) is, to cure the Plica, or King's Evil of
this Country, in case Our own Majesty should fail of that Virtue. Slingibeski
Betheliski, Chief Headsman of Warsaw. Francisco Turnspitanski, Esquire of Our
Body, in case he will promise not to sell his place. The Valiant Russillaus,
Captain of Our Guards, and Knight of the Halter, a new Order to be instituted
at Our Coronation. Cappellanoff le Grandi, Intended Viceroy of the first
Kingdom our General shall Conquer. Madona la bella Croftesia, Poultneyinda la
Pruda, Lady Abbesses for two Protestant Nunneries, to be established for the
use of Us and Our Ministers. Everardo Fitz-henerisko, To write Libels against
Us by Our own Consent, to bring Us into favor with Our People. Jean
Drydenurtzitz, Our Poet Laureat for writing Panegyricks upon Oliver Cromwell,
and Libels against his present Master King Charles II. of England. Tom.
Shadworiski, His Deputy. Sodomito Fanshawiski, Designed Our Ambassador to the
Grand Seigneur with a Present of Protestant handsome Boys in order to his
Conversion.
This was the best account I could possibly get of the matter: There were
indeed a great many more nominated to Offices and Preferments; but not being
able to gain a perfect Catalogue of them, I have contented my my self with
barely a recital of such things as upon my own knowledge I dare recommend to
the world for Truth; and that, to the best of my remembrance, I have exactly
observed in the foregoing Relation.

But in the very height of all this expectation, one night as his Majesty Elect
lay musing in his Bed, restless with the thoughts and expectation of the
approaching Empire, there appeared to him by the light of a Lamp that was
burning in his Chamber, a dreadful and most monstrous Vision; the Shape and
Figure of it was very Confused and Irregular; sometimes it looked like the
Whore of Babylon, naked, and of immense nudities; Presently, in the twinkling
of an eye, the Form was changed, and it appeared like a Justice of Peace
strangled by a Crew of Ruffians, who afterward ran him through the Body with
his own Sword, that it might be thought he hanged himself; Of a sudden it was
altered again, and seemed a Troop of Pilgrims, armed with Black-Bills, that
came from the Lord knows whence, landed the Lord knows where, and are gone the
Lord knows whither. His Majesty seeing it vary so often, and so terribly,
(calling up all the Faith he had to his assistance) boldly demanded, In the
Name of etc. what art Thou? Instantly, after a terrible Clap of Thunder,
attended with several Flashes of Lightening, it contracted it self into the
shape of a Doctor of Salamancha, and in an hideous tone cried, I am a PIOT; Woe
to England; Farwell till 78. and vanished. No sooner was it gone, but a stupid
amazement seized upon the Majesty of Poland, and cast him into a deep sleep,
where he lay till morning; when awakening, he found himself stripped of all the
high and aspiring thoughts that before had filled his mind; Pity and Compassion
toward his Native-Countrey cooled utterly his Ambition; and from that moment
he laid by all thoughts of Converting the Turk, and resolved to stay at home
for the Confounding the Pope.

Thus has this good Man (for now he is no more his Majesty again) refused the
greatest Promotion that perhaps any Subject of England was ever raised to,
merely to stand in a Gap here, and stay the Plague that was coming upon us.

Sir, what Justification of him may be gathered from the Truth of this, and his
present condition, I leave to your better Judgment, and subscribe my self.

Your humble Servant, etc.

London, Printed for (...) Smith Bookseller in Chief to His Majesty Elect of
Poland, 1681.


