Madam Gwins ANSWER TO THE DUCHESS Of Portsmouths LETTER
Madam.,
BY your undated Letter I find that you had a very Pleasant and a very
Prosperous Voyage and that the Winds were fair, the Sea smooth, and the Ship
sound, what says Pluck the more -- the better luck, many an honester woman, has
been drowned Crossing the Thames, whilst you it seems escaped Crossing a Branch
of the Sea, the Seamen it seems looked upon you as the Star by which they were
guided, I wonder the more at your landing so happily for I should rather have
judged you an Ignis Fatuus or a Willy with wisp or a false light -- that would
have made them run headllong to their owh destruction, but give a man luck and
throw him into the Sea. I had like to have said he that is born to be hanged
will never be drowned, you tell us of great things, that you are Bigbelly'd
with hopes that your little Prince will Mount the Seahorse and ride Admiral of
the narrow Seas, but hold I have a little Lord that crep out of my cranny that
may for ought I know prick your Bladder and let out that ambitious wind, both
sprung from one Branch and why should not he hope for something, as well as
yours gape for all: there is little difference by the Mother side, if we search
the Kerhaells family in France, and mine in England. You boast much of
Neptune's kindness and stick not to say that he was Sea sick for you, that he
proffered you Gold, and Pearl, and what not, if you would have let him stick
his Trident in you.

But you (innocent soul) spawned out his salt water Temptations. I may say to
you as its said in another case who has believed our report? You that will
drudge like an Apple-wench for Gold; would drudge like an Oyster-woman for
Pearl. therefore leave off your Vainglorious boasting for we know you too well
to believe you Hereafter forbear meddling with my Mamma it is true she dyed in a
ditch, but what then; she was a soul, she loved Brandy, and as for your Pappa
his lodging in Wiltshire was but in a Pigsty, that if I came from a Drunken
family, you sprung from a swinish race and pray what is the difference when our
Pedigree is summed up? why should you and I fall out? by your Letter I find you
in ^pocky heat you do not only reflect upon me but upon most of our English
Lady's; what strange effects has the French Ahc already produced! you have
hardly warmed your feat with the Pox, and yet you appear, to be in a mighty
heat. If you have such a plaguey prodgious stomach that you can taste of twenty
Dishes. and yet after all take a snack with the Coachman, or a private
collation from the Butler hit's pity but you were confined with the King of
Morocco's Ostriches in St. Jams's Park and fed with pieces of old Iron, or at
best with Oxes liver for Royal fare does but ill become you, the greasy great
eating Quaker was easier satisfied then you seem to be. If you have so
lascivious an appetite as your letter mentions, it is well if the French Kings
Army can satisfy you, as for my part I can content my self with the society of
one or two good likely footmen, after I have had a little Royal pastime, and
therefore press me no more to marry, what need I keep a Cow that can have a
quart of Milk for a penny; now I can go to Newmarket, anon to Windsor, and from
thence to London, and who dare say Nelly where, go thou? I can admit this
Gallant to my embraces to day another to morrow, and still be at quiet at home,
should I once give up my pleasures into the hands of a Cuckold there would be
no end of my sorrow I durst not then let a man come near me but in long Coats.
Jealousy would burn up all my delights, that thing you call Husband would make
my bed uneasy he would be as gall and Wormwood in my drink he would imbitter
all my delights. If I cast but an affectionate eye, on an old acquaintance, he
would cry I itch'd for his embraces, and it may be give me the strapado to put
him out, of my thoughts. Marry! bless me at these years, to whom? for what?
what would be the effect of Marraiage? many a thump on the back, but few on the
britch, No, no, your advice in this case is as destructive to me, as it has
been to our Kingdom in other cases I doubt; rather then marry, I would make the
Ambassador of Morocco's men my Gallants, one after one, and when I had hired
them all I would send for the Pump the Bolsprit or the Mainmast you speak of,
and hug them as the Devil hugs the Witch. When I am so old that I can neither
go nor see then I Will marry a man that shall lead me into what Company he likes,
and if he be jealous then the Devil's in it; I am not so old but I can Skip to
Newmarket as nimbly as the youngest lass in Town and whilst any Royal sport is
stirring hope to come in for a snack.

Whilst any thing is stirring for the Belly,
The best In The Land will give a piece to Nelly,
And comfort her old age with Royal jelly.

LONDON Printed for J. Johnson.


