A Fuller Discovery OF THE Dangerous Principles, And lying spirit of the People
called Quakers made manifest, in George Whitehead, John Whitehead and George
Fox the younger.

In their Book against John Horn and Thomas Moore of Lin Regis in NORTHFOLK.

Written by the said Thomas Moore and John Horn for the fuller satisfaction of
all such as desire to be further satisfied about the evil and erroniousnesse of
the said People called Quakers.

Most men will proclaim every man his own goodness, but a faithful man (to
Christ and his Cause) who can find? Prove. 20. 6. I marvel ye are so soon
removed from him that called you (not into your selves, but) into the grace of
Christ unto another Gospel: which is not another; but there be some that
trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. But though we (even
Apostles) or an Angel from heaven (persons of most Angel-like carriage and
appearance) preach any other Gospel unto you, (as the following Discourse shows
that these Quakers do,) then that which we (the Apostles) have preached unto
you, let him be accursed, Gal. 1. 6, 7, 8. LONDON, Printed for John Allein at
the sign of the Rising Sun in Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
ONce more we have herein presented thee, Courteous Reader, with a discovery of
the People called Quakers, in which thou may see from their own written and
printed sayings, by what manner of spirit they be led, and what manner of
Doctrine they publish and strive to maintain; and indeed the naughtiness of
their way is made manifest, partly by their Principles and Doctrines broachedly
them, and partly by the manner of their carriage in their managing and
maintaining them: We shall give thee here a brief account of both in a few
Observations.

1 For the Doctrines and Principles maintained by them thou may observe in
their Queries sent us, (printed with our Answers to them at the close of our
Answer to their Book against us) as hint^d, and in their book more clearly
asserted or employed these following, viz.

I. That Christ has no other body but his Church; no personal body: and so
that that body of his flesh in which he suffered and bare our sins, and which
rose again, is not a body, or is not in being, Book, page 7, 8, 9. answered by
us in our Reply, page 25. to pa. 42. and Quest, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10 11.

II. That the blood of Jesus Christ, or his personal abasement and sufferings
in the flesh to the shedding and pouring out his blood and soul to Death,
sustained by him once in the end or last Ages of the World are not the
foundation, or of the foundation of their faith, and so that their faith is not
faith in Christ's blood as so considered, nor is that precious blood or those
sufferings of Christ that wherewith their conscience is purged, or the
spiritual drink of the soul but some other thing, principle or spirit in men
which they put the Name of the blood of Christ upon: See if this conceit or
Doctrine in both parts of it, negative and affirmative, be not hinted in their
Quest. 12, 13, 14. seeing the body of his flesh in which he suffered they deny
to remain, and yet say his blood is in his flesh, what can they mean by his
flesh, but something of his Church, which only they grant to be his body, and
so that his blood is nothing but some seed, principle or sufferings in his
Church; their pleading against his blood, or suffering as the foundation, or of
the foundation of Faith, thou may see in their book p. 14, 15, 16, 17.
answered by us here, p. 52, 53, 54, etc.

III. That the lower parts of the earth into which Christ descended, and the
heavens into which he again ascended are no local places, but some conditions
or conceits in men. Qu. 3, 4, 5, 6^. Book p. 8, 9. answered by us, p. 26, 27,
33.

IV. That the same body that dies shall not rise again in the Resurrection,
Book, p. 10, 11. Answered by us, p. 42* to 46. and Quest. 16, 17.

V. That the souls of the wicked shall not come out Hell at the great day of
the Resurrection and judgment to be further judged they imply, Quest. 18. and
so that neither the souls nor the bodies of the wicked shall rise again to
judgment.

VI. That that coming of Christ in which the dead in him shall be raised and be
caught up into the Air together to meet him, and be ever with him, and in which
he shall descend from heaven with a short, and the sound of the trumpet, etc.
mentioned 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15 16. is already long since past, For they say the
Apostles and Believers of that Age in which the Apostle wrote remained to it,
Book, p. ^. Answered p. 32. Quest. 15. and so they agree with Hymeneus and
Philetus, that said the Resurrection is already past, 2 Timothy 16. to 18.

VII. That the Christ we look for to come from heaven again they desire not the
knowledge of, Book* p. 10. Answered p. 41.

VIII. That they are sinless, or have no sin in them, they deny not, and that
those that are believers in Christ and born of God are perfectly freed from
sin, as to the being of it in them, Book, p. 1 to 6. and yet that the little
children that John wrote to (who were also born of God and know the Father)
might have sin in them, Ans. p. 9, 10. to p. 24.

IX. That all sin is guide, when as the scripture distinguishes guile from
other sins, and other sins from guile, 1 Pet. 2. ^. and says some have no
guile in their spirits, who yet have sins (though forgiven and covered, yet
there to be covered) Psalm. 32. 1. 2. Book p. 4. 5. Answ p. 17:18.

X. That Adam might have died the natural death if he had not sinned, and so
that the bodily or natural death came not in by sin, Book p. 6, 7. Ans. p. 23.

XI. That Christ came not to redeem men from out of the natural or bodily
death, B. p. 7. Ans. p. 25.

XII. That our faith that is not grounded in Christ's appearing in us is to be
turned up by the roots; and so by consequence that all the faith that is
grounded in Christ's appearing and suffering for us without us, and in his
appearing in heaven for us (and so such faith as that of the Elect, mentioned
Romans 8. 33, 34, 35.) is by these men's Doctrines to be rooted up, Book p. 10.
Ans. p. 41, 42.

XIII. That the Apostles and all that were led by the spirit of God, etc.
witnessed the Redemption of the body* (spoken of Romans 8. 23.) when they were
upon the earth, and did not put it afar off (as they deridingly phrase the
looking and waiting for it) till after, death, in which they say again in
effect that the resurrection of the believers body is made in this life, Book
p* 11, 12. Ans. p. 47, 48*

XIV. That the knowledge of Christ after the spirit as he was before the world
was, (when as he was not come in the flesh or promised as one to come) is the
knowledge of him to Eternal Salvation, Book p. 6, 7, 8. Answ. p. 48, 49, 50.

XV. That the Scriptures are not a medium of faith, Book p. 18, Answ. p. 58. 59.

XVI. That the light wherewith Christ lights men is not both natural and
spiritual light or good, Book, p. 20. It seems he is not by their Doctrine the
Author and procurer of all good to men both natural and spiritual, and so we
are to thank him, and God by him for both, see our answer, p. 61.

XVII. That they that speak not according to the Law and Testimony, and whom we
should not seek to for direction, though they have no morning light in them,
yet have Christ's evening or candlelight; and so that by the Prophet. Isaiahs
counsel, men should not listen to them that have but Christ's evening or
candlelight, Isaiah 8* 20. and yet the Apostle Peter by these men's Doctrine
commended the Believers for taking heed to the evening or candlelight of
Christ that was not the morning light, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. and as if Christ's
candlelight would lead men to speak otherwise than according to his Law and
Testimony, and yet is to be heeded to by men, Answ. p. 62.

XVIII. They deny the continuance and usefulness of the outward Ordinances of
Baptism and Lords Supper, or eating Bread and Wine in remembrance of him, till
the end of the World in the Church of Christ, in a manner deriding them, Quest.
19, 20, 21* 22.

XIX. They intimately deny justification by a righteousness imputed to us,
contrary to Romans 4. 5. 11. and maintain a justification by righteousness
within, which indeed in them is a mere unrighteousness, as denying and
evacuating the virtues of Christ's sufferings in his own personal body and his
sacrifice for us, Quest. 25.

XX. That to endeavor to detect and make manifest their delusions or the
delusions of any others, and to preserve people from them is a being impatient
under and raging against Gods judgments; or else that it is no judgment of
God to have delusions and Deluders sent amongst us to exercise and trouble us,
or that we ought not to contend against them, Book, p. 23. Answ. 68, 69.

XXI. That these Teachers whose hearers do slight and neglect the truth
preached by them and remain not withstanding it, slothful, formal, covetous,
etc. are false prophets; by which conclusion they involve him who said he had
labored in vain, and spent his strength for naught, that would have gathered
Jerusalems children often, but yet they were not gathered; even Christ himself,
Isa. 49. 4, 5. Mat. 23. 37. Yea and all the Prophets and Apostles of Christ who
had many such hearers, as if they also were false prophets, Book p. 28, 29.
Answ. p, 7^, 74.

XXII. That Christ is a seed of God in men which in some wants Redemption, and
is burdened by corruption, and desires to be free from the burden of sin, and
always to do his Fathers will, and so has not ceased from sin in them, nor
can do in all things his Fathers will, but needs a power to reach to him where
it is begotten, to set him free, redeem or raise him up, in which power he
arises in them that believe in the light for their Redemption, Book, p. 21.
Answ. 63, 64, 65.

XXIII. That Christ is first known as one without form or com^linesse, and is
in some a seed that yet suffers, and in others reigns and is known to be Prince
of peace; so that he both suffers and reigns at once in diverse persons, Book,
p. 21, 22. Answ. p. 63, 64, 65. Such be the Doctrines discovered in their
writings to us, concerning the last two, because therein is a discovery of that
Imagination of theirs which they call Christ, and which they preach as the true
Christ, or as James Naylor in his Book called Love to the Lost, says is the
seed of Abraham, which Christ takes after the flesh. We shall note some things
here more particularly, as

1. That by Flesh and Seed of Abraham after the flesh, they mean not any
natural Seed or Body of man, but a certain seed or principle in every man's mind
whether he know it or no, which in some men is not fully able, but desirous to
follow after God, and be free from sin, they say not to free him in whom it is
from sin, but to be free it self from sin, and yet this seed with them is the
Christ, the Word that was made flesh; the true light that is in every man that
comes into the World, and that is manifested in men to take away their sins;
yet it cannot be said (it seems) of it, that in it is no sin, but for it
desires to be free from sin and follow God, but (it seems) does not nor can yet
in some men till raised by the power, and when so manifested in men, they are
perfectly sinlesse.

2. When they say this Seed or Christ is known in some men as suffering and
burdened with corruption, and desiring to be free from sin, etc. is not that
the death of their Christ? or do they not blaspheme the true Christ, who is
raised and made a quickening spirit, while they represent him as one not able
to do his Fathers will in some men, and as one that needs Redemption, and to be
set free himself.

3. When they say this seed the power reaches to where it is begotten, and in
the power it arises, etc. is not that the Resurrection of Christ with them for
man's Redemption and Justification; and so the believer in the light for
redemption believes first in a dying Christ dying yet in him, unless the light
he believes in be another Christ, or some thing besides Christ; or rather their
candlelight, which is put out in the wicked, is all one with their Christ
suffering, and making his grave with the wicked, and their Christ Redeemed and
rising in men is the light reviving as the morning light in them, and then the
man is redeemed and raised sinlesse too; and so there is their and their
Christ's Resurrection together.

4. And yet again, mind their strange expressing of this Redemption and
Resurrection of their Christ; This Seed, say they, the Power reaches to where
it is begotten, and in the Power it arises. What is this power that they say
reaches to that Seed, is it Christ or not Christ? If it be not Christ, then it
seems their Christ crucified or burdened with corruption is not the power of
God, but needs another power to Redeem him, that is not he; no, alas their
Christ lies struggling under corruption, as weak it seems as the poor believer
himself, that cries out wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
body of this Death. So that what Paul said of himself as carnal and sold under
sin, is true of their Christ in some, he would rise and cannot, he wants power;
he would do the will of the Father, but cannot it seems, till the power reach
to him; and so he may say too as Paul said, To will is present with me, but how
to perform what I would I find not. If the power be the Christ, then how was
Christ there where he lies burdened with corruption in man, and making his
grave with the wicked before he was begotten? for the power is not begotten in
all that Christ is in as a suffering seed, and so he suffers before he be
begotten, and he by whom all things were made is in some men, and yet his power
not begotten; which when it reaches to the seed, it rises in it by degrees
surely as men in whom he is, give way to him.

5. Yea, here we may see the reigning of their Christ too, and of his Saints
with him, in that they say, in some he suffers, and in others he reigns, and is
known to be Prince of Peace: Is Christ divided then? or does some part of him
in some suffer, and other part reign in others; it seems he has neither done
dying, nor been at any time without his Reigning, and his to Reign with him, so
that here we have the Mystery of their Religion.

6. Nay, what is this seeds rising but the Redemption of the body with them;
for as for the Redemption of any Natural body of man from the Natural death on
them, or judgment on them after that death, they plainly deny it; only they
talk of a seed shall rise, and what is that but this seed that they say Christ
takes after the flesh?

7. Note here also how this their imagined Christ differs from our Christ, the
true Christ witnessed to and Preached in the Scriptures; for their Rock is not
as our Rock, their Christ as our Christ, themselves being Judges, Deuteronomy. 32. 31.
with their Book, page 10* our Rock is God in Christ, and so our Lord Jesus
Christ, between whom and their Christ consider these differences.

1. Our Christ is that Holy and Innocent man that was born of the Virgin Mary,
and lived in his personal body upon the Earth in the days of Augustus and
Tiberius Cesars amongst the Jews; And who in that body of his was crucified or
nailed on a Tree, died and was buried, and rose again the third day, and
appeared in the same body to his Disciples, after which he in that his body
left the World, ascending up from the Earth into the highest Heavens, where he
is Glorified with Gods own Self, the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him
bodily, He being God over all blessed for ever; This is he whom these
perverters deny and jears at as having the form and body of a Man, and set up
another thing in his stead, that has neither personal head, hands nor feet,
flesh or bones proper to himself, but an imaginary seed within every man,
desiring to follow after God, and be free from sin, which they call the Light,
the Christ, the Power of God, etc.

2. Our Christ in a personal body of his own distinst from, and out of our
bodies, bare our sins to and on the Tree or Cross, and so in that body died
for our sins, and in the same body rose for our justification, that we
believing in him might be justified by his Blood, and accepted in his
Righteousness, and from thence have sin die in us, and we dying to sin might
live to Righteousness; These plead for a Christ, without any body of man
distinct from others, or out of them, but a certain seed with an imaginary
flesh and blood, dying and beating sin in every man, and rising where the Power
reaches to it in men, having no other body but what is in some men dying, yea
in every man in its time, and in some men rising but not in all.

3. Our Christ in his said body did once, and but once in the last Ages of the
World, little more then, one thousand six hundred years since, suffer and die,
and rise again and, can now therein die no more, death has no more dominion
over him, but he is alive for evermore in that body Glorified in the Heavens,
which these perverters deny; But their Christ is always suffering, and so
dying in some men and rising in others, and reigning in some, and so has been
always dying and rising in m^n from the beginning of the World, and so will be
to the end, their words plainly enough import as much.

4. Our Christ by that his death once suffered, and in his Resurrection in that
his body, and that body once in sacrifice offered up to God, has overcome
Death and the Devil, slain the enmity and taken out of the way all that was
contrary to us, redeemed us from the curse of the Law, obtained eternal
Redemption for us, and received the immeasurable fullness of the Spirit in the
man and for men, and is become Wisdom Righteousness, Sanctification, and
Redemption, being by virtue of all his foresaid sufferings and sacrifice, the
propitiation for the sins of the whole World of man kind, the Mediator of God
and men, that all that believe in him may by Faith be reckoned after him* and
receive of the virtues hereof, a first fruits of the Spirit, making their
Spirits li^e for Righteousness sake, and giving them the hope of the fullness
in Soul and Body at his coming again to be enjoyed by them for which they wait,
of all which these Perverters make nothing, as James Naylor writ to a certain
Gentleman by way of reproach; Thou look to be saved by a man that dyed 1600.
years ago; this is that they scoff at, giving out in their words that the death
they mean of, is not the death of a man in a Mortal body which was Natural and
must have dyed, they say, though sin had never been; But the death they mean is
the death of the Seed or Christ that is always dying and rising, sometime in
one and sometime in another, which death and resurrection they extol, and
account the other but a shadow and figure of.

5. Our Christ being in his glorified Body in the Heavens, the fullness of the
Godhead dwelling in him bodily, by his spirit draws in many to believe in him
of whom he in his Personal body is the Head and they the Members are one
spiritual body or Corporation. But these Perverters denying that their Christ
has any Personal body, made but one Body in and of all, and that the Seed
sure, for the Natural Bodies of themselves and others, they say must die and
never rise again, and therefore sure they are in their account no part of
Christ's Body that must live ever, and sure that Seed is no Personal Body but a
conceited spirit that is within them with a conceited flesh and blood in them
to; This is the fullness of God they say, whereof they are every one of them in
this Seed the Members; such an Idol was scarce ever in any Generation of men
set up before.

6. Our Christ is by his Word and spirit, and the riches of his Grace in the
hearts of his people by faith quickening and inlivening them, which these
perverters deny and jeer at, and say, Their Christ in all the reality of his
Body with his Flesh and Blood is wholly within them (for so some of them have
said) even sensibly bearing their sins in them, though not willingly as Christ
bare ours on the Tree, but desiring to be free, and so is rising in them and
reigning in Glory; So as the Redemption and Resurrection of the Body others
wait for, these say they, have in this body within, a pleasing fancy.

7. Our Christ will come again personally in his own Glorious Body, and every
eye shall see him, in which coming he will, not by degrees or one after
another, but at once together in one moment in the twinkling of an eye change
the surviving, and raise the dead bodies of all that sleep in Jesus, so as they
shall be all mortal, and meet him in the air, and appear in Glory with him
freed from all Hunger, Persecution, Sorrow and death for ever, and blessed in
the enjoyment of him with whom they shall reign for evermore; and when he is
set on his Throne, he will gather all Nations before him raising all men, not
leaving out these Deceivers, but all shall appear before his Judgment Seat
even those that rebel against him, and in this day deny him, then shall they
acknowledge him Lord, and his People that have now confessed him the beloved of
the Lord, when themselves shall be judged by him and sent into the Lake of
Fire, etc. all which coming of his and the Resurrection of the dead and
judgment after death (the bodily death) is by those Perverters also altogether
denied, they owning no other coming of Christ then some of them enjoy now, nor
other Resurrection then is now sometime of one and sometime of another, and yet
they of them that enjoy the Resurrection of the body, they talk of sometime
bunger, and feel pain and cry out of Persecution, and must die the bodily, yea
and rise again to the second death too.

8. Our Christ has by his spirit so fully discovered himself in the Testimony
of the Gospel that is the written verity, that in and according to the plain
import of the saying thereof he is to be known so far as we may know him till
his coming again, and by and wit that the Holy Spirit does witness of him to,
and teach the hearts of the believers, and they from the same spirit, and
according to the same Gospel do conside in him, confess him and hold him sorth
to others, and for that are opposed by these perverters; Of whose Christ and
their Doctrine of him, though whatever is said of the true Christ or of his
Church in the Scripture they apply to their false Christ, and to themselves, as
if they meant no other Christ nor faith then the Scriptures speak of,
perverting them to that end; Yet the scripture writing indeed speaks not but
to the condemnation, overthrow and confusion thereof: warning all believers not
to hear or follow them, nor receive them to house, nor bid them God-speed; But
hold them accursed, beware them and avoid them as Wolves, false Apostles, and
Reprobate concerning the Faith. Such the Doctrine and Principles which these
men call the truth, which indeed is error and darkness, let the Scriptures be
compared.

2. For the manner of their managing and maintaining their doctrine, let these
particulars amongst diverse others be noted.

1. They come in their own name or authority, boasting of themselves and
witnessing to and of themselves: and so obtruding things upon men, not by and
in the light and evidence of the spirit, in and according to the Scriptures, as
the true Apostles use to do, but upon their own authority and the authority of
their sayings, and witnessings which therefore they say also are of equal
authority with, etc. Better than the saying of the Holy Spirit in the
Scriptures, as appears by George Whiteheads answers to the Cambridge Queries.
To this purpose is their saying in their Title Page, that what they have
written and made manifest in their Book is, they say, by the Truth (they say
not which is in Christ or in the Gospel of Christ, but) which is in George
Whitehead, John Whitehead, George Fox the younger, to which three witnesses in
their own names, We oppose the three in Heaven, the Father, the Son or Word,
and the Holy Ghost, and the truth that is in and is witnessed by them, much of
this their way of selfwitnessing and obtruding things in their own name, word
or authority, the Reader may see in their Book, p. 8. 13. 18. 20, 21, 22, 23.
26. In which they are such as the false Christ's and the false Prophets, of whom
our Lord said to the Jews, if another come in his own name, him ye will
receive, John 5. 43. And like the Idol worshippers and preachers, of whom the
Lord says by the Prophet Isaiah, that they were their own witnesses, Isa 44. 9.
And though they say the Lord says, yet they do therein as the false prophets
affirming the Name of the Lord to their own words, dreams, fancies, or
deceits, as in Jer. 23. 16. 25, 26, 27. Ezekiel. 13. 7. As we might also instance
in some they have said of that they were Priests, and Hirelings, and took
Tithes that were never exercised in such away, as a certain woman said of
Thomas Moor junior, at Glentworth in Lincolnshire, and George Fox said in Bury
Goal, of one Disbrough brother in law to Joseph Hagger, being a trads-man in
London, yet they pretended that they speak by the Revelation of the spirit of
them in which their imposture and deceit was made manifest.

2. When they do quote Scripture, they usually pervert and corrupt it,
altering, leaving out something, or adding thereto corrupt and false glosses;
we may instance some few particulars, in their book against us. As,

1. Alleged 1 John 5: 10. He that believes has the witness in himself,
b^ing out on the Son of God, without which it is not true, for the Devils
believe yet have not the witness spoken of in 1 John 5. in themselves, Jam. 2.
19.

2. They allege 1 John 4. 17. as he is, so are we in this World, to prove
that they are without sin here, as well or much as Christ is, though its
evident that contradicts the Apostle himself, who says 1 John 1. 8. If we say
we have no sin we deceive our selves; touching which quotation, because they
make some specious use of it to deceive the simple; We shall note some things
here further about it, for the help of the weak: let the Reader mind then that,

1. He says not as he was besore the World was, so are we in this World, for
so he was glorified with the Fathers own self, equal to God, and in his form
the same with God, by whom all things were made: So there was not nor ever was
or will be any other man or Angel like him, and so as he was and is, John 1. 1,
2, 3. Col* 1. 15, 16. Phil. 2. 7.

2. He says not, as he was when the Word was made flesh in Union of Person
with the Son of God, Gods only Son, his first begotten and first born, God-man
in one Person, John 1. 14. 18. Mat. 1. 23. So is no man else.

3. He says not, as he is now at Gods Right hand in his body glorified by
virtue of that he did here on the Earth, in his personal sufferings, for so he
is the Lord of all; Angels, Powers and Authorities being made subject to him, 1
Pet. 3. 22. alive and living for evermore, and has the Keys of Hell and Death,
Rev. 1. 18. Yea, so he is the Christ, exalted a Prince and Savior to give
Repentance and Remission of sins, Acts 2. 36. and 5. 31, 32. The great High
Priest and King, that has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him, Heb. 7.
and 8. Mat. 28. 18. The fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily, Col 2.
9, 10. The Mediator of God and man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. The Way, the Truth, the Life,
John 14. 6. The recoverer of Mankind, the second Man, the last Adam who is
made a quickening Spirit, Rom 5. 14. 18. Gal. 3. 13. 14. and 4. 4. 1 Cor. 15.
45 to 49. The Savior of the World, and propitiation for the sins of the whole
World, 1 John 2. 2. and 4. 14. The Author of Faith, and of Salvation, Heb. 12.
2. and 5. 9. The caller of all, Isa. 45. 22. The Head and Husband of the
Church, and special Advocate of believers, Ephesians. 5. 26. and 1. 22. 23. 1 John
2. 1. So he is and was, so as there never was, is, or will be found another in
these respects as he, to do that which and as he has done, and to be by virtue
thereof as and what he is.

4. He says not as he is in himself in his own person (and for the work done
by him, and excellency in him) in the estimate will, and love of God his
Father, so and in the same manner and sense are we; Not so, for it has pleased
the Father that in him all fullness should dwell, and that in all things he
should have the pre-eminence, Col. 1. 18, 19. And so likewise is he in the
esteem of the true Church, 2 Cor. 4. 5. Col. 3. 11. So as no other is as he,
much less upon the account of any thing done in and by them.

5. He says not as he shall appear at his coming again, so are we in this
World, no, that is denied by the Apostle, for in that respect we are dead, and
our life hid with Christ in God, and such conformity to him is not here to be
enjoyed, but waited for till his glorious appearing, 1 John 3. 2. Col. 3. 3, 4.
none yet so as he is, Phil. 3. 12. and 20, 21.

6. He says not simply as he is so are we; not so, for he is the mighty God,
Ti^. 2. 13. God over all blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. God-man in one person,
John 1. 14. Mat. 1. 23. He by whom the Worlds are upheld, Heb. 1. 3. And by him
God will raise and judge all men, Romans 2. 16. None therefore so as he in such
respects.

7. Nor says he, as he was in the World so are we, though in some respects
that be true. He when here in weakness here on Earth was then Immanual, the
only begotten Son of God, the Savior of the World; So no other, none so
empowered to give forth the Gospel, and appoint new Ordinances to be used as he
was, we may only receive, declare, and use what he gave forth and appointed;
Yet as he when on Earth preached that Gospel and suffered shame and reproach
for so doing, and was humble, meek, loving, patient and constant to the death
in so doing; So it becomes us to do and be, that we may therein be like him,
John 15. 1^. 22. Ephesians. 5. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 22. And so in living by Faith, so as
he; but this Text speaks in a more proper Language for encouragement. And so,

8. He says plainly (not of others but of themselves, the Apostles and those
unfeigned believers that were one with them in the same Faith, as he is so are
we in this World. He had before declared the foundation, and Gods love
commended therein as the ground of confidence and love, verse. 9. 10, 11. like
that in Romans 5. 1. 10. And how by the abiding of this love in us, God dwells in
us and his love is perfected in us, verse. 7, 8. 12, 13. And then affirming that
they had seen and did Testify that the Father sent the Son the Savior of the
World, verse. 1^. and how they had known and believed the same commended through
him, and how they that have believed and dwell in that love dwell in God, and
God in them, verse. 15, 16. He adds, herein is love with us (or our love) made
perfect, (he says not so perfect as there is no fear in us, because there is
none in love, but that) perfect love casts out fear, etc. (does daily or
continually cast it out as it rises in us) that so we may have boldness in
the day of Judgment; And gives this as the reason, because as he is (which
can here be no other then as he is in the publication and demonstrations of him
in the Gospel, approved, and received, or despised and rejected) so are we (in
the declaration and holding forth of this message approved or rejected) in this
World, which is suitable to that foretold by our Savior, Mat. 10. 40. Luke 10.
16.

Again, (as he) used comparatively, signifies not in every respect nor in the
fullness of measure, as may be seen, Mat. 10. 16. Gal. ^. 12. Rev. 16 15. And
so here, Not as he by his omnipotent power upholding the Heavens and the Earth,
and ruling amongst all for ever, making his counsel to take place, upholding
his Church in the World, etc. Not as be is in his omniscience in the World,
seeing all things, and beholding the hearts, thoughts and ways of all men, not
as he in his Perfection of Holiness and Righteousness as inherently found in
us. He is yet about that work to bring his Church to that, that he may in his
season present them so to himself, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. 1 These. 5. 23, 24. Acts 3*
19, 20, 21.) Because of his perfect Righteousness and Power, vengence belongs
to him, and he may punish and cut off at his pleasure, (not so we, Romans 12.
19.) So that such an assuring to be like him, as th^se imply in such perfection
of sinlessnesse, (applying it to themselves) is to aspire to such a likeness
to and equality with God, as the Serpent tempted Eve to; And no marvel if such
be high conceited of themselves, and however sinful yet say they have no sin;
And count themselves Lords, and disdain to have any over them, and judge,
revile, and likely would destroy* if in their power at their pleasure, this
principle leads to it; But it is manifest the sense and import of the word is
according to the business the Apostle is treating of, and his scope and end
therein; And that is as beforesaid, for no man has seen God at any time, but
he has manifested himself in his love, and his love to us in the gift of his
Son, and this declared in the Gospel, that being believed we might love him and
one another; And such as have so received the Gospel, he makes his instruments
according to the measure of his Grace received, to declare it to others, and
they that in Faith and love so do, are in their measure in this respect, as he
in this World, as Scripture also elsewhere shows, they being by his Grace
framed to his mind, are set to pursue his design. And so,

1. They are his Ministers of his Word and Grace put into their hearts, and so
in his place and stead to bear forth his Name, and carry on his work and he by
them displayes his love, and beseeches men and convinces, and brings in to
himself, and so they are the Light of the World, and edisiers of their brethren
in the World, 2 Cor. 5. 14. 21. and 6. 1. 2. Mat. 5. 14, 15, 16 Phil. 2. 15.
16. These. 5. 11. And so they are as he is in this World, though he be still
above them; They Ministering the Epistle of Christ, and he by his Spirit therein
writing it in their hearts, 2 Cor. 3. 2, and 3. 6.

2. As any of the World receive their Testimony, so they receive the Spirit and
Christ therein, and loving him they love them for his sake, and being won out
of the fellowship of the World they come into oneness in love, fellowship, and
approbation with Christ and them, and as Christ owneth and approves and
delights in them, their Faith, love, fellowship, etc. So do these for Christ
his sake also, and so according to their measure they are as he in this World,
Mat. 10. 40. 41, 42. Luke 10. 16. John 13. 20. 2 These. 1. 10. 2 Cor. 3. 2. 3.
Phil. 4. 1.

3. As any of the World refuse and despise them in and for their Testimony*
born forth with Gracious Words and Deeds, they refuse and despise Christ, and
as they defame, hate, persecute them, so they defame, hate, and persecute
Christ, and so as he is, so are we in this World, Luke 10. 16. Acts 9. 4* 7.
John. 15. 18. And with the two former this last sense is especially here meant.
Now knowing this, that as he is received, known, loved by any in the World so
are we; And as he is unknown, despised, hated persecuted in his Doctrine, and
judged by any of the World, so are we, 1 John 3. 1: This gives us boldness in
the day of judgment, upholds and makes us fearlesse in such incus revilings,
condemnings, judgings, and affords us strong consolation, that when he comes to
Judge, he will justify us that were condemned for his Truth, and condemn them
that condemn us for it; Surely George and John Whiteheads and George Fox
intended us no such consolation against all their revilings and judgings of the
Truth and us, but any impartial Reader may see their miserable wrestings and
abuse of this place, upon which we have been the larger, Reader, for thy
instruction and helpfulnesse, it being a Scripture much made use of by them as
countenancing their conceit of their sinlesnesse, and we being very brief to
things in our following answer, in the rest we shall be briefer.

3. Quoting, 1 John 2. 1. in their p. 3. My little Children these things writ I
to you that you sin not, and if any man sin, we have an Advocate; They stop
their leaving out, and he is the Propitiation for our sins, which plainly
imports that the Apostles and Believers he couples himself with, owned that
they had sins when he so writ, in that he says not he was only, but he is the
propitiation for our sins what but fraudulency and shuning of the Light there
was in their so quoting it?

4. Quoting Prove. 20. 9. fore quoted by us, they ( p. 3.) leave out the last
clause too, viz. Who can say, I am pure from my sins, because directly making
against their wrong apprehension of their sinlessenesse.

5. Their nonsencical glosses put upon that Text, Eccles. 7. 20. and 1 Kings 8.
46 in their pages 3. and 4. Thou may see spoken to by us. p.

6. So also their wrong reading of Ephesians. 5. 30. adding to it of their own
heads, p. 9. thou may see spoken to, p.

7. Likewise, whereas in Phil. 3. 21. it is said, our conversation is in Heaven
whence we look for a Savior, they turn it about and say, there ( not thence)
they looked for the Savior.

8. Their like abuse of Acts 17. 11, ^2. thou have it spoken too. p.

These amongst many other, may suffice to show what abusers of the Scriptures
they be at their pleasure, in their quotations of them and glosses upon them.

3. They maintain their false conceits by falacious or senseless reasoning,
syllogizings and inferences, as at the dispute at Lin, George Whitehead to
prove all sin to be guil, brought this falacy; All sin is a transgression of
the Law, guile is a transgression of the Law, therefore guile is all sin, which
any that understand the rules of Syllogismes know to be a Paralogisme, or false
reasoning, such as the Apostle in the Greek Text of Col. 2. 4. Expressly faults
and warns us of, and in their Book G. W. turning about, denying and falsifying
his own former Syllogism, sets down a more vicious and corrupt Argument then
it, to beguile the simple, with being but his own and his brethrens three
ways, asserting the same thing in diverse forms, or with very little
alteration, and that without any Scripture proof for any of them, viz. Every
transgression of the Law is guile or sin, and all guile includes all
transgression of the Law, therefore every sin is guile; Like as if one should
prove every Beast to be an Ass, thus. Every Beast is an Ass or a living
Creature, and all Asses includes all Beasts; Therefore every Beast (Foxes and
Wolves to) as an Ass, p. 5. Again in the same page, they prove all sin to be
guile, thus. Any one sin makes a man guilty, and so he has guile in him, a
foolish inconsequence, as if guile and guilt were one and the same thing,
whereas George Whitehead being a Scholar knows the contrary, and therefore
therein he wilfully plays the Jesuit or Sophester to delude the Ignorant with
seeming like terms. So page 1. to prove the perfection of sinlessenesse in
themselves they say, the perfection of sinlessenesse is in the witness of God,
as if that and themselves were one and the same, and page 6. to prove that Adam
might have died the natural death, though he had not sinned, they argue as
thus. Because Christ who had no sin, not considering that Christ had our sins
laid upon him, and for them he died, but Adam should have had no sin laid upon
him, or imputed to him, had he not sinned himself; But such like reasonings are
too many to number up in them.

4. They carry on their false designs and doctrines with lies and falsehood most
frequently, as in saying often, that we accuse the Saints, and plead for sin,
p. 2, 3, 4, 5. And in belying J. H. in saying that he turned G. Ws. words about
his false Syllogism above mentioned, when as all that were at the dispute, and
heard and remembered his words, may remember they were word for word, as John
Horn relates them; Yea, and in belying his own words, in saying they were such
as they indeed were not. Again, in saying we might as well have accused the
true Prophets and Apostles with being Preachers of lies, and deceivers, as the
Quakers, and that the same Spirit in us that has accused the Quakers with
being deceivers (that is the Spirit of Truth) would have accused the true
Prophets* Christ and his Apostles for being deceivers, page. 5. That we
contradict our selves in many things where we have made it we have made it
evident there is no contradiction; That we look for a Christ like our selves,
but that he has no Blood in his Body as we imagine, p. 10. That our expecting
the Redemption of the Body to be waited for aster Death, is contrary to the
Saints expectations. p. 11. and 12. In which words is both equivocation and
falsehood, that what the Scriptures say of Christ and his Body they own, in
which they also either equivocate or say falsely, or both; they equivocate if by
owning they mean as probably they do, they own it as true of themselves, (the
Quakers) as if the things spoken of Christ and his Church are verified in and
of them, and may be affirmed of them; Or if by owning they mean they believe
and hold them true concerning Jesus of Nazareth, and them that believe on him
to be saved through the virtue of his sufferings, Sacrifice and Mediation, then
they say falsely. Yea, whether this or the former be their meaning, they are
false therein, as our reply makes manifest to the impartial Reader; But who can
number up their lies and falsehoods in falsifying our sayings, and otherwise
which the following Reply will further evidence. He that will procure and
search and compare what Christopher Wade of Water-beach has written against
them, with their writings against him, may see a whole dozen of notorious lies
of George Foxes, clearly proved against him, to which G. W. in his answer gives
the go by most egregiously; and in none of them disproves him.

5. They misrelate and give the go-by to many of our charges and sayings, as
for instance; We quoted Jam. 3. 2. to prove all believers here to have sin, or
sometime to offend, to this they say nothing, only quote the place and give it
the go-by, telling us only that James exhorted men to let patience have its
perfect work, etc. Which is nothing to the purpose, p. 3. So what we said of
the Nature of man, as it is in Christ, discharged of sin, Law and Death, in his
Resurrection, p. 10. Of our former Book, that they represent it as if we had
said it of the Nature and being of man, as in us to be discharged in our
Resurrection, p. 11. And whereas we charged them with denying the Humanity of
Christ, as to its being now in him, they give it the go-by, answering only
that they never denied the Man Christ, for his flesh is their food, p. 14.
Whereas they had before denied him to have any other Body then his Church, p.
8. And to our saying, that Christ is not really and personally in the believer,
as in Heaven, but by Faith, they let go the words personally and as in Heaven,
in their answer, and traduce us as denying any real being of him by Faith in
the believer, p. 14. More such like dealings thou may find in p. 15. and 18.
and diverse others.

6. They carry their designs by reproaches, Nicknames, and abusive
expressions, in which also much hatred, malice, and spite against us is made
evident to be in them, and so that they are far from sinlessenesse; to this
purpose it is that in their Title page and Postscript they Nickname us,
Calling us,

1. Teachers of the People called Moorians, or Manifestarians, and called by
some Free-willers, and Independants, which what can it proceed from, but their
hatred of us, and indignation against us, Seeing,

1. The Names we own not, nor are the People we Teach so called, as Moorians,
that we know of, T. M* sen. (it seems) for affirming not of himself as his own,
but from *the Testimony of Christ and his Spirit recorded in the Scriptures,
that Jesus Christ is the Savior of the World, and gave himself a ransom for
all men, and is by virtue thereof the Mediator of God and men, the propitiation
for the sins of the whole World, and extends to men, means leading them to
Repentance, and is ready to receive such as in the means are prevailed with to
believe, and this a good ground and motive to Repentance, Faith, Love, etc. Was
by some that opposed, those truths standered and called Papists or Arminian,
and some of the same mind with him in those truths, were by means of a certain
Manciple in one of the Colleges that turned Almanack-maker, and reproachfully
devising that Name called Moorians, by some drunkards, profane and cavilling
persons, but never owned by him nor by any of his friends, much less by us or
the people we teach, nor do we know of any civil people or others, these
revilers excepted, that say or write of us, or of any people that they are the
people called Moorians, as these men call themselves in diverse of their
writings the Quakers, and the people called Quakers, which makes it lawful for
us also without reproach to give them that name, by way of distinction in our
speaking or writing of them, as the names Herodians, Sadduces, and Pharisees
are given in the Scripture to, and were owned by those peoples so called
without reproach to them;) And the rather because the Name (Quakers) fathers
their Doctrine upon no man as the name Moorian does, nor charges it with any
particular evil Opinion, as the other name Manifestarian and Free-Willers
import, though had they been thereby wronged and reproached, yet the Spirit of
Truth would have led them not to return reviling for reviling, reproach for
reproach, and to join hands with drunkards and others; so that herein they are
convicted to be sinners, being guilty of reviling: As also in that,

2. They add or Manifestarians, as if Moorian and Manifestarian were the same
with them; this is another of their spiteful reproaches against the same
people, in which they join with such as fearing the eclipsing of their own
honor, are offended that we should own no Father but God, nor Doctor but
Christ by his Spirit, and by his Servants, so Ministering his Epistle, as that
he himself is the writer of it, so as each may have the certainty of his
believing from Gods own Manifestation of it; For because T. M. and others do
hold that men's coming into Union with Christ, and knowledge of peculiar
interest in him, and his privileges is by the Holy Spirit, in his Testimony of
Christ inlightning their minds, and discovering the peace made by his blood,
and life obtained by him; And commending the love of God therethrough, and what
Christ has done and is ready to do for sinners, so as he thereby inableth them
to discern, and moves them to believe in him; And so such as through this
Grace believe are right believers, others not so: And that this testified and
manifested by Christ his own Spirit in the Word of Grace, in which Christ
manifests himself and his things, as in John 14. 21. and 16. 14. 15.
Therefore some in times past that were strangers to this Grace, and did seek
life in a Pharisaical Righteousness, and by their strifes after such
Righteousness to evidence and manifest to themselves and others, not otherwise
knowing that they were in a Gracious state and had unfeigned Faith; And others
that pretend Christ in men, and the true Light in them, but they know it not,
and that their Ministration unto men is not to bring out of darkness into
Light, but to manifest to them the Light and Christ that were before in them,
(to whom therefore that name of Manifestarians might more properly be given) I
say some such Nicknamed them, and reproached them with the Name of
Manifestarians, and amongst them Mr. Edwards in his Gangraena, was pleased to
vent his passion in that reproachful term, since whose writing we have scarce
ever met with it from any other, till these three brethren in evil have
therewith reproached the people taught by us; yea, and not content with that,
they add in a Parenthesis,

3. And called by some Free-Willers and Independants, in which they seem to
except themselves from being of the some that so calls us, yet will call in any
some to their help to defame us rather then not to vent all their gall against
us, which what shows it but a great deal of envy, fury and malice that could
not be kept within narrower bounds? possibly there be some that are Episcopal,
and some Parochical, and some Congregational Teachers; either of those that
call themselves the Baptized party, or of others that hold that man has Free
will by nature to spiritual good, (though we think scarce any will express
themselves in such terms, much less are all of any of those sorts chargeable
therewith, or may Independents and Free willers be used as conversible terms)
but as for us we disown it, and our writings in public testify against it, it
is rather chargeable upon those men, and all of them that hold every man has
the true light, the good Seed, and Christ in him from his birth, and so
consists of light and darkness, flesh and spirit, etc. And as for
Independents, we hold none properly so but God, though in some sense they may
be branded with holding themselves to be such as assume to themselves equality
with God, or think and hold that they have all their life, strength and
sufficiency from within themselves, so as they need not to be taught or helped
by any other, nor ackn^wledge any God or Christ without themselves as needful
to be looked to or be depended upon for help and strength, etc. (such as with
the younger Son in the parable, will have all in their own hand to live upon*
and not to depend upon his Father without and above him, Luc. 15.) and that
submit not themselves to any Powers or Magistrates set over them; but those
things we disclame, having our dependence upon God in Christ, and in his way
taking help of one another, submitting to those over us in the Word of the
Lord, and to what Magistrates the Lord sets over us for his sake; and therefore
neither Free willers nor Independents, as these would have us reproached,
though joining hands therein with any some to cast an odium upon us. But yet
besides all these,

2. In the same Title page they spit their rancor against J. Horn in a
reproachful way calling him J. Horn a Priest in Lin and Priest Horn (as in p.
15, they do the like to another, whom they reproachfully call Priest Higginson)
in which they do not say as in the other reproaches, called Priest, or whom
some call Priest, but as being themselves in their malice and bitterness, the
Author of that reproach they themselves so call him, which appears clearly to
be done by way of bitter derision and reproach. For the word Priest is either
used

1. In a good sense, as when the believers are called by the Apostle a
Spiritual Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 5. and he has made us to God Kings and
Priests, Rev. 1. 6. and 5. 10. in which sense John Horn disownes not the name,
though not as he is John Horn but as a believer, it way be given him; but that's
a name of honor, which their manner of expression argues they intend not to
John Horn or to the other, nor are they such Priests which they call John Horns
Brethren against whom he bears witness. Or

2. In a bad sense, in which it must needs be a reproach and apparently uttered
with some venom or spite as well as falsehood on their parts, for so they must
either mean that John Horn is

1. A Priest of the Order of Aaron, a Levitical Priest; and then they say
evidently false, for their Office was to offer bodily, bloody and outward
sacrifices for sin, and to burn incense, and they were distinguished from the
Levites whose office was to Teach but not to offer sacrifice and burn incense,
and those Priests were types of Christ, and since he has come and offered up
the acceptable sacrifice of his own body, we have no more such Priests.

If they Reply that he may be called such a Priest because he receives Tithes,
We Answer, That follows not if he did so; for all were not, nor are Priests
that took or take Tithes; the Levites took Tithes who were no Priests, and many
Gentlemen and others in our Nation take Tithes, whom yet these men do not
therefore call Priests, and therefore that can be no good reason for such a
Name given him. Or they mean,

2. A Priest in the Roman sense, to make the body of Christ under visible
forms and accidents (as these men called Quakers do in a manner in their
immaginations invisibly) and to offer up a propitiatory sacrifice for the quick
and for the dead; if so they know themselves to be liars therein to; For they
know that none such are allowed by the professed Church in England called
Protestants, for many years. Or,

3. A Heathen Priest appointed to offer bodily and bloody sacrifices to some
Idol or false God, if they use it in such a sense, they then not only reproach
and lie against John Horn, and the other, but also intimately blaspheme against
God and Jesus Christ the Lord, as if he was but an Heathen Idol or false God,
for to none other does John Horn perform any Act of Divine Worship; Its
probable they mean it in this sense, for so one of their society at Whithesee
called one, that reads the Scripture in the Congregation, Priest, and when
entreated to forbear, bebecause the Scriptures read are the Words of God, and
discover Christ the Lord, and prayers were directed to God in his Name, and the
Gospel by one also was then Preached, and Christ is the true Lord and not Baal,
he grew more fierce at that, and called, Mattan, Mattan, Mattan, meaning Mattan
the Priest of Baal, 2 Kings 11. 18. By which thou may see, Reader, what
reproachers they be of Christ, and the Christian Religion; in any of these bad
senses if they use this term Priest of J. H. they are not only revilers but
notorions liars. Or,

4. If they use it as profane men in contempt of the Ministers, that know not
else what sense the word Priest has, save only they judge it reproachful,
then have they at best joined therein with the false profane scoffers,
Ishmaelites and evil men; And so it appears however that they were not led by
the Spirit of Truth which leads none to be revilers, so that had they called
their writing their own witness, and not the witnesser of the truth in them
(which indeed is not to them, 1 John 1. 8. 10.) they had done yet less evilly
then they have in putting their falsehoods and reproaches upon the Truth.

3. But besides these, their Book is full of reproaches elsewhere, as that we
accuse the Saints and brethren, page 3. Are in confusion and are wise men of
Babylon, page 5. and 7. Rail against the Innocent, page 5. plead for sin, page
6. Say that we, like fools whom the Apostles reproved, would not be satisfied
with their Answer, page 10. That the Body of Christ which is Spiritual is not
discerned by us whose minds are out of his spirit, page 8. that we establish a
blind and dead Faith, page 15. Are blind guides, page 16. 18. that we know not
naturally, page 13. That they might have received as good an answer from School
Boys, page 16. Call us dreamers, and this (say they) is a dream, and one of
John Horns divinations, page 17. Call us Hypocrites, and power out a great deal
of abusive and reproachful Language against us, for owning our selves as part
of the Nation that have neglected Christ and long abused the Truth, page 22,
23. etc. Yea, their latter part is full of abusive reproaches, and revilings,
(as well as their inward parts full of deceit and naughtiness) not like the
good Apostles that brought not railing accusations, though against the Deail,
but like the Apostles and false Teachers, whose mouths are full of cursing and
bitterness.

7. To name no more, They carry on their own work by proud boastings and
speaking high swelling words of vanity vaunting of themselves, and in that also
walk in the steps of the false Apostles, and false Teachers, who were proud
boasters, Fierce, Heady, High-minded, dispisers of them that are good, etc. And
like the Old Pharisees that justified and lifted up themselves as Righteous and
despised others, Luke 18. 10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 5. 12. and 11, 12, 13, 14. 18. 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3. 2 Pet. 2. 1. 10, 11, 12. 18, 19. Judges. 13.

What boasters of themselves they be, may appear by those passages and the
like; As for the Quakers dying, because of which they would accuse them with
being sinners; here their darkness (speaking of us) appears, as if the
Quakers might not be thought to be sinners. Again, we (say they of themselves)
shall be a heavier judgment unto you, for we are a burthensom^ stone to all
the ungodly, and the more ye strive against us, the greater will be your
torment. Cease striving against the Truth of God and us his People, for the
more ye strive against us, and the Truth we live in and are witnesses of, which
Truth is Christ, who is also in us, etc. And a little after, the Mighty
Powerful presence of the Lord does accompany us, whereby we reach the faithful
witness of God in the People, which answers to the Truth of God declared by
us, page 23. (The contrary to which notwithstanding these great swelling words
appeared in George Whitehead in his discourse with J. H. at Lin, since the
foresaid vapor, he being mightily baffleled, as the Audience then present can
witness.)

So they boast themselves of their Teaching freely, and not being greedy of
filthy Lucre, but doing what they do out of a willing mind, etc. This ( say
they) is owned and practiced by us the servants of the Lord called Quakers,
etc. Page 28. And so did the false Apostles, it seems by what the Apostle
writes of them, 2 Cor. 11. 12. They use to boast of their free Preaching, of
their corrupt Doctrine too, though it cost them that receive it too dear, how
cheap and free so ever it appeared; Yea the whole latter part of their Book is
little but reproaches of us, and boasting of themselves.

Such their Doctrines, and such the way of their managing them, judge Reader of
them both impartially, and of the further discovery of them in the ensuing
reply, From which we shall no longer detain thee; Read seriously, and pray
heartily to God for manifesting his Truth to thee, and guiding thee into it,
and keeping thee from errors, to him committing thee, we rest,

March the 27th. 1660. Thy helpers in the Faith and Truth of Christ. JOHN HORN.
Sen. and Juni. THOMAS MOORE.

A FULLER DISCOVERY Of the Dangerous Principles and Lying spirit of the PEOPLE
Called Quakers, Made manifest in George Whitehead, John Whitehead, and George
Fox the Younger, in their Book against John Horn, and Tho. Moore of Lin.
HOw grossly Ignorant, miserably Erroneous, and Impudently wicked the Quakers
be, all may perceive, that are of ability to judge and discern indifferently,
between us and them, in what has bin published by either of us, yet for the
sakes of those that are not able to discern, by a bare reading of what they
have writ, or will not be at the pains to compare us impartially. We have
herein further noted their Ignorance* Error, Confusion, Hypocrisy, and
Deceit, to their hands, in which they that will but compare us, may see our
integrity in our dealing with them. However, we shall desire to Approve our
selves to God therein, and make manifest their deceits and falsehood, so as all
that will may discern them.

1. They lay down ten Principles in their Epistle to the Reader, as ours in
which they show their ignorance and deceit; they be thus:

T. Moor (say they) affirmed, That sin is a natural heritage in the believers
while they be here: To which T. Moor says.

Ans. This is falsely expressed, his sayings were, That sin is in the believer
as a natural heritage from Adam, while he is in this mortal body. And in noting
this as erroneous, they intimately deny the natural uncleanness of man by sin
entering into the world by one man's sin, and so that all have sinned in him, and
are fallen short of the glory of God, in and unto which they were created: Or
else with the Papists imagine that its taken away by Baptism or Regeneration,
so as no more to be in men here: But note, that T. M. says its in them as a
natural heritage, from the first natural root, fallen Adam, in which is implied
a distinction between what is the believers by nature, as a son of the first
Adam, a man; and what is his by grace, as in Christ the second Adam; and the
Apostle tells us, That by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
and that it abides in the believer, after believing is plain, in that Paul
says, sin dwelt in him, even then when he says, it was not he that did sin, but
sin in him, Romans 7. 17, 20. For I know that in me (that is in my flesh)
dwells no good thing; there his natural heritage: In which also he implies,
that in his Spirit was that that is good dwelling, as also he after says, verse.
22. and that sin abides not in the believer till death, we find no Scripture
says, but the contrary, That no man living shall be justified in the sight of
God if he enter into judgment with him, Psalm. 143. 2. If no man living, but by
Gods not entering into judgment with him, then no man living here is without
sin, for if there were, though God did enter into judgment with him, he should
be justified, for God certainly cannot in judgment, or will not condemn him in
whom is no sin; so that their ignorance and error herein appears, in accusing
T. M. of Error herein.

2. T. M. (say they) affirmed, that their nature is restored in Christ
(speaking of their own nature) and that their nature is a filthy nature, and
Christ took upon him their nature.

Ans. This also is falsely expressed and perverted, for his sayings were to this
effect: That the nature or kind of man is perfectly redeemed and restored in
one for all, even in Christ the second Adam, while yet sin is in, and death
upon the Individuals, or particular persons of men, for whom such Redemption is
obtained in and by Jesus Christ: Yea, even the believers body is yet vile,
while not changed by death, and they all waiting for the redemption of the
body; but here they confound things together and deal deceitfully, they might
as well have taxed the Apostle of confusion, for saying, men by nature do the
things contained in the Law, Romans 2. 14. and yet by nature are children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. The word Nature signifies diversely, when we say our nature is
restored in Christ, we speak of the nature or kind of man as it is
distinguished from the nature or kind of Angels and other creatures, which
whole nature by reason of sin committed by it in Adam was fallen under wrath
and curse; but being assumed by Christ (who was made flesh, and man, and not in
the nature or kind of Angels) he has redeemed it (even man's nature or being,
which is ours too inasmuch as we are men) and restored it to favor and
fellowship with God in himself, and yet we say our nature, kind, or being, as
in us, not in Christ (for the same common nature, kind, or being of man, is in
every man, though in diverse persons diversely) is corrupt and filthy in it self
by reason of sin in it, Isai. 64. 6. and death upon us, further then purified
and purged by him, yet Christ took upon him our nature (as before) not as it is
filthy in us by sin in it, but as it was under bondage to death and ourse
without filth in him, he being sanctified in his conception, so as to be the
Holy One even in his Birth, ( Luke 1. 35.) whereas others are conceived in sin,
and shapen in iniquity, (Psalm. 51. 5.) so that there is neither error nor
confusion in what is said by T. M. hereabout, but they have mis-related his
sayings, and therefore tax them because they agree not with their Errors
concerning man's natural sinfulness called Original sin, and the humanity of
Christ denied by them.

3. John Horn (they say) holds, that they that had no guile in them, had sin in
them, that every sin is not guile.

Answ. It Is well they dared not to put in David with him, as holding the same
error, for he says that man is blessed whose sins are covered, and to whom the
Lord will not impute sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile; so then it
seems some men in whose spirit is no guile have sins in them, though covered,
and not imputed to them, there needs no cover for what is not, yet John Horn
did not say that every one that had no guile in him had sin in him, for he
excepts Jesus Christ who neither did sin, nor had guile in him, not that
Principle then; but the contradiction of it is the Error.

4. T. M. (say they affirmed) That the blood of Christ shed is not in his
person in heaven, but the virtue of it: To which T. M. says:

Ans. That herein also they have altered and falsified his sayings, which in
Answer to their Question where the blood of Christ is, was to this effect: That
the material blood was shed, and the virtue or preciousness thereof; or of his
bloodshedding is now with the Father in the person of Christ in Heaven,
forasmuch as by means, and for the worth thereof, he is raised from the dead,
and entered into heaven it self, there to appear in the presence of God for us,
having by it obtained life from the dead, even eternal life, and redemption for
us. Mind also Reader that they say, p. 15. that they blame us not, nor did
blame us for not asserting that the bloodshed is in the body of Christ: Why
then note they this as a dangerous principle had T. M. so said.

5. T. M. (say they affirmed) That the blood of Christ shed is the foundation
of their faith, but where it is they answered not, nor could they tell.

Ans. The forementioned Answer to their Question, was first often given and
urged, else what meant their reply to it to this effect: That the virtue of a
thing cannot be separated from the thing it self, that it may be where the
thing it self is not in a present, real, sensible existence, or being; the
contrary to which was then proved, as is showed in the Book they pretend to
answer: And further T. M. his Assertion was, That as the blood of Christ is in
heaven with the Father in the sense above expressed, so its the ground and
foundation of our Faith, it being that by means of which he is so, and so we
still say that the blood or sufferings of Christ, and he through and by means
thereof being raised from the dead, and glorified in the same body in which he
bare our sins (without which his sufferings could have done us no good) is the
foundation of our faith; it seems it is not of theirs, and so they have not
faith in his blood as the Apostles preached, ( Romans 3. 25.) their faith is
founded in something else, and so they are men of dangerous Principles, beware
of them.

6. T. M. They further say affirmed, That the life of Christ is not in the
blood of Christ (whence they infer that) the Foundation of our faith has not
the life of Christ in it.

Ans. This also is a deceitful abuse and falsifying of his words which were in
answer to their assertion, That the blood of Christ is nothing else but the
life of Christ, the Spirit or power of God, bringing those Scriptures for
proof, that speaking not so much as of man in his mortal state, but of other
mortal creatures, say the blood is the life, and the life of the flesh is in
the blood, Genesis 9. 4. Lev. 17. 11. In answer to which T. M. said, that the life
of Christ's personal body (which body they deny) is not in or by the supply of
material blood, as the life of mortal creatures, yet he said that the eternal
life and redemption in Christ for us is the fruit of his blood, being obtained
by it: So that their conclusion has not the least color from his saying, but
is contradicted by it, for the material blood that was shed as to its present
locallity or place of being, as to its matter is not the foundation of our
faith in whole or in part; but his bloodshed or sufferings to the pouring out
his soul to death for our sins, and he by virtue thereof, as is before said.

7. T. M. affirmed (say they again) that the light wherewith Christ lights
every man is both natural and spiritual.

Ans. That Christ is the true light that lights every man coming into the
world, and that the light which he gives or wherewith he lights them, is all
that is truly called light and good, whether natural or spiritual, we did and
do assert as truth; their denial of which implies an evil Principle held by
them, Viz. That they deprive Christ of the glory of being the Author and giver
either of the natural light or good, or of the spiritual.

8. T. M. say they, said, That the person of Christ (namely of flesh and bones)
is a quickening spirit, and dwells in the believers by faith, and to prove it he
said that the Corinthians dwelt in the heart of Paul.

Ans. There again they falsify and pervert his sayings, which were that the
person of Christ that had and has flesh and bones (a person of flesh and bones
we call him not; that's the term they put upon him by way of derision and
reproach) even Jesus Christ, who was made of the seed of David according to the
flesh, is declared to be the Son of God with power, by the resurrection from
the dead, even in the same body in which he bare our sins on the tree, and he
the second man, the last Adam is made a quickening spirit; which was answered
against their seeking privily to insinuate to the people, that that body of his
flesh was abolished or annihilated, so that now he has not that body, or
possesses not his glory therein, to show the vanity and wickedness of their
endeavors, wherein it was urged, that the manhood or body of his flesh is not
annihilated by his becoming a quickening Spirit, it being the man Christ Jesus
the last Adam, that's made a quickening Spirit; yea, its because this man
continues for ever in the name and glory of the Father for us, that he has an
unchangeable Priesthood, and is able to save to the utmost them that come to
God by him; God having given to the Son of man to have life in himself even as
the Son has life in himself. As to the other part of the charge, T. M. his
saying was, that its the man Christ Jesus as thus considered as a distinct
person, personally or bodily distant from them (so as they are absent from him
while they are at home in the mortal body) that is and dwells in the believers
heart by faith. To their sensual scoffing at which, as not being able to
comprehend by their sensual imagination how such a thing might be, such matters
of faith being too high for them (as even the least things in the wisdom of
God are too high for a fool that seeks to be wise in himself) we brought that
of the Corinths and the Philippians being in the Apostles hearts by love, 2
Cor. 7. 3. Philip. 1. 7. not to prove that Christ dwells in the believers
hearts by faith, that's fully and plainly the assertion of the Scripture, and
needs no other proof, Ephesians. 3* 17. 2 Cor. 5. 7. But for illustration and
discovery of the thing to the weakest of them whom they endeavored to subvert,
to show them how one might dwell in the heart of another, and yet be personally
distinct, and as to bodily presence distant also, 1 These. 2. 17.

But mind Reader, that these men do flatly oppose the dwelling of the man
Christ as a quickening spirit in the hearts of the believers by Faith, which had
they not been blinded with Antichristian Babilonish confusion, they would not
have done plainly therein without covert contradicting the Spirit in the
Apostle, that with so great earnestness prayed for the Ephesians, That Christ
might dwell in their hearts by faith; but its manifest that these men know not
what faith is, but take it for a believing something of God or Christ, from a
knowing or experimenting it in themselves as the Devils believe, James 2. 19.
Which yet is not faith or having faith, and their after abuse of, and clipping,
1 John 5. 10. in their p. 1. Gives occasion to think they take it so; or for
sense or sight as many of their words import, but did they know that believing
is the receiving a thing from a report, and that every believing is not faith
in Scripture account, Prove. 14, 15* 2 These. 2. 11. But the hearty believing of
that report in which the true and saving Object of faith, is set forth and
brought nigh, Isa. 53. 1. John 7. 37, 38. Romans 10. 8, 9, 10. Whence believing
receives the denomination of faith, they would not thus have said and writ, for
those that are willing to understand this business; we shall here take liberty
to open what the Object of faith is which is often called faith though of many
not believed, and what that believing is which closing with that Object of
faith is therefore called faith and not else.

1. The Object of faith is the same that was preached by the Apostles for the
obedience of faith, or to the faith, Gal. 1. 23. Romans 1, 3, 4, 5. and 16. 25,
26. The most holy faith in believing to be built up in Jude 20 The precious
faith of Gods elect. Tit. 1, 1* 2 Pet. 1, 2. Which object though one yet is
three ways considerable.

1. In respect of the most inmost and absolute Object the further and full stay
of the soul, and that is God Almighty, the divine essence of God in Christ as
evidenced by the holy Ghost in his infinite power, love, mercy, truth, etc. And
so God is called the trust of his people. Psalm. 40. 4* and 17* 3, 5.

2. The most inmost and absolute medium which the believer discerns, comes to,
and fastens on God; and that is Jesus Christ the son of God become man the
Savior of the world, etc. Romans 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. John 4. 42. 1 John 4. 14. And
this as he is set forth in Scripture, John 7. 37, 38. Romans 16. 26. Both in
respect of what he has done in his incarnation, death, resurrection, sacrifice
by which he made peace, obtained redemption, completed righteousness and
received spirit in the man and for men; and what by virtue of all this he is
doing in his mediation between God and man and appearing in the heavens before
God; interceeding for transgressors, and advocating and mediateing in special
manner for believers; affording and continuing means and sending forth spirit
to the rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell amongst them, and to believers
to lead them into all truth, and what by reason and virtue of all said he is,
even the propitiation for sins; wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and
redemption, the Savior of sinners, the head of believers, the fountain of
life; the Lord and Judge of all. And what he has assured in his (...)
confirmed by his blood, that he will do in his visible and glorious (...) the
dead; and causing all his peculiar to appear in glory with him* and bring (...)
before his judgments seat, to acknowledge him and receive (...) 1 Timothy 2 4,
5, 6. Tit. 1. 1. 2, 3. and 2. 11. -14* and 3*-4. 7. And thus is Jesus Christ
both the Object of faith, and living and enlivening medium by which any comes
to God, and believe in God, Heb. 7. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 21.

3 The isntrumental and outward Object or medium through which God in Christ
and his well pleasedness in him, and the things above mentioned are declared;
and according to which he is to be beheld, believed, and trusted, in which is
the faith the Apostles preached and wrote to be obeyed in believing, and this
is the word and Gospel of God and Christ, as testified and recorded by the
spiration and inspiration of the Holy Ghost in the holy Scriptures, John 5. 39.
and because so reported it is called his name, Psalm 138. 2. and believing him
is in believing his Gospel, Mark 1. 15. Joh. 2. 22. and 5. 47. and begins in
glorifying his word, Acts 13. 38. and so right believing on him is believing on
him, as the Scripture has said, John 7. 37. and according to his word, and so
trusting him in his word, Pal. 56. 3, 4. 10, 11. and so to usward; this is the
first and outward Object and medium, nigh to us discovering God and Christ,
that we may trust rightly in him, the next which through this is come to, the
inmost living mediate Object discovered in that word, and through that word
believed in is Jesus Christ as aforesaid, and so through Christ the last and
most inmost and absolute Object is God in Christ, 1 Timothy 4 10. Romans 4. 24. and
so the Object of faith is one, that is, God in Christ as discovered by his
Spirit in the Gospel, and this is the faith of which these opposers discover
themselves by their own words to be void and of no judgment, as after also may
more appear.

2. As for that believing which closes with this Object of faith, and is
therefore called faith, it is in holy Scripture shown to have these three
things in it, together in one.

1. A right discerning judgment and persuasion of God in Christ, according to
the discovery of himself in this word and testimony, and begotten by this word
and testimony, Joh. 5. 39. 44. 47. and 7. 37. 2 These. 1. 10. Rev. 19. 10* Heb.
11. 13.

2. From and with this an hearty imbracement of this discerned, and from thence
an unfeined believing and trusting in God, for all the grace and glory in
Christ promised, Heb. 11. 13. Romans 4. 18.-25. and 5. 8, 9, 10. 2 Timothy 4. 18.

3. Thirdly, a yielding up the heart and powers to be saved and framed in
affections, choice, and endeavors of service, by the teachings, allurements
and operation of this grace believed, Isa. 45. 22. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Cant. 1. 3, 4.
and 2. 4, 5, 6. Phil. 3. 3* 7, 8, 9. 1 Pet. 1. 5, 6. 8. Romans 6. 17. Tit. 2.
11.-14. Heb. 11. 13. And in these three meeting in one is that believing, that
closing with, and receiving this Object of faith, that is rightly called faith,
which had these opposers known, they would not have avouched it an error to
say, that Jesus Christ the Lord from Heaven the quickening Spirit dwells in
believers by faith, for by faith (the Object discovered and believing, or faith
in the heart begot there) they receive his word or testimony into their hearts,
Jam. 1. 18. 2 Cor. 3. 3. and where this word abides in the heart there and so
is Christ, John 15. 4. 7. 1 John 2, 24. and 5. 10. and 2. 9. And here through
the Holy Ghost discovering Christ and the things of Christ, the virtues of his
death, resurrection, fullness, sacrifice, and by his divine light, breathing,
and power glorifying him to their hearts, ( John 15. 26, 27. and 16. 13, 14,
15. 1 Pet. 1. 20. Romans 4. 25.) draws them more on Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5. From
whom they receive and believing have in them remission of sins, Acts 10. 43.
Col. 2. 13. Justification, and peace with God in Christ, access to God in that
grace, and hope of glory, Romans 5* 1, 2. 8, 9, 10, 11. 1 Cor. 6. 11. And as
these are by the word and spirit witnessed in them, and received by them, so
and thereby is Christ in them, 1 John 5. 10. 20. Col. 1. 27. And by the word
and Spirit in it with these riches received, is effected in them an inner man,
a new heart, new Spirit, the mind and disposition of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 20.-24.
Col. 3. 10, 11. Romans 8. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 2. 16. 2 Cor. 3. 3. 17, 18. And as this
Spirit, and mind, and faith, and love is in them, so and therein is Christ and
God in Christ in them, ^ John 3. 24. and 4. 13. 16. And from this abiding in
the Spirit, flow springs and fruits diffuseing themselves through the man with
motions of love, joy, bowels of mercy, heavenly desires, etc. Which as in them
and yielded to, so and therein is Christ in them, Hos. 14. 8. Math. 13. 33.
John 7. 38, 39. Gal. 5. 22, 23. Who by and with all these riches of his grace
indueth them, with some useful gifts more or less of the Spirit which pleases
him; in which they may be use full in and with the grace received, and Christ
in them and through them, and they by and from him show forth his virtues to
his praise, and the convincement and edification of others, and reproof of
opposers, and so also is he in them, 1 Cor. 12. 4,-12. Ephesians. 4. 7.-16. 1 Pet.
2. 4, 5. 9. and 4. 10. 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16. And herewith also a discerning and
savouring of the appearance of his grace, and ointments in believers of the
same fellowship in the Gospel* so as though to others they be not savoury but
offensive, yet by them they are acknowledged, tasted, entertained, received and
approved in their hearts, and so in Union of love by Christ's own
interpretation, acceptance, and approbation is he received, entertained and
enjoyed by them, 2 Cor. 2. 15. 17. 1 John 4* 6, 7. Math. 10. 40, 41. and 18. 5.
And from and with all the former an experimental knowledge of the coming in,
and efficacy of the love, grace and glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ,
and the treasures of life in him now slowing forth, and the hope of the glory
to be enjoyed at his visible coming again, in which as they are in him so he is
in them too, 1 John 5. 20. 2 Cor. 4 6, 7. Joh. 17. 3* 6, 7 Rom 7. 25. and 8. 1,
2. Phil. 3. 20, 21. 1 These. 1. 3, 4, 5. 10. And so Christ the quickening Spirit
is by faith dwelling in believers hearts, and this is called the riches of the
glory of the mystery among or in the Gentiles preached by the Apostle, Col. 2.
27. Where the Apostle says, not as these perverters say of themselves, P. 14.
That Christ in them is the mystery, but the riches of this mystery is Christ in
men the hope of glory, namely by faith in men as is before declared, even in
such as unfeignedly believe in him, not the possession of glory, which is not
to be enjoyed till his glorious appearing when these mediums now in use will
cease, Col. 3. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 13. 10. 12. but the hope of glory. Thus far we have
enlarged by occasion of this their eighth charge to show how Christ dwells in
the heart by faith for thy usefulness Reader, and now we proceed to their
following charges.

9. I. H. To that of 1 Cor. 15. 45. The last Adam was made a quickening Spirit,
John Horn said he was distinct from the eternal Spirit.

Ans. But John Horn added by way of explication, what they fraudulently
suppress, that he is distinct (he said not divided) from the eternal Spirit in
which he offered up himself to God, the Holy Ghost* or the third of the three
mentioned, 1 John 5* 7. and I. H. gave this reason for what he said, that the
second Adam was made a quickening Spirit; the Holy Ghost was not made so, but
was so eternally, so as the last Adams being a quickening Spirit was not.

10. T. M. To prove sin a natural heritage in believers so long as they are
here brought, Rom* 7. 17.

Ans. That indeed he brought amongst other proofs to prove sin even in the
believers a natural heritage from Adam. Is this a dangerous Principle to quote
Scriptures for what we assert? see the Answer to the first Principle noted
against us, besides which we may add; that in that and the foregoing and
following Verses, some of which also were alleged, is a clear distinction
between the outward and inner man, the new man in his Spirit that sinned not,
and the members or mortal body, in which he says that even then sin dwelt, and
that it was as a natural heritage from Adam appears in that he says, I am
carnal sold under sin: not I have sold my self to sin, as it is said of Ahab
willingly sinning, but I am sold, passively, as implying by another, and who
could that be but the first Adam, by whose one offense many were made sinners.
That all those Principles were asserted by us (as they say) is false, and so it
is that they were contradicted by the truth, as what we have said to them
evinces: They did wisely to say only, ( That our darkness and confusion may
easily be seen,) without assaying to prove it, because easier said then proved:
Let us see what they do in answer to our Book.

The Reply to their Book.
WE charged them (and yet do) to be guilty of great Errors: as 1. In pleading
for and maintaining a perfection of sinlessness in themselves in this life. To
this they say, We are in the great Error our selves who deny the perfection of
sinlessness in the Believers, for the Apostle said, He that believes has the
witness in himself, 1 John 5. 10. which witness is perfect and sinless, so not
without the perfection of sinlessness.

Rep. See Reader, they intimately grant our charge and plead for it, but
prevaricate or shuffle, for we did not fault them for asserting a perfection of
sinlesness in the witness of God, nor for saying that something in the believer
is sinless, but that they have the perfection of sinlesness in themselves, or
are in themselves sinless, beside they clip the Text, they quote leaving out
[on the Son of God] the object of the right believing, and so turn it into a
lie, for the Devil is said to believe too, Jam. 2. 19. yet has not the witness
(sure) in himself, nor does the witness of God appear to be in them, that is,
in the right believers on the Son of God, they being not believers but denyers
and underminers of him and the Fundamental matters of the testimony of God
concerning him, as the following Answer evinces.

They add, He that believes has the witness that he is righteous, and having
this witness in himself, he is not without the perfection and purity of it in
himself, for the witness of God cannot be divided from the nature of it.

Rep. It is not true that every one that believes has obtained witness that
he is righteous, see Jam 2. 19. though he that believes on the Son of God, and
so in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness,
and in that sense he is righteous, Romans 4. 5, 6, 7, 22, 24. and yet obtaining
witness that one is righteous is a farther thing, Hebr. 11. 4. and as the
witness of God cannot be divided from the nature of it; so neither can the Law
in the members, the fleshly and carnal disposition be divided from the nature
of it; and as the one is in the believers heart, so the other is in his
members, and these two warring the one against the other: but their arguing is
like as if they should say, the believer has no flesh or blood in his body,
because he has a spirit in his body that has neither flesh nor blood in it,
or that they be guilty of the imperfection of witlesness because they have
something in them (their gutts suppose) that be witless, and they are not
divided from their nature; they add, John said (speaking of Christ) as he is
so are we in this world, 1 John 4. 17. and therefore that we have manifestly
wronged them and the Apostles.]

Rep. That we have either wronged them or the Apostles is false, for that they
hold what we said, they do, they deny not, and that the Apostles so held they
prove not; the place they quote says not, as Christ is without sin in himself,
so are we in this world, no more then he says as Christ is without a natural
corruptible body, or without pain, ach, or bodily death, so are we in this
world; they may as well gather the one, as the other from that saying, and that
the Apostle meant it not in respect of sinlesness, as men, is evident by
comparing it with 1 John 1. 8. where he says, If we say we have no sin we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; we may not strain Scriptures
beyond their scope, nor may we say we are in every respect as Christ is either
in himself, or to the world, or to believers: Christ is God over all, so are
not the believers: Christ is the second Adam, a quickening spirit, so are not
the believers: Christ is the only begotten Son of God, so are not the believers
on him: The only begotten Son of God, and they that believe on him are distinct
and different persons: Christ is the Savior of the world, so are not the
believers, not the Savior, though instruments of saving men: Christ is the
propitiation for our sins, and for the sins of the whole world, so are not the
believers: Christ is the Head and Husband of the Church, so are not the
believers; but as Christ is so are the believers, and in an eminent sense so
were the Apostles in the world, in the judgment, knowledge, account of the
world, as also in a measure set to be lights in the world: But the main scope
is, that in respect of judgment, account, and estimate, as Christ is, so are
we in this world; for he says, Herein is our love, or love with us made
perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment: (when we are judged
of men here) because as he is, so are we in this world, as to their receipt,
approvement, rejection, or disapprovement, we have our fellowship therein with
him, which also gives us strong consolation and confidence that when he comes
to judge he will justify us that were here condemned with him; but what is
this to their being sinless in themselves? They add, That they say not there is
any perfection themselves without Christ, who is their righteousness, and they
the righteousness of God in him.

Rep. That Christ is their righteousness, etc. is but their own testimony of
themselves which we cannot receive, because the true Christ (whom we with the
Apostles look for from heaven, so to come again, as they see him go up;) they
say p. 10. they desire not the knowledge of; nor does their not saying that
there is any perfection in them without Christ suffice to excuse them, for its
an Error to say, that through Christ they have perfection in themselves so as
to be perfectly sinless; even the believer in Christ, though in Christ perfect,
is not as yet perfect in himself through Christ while here. Paul though in
Christ said he was not perfect, nor had attained, Phil. 3. 12, 13. no not to be
sinless, Romans 7. 20. 1 Timothy 1. 15. That Christ was manifested to take away our
sin, and in him is no sin we granted, but added, that its never said so of any
else, no where said by any of the Saints of themselves, or of any of their
brethren, that they had no sin in them, or were not sinners: But they bid W.
and F. mark how fairly we contradict our doctrine by telling its said indeed
that he that abides in him sins not, and he that is born of God, does not
commit or work sin, because the seed of God abides in him, neither can he sin
(that is, commit, work, or yield up himself to sin) because he is born of God,
which they render as inconsistent with our counting their maintaining a
perfection of sinlesness in this life, as a great error, and say we would
accuse the Saints or brethren with being sinners.

Rep. 1. Is this to accuse the Saints or brethren to observe what they have
said, or not said of themselves or one another? If so, then all are accusers of
them that observe their sayings, and so it seems they to avoid accusing of them
observe them not. If it be not then are they liars (and so not sinless) that
call our observing what they said, or said not of themselves, an accusing of
them, for we did no more in those sayings they have quoted as any impartial
Reader may see. 2. What we observed they said, contradicts not what we noted
they said not; if they can find that they said of themselves or of their
brethren, that they had no sin in them, or were not sinners, they should
produce it, and prove us liars, if not, then have they falsely charged us with
self-contradiction. These two contradict not, John said, He that abides in him
sins not, and John said not, he that abides in him has no sin in himself,
or is not in that respect a sinner, or that any does perfectly abide in Christ
in every operation and act, so as never to wander in his mind out of him: Paul
abode in Christ in the main, and did not commit sin, for he says, Its no more
I, but sin that do it, and yet Paul then had sin in him, for he adds, but sin
that dwells in me: Yea, and said, that with his flesh he served the law of
sin, and yet with his mind served the law of God, Romans 7. 20, 25. Did Paul then
contradict himself? If yes, then will we be counted contradictors of our selves
also with him; if no, then neither do we contradict our selves; but either they
are ignorant of the nature of contradictions, and so not perfect; or else
knowingly say falsely, and so are vicious: We then yet account what they
maintain a great Error, and yet say what the Apostle John said, because he said
not what they say, that he that is born of God has no sin in him, but on the
contrary, If we say we have no sin in us, we deceive our selves, and yet they
were born of God, sure they believed Jesus to be the Christ, and whosoever does
so is born of God, 1 John 5. 1. so that any that are not blind may see the
confusion and deceit in themselves that they would persuade them they may see
in us, and we have not broken our selves (as they say falsely of us) against any
stone, nor can any stone we war against in them break us, being but such as are
to be removed out of Gods Vineyard, Isai. 5. 2. they add:

W. and F. If Christ be made manifest to take away sin then they in whom he is
made manifest are not to have sin in them; so long as they are in this life,
and if he that is born of God cannot sin nor yield up to sin, then he is not a
sinner but clear and perfect from sin. Rep. We deny these inferences; the
latter we have spoken to and disproved above, to the former we say, I'ts not
their duty to have sin as their phrase may seem to imply: Nor do we say it is
their duty but their infirmity; even as to be weak and mortal is not their
duty, but their burden, but if by [are to have sin in them] they mean they
have or will have sin in them so long as they are in this life; we deny that
inference till they prove that Christ was manifested to take away sin, so as to
take it wholly out of the nature of man in some of the particular persons in
this life, and that too absolutely infalibly; we are not to build our faith
upon their inferences, but upon Gods sayings, and God by his Apostle says not
Christ was manifested to take away sin, therefore in us is no sin as their
Inference imports; therefore their Inference is denied by us; nor slumble we,
much less do we break our selves at that stone: They add, Whosoever sins
has neither seen Christ nor known him; now they that affirm that the Saints or
they that be born of God are sinners they might as well say that the Saints
have neither seen Christ nor known him. Rep. True if by saying they are sinners
they mean they be in their sins, and live in their sins, he that so sins
has neither seen him nor known him, but to be in sin and to have sin in men,
to live in sin, and to have sailings or be overtaken with faults as, Gal. 6. 1.
Are very different things, and in such sense he that says the Saints are
sinners that is have sin in them, and in some things, offend, does not all one
as to say they have not seen or known Christ; a man may be a sinner by having
sin in him and yet not sin, as Romans 7. 20. Paul did not the evil, yet says, of
whom (namely of sinners) I am the chief, by your inference Paul might have said
he neither had seen Christ nor known him; and Isaiah might have said, I a man
of polluted lips therefore mine eyes never see the Lord of hosts, whereas he
says the contrary, for mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of hosts, which
he spoke of Christ when he saw his glory, Isa 6. 5. Joh. 12, 41. See Reader how
there runs a constant stream of mistake in all their writings.

To those phrases, He that is born of God cannot sin, we said it is no more then
to say that a man acted of God cannot therein sin. To this they say, It Is no
more then to say that a man acted of God cannot sin in being acted of God; or
he that does righteousness does not sin in so doing.

Rep. Yes it is some thing more, viz. That men's sinnings are not of God nor can
be, and so that they that sin do not do righteousness nor are born or acted of
God thereunto; contrary to many that pretend that whatever they do they are led
of God thereunto, even then when they sin, and to that purpose. I was told by
one (whether it be true I know not) that some of the Quakers should say, that
what ever they do after they are believers or born of God (in their sense) they
cannot sin in it: the Apostle Argues the root from the fruit, as in James 1.
13. Let no man say when he is tempted I am tempted of God, for God is not
tempted with evil nor tempts he any man's but a man is tempted when led away by
his own lusts, etc. As for reserving an accusation against him that's born of
God, as they charge us it is answered before we accuse not whom God justifies,
nor contradict we what John says, that He that does righteousness is righteous
as God is righteous, for he says not he that does righteousness is as
righteous as God is righteous in whom there is no sin; similitude there is but
not perfect equality, yea therefore is righteous as Christ is righteous, not
because there is no sin in him, but because Christ is made to him of God his
righteousness; and in him he is righteous as Christ is righteousnot in himself
through Christ as ighteous as Christ is in respect of being without sin, they
add See here how they have accused the Apostle Paul I. H. and T. M. words are
these, yea in 1 Timothy 1. 15. He says he was then when an Apostle the chief of
sinners.

Rep. Here again they say falsely of us, unless to say what the Apostle said of
himself be to accuse him; that the Apostle even when an Apostle said (not I was
but) I am the chief (namely) of sinners see the Scripture quoted by us, nor
follows it as they imply, that because the same Apostle in 1 Timothy 1. 12. Says
that Christ counted him faithful, and put him into the Ministry that we might
as well say he that is faithful to Christ is the chief of sinners, no, it only
follows that he that said he was counted faithful by Christ also even then
acknowledged himself the chief of sinners: and that's true unless they can blot
out the words of Scripture and prove them false, read else and see if he that
in verse 12. Says that Christ counted him faithful, etc. Says not verse 15.
Christ came into the world to save sinners of whom I am the chief, is it we
that said thus of Paul, or Paul that said thus of himself, let all men judge,
or can they deny that Paul said of himself what we say he did, and when we say
he said it, surely no, but they say when as it is said Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners of whom I am chief; and says he had obtained mercy,
now does it not follow that Paul was one of the chief or greatest sinners; but
he was one of the chiefest sinners that was saved by Christ, who saves his
people from their fins, and does not suffer them to remain the greatest sinners
when they are saved from sin.

Rep. To this their gloss we say, does Paul say of whom I was the chief, or of
whom I am the chief? of his obtaining mercy he says in the time past, I
obtained mercy, but of his being the chief of sinners that Christ came to save,
he says not in the time past; I was but in the time present I am the chief.
For though he did not sin so grossly as before, yet he was still the same sinner
or sinful man that Christ came to save, yea, and might possibly account every
small neglect or failing a greater sin now then his greatest sins before;
because sensible now of his more engagement to Christ for his having showed him
such favor, a smaller offense against greater knowledge and mercy, may be
greater then a greater sin against less knowledge and mercy, however what he
said of Paul we proved and prove yet from the Text, that is, that he said of
himself even then when an Apostle, that then, in the present tense, he was a
chief sinner, if he said falsely of himself, then was he therein a sinner; if
true, then have not we said falsely of Paul, nor accused him.

W. F. They say, As for the Scriptures we bring, 1 John 1. 8, 9, 10. and Jam.
3. 1, 2. These prove not that we would have them, that the Saints were not
perfectly freed from sin in this life, they did not preach up sin and
imperfection to remain in this li^e (as they say we do) for both James and Joh.
exhort them otherwise, for said James let patience have her perfect work that
you may be perfect and entire wanting nothing, James 1. 4. And John said, if we
walk in the light as he is in the iight, we have fellowship one with another,
and the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. and Chap. 2. 1.
My little children, these things have I writ unto you, that ye sin not, and if
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father so he did not include them all
as to remain sinners, for they were all sinners while they were not cleansed by
the blood of Christ.

Rep. 1. That these Scriptures prove not that the Saints were not perfectly
freed from sin in this life, it is but their saying so, for are they perfectly
freed from sin as to the being of it in them, that have it as these say they
had, and David says, no man living (and sure men are living while they are in
this life) is so free from sin as to be justified, if God enter into judgment
with them, Psalm. 143. 2. And as for preaching up sin and imperfection, that is
falsely and slanderously said of us, do we preach them up because we say they
remain, sure then David preached them up when he said as above. 2 James and John
exhort to the contrary they say, is this a good argument or a piece of
sophistry, John and James exhorted against sin, therefore they did not sin? is
it not as good to say God commands all men every where to Repent, therefore no
man is impenitont, all do repent. James said, let patience have its perfect
work that ye may be perfect, etc. Therefore it seems they were not yet perfect
nor entire, but wanted something: why else would he have so exhorted them? Nor
does that prove they ever were so perfect and entire as to have no sin in them
while here, seeing Asa was perfect all his days yet had sin and sinned. 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. and 16. 7. 10. 12. Do the Apostles say, let no sin be in you,
any where? Men are perfect and entire, and want nothing when they have all
things that may further them to their glorifying God here in their generation,
though they be not perfectly possessed of all things they are capable of
attaining hereafter, may they not as well say men may have all their happiness
and glory here before their decease, the resurrection and whatever they may
have in the world to come, because James says, that ye may be perfect and
entire wanting nothing? Again, can patience be said to have its perfect work in
any, so long as it has any further exercise for it, and has it not something
further till death be over.

3. To John's saying, What need of cleansing from all sin, where is no sin to be
cleansed from. He says not, it has cleansed us already, but cleanses us,
what cleanses now finds something to be cleansed from; and does not the
Apostle plainly say so much, when he immediately adds, If we say we have no sin,
we deceive our selves, let all judge how these Quakers and the Apostles cross
one the other. They say, because it cleanses us from all sin, those that it so
cleanses have no sin, the Apostle says immediately after that saying, If we
say we have no sin we decei^e our selves, does not prove these men to be
deceived, and so to deceive others, seeing they are of such as say so. 4. What
made them stop in their next proof, at ( we have an Advocate, when the Apostle
adds, and be is the propitiation for our sins,) they see the words, [ our sins]
mentioned there, and that scared them from the quoting it so far. Oh, do not
their Consciences accuse them as juglers and deceivers in this Argument, and
that they are afraid of the light, it shines so full against them? 5. And how
follows their Conclusion then, So then he did not include them all as to remain
sinners, etc. Whom did he exclude, seeing the blood of Christ cleanses them
that have fellowship with God? (and had not the Apostles so by their own
confession) yet they say our sins, and if we say we have no sin (even we that
have fellowship with God) we deceive our selves: But they ask, W. and F. What
one sin or sins we can lay to Paul, or James, or John's charge, or to any of
them that they were not perfectly freed from sin before their decease, let them
prove some sin (say they of us) which was not destroyed in any of those before
their decease (and who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect) let them
speak out and answer directly, or for ever be silent from pleading for sin, or
accusing the righteous as they have done.

Rep. It is enough that we believe Paul and James, and John, that they had sin,
and did in many things all offend, though we cannot name their particular
offenses, as it is to believe multitudes to have died, though we know not of
what particular diseases, would it not be a fine argument to say, prove of what
particular diseases Ezra and Nehemiah and Esther died, or else be for ever
silent of accusing them to have been mortal? That in many things they all
offended we believe because James tells us so, but what were their many
offenses we know not because they tell us not, we can tell some sins these men
are guilty of if they had asked us namely of lying, deceit, guile, sophistry
taking up a reproach against their neighbor (as they do in the conclusion of
their Book) Thomas Moore Sen. But what John and James in particular were guilty
of besides natural infirmity we cannot tell because the Holy Ghost has not
told us, nor do we lay any thing to their charge, nor did God because he
forgave, justified and owned them through Christ's death and intercession for
them, which he needed not to have made for them, or been the propitiation for
their sins had they had no sins then, yea it was their abiding in the faith of
Christ and living upon him as the propitiation for their sins in which they
sinned not, and the ceasing to live upon that as of no need for a man (as
having no sins for Christ to be the propitiation for) is one way of going out
from Christ into a man's self and so of not abiding in him, not say we their
sins were not destroyed as to the dominion of them over them; much less that
they were not freed from them through Christ's mediation as to the imputation of
them, they were covered though they were there to cover, they add.

W. F. John did not say if we are not all sinners we deceive our selves, but if
we say we have no sin and have not sinned, which if the little children that
John wrote to, that they might not sin had sin then John might say we have sin,
for he numbered himself with them as friends, or those whose sins were forgiven,
and yet the young men and Fathers he wrote to had overcome the wicked one and
had the word of God abiding in them. 1 John 2.

Rep. What confused deceitful stuff is this, for 1. What does that word
(which) belong to and agree with? And how come in those words [or those whose
sins were forgiven] or how hang they with what went before them? 2. Are they
not all sinners that have sin and that have sinned? What call they them then?
And if they had sin then how were they sinless as they plead? 3. And what if
John say not so, yet Paul said of whom ( viz sinners) I am the chief and said
so When he wrote to Timothy and was an Apostle, and James says in many things
not only we have sinned, but in the presenttense we offend all, are not
offenders sinners? 4. If the little children wrote to that they might not sin
had sin, what becomes then of their former argument from exhortations to be
perfect or not to sin, etc. 5. And if John might thence say we have sin as
numbering himself with them as friends, what hypocrites be they then to fall so
foul upon us because numbering our selves with the Nation we said we have
neglected and long abused the truth? But yet, 6. How prove they that it was
only the little children that might have sin seeing James says in many things
we offend all! if we all then not the little children only for they were not
all the body of them? it is but a presumption without proof that he only
numbered himself with the little children without any ground for it in
themselves; Nay, it is contrary to what James says, 7. They say [or those
whose sins were forgiven] why then be they not blind guides to say they whom
the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin have no sin in them; if those that
had their sins forgiven might have sin in them! they that had their sins
forgiven had they not all forgiven; and is not forgiveness of sin cleansing
from sin and that cleansing too most properly from it which is by the blood of
Christ, Romans 5. 9. And if persons that have all their sins forgiven may have
sin who then may not that are here? They imply the young men and fathers who
had overcome the wicked one and had the word of God a biding in them, but then,
8. Had not the little children that had their sins forgiven them, overcome the
wicked one and had they not the word of God abiding in them? They had the same
thing in substance with the Fathers, for the Fathers knew him that was from the
beginning and the little children knew the Father (is not the Father he that
was from the beginning?) Were they children without the word of God abiding in
them, or without overcoming the wicked one. David says he had hid the word of
God in his heart, that he might not sin against him, and yet how often
complains he of sin, and prays to have removed from him the way of lying, and
implies that his eyes wandered after vanity, and that his ways were not yet so
directed as to keep his statutes and have respect to all Gods commandments?
What else means; Oh that my ways were directed that I might keep thy statutes,
and then shall I not be ashamed when I shall have respect to all thy
commandments, Psalm. 119. 5, 6. 11. 29. 36. And had not Paul overcome the
wicked one when he says sin dwelt in him? Nor James, when he said in many
things we offend all! surely they had, so that their reasonings are very aerie
and without any proof from Scripture, or any thing but their own authority to
warrant them.

W. and F. To Prove. 20. 9. Who can say I have made my heart clean, they say
this is not against them, for they themselves do not say that they have made
their hearts clean, it being Chrsts work to cleanse and ever to have perfected
them that are sanctified, and Solomon says the just man walks in his
integrity, and the righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way.

Rep. They are shrewdly driven to their shifts, for they durst not repeat the
whole Scripture we all edged because they know not how to stare in the face of
it and find out an handsome gloss to elude it, what could they not think of
one shift to evade that clause, I am pure from my sin? Yea their shift for the
other is like Adams fig leaves, for what though it be Christ's work to cleanse,
yet the Apostles exhort believers to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of
flesh and Spirit, may not a man as well collect from thence that a man may
cleanse himself from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit and so make his heart
clean, as from other exhortations to be perfect, to infer, that a man may be
free from all inherency of sin here? Again, Peter says, seeing ye have
purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit, and in such a
sense who can say I have made my heart clean so as that I am pure from my sin?
And surely though Solomon says the just man walks in his integrity, yet he
speaks not of a just man that has no sin or sins not, for he says, there
is none such upon earth, Eccles. 7. 20. Which Scripture next you shamefully
elude, for because its said, there is not a just man upon earth that does good
and sins not, they s^y W and F. Mark for there, among those that were in
their changeable State, nor among them that are born of God, for they cannot
sin.

Rep. Ah fie for shame where speaks he of such a [the^] (...) in their
changeabl^ State? Does not George Whitehead? en (...) and does the word [(...)]
that signifies there is point out any (...) what is spoken should be bounded?
Is not [there is] one word in the Latin, and therefore in the English not to
be severed as they do in their Mark? Is it not the sign of a Verb, And not an
Adverb of place? Yea, do they not know, the word, there is, are not in the
Hebrew Text neither? For they are put in a small character, to imply that they
are not in the Hebrew Text, and if the Text have no there where will they Mark
it, he says, for not upon earth a just man that does good and sins not; not
one so perfectly and fully born of God in all things, and surely men are upon
earth so long as they are in this life their having their conversation in
Heaven hinders not their being on earth; and 2. Are not the just and fearers of
God in a changeable State while in this life? What means Joh else to say
(though he was a perfect man, none like him in the earth) all the days of my
appointed time I will wait till my change come? Joh 1. 8. with 14. 14. He had,
it seems, a change yet to come though a perfect man, and therefore born of God,
without being born of whom is no perfection, and if none among all in the
changeable State is without sin, or so just as not to sin, then perfect men,
such as Joh was, are not so perfect as to be without sin; see how miserably
they are ver thrown in all their arguings and subtersuges, they say.

W. and F. John Horn and Thomas Moore say there is no man that sins not, and
it is true indeed, that Christ said of Nathaniel that he was an lsraelite in
whom there is no guile; and then to this they answer, that we are confounded in
what our selves bring, there was some in whom was no guile contrary to what we
affirmed before against perfection.

Rep. Here we have two or three of their lies more together, 1. In saying, we
say there is no man that sins not, when as it was not we but Solomon, and
the Spirit of God in him that said it; and we expressed it thus. Solomon also
says, 1 Kings 8. 46. There is no man that sins not. 2. In that they say we
are confounded in what we bring, and that that saying, there are some in whom
is no guile; is contrary to what we affirmed before against perfection, did we
ever say any thing before against this that there are some in whom is no guile,
let the reader read what we said and judge. 3. It Is false that we speak against
perfection, for it was not against perfection, but against their corrupt and
false Tenet about perfection of sinlesness in themselves, or some men's being
sinless here, and the Scripture says nothing against what we said but for it,
that in 1 King. 8. 46. Most directly, let us see how they shift the force of it.

W. and F. They say to it, Mark the words (for there) again amongst those that
sinned against God. Rep. Miserable nonsensical shift, which first pulls the
word (there) from the word (is) which in the Latin is but one word as George
Whitehead knows, and therefore jugles and plays the Sophister to deceive simple
people that take him for a Rabbi, nor is it in the Hebrew Text, as before we on
the other place noted. 2. Makes the wisest of men to speak non^-sense or a
Tautology to God, and to say there is, no man among them that sin that sins
not; wretched men that durst so abuse the Scriptures and the Holy men of God
after this manner, by that way of gloss, when it is said there is no darkness
nor shadow of death where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves, Joh 34.
22. They may teach people to elude it thus, Mark that (there) in man's goings
there is none, but there is some somewhere else, and so when he said it is said,
Isa. 45. 6. That they may know me from the rising of the Sun and from the West,
there is none besides me, I am the Lord and there is none else, they may teach
people as well to Mark the word (there) and so to conceit that though there be
none in the East and West, yet in the North and South, there may be other
Jehovahs or Lords, and so when he says, verse 21. Tell ye and bring them near
(namely them that set up the wood of their graven image, and pray to a God that
cannot save) yea let them take council together, who has declared this, etc.
Have not I the Lord and there is no God besides me a just God and a Savior
there is none besides me; they may bid people Mark the word (there) as if it
pointed only to those that set up the wood of their graven image, that among
them there is no God nor Savior but God; but among other people there is, Lord
arise and scatter such enemies to thy truth in their abuses and perversions of
it! but as knowing that was but a silly shift they fly to another and add.

W. and F. And this was in the time of the old covenant Solomon spoke these
words, but now the Lord makes a new covenant when he takes away their sins not
according to the old covenant which the Israelites brake, Heb. 8.

Rep. 1. What needed this gloss if the other was good? 2. Then they will say
either that in the time of the old covenant there was no man that sinned not,
none no where; and then their Mark the word (there) is void, or else that then
there was none amongst them that sinned who sinned not; but now there are some
amongst them that sin that sin not, else why do they oppose the new covenant
and the old if the state of men under both be one and the same? It seems then
in this time they may be sinless and yet sin, ly and forge and traduce and yet
not sin in it all. 3. But were not Paul and John and James under the new
covenant and yet they say in many things we offend all; and if we say we have
no sin we deceive ourselves. But if in the time of the old covenant there was
none that sinned not, why add they a third refuge of vanity? viz.

W. and F. Solomon also said, let your heart be perfect with the Lord your God,
and to walk in his statutes and to keep his commandments as at this day.

Rep. What does this imply ^omparing it with their answer, but that either
under the old covenant men might be perfect and without sin, and then their
other answer was vain and foolish: or else that the perfection of heart Solomon
spoke of, was not such as excluded all sinning or being of sin in men; for as
much as that was said under the old covenant when there was no man that sinned
not; choose which they will take of these: for one of them is necessarily
employed by them and either of them shows them to be confounded, and not to have
confounded us with their Sophistry, or if they will their dreams and Dominions
which all fail them, then say.

W. and F. John Horn added, It is not said there that there was no sin in
Nathaniell, to which they say, John Horn here would accuse Nathaniel to have
sin in him, when as Christ said there was no guile in him, Ioh. 1. 47.

Rep. It Is no accusation against a man to observe what is said of him in the
Scripture, but they further charge John Horn, as erring in affirming as much as
that all sin is not guile (which is Negative not an affirmative,) and fault his
distinstuishing hypocrisy and envy from guile and yet confessing that guile is
a deceitful hiding a man's sin or deceit.

Rep. Well if guile be a deceitful hiding a man's sin then all sin is not
guile, for that implies there is some sin beside guile, that guile, would hide
or lead men to hide, but they add as a demonstration of our ignorance. What is
not hypocrisy a deceitful hiding a man's sin, and is not every sin deceit, and
deceit guile. To this we answer and let all men judge of it that can
understand. 1. That not we only but the Apostle Peter distinguishes between
guile, and envy, and hypocrisy, etc. When he says lay aside all malice and all
guile, and hypocrisy, and envy, and evil speaking, unless they will make the
Apostle Peter to speak Tautologies and multiply words without cause; for what
need to say all malice, and all guile, if all malice and all guile are one and
the same, and what need to add after all guile [and hypocrisy, and envies,
etc.] If all guile be all hypocrisy and envies, and all sins else? Judge Reader
whether the Apostle would speak idle words and needless, Again, 2. To their
question, is not hypocrisy a deceitful hiding a man's sins, Answer, nay rather
its a deceitful counterfeiting virtue and goodness (as they do) though where
it is there is also guile to hide a man's sin, yet these two are distinct. 3.
They say is not every sin deceit, and deceit guile. Answer, every sin is not
that which is called deceit or fraud, nor every deceit guile, there is sin of
ignorance and mistake without intention to deceive, or double heartedness or
deceit fullness of heart, when a thing is not known to a man; a man would do
better if he knew, as when Paul reviled the high Priest, Act. 23. And so that
ruler of his people, it was not deceit his so doing, or out of a mind to do
deceitfuly, but out of mistake or ignorance, nor was it sin that he was
deceived in his thoughts about him (for it is no sin for a man not to know the
Person of another that he knows not) but his rashness and reviling him as he
did though mistaking him was his sin, so that neither was that his sin guile
nor was his being deceived about his Person or Office his sin, much less guile,
in him; Let the understanding judge of what is said.

They add. G. W. This being John Horns reason to prove all sin not guile
because it is said in 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. Laying eside all malice and all guile
(Mark all guile) and hypocrifie: the word (and) being his distinction he might
as well say envy is not malice because there is (and) between them. To which
John Horn replies. 1. Why say they Mark all guile, does the saying all guile
make it to be all sin, no sin but guile? Why then [all malice] should be Marked
too, that that's all sin, and so no sin of ignorance, but all sin is malice,
because its said all malice, and by the same reason because its said Ephesians. 4.
31. All bitterness; bitterness too should be all sin. 2. Why Mark all guile,
rather then Mark, and hypocrisy, as distinguishing hypocrisy from guile, for
(and) uses to couple things distinguished most usually. 3. Why say they the
word (and) is my distinction, when it was the Apostle Peter's too as well as
mine. 4. I may say that envy is not all malice; though it have malice in it,
yet malice may be without it in some cases. I may say my elbow is not my arm
though it be in my arm, so I may say envy is not malice though malice be in it;
there is a distinction between them, envy is a looking at another prosperity
with grief at it, malice is an evil will toward a Person; whence envy
proceeds, you add. That in that thing many see my folly at the dispute in
affirming that all sin is not guile, when as all guile does only include one
sin as I would have it, but all sin, and any sin makes a man guilty, and so he
has guile in him, so that he that had no guile in him had no sin in him.

Rep. Who would not pity and bewail the miserable case of those people that
are carried about by such silly deceitful men as these be, for in this. 1.
They say falsely in saying many see my folly at the dispute in saying all sin is
not guile; for how is that folly that stands against all their deceit, some
possibly might not understand the truth of what I said through their own folly,
but that any could see my folly in what it was not to be seen is impossible. I
am sure diverse see their folly in affirming all sin to be guile, and the sorry
ways they took to prove it, and that they may see yet, for. 2. When as all
guile (they say) does only include one sin as I would have it, then it is as I
would have it, it seems; and then where is the folly to be seen but in them
that charge me with it; and then, say it is as I would have it, but I suppose
the word (not) is omitted in the printing, for I will be ingenious though to an
adversary, they should have said all guile does not only include one sin as I
would have it, but if that be their mind, yet they belly me in saying I would
have all guile include but one sin; I would rather say it is one spring or kind
of sin, and is included in many or diverse sins and yet is not the diverse sins
in which it is, nor is it included in every sin, much less includes it all sin
no more then all malice or all bitterness includes all sins, because they
include diverse acts of sin. 3. When they say (any one sin makes a man guilty,
and so he has guile in him) they speak very ignorantly or very guilefully (for
I distinguish them) ignorantly if they think guile and guilt of one
denomination, and guilty to come from the word (guile) and so all that makes
guilty, to make guily. Guilty is said of guilt, I trow, and not of guile,
though guile produces guilt, yet a man is not denominated guilty from guile but
from guilt, and guilfull from guile. If they know not this; they are very
ignorant and not perfect in knowledge and then they are wretchedly unhappy that
take them for Oracles that are so ignorant. If they know this, then dealt they
guilfully and intended to deceive simple ignorant people that cannot
distinguish things that differ, by their Sophistry: and then the case of their
followers is yet more wretched, which things being so. 4. Their conclusion
cannot follow from those premises, viz. So that he that had no guile in him had
no sin in him, but the contrary; so that he that had no guile in him might have
ignorance and other sins in him.

G. W. They accuse J. H. also of turning George Whiteheads words in saying, he
said guile is a transgression of the law, therefore guile is all sin, which
(they say) is falsely framed, and that the words were to this effect. Every
transgression of the law is guile or sin, and all guile includes all
transgression of the law, therefore every sin is guile.

Rep. I call God and men to witness whither George Whitehead be not herein a
notorious liar, who has shamefully turned his own words and belyed both
himself and me, why else should I match it and detect his Sophistry in his
syllogism by this as like it, all sin is a transgression of the law, but lying
is transgression of the law, therefore lying is all sin. It is true that
syllogism of his was falsely framed, and so much I told him then, but it was of
his own framing; nor does he repeat it here as I writ it rightly, and as he
framed it, but leaves out the word (all) in the minor and the whole major
proposition, as any that compare our books may discern. And when they say their
words were to su^^ effect as they repeat; why say they not directly they were
their words? may they not as boldly lie and falsify in one thing as in
another? and what kind of argument have they framed here, sure as corrupt as
that he framed then: for here is but only the same falsehood affirmed in three
several forms of words to the same sense and none of them proved; and yet they
would infer the last form of them from the two former, just like this; every
transgression of the law is anger or sin; and all anger includes all
transgression, therefore every sin is anger, but why says the first
proposition, every transgression of the law is guile or sin; it is true, its one
of them if their (or) disjoyn then they distinguish sin and guile, if it but
explicate then they beg the question instead of proving it. Oh! Lord deliver
this Nation and the poor ignorant people from such sophisters as these be that
lead men to destruction. They ask.

G. W. What sin can we prove that Nathaniel had in him when he had no guile in
him; and tell us, we must prove some sin then in him or see our selves
confuted.

Rep. They may as well say, seeing the Scripture witnesses that the children of
Korah dyed not in the judgment that befell Korah and his company, what disease
dyed they of? and if we cannot prove that they dyed of some disease then we are
confuted if we believe and hold that they dyed. For as there are many diseases
they might dye of, though not in that judgment; so there be diverse sins
besides guile, secret sins distinct from presumptuous sins as David implies,
Psalm. 19. 1. When they tell us what were those secret sins David prayed to be
cleansed from, distinct from presumptuous sins, then may we tell them what sins
Nathaniel had distinct from guile; David implies sins in them, though forgiven
and covered, in whose Spirits is no guile, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Which we also
quoted, and that will save us from being confuted though we can prove no one
particular sin in Nathaniell, but that Scripture they skip over in silence, as
afraid to meddle with it because thereby they are confuted.

To our Quotation of Ed. Borroughs saying that saints upon earth may be
perfectly freed from the body of sin and death; and our concluding them from
their doctrine of sinlesness to be deceivers. They say.

W. and F. Here we might as well have accused the true Prophets and Apostles. (
Rep. It seems then by their own intimation they be not such but false Prophets
and Apostles; what needed that word (true) by way of distinction of them from
themselves else, if not to imply that they also be Prophets and Apostles but
not true? Mind this Reader and beware of them then) for say they they witnessed
to the same the Quakers witness to.

Rep. Here they own themselves Quakers too, so that we may call them lawfully
so, whereas they traduce us by many Nick names that we own not, as Moorians,
Manifestarians, Freewillers, etc. Did the true Apostles and Prophets ever so
nickname their Opponents as these false ones do?) But let us see their proof
that the true Apostles and Prophets witnessed to the same things that the
untrue ones the Quakers do. They add as said the Prophet, Blessed are the
undefiled in the way, they also do no iniquity, Psalm. 119. 1, 2, 3. And says
the Lord ye shall be clean from all your filthiness, Ezekiel. 36. 25. And Christ
exhorted his to be perfect as their heavenly Father is perfect, Math. 5. 48.
And every one that is perfect shall be as his Lord; and the same Apostle who
said, ye are complete in Christ, said, also in whom ye are circumcised with the
circumcision made without hands in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, Col. 2. 10. 11.

Rep. Here is no place yet says, that either those Holy men themselves or any
others then living were without sin in themselves, which is the thing should
have been proved. 1. As for the Prophet David, lived not he under the old
Testament as well as Solomon whose saying, there is no man that sins not
they would therewith have eluded; but [undefiled in the way] may signify;
either in Christ who is the way, John 14. 6. And that we granted or; in the way
of their walking, so as Zachariah and Elizabeth were blameless in their walking
in all the statutes and commandments of the Lord, and yet Zachary had sin in
him, which discovered it self when tried with the vision, for he believed not
the Angel and therefore was punished with blindness, Luke 1. 6. 20. And [they
do no iniquity] perverse evil, as the word signifies, is all one with, they do
not commit sin, yet even such as do not commit sin have sin in them, yea and
with their flesh serve the Law of sin, as we may read, Romans 7. 20. 25. 2. In
that of Ezekiel 36. 25. They confound things distinguished, for it is not said (as
they quote it) in one and the same period, you shall be clean from all your
filthiness; but the words are distinguished thus. I will sprinkle clean water
upon you and you shall be clean: (there is a half stop and then follows) from all
your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you. And as God
promised to do so does and will he do; the blood of Christ cleanses us from
all sin, and yet it follows, If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves,
and he is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 1. 7, 8. and 2. 2. As was
before noted, he that forgives and cleanses us by way of pardon from all sins,
bids us also pray as duly as for our daily bread, forgive us our trespasses,
etc. 3. As for exhortations to be perfect, they prove not the being of the
thing exhorted to. They supposed above the little children to whom the Apostle
wrote that they might not sin, might have sin in them not withstanding. Nor is
all perfectiom, perfection of sinlesness in men's selves; Asa was perfect
hearted all his days and yet had sin and sinned, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. and 16. 9.
And yet every one that is perfect shall be as his Lord, he says not he is so;
yea in saying he shall be, he implies he is not yet so: but when he shall
appear we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is. This we granted:
but they skipt it over. 4. The Apostle said, they were circumcised with the
circumcisiou made without hands in the putting off the body of sins of the
flesh: but it was in Christ he says, for so much the words [in whom]
signifies. And the same Apostle in the same Epist. Col. 1. 10. 11: to the same
people therefore he says, but now you also (Mark now also) put off all these,
anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communication, etc. Col 3. 8, 9. it
seems then they had those things yet to put off still: for can any put off what
is not? So to the Ephesians too, when he had said they had learned to put off
the old man and put on the new; he adds, wherefore: putting away lying, speak
every man truth to his brother; a lesson these men have not yet learned. To the
Corimbians also he says: purge out the old leaven that ye may be a new lump
even as ye are unleavened, so that in some sense (in Christ) they were
unleavened, and yet in other sense needed to purge out the old leaven, which
implies it was yet in them, for how can a man purge that out of him that is not
in him; but they through ignorance confound these things, and run themselves
and Auditors into delusion.

Again p. 5. l. 36. They distinguish the true Prophets, Christ and his Apostles
from themselves that are accused by us, and so again imply, that they be
neither the true Christ, nor his true Prophets or Apostles. Reader, mind it,
they give out themselves for Prophets and Apostles; and some of them say they
are Christ, but they are false ones, and why then plead they for their false
prophecyings and witnessings! But they indeed show their confusion and railing
against us, as after will appear to their own delection and shame, as for their
innocence, no liers are innocent but they be over and over proved liers, that
perfect heartedness, and compleateness in Christ may consist with sin being in
men in this life we have showed. And they cannot disprove unloss they will blot
out, Col. 2. 10. with Chap. 3. 8. 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. so 1 Cor. 5. 8. 9. Which we
noted above, either let them say those Scripture sayings are false, or else own
their own words to be false, in saying that we fight against our own words, and
that they that are complete in Christ are perfectly freed from sin (namely) as
to all inherency of it in themselves, or they say nothing to purpose; that
sinners are out of the compleatness of Christ (which though in some sense true,
viz. Of sinners out of Christ, yet is not universally true, except Paul when he
said of sinners I am the chief, was out of Christ's compleatness) that the heart
that has sin dwelling in it is not perfect, contrary to, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. with
16, 17. Where Isaiahs heart is said to have been perfect all his days, and yet
he is charged with relying on the King of Asyria, and not relying on the Lord
his God, and those were heart-sins, surely, and they dwell there too for some
time, as the verses before manifest.

p. 6. They accuse us of confusion, that we say believers are come to a further
state and covenant then Adam was in before his fall; who then had no sin in him
and yet accuse the believers (they say) with having the body of sin, or not
being perfect while here.

Rep. Here they show their own confusion for the believers being in a better
state or convenant in Christ, hinders not their having sin yet in themselves to
purge out, as is evident in Col. 2. 10, 11. with 3. 5. 8, 9. No more then it
hinders them from having infirmides and death which Adam unfallen had not,
besides they have added a lie or two, as that we accuse the believers with
having a body of sin, then Paul accused them when he said the believers old man
is crucified with Christ that the body of sin might be destroyed, the words
(might be) plainly imply it a thing not then done but to be done, as in all
like expressions is evident, and that we accuse them with not being perfect
when in diverse respects we grant them to be perfect, as perfect in Christ
Jesus, and many of them perfect with Christ in their Spirits without guile
there, and perfect comparatively to some others, etc. In the same page they
wrong us in giving it as our saying that Adam might possibly sin and die but
not so the believers, whereas we added what they suppress to not so the
believer; not under a covenant of works here: nor hereafter the resurrection
capable of sinning, and dying as Adam before his fall was, again they say, we
would accuse the Quakers of being sinners because of their dying, which is
false, let any man read our book, p 3. What we said is thus, that the Quakers
are not in Adams state before the fall, because Adam had no death, then upon
him as the Quakers have, for they must die; but they say, here our darkness
appears, for believers dying the natural death does not prove them sinners
while here, for through death they gain more of the peace and glory of God;
which they partake of in their life time, which is both confused and
inconcludent, for what if the believer gain by his death, may it not therefore
argue he had sin in him while he lived; is not the being freed from the body of
death, and inherency and combating with sin again think they? Though we did not
bring it for an argument to prove what they charge us with as we before
discovered, and for their confusion, their words sound as if they believed that
the greater gain by their death they have it all in this live; for they say not
more of the peace and glory of God then they partake of in this life, but which
they partake of in this life, but where can they show us any that ever died
that either had not sin in him or sin imputed to him.

They imply p. 6. l. 25, 26. By their taxing us with the contrary that Adam
might have died the natural death if he had not sinned, and to prove it add,
for Christ died who had no sin. To which we reply. 1. Did Christ die a natural
death; was it natural to Christ to die. 2. Had Christ no sin of ours upon him
which occasioned his death! or should he have died though he had not them, laid
upon him? He bare our sins in his own body on the tree therefore he had sins
though none of his own, he did no sin neither was guile found in his mouth (see
there guile and sin distinguished, as if all sin is not guile, or guile not all
sin) yet he bare our sins, 1 Pet. 2. 22, 24. 3. Is this a good inference,
Christ died that did not sin; yet had our sins charged or laid upon him,
therefore Adam should have died a natural death though he had not sinned, let
the reader judge, they say Christ died to destroy the death that came by sin.

Rep. 1. If death came by sin, as the Apostle testifies in Romans 5. 12. What
death was that if not the natural death! Or where does the Apostle distinguish
and say, there is a death of men that came in by sin, and the death of men that
came not in by sin, and that is the natural death? Or where find we mention of
Adams dying before and without respect to his sinning in any kind of death. 2.
Did not Christ by death destroy the natural death, both in taking away its
force for taking us out of favor and fellowship with God, and in becoming the
Resurrection and life from death by whom men shall be raised up out of it at
the last day? Did he not destroy that kind of death which he died; and if that
was the natural death, as they say, the bodily death, we may say then that he
also destroyed: and so destroying that death that came in by sin, it follows
that the natural or bodily death came in by sin too; and so that Adam should
not have died had he not sinned. Do they think that we will worship them and
call them the masters of our faith to receive their dictates without proof? Let
them show that Adam might have died the natural death, or the believers either,
if they had not sinned.

They say, They who die in the Lord are blessed, and to die is gain to them

Rep. True, but its by virtue of the Lord in whom they die, that turns their
curses into blessings; death into life. Nor is it natural to die in the Lord,
though to die be. Its true too [that the righteous men's dying was not charged
upon them as a reward for their sin] and yet true too that had they never been
sinners or sinned in Adam they had never died, for as much as by one man's sin,
death passed upon all as the Apostle witnesses, as a reward of Adams sin and
theirs in him it first was denounced, and though through Christ the weight and
destructiveness of it is removed yet the carcass of it remains upon men
generally, though through Christ turned to the believers gain.

W. and F. They say, God said to Adam in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall
die, but Adam lost not his natural life in the day he eat of the tree of
knowledge: for after that he lived in the body.

Rep. Herein again they show their confusion, for what though Adam lived in the
body after he eat of the tree of knowledge, follows it he had not lost his
life, that day he eat? A man my loose or forfeit that which may not presently
be taken from him: men loose their lives in a Law sense when they do such
things as subject them to the Law, so as they are thereby condemned to die;
though death be not presently executed upon them. That day he died then in the
sentence of the Law though not as to its execution upon him, which yet had been
then executed too, its probable, had not Christ the Mediator interposed between
him and death to die for him. Besides that a thousand years being to the Lord
but as one day and he dying in that space he might be said in that sense to
have died on the day he sinned.

They say, The covenant Adam was in before his fall, was a covenant of life:
for he was in the image of God and a living soul; having the breath of life in
him and had dominion in it, while he stood in his habitation, etc.

Rep. That Adam was under a covenant of life before the fall is true (nor
opposes our sayings, but their own, that Adam might have died the natural
death though he had not sinned.) But they have weakly proved that it is so: for
sure the covenant made with him was with him alive and as a creature, and not
made with him before he was a living man, and therefore his being in the image
of God, a living soul, having the breath of life in him and dominion in it, as
they speak, are not to the purpose. The covenat might concern their continuance
to him, not his being made first in them; they add, this state have the
believers proved and witnessed, that life and nature and image that was in man
before the fall, though they become further in the second Adam who is greater
then the first Adam.

Rep. Still they dictate magisterially; where have the believers proved that
state of Adam and witness it, let them show it in all the Scriptures: for as
for their witnessings they are of no Authority with us, its the truth of their
witnessings we would have them prove and not only tell us they are true, for
we are not of the mind with some simple that believe every of their words, to
believe that their sayings are as good or better then the sayings of the
Prophets and Apostle in the Scriptures, have any believers, ever witnessed that
they were without sin as Adam, and under no more sentence of death, then Adam
while in his innocent condition, let them show us that, that we may believe it,
have any believers proved that state of Adam to have life in themselves and not
in Christ crucified as Adam had? And how are they come further in the second
Adam: are they led to that and the second Adams state too? Where prove they
that? Into the natural life of Adam as earthly and fallen, full of sin and
death, such as Adam fallen derived to them they are born, and through it are
led, yea and out and beyond that in Christ in a measure here, and fully
hereafter; but that Christ leads them first into the state of Adam innocent,
and then into the state of Christ, they must prove, and not only dictate
before it find credit with us, or with any that know and believe the
Scriptures, but they imply, That if Adam was under a covenant of works, do this
and live, then he should not have lived when he was in innocence till he had
done some thing to merit life.

Rep. The mistake of this is showed above, in that that covenant was not for
the first giving, but for the continuance of his life in the favor of God and
that (though he could not merit by any works and obedience) was to be continued
upon his working, that that was good sinlesly, otherwise he was to die, as
appeared in that he lost it by his sinning and fell under death, from which
that covenant afforded no Redemption as the covenant in Christ does; so that we
have not spoken ignorantly as they charge us, but the ignorance is found with
them, that confound what covenant Adam was under with what was given to the
people of Israel; for convincement of their sin when fallen. The covenant of
works or Law as given to fallen man in the hand of a Mediator entered because of
transgression till the seed came, and so was given with subordination to the
covenant of grace, even the grace of God in the Redeemer from the fall and the
death that came by sin; as the natural death also did: though they erroneously
imply the contrary, and no marvel for if that death be by sin, then there
must be a Redemption out of that death; and so a Resurrection of the body from
it: which seeing they deny how can they grant it comes in by sin, and that the
seed should Redeem the creature out of it? So that herein also their iniquity
and corrupt judgment is seen and the root of their denial that the natural
death came in by sin; namely their denial of the Redemption by Christ from
that death and so the Resurrection of the body from it as after will more
appear, so that here Reader we have a complication of errors in them. Thus
much to their defense of their first error about their sinlesness, let us see
how they defend their second.

Our second charge of them was about the personal body of Christ, in which he
suffered, which that it is ascended into Heaven, the Heavens without all men
and above the clouds opposed to the visible earth, we say they would not be
brought to acknowledge; touching which whether we questioned several times
altering our words as they charge us, let them judge that read our book. But
they say, W. and F. We contradict our selves because we say that they said the
same body that suffered was glorified at Gods right hand in heaven.

Rep. Nay, not unless by that body and that Heaven we say they meant as we
expressed in our question, which we said they did not, and they in their book
clearly manifest the truth of what we therein said; so that it is but another
falsehood added to the former, to say that we are stifled in our own confusion;
and another yet, to say, that we charge them ignorantly with what they meant:
for here they plainly say, W. and F. It appears we hold Christ has two bodies
in telling of a mystical body, and not receiving that as in answer, that his
body is the Church the fullness of him, that fills all in all, and in that
from our words (they say) we would have Christ to have a body besides or
distinct from the fullness of God, when as the Scripture does not say that
Christ has two bodies, or that his body is a body of flesh and bones without
the blood in it, as they say we told them.

Rep. See here Reader, did we ignorantly charge them, that by the body they
said was glorified in Heaven, they meant his Church; do not they here speak it
out while they tax us with holding Christ has two bodies, because we say he
has his personal body in which he suffered, and which he showed to have flesh
and bones in it, as a Spirit has not. And is it more absurd for Christ to have
in two senses, a body or two bodies in different senses of the word body, then
for the believer to have two heads in two distinct senses; has not George
Whitehead and the rest, each of them their personal head in which they have
tongues with which they smite them that are more righteous then themselves? And
if they were believers in truth, should they not have Christ for their head
too? And why then may not Christ have a body of his own as a man, the man
Christ Jesus, in which he showed his Disciples flesh and bones; and yet have a
body mystical, or body signifying a Church, society or congregation as he is
the Ruler and Governor of them and in them by his Spirit? And does not the
Scripture set forth both these to us as distinct bodies, though those very
words two bodies it has not; was it his body the Church in which he showed his
Disciples his flesh and bones, hands and feet that were pierced with Nails,
and in which he bare our sins on the tree? And was it his personal body for
which Paul filled up the remainder of the sufferings. Col. 1. 24. Is there not
expressly the body of his flesh mentioned, Col. 1. 22. In which he reconciled us
to God (his now glorious body in the Heavens to which the body of his Church is
to be fashioned into the likeness of it, Phil. 3. 20. 21.) And the body his
Church, Col. 1. 24. See here how these men broadly deny Christ as man, and
only make him a Spirit filling the Church, and so the Spirit and the Church to
be Christ and is not that all the Christ they confess now to be? And whereas
they say, "we would have Christ to have a body besides and distinct from the
fullness of God, Col. 2. 9. We say, we acknowledge a body in which dwells the
fullness of the Godhead, which we say is distinct from the fullness of the
Godhead that dwells in it, and is distinct too from the Church, the fullness (it
is not said of God as God) but of him that fills all in all, that is of
Christ as Mediator in the power of God, Ephesians. 4. 9, 10. Yet that his body is a
body of flesh and bones in Heaven without blood, in it we determined not: but
that that body of flesh and bones, or in which he showed his Disciples flesh
and bones, is asc^nded up into Heaven, and he as in it is glorified; against
which they reason th^^*

W. and F. It Is not proper to say a body of flesh and bones is in the Heavens,
as if it were in many places at once, for Heavens are more then one; a silly
reason: for by that reason it is not proper to say a body of flesh and bones is
in the waters, or a stone sinks in the waters, for waters are more then one,
Heaven and Heavens are indifferently used in the Singular or Plural number; as
water and waters be, as we find the birds of the Heavens, Jer. 4. 22. And the
fowls of the Heavens, Jer. 9, 10. And often fowls of Heaven, as Job. 35. 11.
Jer. 7. 33. They add, the body is one and has many Members, 1 Cor. 12. 12.
Answer, that's said both of a personal and mystical body or society in
different senses; true also that the body of Christ (either Personal or
mystical) is not carnal but spiritual) nor was it carnal when he showed it
to have flesh and bones: carneum and carnale differ, a heart of flesh and a
carnal heart differ, for when God promises a heart of flesh he means not a
carnal heart; so that these are sorry mistakes not solid arguments, against
Christ's having his personal body, glorified in the Heavens. They say

W. and F. They who are carnal as we be (they say, and we shall bear their
reproaches) could not discern that body they grant him to have, though the
outward bodies of believers they might discern; and yet this body of Christ is
discerned by the believers who are led by the Spirit of God: and is in heaven
above the clouds, which they that are gazing abroad, and looking carnally to
see Christ, they discern not the Lords body, for they see not through the
clouds into the heavens; so Christ is taken out of their sight.

Rep. Now here the reader may take notice, both that the body they say is in
Heaven above the clouds glorified is not a personal body, such as Christ
showed his Disciples after his Resurrection, for they said p. 7. His body is
the Church, and the Scriptures says not that Christ has two bodies'; and also
what Heavens they say Christ's body is in, viz. above the clouds in men's
imaginations: but however they cast mists and clouds in their expressions,
blessed be God, we are able to discern their meaning, that they mean nothing
less by Heaven, then the Heavens without men, and such as Christ being taken
into, he was thereby parted from his Disciples that beheld him, as Luke 24. 51.
But Stephen (they say) that was full of the Holy Ghost saw the Heavens opened
and the Son of man standing on the right hand, of his Father; and John in the
Spirit saw into Heaven, etc.

Rep. Yea, verily Stephen saw into that Heaven, and saw that person that they
believe not for want of the Holy Ghost the Spirit of faith; what Son of man did
Stephen see in Heaven? Nothing but the Church as filled with Word and Spirit,
glorified in a glorious Heavenly condition; is the Church of God the Son of
man: or is the seed in them the Lord Jesus into whose hands he commended his
Spirit? And did the Spirit of Stephen then when separated from his body go into
the Church of God the rest of the surviving believers, or into some seed within
himself and them; let them speak out and unriddle their dark parables, and open
their cloudy conceits, that men may see into their Heaven where they think
Christ was seen by Stephen; and So that we did not ignorantly charge them with
their meaning therein; but they would seem to give an Answer to our Question
here, which they could not think on at the dispute, viz. That Christ's body is
not distinct from the Spirits of all men; as it is distinct from carnal bodies.
Answer, They would have stopped sure at [the Spirits of all men] but that they
love to be in the clouds, that their meaning may be taken out of the simples
sight. They add that [as he is distinct from carnal bodies] to cover over a
lie with the face of truth, and blind men with the show of an Answer, when as
in truth it is none: for our Question was not whether Christ's body be distinct
from the Spirits of all men in the same manner as from carnal bodies; but
whether the body they speak of [rather] be distinct from both of them, be the
manner what it will; To their additionall falsehood [as we imagine] as if we
imagined it distinct from them both after the same manner, we say, it is as
truly distinct from the one as from the other, but not after the same sort; it
differs from the carnal bodies of men in carnality, and grosness and
corruptibility, etc. It differs from the Spirits of men in substance, it is a
body and they are Spirits; yet it is distinct from both of them because neither
are they it, nor it they, but let us view their reason for the different
distinction between them. They say, The Sperits of just men, etc. rejoice in
him.

Rep. Who do they rejoice in? In his body or not; for we are speaking of the
distinctness of his body from their Spirits, if they and their Spirits be his
body, how rejoice they in his body? Do they rejoice in themselves; or is there
another body for them to rejoice in, besides themselves that rejoice all of
them in Union? They say, The true Church in Christ which discerns his body in
his fullness is but one complete body in the fullness of God.

Rep. Here they are in the clouds indeed, but clouds of darkness, his light is
not spread upon them, for, 1. What difference is there between the true Church
that discerns, and his body discerned by it; if as they said before his body is
his Church, and we read not of two bodies of Christ? If none, then his Church
discerns its self and rejoices in it self: and the Church that discerns it self
is one complete body in the fullness of God (before it was the fullness of God,
and now it is in the fullness of God; but the Scripture says neither of it) if
the Church which is his body see or discern another body of Christ besides
itself, then they must say too, there are two bodies of Christ, one that
discerns, and another that is discerned by it, which they before denied and
reasoned against; what confusion are they herein? By which we are so far from
knowing, that they own what the Scriptures do declare concerning Christ and his
body, as they say of themselves, that we hereby know them to be they that do
not own it, and we will discern notwithstanding their palliating over the
business with subtle expressions, as [That the same that descended into the
lower parts of the earth; is he that ascended far above all Heavens, that he
might fill all things, the same Christ that suffered in the body at Jerusalem,
who appeared in diverse forms after the Resurrection, in the transfiguration
before, the same arose again, and was taken in his ascending out of the sight
of them that gazed after him; and is glorified in the same glory which he had
with the Father before the world was] yet we see your deceit, that in all this
you yet deny that body that he suffered in to be now in glory, that personal
body that had flesh and bones in it, and therefore that you believe not what
was said to those you reproach for gazing after him, that he should even so
come again in like manner as they had seen him go up into Heaven; for that was
in a body with flesh and bones in it, and was visible to the eye till a cloud
received him out from their sight: and that this you deny, appears in what you
have said before of the Church being his body only, and by what follows, viz.
That [as he who is the Word became flesh, so when the days of his flesh were
finished, he was translated into his own glory which he had with his Father
from eternity; and so the second Adam is a quickening Spirit] for in those words
you imply that his flesh, or the substance of his body in which he bare our
sins is ceased, and so that his humanity, or what he took of the Virgin, and of
the seed of David after the flesh is gone, so as he is only a Spirit without
any human body: but how then did the Apostle oppose Christ in his ascending
into Heaven unto David? Acts 2. 34, 45. For by that David ascended as much as
Christ, for his Spirit went to God when his body went to the dust, Eccles. 12.
7. And it seems by your sayings, Christ's body is not ascended, but by the
Apostles saying, Christ is opposed to David in ascending in what he [ David]
ascended not, whose body he says is the sepulcher; therefore it follows, that
the body of Christ is ascended, and is taken up into glory, and is called the
glorious body of Christ to which the believers body is to be conformed and
changed into its likeness; not into the Churches likeness sure, which as yet is
much of it in a suffering state, and not a glorious body; yea, the Apostle
tells us, that of the fruit of David's loins according to the flesh Christ is
raised up to sit upon his throne, Acts 2. 30. Is he the man Jesus, the Mediator
of God and us, the propitiation for our sins as a Spirit merely! Or is he the
man Christ as he is God in us, or a Spirit in Union with his Church? And is so
as he, the propitiation for our sins; then he bare his own sins in his body,
and is the propitiation for himself; seeing the Church is he or part of him,
his body that was offered up for us. It Is true, the second Adam was made a
quickening Spirit, yet abides a man, and has a glorious body dictinct from his
Church, to which our body is to be conformed; even as Adam was a living soul
yet had a natural body.

W. and F. To your question, you ask us, viz. Whether we believe that body the
saints upon earth do discern, and which the world cannot discern is a body of
flesh and bones, yea or nay.] We answer, it is the body that was broken for us,
and is to be fed upon by us, as is plain in 1 Cor. 11. 24. 29. [not discerning
the Lords body] it is that that is remembered and communicated with in the supper
of the Lord which ordinance you have denied in your queries to us, and that
body was the same that Christ showed to have flesh and bones in it; and in
which he went up into Heaven, as before, think you the Church was given and
broken for us: and is the breaking of the Church that which we are to have
communion with, and remember as the matter of our seeding in that Ordinance?
Though the body mystical of Christ his Church, is also to be discerned by the
believers and is not by the world: but if the Church be the body discerned
which in the supper we have the communion of, and which was broken for us; then
the flesh of Christ which we eat is something of the Church, the flesh and
substance of the Church, and so the Church is to eat itself; what confused
stuff is this that is insinuated by you to us? But by the reason you give off
your propounding that question, viz. [seeing we own the believers or Church to
be the body of Christ, and plead for another body of Christ distinct from them]
it is plain without contradiction that you deny the personal body of Christ to
be, and abide in the Heavens; and to deny the man Jesus to be the Object of the
believers faith, and why shamed you to speak out this so broadly at the
dispute? Was you then more bashful, and are since grown more audacious and
impudent.

W. and F. They say, It Is gross confusion to say, that believers are Members
of Christ's flesh and bones, and then to say, they are not flesh of his flesh,
and bone of his bone: as if Christ had two bodies of flesh and bone, one of
which the saints are not Members, when the Apostle says as much as they were
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, in saying no man ever hated his own
flesh, but nourishes it and cherishes it; even as the Lord the Church: for we
are Members of his body of his flesh and of his bones, Ephesians. 3 30.

Rep. Surely the gross confusion is clearly in themselves here as is easy to
demonstrate. 1. They belly us, in saying of us that we said, what we said not,
viz. That believers are Members of Christ's flesh and bones; we said, the
Apostles preached that the believers are Members of his body, of his flesh, and
of his bones, neither the Greek nor the Latin (as G. W. At least as to the
Latin may know) will bear that construction, Members of his flesh and bones,
but Members of his body; of (that is out of) his flesh, and of (or out of) his
bones, ex carne ejus and ex ossibus ejus. 2. Is his Church flesh and bones?
said they not above that a body of flesh and bones, cannot be said to be in the
Heavens, but if believers be a body of flesh and bones, as they are if they be
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, must they not needs be then a body
of flesh and bones in Heaven; seeing they grant his body to be in the heavens,
yea to be the fullness of God that fills all in all both in Heaven and earth;
is flesh and bones the fullness of God filling all in all both in Heaven and
earth? It Is true that the Church consists of Members, that each of them have
personal heads and bodies of flesh and bones as men, but are they flesh of his
flesh and bone of his bone? Is our flesh of Christ's flesh, and our bone of
Christ's bone? How then has not Christ flesh and bone of his own, distinct from
the body his Church, if our flesh be flesh of his flesh, and our bone be bone
of his bone? Does not that phrase speak plainly of flesh and bones of his,
distinct from the Church, which they say too is flesh and bone; is not the
confusion then in these men that deny Christ to have a body of flesh and bones
distinct from his Church, and then to say his Church is flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his bone, and so to imply a distinction between the flesh and bone that
the Church is, and the flesh and bone that it is of? As was between Evabs flesh
and bone, and the fleshand bones of Adam out of which she was made flesh and
bone; for to her that phrase is applied, Genesis 2. 23. 3. Whereas they put this
consequent upon us that we by denying their addition to the Scriptures make it
as if Christ had two bodies of flesh and bones, one of which the saints are not
Members, see if this follow not clearly from their addition? For whereas the
Apostle says we are of his flesh and of his bones, and so implies but one body
of flesh and bones out of which the Church is; now these to that body of flesh
and bones which is Christ's, make a second, which is the Church, while they say
the Church is flesh and bone too, flesh of his flesh and bone of his bone; even
as Adams body of flesh and bone out of which Eve was made, and Eves that was
made out of it were two bodies of flesh and bone. 4. Do they not belly the
Apostle too when they say he says as much as they were flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his bone; in his saying, no man ever hated his own flesh* but loves it
and cherishes it; even as the Lord the Church, for we are Members of his body,
of his flesh, and of his bones? Is it not clear that the former part speaks of
men loving their own natural bodies called their flesh, but the latter part
speaks of Christ cherishing his Church, but calls not the Church his flesh and
bone, but Members of his body; of (that is out of) his flesh, and of (that is
out of) his bone, implying that the Church is sprung and framed to him to be
his Church out of his flesh and bone, that is, from his incarnation, suffering,
and the things done in and by his being made flesh, had not he had a body
prepared for him, even a body of flesh and bones in which he did the Fathers
will, he could have had no Church; we are the fruit of the travail of his
soul, Isa. 53. 10.

We noted that this opinion of the Quakers denying that body, ( viz. That body
personal, that body that had flesh and bones, and in which Christ suffered) to
be glorified, does at once turn up by the roots all the faith of Christ's
appearing in the Heavens for us, etc. To this they Object again our confusion
and falsehood, because we said before of the Quakers, that the same body that
suffered was glorified at Gods right hand in Heaven, and now charge them with
denying that body to be glorified.

Rep. Mind here reader their subtilty, how they hide themselves in
aequivocations, when we say they deny that body to be glorified; it is clear
that we speak of his body personal, the body of his flesh: and does it not
plainly appear that they deny that to be glorified when they deny any body of
Christ remaining but his Church? But now when they said the same body that
suffered was glorified, we told you before they meant but his Church, and so
that body they that confess to suffer and to be glorified is not the same that
we say they deny to be glorified, and to that purpose both in a letter we had
from them, and in their book they tell us of the seed, Christ suffering
somewhere and in some, and reigning or glorified in others; were there ever
such juglers and Jesuits as these we deal against, that are full of lies and
confusion, and wind about into many shapes and aequivocations to deceive the
simple, but cannot be ashamed of them, they are so hardened?

They plainly show their corrupt and wicked judgments about the coming of the
Lord from Heaven, 1 These. 4. 15. While they say. W. and F. we blindly put it
afar off, and that that coming of Christ the saints who were then alive (namely
when the Apostles wrote) remained unto it.

Rep. So then by that the Lord himself descended from Heaven with a shout and
with the voice of the Archangell, and with the Trump of God, and the dead in
Christ were raised before Paul and the believing Thessalonians dyed, and so
they did not sleep as to their bodies, but were suddenly changed and taken up
to meet the Lord in the air, and to be ever with him; then that's false that
Hystories relate of Paul's being beheaded at Rome, and in vain do men look for
Christ's coming to raise the dead, for that's past and gone before the Apostles
age was past. The resurrection of the just is over then, for that was to be at
Christ's coming, and why should any preach now, and believe in Christ now, when
there is nothing of hope now to be looked for? Are not these sufficiently
gross and wicked in their judgment, that dare take away the hope of Christ's
glorious appearance, and the being for ever with Christ to be by any man now
expected* But it is strange Christ should come, the elements melt with servent
heat, the trumpet sound, the dead in Christ be raised, and no man hear, or
speak, or write of it in any age, except [ in haereticorum cubiculis] as
Tertullian speaks, or as I may rather say, in the fancies of Heretics, but
alas! Reader, these men turn all these things into fables, perverting the whole
Scripture to their corrupt sense; by dead in Christ meaning but the spiritually
dead in some fancied death; sleeping in him, and the trumpet and shout, and
resurrection all Allegorical; and so they thereby deny and undermine both the
coming of Christ, the resurrection and the judgment spoken of in the
Scriptures. Tohelp thee against them, whereas they urge [we that are alive and
remain to the coming of the Lord] as if they that then lived should certainly
live and abide till his coming, know that the Apostle writ of it as a thing
that is hidden as to the day and time of it; and writes of the Church as of our
body in all ages, and so by, we that live and remain, means but those of us
that shall be found living, that is, of the company of believers, with whom
they numbered themselves, because then living; and possibly not knowing but they
might have lived to his coming. But it no more implies that the believers of
that age should live and remain till the coming of Christ, then that they who
lived in David's age, or when the Psalms were penned lived in Moses age many
hundreds of years before him, and rejoiced in the Lord when Israel went over
the sea; because it is said Psalm. 66. 6. They went through the flood on foot,
there did we rejoice in him; or that the people in Hoseas time were born and
lived in Jacobs time, because in Hos. 12. 4. Speaking of Jacobs wrestling with
God in Bethell, he says, he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us.
This one passage of theirs, were there no more, is sufficient to discover their
horrible corruption and reprobacy of mind in the things of Christ, but more of
the like corruption they show about the Heavens and Christ's coming from thence
in what follows; for to that in Philip. 3. 20, 21. Where it is said our
conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior the Lord
Jesus, they say,

W. and F. They say, so their conversation was in Heaven, and there they looked
for the Savior.

Reply. See here one perversion, the Apostle says they looked for a Savior
from thence to come, namely from Heaven: and these say where we look for a
Savior, no doubt but had we said so as they say of the Apostles, they would
have reproached us, and said, see these men have their Savior to look for yet,
(as in a letter to us, to our saying that the Saints seek their pardon and
healing in Christ they retort, that we accuse them of having their pardon to
seek) so wicked are they; But of the Apostles looking for Christ from Heaven,
they take no notice, Its no part of their Faith or Expectation it seems, they
add,

W. and F. They did not say their conversation was at a distance far off above
the Clouds where we (they say) look for a Savior like our selves, but that he
has no blood in his body as we Imagine.

Answ. They said their conversation was in Heaven, and Heaven is above the
Clouds, and Gods Glory is in and above the Heavens, and in that Glory Christ
is, and where Christ is there was their conversation; as they Exhort also to
set our affections upon things above where Christ is also at the right hand of
God, he says not upon things within your selves, but upon things above, Col.
3. 2, 3. But ye may see these men deny the God above, and say in effect with
the false Prophets, Jer. 23. 21. God is a God at hand but not a God a far off.
But as they said not their conversation was above the Clouds, in those very
words, though they said it in effect; So neither said they their conversation
was in themselves and thence they looked for a Savior, their reproach of us [
that we look for a Savior like our selves (but that he has no blood in his
body as we imagine) whom they say they desire not the knowledge of, and that
our faith which is not grounded in Christ's appearing in us is to be turned up
by the roots] falls heavy upon themselves, for all people may see their
wickedness therein; for, 1. They belly us in saying we look for a Savior like
our selves; for we do not judge him like our selves, but hope that we who are
very unlike unto Him being in vile bodies, shall be like him at his appearance,
When he shall change our vile body that it might be fashioned into the
likeness of his Glorious Body, which Glorious Body we think not like ours, for
then need not ours to be changed that they may be fashioned into the likeness
of his if they were in its likeness already. 2. That his Body has no blood in
it, we say not, but leave it as a secret, what is the form and manner and glory
of his Glorious and Glorified Body, we say that that body in which Christ
showed Flesh and Bones after the Resurrection, and whose blood was shed out is
ascended and is in Heaven Glorified, and for him in that Glorious Body, we with
the Apostles look for him from Heaven. But, 3. Here they clearly say they
desire not the knowledge of that Savior we look for from Heaven, and so are
out of the Apostles faith and hope, and like the wicked ones that said they
desired not the knowledge of Gods ways, Job 21. 14. 4. When they say, that
Faith which is not grounded in Christ's appearance in us is to be turned up by
the Roots; Do they not plainly imply that the Apostles faith is to be turned up
by the roots, (indeed we see how broadly they endeavor it) for though the
knowledge of Christ was given into the Apostles hearts, and his Life and
Virtues appeared in their Doctrine and walking, yet their faith was not
grounded in his appearing in them, but in what Christ had done in his death and
sufferings for them, and in his appearing at Gods right hand for them, see
else, Romans 8. 33, 34. Their faith stood in this that Christ had died, yea
rather was risen again, and is at Gods right hand making intercession for them;
but we may see how far these men's faith differs from the Apostles, that make no
account of Christ's appearing in the flesh, or in his Glorious Body hereafter;
So as to have their faith grounded therein but only in an imaginary appearance
of Christ in them, for so it must be, and no better, that has not for the
ground of it Christ appearing in the flesh for them before they were born, and
so not in them, and his appearing in Heaven for them, and in Glory to them at
the end of the World; The faith of which they imply must be turned up by the
Roots; for mind what they oppose that saying to, We said that at once they
turn up by the Roots all the faith of Christ's appearing in the presence of God
to Mediate for us and make intercession, which the Apostles and Primitive
believers had so much of their hope and rejoicing in, as also all the Faith and
Hope of his Glorious descending and coming again to change our vile bodies,
etc. and to all the Kingdom and Glory to be revealed to and enjoyed by the
Saints; Now they taking no notice of Christ's appearing in Heaven to Mediate for
us, and having spoken of the Faith of Christ's coming again from Heaven as a
thing past in Paul's age, say that our faith which is not grounded in Christ's
appearing in us (which implies all the points before mentioned, for Christ's
appearing in us cannot be the ground of the faith of those things but only a
fruit and confirmation of it) is to be turned up by the Roots, so that they
deny the fundamental Doctrines to establish only their imaginary conceits. But
remember Reader that they said before that the Apostles were the true Apostles,
and so they be but false Apostles and Prophets, in their imaginations.

3. We charged them as Reprobate concerning the faith about the Resurrection of
the dead, and thou may see Reader what good ground we had so to do by what
they have said now about it; For if Christ's coming, at which the dead are to be
raised, was while the Saints in the Apostles time alive remained, then is the
Resurrection they speak of past, so that there needs no further doubt of their
corruption about that. We charged them with saying that the same body that dies
shall not be raised again, and in their Book they plead stiffly for it.

W. and F. We change George Foxes words, for he said that which is raised is a
spiritual body, and that that which is raised was dead; Well how did we
represent them? Why thus, that that which should rise is a spiritual body, and
that that which died is or shall be raised. It seems we did not apprehend his
error fully enough, we asked about a Resurrection to be made hereafter, and he
subtly answered about a Resurrection past, for where else is the change,
except that we say should be raised; Where he said that which is raised, we
said that which dyed is or shall be raised, and he said (they say) that which
is raised was dead, but whereas we said they might mean thereby a dead spirit
dead in sin, they do not at all take notice of it to deny it; See then what
corrupt Equivocaters we have to deal with, that when we ask about the body to
be raised, they answered about something raised that was dead, but that the
body that dies shall be raised they will not say yea, they deny it; And are
they not then clearly enough Reprobate concerning the Faith of it, its probable
that by the spiritual body that is raised, they mean nothing else but the
Church, the body of Christ which was dead in sins and trespasses before
quickened by him, as Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. and if they say no, we challenge them to
answer what that is that was dead and is raised a Spiritual Body, if not the
Church of Christ as being in the World in its several ages; They tell how they
put the fool upon us (its I kely for believing the Resurrection of the Body
which the Apostles put upon the denyers of it, and so rather appertains to
them) how they answered us plainly, and we would not be satisfied that it is
sown a natural body and is raised a Spiritual body.

Reply, But yet when we asked what that [it] was that was sown a natural body
and should be raised a Spiritual body, they would never tell us, and how then
should we be satisfied with their Answer.

They say, The Apostles does not say that that which dies or is sown, which is
earthly, shall rise.

Judge Reader, Says not the Apostle it is sown a Natural body, it is raised a
Spiritual body, and this corruptible shall put on in-corruption, now is not the
Natural body an earthly body, and is not this corruptible an earthly body? Is
not that an Earthly body that is laid in the grave and is corruptible? And if
this corruptible put on incorruption, and this mortal (and is not that the
Earthly body?) put on immortality, then does not this corruptible and Earthly
body rise incorruptible, and this mortal rise immortal? Is it not as plain as
the Sun? If it be this mortal that is now mortal that puts on Immortality, then
its this that is now mortal that shall be in the Resurrection Immortal, and if
this that's now mortal shall put on Immortality, then this that's now mortal is
not to be Annihilated and lost; for how can that that is not put on any thing,
much less Immortality? The mortal shall loose its Mortality, and put on
Immortality; and the corruptible shall loose corruption and corruptibility, and
put on incorruption; but the corruptible it self and the mortal it self shall
not be lost, but rise Incorruptible and Immortal.

They say, They told us that which thou sowest is not quickened except it dye,
and that which thou sowest thou sowest not that body which shall be (mark, thou
sowest not that body that shall be) but bare grain, etc. Which (they say) is
contrary to what we affirmed that the same body (namely) that dies or is sown
in the Earth shall rise again.

Reply. Now Reader, mind again how they are clearly out, mind the Apostles
words again, and mind ours, and see if they be contrary, the Apostle says not
that which thou sowest shall never be quickened, but be utterly abolished, but,
that which thou sowest is not quickened except it die; implying that if it die,
it (even that thou sowest) shall be quickened; and does not that agree with our
saying, that the body that dies shall be raised again, even that thou sowest if
it die it shall be quickened, but not unless it die; it is not one thing that
dies and another that is quickened, but the same that being sown dies is
quickened being dead; This confirms and is not contrary to our saying; Again
the Apostle says, and that which thou sowest thou sowest not that body that
shall be, but bare grain, but then he adds (which they leave out) but God
gives it (mark it, the same that thou sowest) a body as pleases him, to every
Seed his own body; the Apostle says, that men sow not the same body that shall
be, nor say we that men sow or yield up to death the same body that shall be,
that is immortal incorruptible bodies, for so they shall be, but its this
mortal body they sow that shall be immortal, and this corruptible body that
shall put on incorruption and be incorruptible, the same that men sow rises,
but they sow it not the same that it shall rise; the Apostles instance clears
it evidently, for says he, thou sowest bare grain, it may chance of Wheat,
etc. signifying that the body sown, is not that it shall be in respect of form
or condition; Therefore he says, bare grain, as if he should say thou sowest
it not in stalk, and blade, and ear, and kirnel in the husk, as it shall be,
but bare grain, and in that thou sowest not that body that shall be, but he
says, not that body thou sowest shall not come again in another manner of
body, but implies the contrary, in saying God gives it (what it, if not that
it thou sowest? For G. W. knows that the word it is a relative, and has
reference to that that went before) a body as pleases him, that is such a body
as to its form as pleases him, to every seed its own body, that which is
suitable to it self, and of the same nature which it was, though not the same in
manner and form, and this agrees with, and is not contrary to what we further
said, viz. it is the same that is sown which is raised, though it rise not the
same (in the same quality and condition) as its the same bare grain that is
sown, that comes up or is quickened if it die, but it comes not up the same
bare grain, but in the body that God gives it, for the body is changed as to
its quality and form, so its sown a mortal body, and the same mortal body that
is sown shall rise, but it shall not rise the same mortal body, it shall rise
immortal, can any thing be more plain? We say the same body that dies or is
sown in the earth shall rise, but we say not that its the same body that dies
or is sown in the earth, that it shall be when it rises, And therefore say not
any thing contrary to the Apostles saying; We say not men's bodies die immortal
or spiritual as they shall rise, But we say the bodies that are sown mortal and
natural, shall rise immortal and spiritual.

To Thomas Moors saying, that the same Kirnel of Wheat, rises up again in the
blade; They say, It is known that the same Kirnel does not rise, but another
body or Ear of corn grows forth in the nature of that which is sown.

But we appeal to sense, whether it be not that Kirnel that is sown that is
changed into the Blade, that springs out and grows into blade, ear, and corn,
as that other body or ear of corn grows forth in the nature of that which is
sown, so it springs out of that which is sown too, and that was sown is
quickened, and grows into that which comes up and not another thing, that being
annihilated.

They talk of Riddles (but of their own imagination) of (conceited) Seeds and
the nature of them, and their center and habitation, like those conceits of
Jacob Behmen, which are all Aliens to the Apostles discourse, which we pass by
as things frivolous and impertinent, being nothing but carnal imaginations of
men destitute of the Truth, and that believe not Gods Doctrine; And as for what
they say of the last Trumpet in the last day, and the Resurrection of just and
unjust; We see their corruption about it in what was said by them above, viz.
that the Saints in Paul's time remained till that coming of Christ, which is to
be with a shout, and with the Voice of the Archangel and Trump of God, by
which they know that though they use the Scripture Words of the last Trumpet
Sounding, and Resurrection of the just and unjust, and that many that sleep in
the Dust of the Earth shall rise and shall come forth, some to the Resurrection
of Life, and some to the Resurrection of Condemnation, every one to be rewarded
according to his Works, and that John said, the Sea gave up the dead in it, and
Death and Hell delivered up that which were in them, and they were judged, etc.
Yet we know by what is already said by them in their Book, and by their
Questions to us, in which they propound; Shall the Souls of the wicked which
are in Hell and have received their judgment come forth again to receive a
second judgment, that they are void of the faith of those sayings, and turn
them into delusions of their own or other men's inventions, for what shall rise
that sleeps in the dust (or that is in the graves, as in Job. 5. 28, 29) if not
the Body that was laid into it which they say rises not? And what shall Hell
and death give up, if Hell give up no souls in it as their question implies,
and death give up nothing in it? For what should it give up? Is it the Spirit
that dies not with the body? but when the body goes to dust it returns to God;
but sure the Apostle says its the Body that is now vile, that shall be
changed, that it (mark that it and its a Relative, and relates to that before
it, which there is the vile body, that it) may be fashioned into the likeness
of his Glorious Body which they believe not; and therefore what but deceit and
equivocation is this in their Hearts, while they quote the Words of Scripture,
that say, every man shall be Judged according to his Works, if neither the Soul
nor the Body come up again, what of the man is that that shall be judged? Let
all judge. And this (they say) is an answer about the Resurrection, but such an
answer as clearly denies it, and turns it up by the roots, as not grounded in
their conceited appearance of Christ in them.

W. and F. They say to their question to Thomas Moore, What was the Seed of
which the Apostle said, God gives it a body as it pleases him; He answered,
That the Seed was the Body that dies or is laid in the Ground, which he pleaded
for the rising of.

Reply, Surely ye wrong T. M. for the Seed there spoken of is the Grain or Seed
mentioned which men sow, and which the Apostle mentions by way of illustration,
T. M. might say, that which answers to the seed in the Comparison is the Body
of man, but see here that by their faulting T. M. as pleading for the
Resurrection of the Body that dies, they plead Tertul. de Resur, carnis, and
praescripta adversus, Heretic*
not for it, but deny it. See then if they be not out of the Apostles Creed,
and out of the Faith of all the Primitive times, who believed and pleaded for
the Resurrection of the body.

But they say to this it was replied, That then every man must rise with two
bodies, if that body that is Terrestrial must arise and have another body given
it, but herein his ignorance (say they) was seen.

Reply, Nay rather your Sophistry appears; For is that seed that men sow a Body
or not? I suppose sense will prove it is, for it may be seen, felt, tasted,
etc. Well then, does God give it a body or no? the Apostle says yes; Has the
Seed then two bodies, one that is quickened it dying, and another that comes
up, surely no; but his giving it a body is his changing it into another body,
that is a body of another form, so is the Resurrection of the dead; Phillip. 3.
20, 21.
It is sown a natural body, God changes and fashions it (mark it) into a
Spiritual body, that's his giving it a body; Even as when the Potter was
fashioning a Vessel upon the Wheel, and it was broken, he made it into another
Vessel; was there two vessels then, one that was made into another, and another
into which it was made? let reason judge; it is another body made of the same,
this mortal shall put on immortality, and this corruptible shall put on
incorruption.

But they say of us, We have both confuted our selves, because in our
Postscript we say, the Apostle implies plainly, that the raised body in the
Resurrection shall not be flesh and blood; Whence they ask, How is it they have
pleaded so much for the same that dies to rise again, which is a body of flesh
and blood, when the raised body is not flesh and blood (they say) whence they
conclude us much shut up in Babylon, etc.

Reply. Reader, mind it again, and see whether we or they be in confusion, we
said the same body should rise, but it shall not rise the same, we say it shall
not rise flesh and blood, a carnal natural body follows it; Therefore it was
not flesh and blood, a carnal natural body when it dyed, or that the same that
was so shall not rise a spiritual body; judge of it by this, men sow bare
grain, the bare grain they sow dying is quickened and comes up, but the grain
they sow comes not up bare grain when it comes up; this mortal body that dies
shall rise, but it shall not rise a mortal body: sure these men have the
imperfection of irrationality, if they cannot understand this difference.

We accused John Whitehead for arguing against the Redemption of the body to be
expected after death, and for saying the Apostles had it before death.

W. and F. Here they fault us for not expecting the Redemption of the body, and
our discharge from sin till after death; because we said also, p. 10. that the
nature of man in the Resurrection is discharged of sin, which we spoke of
Christ made under sin, and Law, and death for us, and in the Resurrection,
namely his resurrection discharged thereof, says that any thing of our not
being discharged of sin (as to forgiveness of it) till the resurrection? What
gross abuses be these?

But they plead for John Whiteheads corrupt sayings, reproaching our W. and F.
expecting the redemption of the body after death as contrary to the Saints
expectations, for they waited and groaned (they say) for the redemption of the
body from under corruption, when they were upon earth, and the creature it self
was to be brought into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, which state was
witnessed by as many as were led by the Spirit of God who were sanctified
throughout in body, in Soul and in Spirit, and put not redemption afar off till
after death, as they say we do.

Reply. Oh monstrous blind corrupted stuff, one would think that all men that
read these things should abhor to listen to these Preachers; for first they
belly the Saints in saying the expecting the redemption of the body after Death
is contrary to the Saints expectation; did not the Saints expect that after
death, their bodies should be raised incorruptible? Did they look to have their
bodies immortal, incorruptible, powerful and glorious before their death? read
1 Cor. 15. and see if these men be not liars in grain, and woefully corrupt like
Hymeneus and Phyletus, that said the resurrection was past, Phil. 3. 20. 21. 2 Timothy 2 17. 18. 2. They aequivocate in saying they waited and groaned for the
redemption of the body from under corruption when they were upon earth, in one
sense it is true, and in another false; It is true, while they were upon earth,
they exercised their patient waiting and expectation, but false that they
expected that the redemption of their body should be proved by them before
death, the redemption of it, I say, either from all the being of sin therein,
or to the being of sin in it till death, we spoke before and proved it from,
Ps. 143. 2. for they say its sown in corruption and raised in incorruption, if
it be sown in corruption, when it dies then it is not redeemed from corruption
before it die, 3. That the Creature it self is to be brought into the liberty
of the Sons of God is true, but that that state was witnessed, that is proved
by as many as were led by the Spirit of God is false, for the Apostle was led
by the Spirit of God, and so are the Sons of God; but if they witnessed the
Creatures being brought into the liberty of the Sons of God and the Redemption
of their bodies from corruption, how says he then that the earnest expectation
of the creature waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God, seeing what
they waited for they did not see and prove, and so could not witness it, for
if they see it, why did they yet wait for it? Romans 8. 14. 19, 20. 23, 24, 25.
Why say they the creature it self shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, and not rather, is delivered from it? yea, and why say they
expressly, we that have the first fruits of the spirit, even we our selves
groaning within our selves, wait for the Adoption, the Redemption of the body,
for we are saved by hope, etc. Were not the Apostles led by the Spirit that had
the first fruits of it? And Paul says, The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8. 2. And were not
they sanctified throughout, in Body, Soul and Spirit, at least in good measure?
And yet we see they did but wait for the Redemption of the Body, they did not
witness it as a thing which they had, nor do we ever find them say they had
it, but they confound the Redemption of the body, with the freeing it from sin
in it, as G. W. in his late dispute, with J. H. declared himself, alleging
Romans 8. 2. his being set free from the Law of sin and death, for proof that
Paul witnessed the Redemption of the body, when as Paul had that before he said
he waited for this, nor does it prove any absolute freedom from the being of
sin in his body, Romans 7. 26. shows;

So see all men how corrupt the Quakers be, and how miserable out of the
Apostles Doctrine and Faith.

And yet fourthly, We say not that either we or the Apostles put Redemption far
off, till after death; It is God that has Ordered the Redemption there spoken
of to be after Death, that we might first bear the image of the Earthly in a
vile Mortal body before we bear the Image of the Heavenly in a Glorious body,
it was their part and so is ours to groan after it and wait for it till the
time of Christ's descending from Heaven, to change our vile body that it may be
fashioned into the likeness of his Glorious body; was ever any man's body
redeemed from Corruption and Death and Rottenness before it died? They may as
well contradict the Apostle, and say that which thou sowest is quickened before
it die. All men may see these be deniers of the Resurrection preached by the
Apostles, and therefore Teachers that are to be accounted accursed, Gal. 1. 8.

Note by the way, Reader, that these men never attempt to answer our Question
propounded to them at both our former disputes, whether that that shall rise a
Spiritual body was ever dead; surely they by their shunning it do declare that
they do not believe it, and therefore by consequence deny the Resurrection of
the dead.

To our charge of them with Antichristianisme in intimately not confessing
Christ come in the flesh, while they make not the knowledge of him as so come
the knowledge to Eternal Salvation, but the knowledge of him after the Spirit
as he was before the World was, in Ed. Buroughs declaration of their faith,
which charge we managed against them, and they could not make good their faith
or prove it by Scriptures though they assayed it from 2 Cor. 5. 16. 1 John. 1.
1, 2, 3. And therefore stood concluded Antichristians. To this upon further
thoughts they give now this answer. That,

W. and F. To know Christ as he is the Power of God, is to know him in the
Spirit as he was before the World was, and that we trust in the living God who
is the Savior of all men, especially of them that believe, but as he is the
living God he was before the World was.

Reply. But this too is false and fallacious, for Christ is the Power of God as
he was Crucified, 1 Cor. 1. 22, 23, 24. and to know him so is not to know him
as he was before the World was, he was the Power of God before the World was;
but to know him as he was the Power of God before the World was, is not the
knowledge of him to Salvation. To assert it, is not to confess but vertually
to deny him as come in the Flesh. The like we may say of the other phrase, he
is not the living God the Savior of all men as he was before the World was,
for he is the living God now in the Manhood or as Immanuel God with us; as made
flesh and dead and raised, but so he was not before the World was, and as not
the living God in man's Nature, or Incarnate, or promised so to be, and as such
considered or as therethrough made manifest, he is not since the fall the
object of our knowledge to Salvation; and though they say they do not deny his
knowledge as in his flesh, that is an Equivocal deceitful speech, its evident
what they say puts no necessity or grants not the sufficiency of the knowledge
of him as come in the Flesh, and so does not confess or magnify it, but
exalts as sufficient that that was before and without it.

W. and F. They say, When we can prove nothing against them (and yet we have
made good all our charge against them hitherto) we have invented these lies
against them, that they may and can in their canting Language say he is
manifest in England, and is persecuted and dies and rises as well as in Judea
and Jerusalem; and that however they make no thing of his being born, suffering
and dying in the flesh; and there they say, they utterly deny us and charge us
as forgers of lies, for they never use they say, such canting Language against
Christ, but own his sufferings in Judea and Jerusalem as he was a true offering
and propitiation for the sins of the whole World, whose sufferings were
effectual both for the pacifying the Fathers wrath, and for the reconciling the
whole World, as is witnessed by them who receive the power of his life which
was manifested through Death to them that truly believed through Christ's
sufferings.

Reply. To which we say, that they use such canting Language we call for
witness John Toldervy in his Foot out of the Snare, where he tells of the
Quakers turning all the Scriptures into Allegories, as about Adam, Moses,
Christ, Jerusalem, etc. Which neither James Naylor in his Book against him
contradicts or faults him for, nor does himself retract in what he write by way
of submission to James Naylor, in his Book called the Naked Truth, yea and in a
Letter to us George Whitehead says, that the Blood of Christ suffers (mark
suffers) with Christ where he suffers (mark its in the Present Tense) for
the prisoner which by the Blood of the Covenant is to be brought out of the Pit
which can hold no water. Now if Judea and Jerusalem be in men, and Christ
suffers yet for the prisoner to be brought out by the Blood of the Covenant,
cannot they say Judea and Jerusalem are in England as well as any where? Yea
said they, not above that that our faith is to be rooted out, that is not
grounded in Christ's appearing in us? Now if their faith be grounded in Christ's
appearing in them, must it not be in Christ's dying and crucifying in them if at
all in his dying? But indeed it is not grounded in his dying at all if it be in
the knowledge of him as he was before the World was, and so to what purpose say
they, or what do they but cant when they say that they own his sufferings in
Judea and Jerusalem as he was a true offering and propitiation for the sins of
the whole World, and that his sufferings were effectual both for the pacifying
the Fathers wrath, and reconciling the whole World? Let them tell us when they
write again, where that Judea and Jerusalem is, whether it be not in them yea
or nay, by his sufferings at which they are reconciled to God, how do they own
any sufferings in Judea else? Not as any thing their faith is grounded in,
unless they were sufferings in them, and he appeared in them in those
sufferings, and so the Judea and Jerusalem where he appeared and suffered be in
them, seeing they root up the Faith otherwise grounded; and how was his
suffering in Judea without, or any sufferings past effectual for the
reconciling the whole World or pacifying the Fathers wrath; and yet Christ
suffers for the Prisoner to be brought forth by the blood of the Covenant?
which prisoner we shall find by their sayings afterward to be Christ too; and
what need of the owning him as so suffering, if it be not the knowledge of him
to Salvation, but as he was before the World was when he suffered not? They
that consult with their Books may see but canting in all this, for if we may
believe what is printed as their Answer to the Cambridge Queries, they
justified Richard Hubberthorns saying, that Christ's coming in the flesh was but
a figure (which since I writ the former expressions I see not disowned but
justified by G. W. in his answer to them with one or two filly frivolous pleas,
as how could Christ else be said to have been transfigured? And did not he
(namely the Scholar he answers) never read that Christ is the figure, his
Fathers substance, etc? Which may serve to cheat silly men and women, but if
Christ's coming was but a figure, then not the true Pacifier of Gods wrath nor
reconciliation of the World, they also falsify our saying in the last clause
recited, for it was not as they repeat it but thus; however in the foresaid
expression they make nothing of his being born, suffering, etc. Those words [in
the foresaid expression] are subtly left out the better to hide their deceit
in faulting us, from those that have not their Books to compare their sayings
with; and we appeal to all whether if the knowing him after the Spirit as he
was before the World was be the knowledge of him to Eternal Salvation, they
therein make anything to purpose of all his dying and suffering in the flesh;
Seeing those things were not done or suffered by him in the Spirit, as he was
before the World was.

W. and F. p. 13. They charge us with belying Geo. Whitehead, in saying he
alleged 2 Cor. 5. 16. To prove that the Apostles did not know Christ as one
that suffered in the flesh, or to be in the flesh; but it was brought (they
say) against our knowledge which is Carnal, and stands in Immagination, and
neither truly know Christ as he was in the flesh nor after the Spirit, but
contend against the knowing him as he was before the World was.

Reply. That we did not belly G. W. but they us, the repeating those things that
passed will evidence, we urged that Ed. Buroughs foresaid passage confessed not
Christ come in the flesh, and G. W. to justify his saying, alleged that the
Apostles thenceforth knew Christ no more after the flesh; which to what purpose
could it be if not to insinuate that to know him after the Spirit, is to know
him as he was before the World was, and to know him otherwise, viz. as one that
since the World, came and suffered in the flesh for men, is to know him after
the flesh? Why else was he beaten from it and waved it upon our clearing it
that it was the Apostles knowing him as one that dyed for all that led him to
let go that knowledge of him after the flesh there denied by him, and therefore
that knowing him as one that died, was not the knowledge after the flesh? Nor
were we declaring or speaking about our knowing Christ one way or other, when
he brought it but against the knowledge they plead for, as the knowledge to
Salvation; false it is therefore that he brought it against our knowledge of
him, which we matter not his reproaching of, who is grievously and notoriously
erroneous as has been seen, yea does not his distinction here, in his
reproaching our knowing Christ (as he was in the flesh or after the Spirit)
plainly imply that the knowing Christ as he was in the flesh, is not with them
the knowing him after the Spirit, and so that the knowing him after the Spirit
is not the knowing him as come in the flesh, contrary to 1 John 4. 2. by which
they are discovered to be Antichristians, if they judge them the same, why do
they distinguish and divide them? It plainly implies that the Spirit after
which they know him, does not teach them to know him as he was in the flesh,
yea its plain too, that by that phrase of knowing him after the Spirit, (in E.
^s. Book) is meant a distinct knowledge from the knowing him as come in the
flesh, and so makes that empty and lifeless seeing here they distinguish them
as different, so that their own words condemn them to them that are
intelligent; And whereas they say ( we contend against knowing him as he was
before the World was, and neglect Christ, and so against the knowledge of the
Glory of God as a knowledge to Salvation.) Herein also are they false, for it
is not against the knowledge of Christ as before the world was that we contend,
but against their making that knowledge the knowledge of him to Salvation, nor
said we we do neglect Christ, though who can so worthily prize and serve him as
in nothing to be guilty of the neglect of him? We shall, God inabling, be more
industrious to mind him and manage his truth against these men's errors then we
have formerly been; much less is there either truth or knowledge but Ignorance
and Confusion, in their making the knowledge of Christ as before the World was
the knowledge of the Glory of God, for the Glory of God is his great goodness
manifested, and brightly shining forth in Christ, sent forth and crucified for
us, Exodus 33. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 4. 6. It is the light of the knowledge of the Glory
of God that is in the Face of Jesus Christ, as represented in the Gospel, which
preaches him crucified; And so that Glory could not be known as he was before
the World was, for God was manifested in the flesh, and not as before and
without the flesh, or respect to it so as to our Salvation; Besides there is
fallacy in saying ( the Spirit and Power in which the Apostles knew Christ, and
one another was before the World was) for its one thing to say the Spirit and
Power was before the World was, and the object now manifested, as now
manifested by that Spirit and Power the knowledge whereof is to Salvation, is
Christ as he was before the world was, and not as he was made flesh since the
world.

Having made good these our charges of them, we shall be briefer in the rest.

P. 13. Our distinction of the condition of the Nature of man, as it is in the
believer from what it is in Christ, they charge with making it in the believers
to be separate from Christ.

To which we say, we believe and say with the Apostle, that the believer while
in the body is absent from Christ, but not separate; Yet we say his nature as
in him, is distinct from it as in Christ, because in the believer its subject
to infirmity, and bodily Death, in Christ it is not, they deny the sinfulness
of Nature, (commonly called Original sin) contrary to Psalm. 51. 5. Job. 14. 4.
Romans 5. 12. 18, 19. And say, ( that to make the believer to have two Heritages,
a Natural and a Spiritual, is an old delusion of the Priests) it seems then
believers have no such Heritage as bodily weakness or Death, or if they have
it, its a Spiritual and not a Natural Heritage to them, is it? But we believe,
and so do all that know anything, that the believer by Nature and after the
Flesh, as a man inherits one thing, and after the Spirit as a believer another;
After the flesh and by Nature the Image of the Earthly, and after the Spirit,
the Image of the Heavenly; was not Paul one of the Priests that here they
reproach, for he taught such a distinction in 1 Cor. 15. 44. 46. 49. There is a
Natural Body, and there is a Spiritual Body, is the believer heir to both by
Nature, or to neither of them Naturally? Let them answer directly, if they
reproach that distinction which holds also in sin and Righteousness, if the
Priest Paul may be believed, Romans 7. 24. 25. For in his flesh he found the law
of sin and had sin dwelling; we suppose that was no Spiritual heritage, and in
his mind the Law of God, we suppose that was not Natural, and do not these men
imply the same they condemn, in saying the Believers witness a better Heritage
then sin in their Nature? Do they not imply that they witness that too, though
a better besides? However may not believers witness that, and yet witness
also a better then that as Paul did? Paul said in him, in his flesh dwelt no
good thing, whence had he that Heritage? and yet in his mind was the Law of
God, was not that a better Heritage?

W. and F. p. 14. To our charging them with denying the humanity of Christ,
they say changing our phrase, They never denied the Man Christ.

Reply. If they deny him now to be a man, and to have a humane Body, then they
deny his humanity, which was it we charged them with, and that they deny his
having an humane body or any other then his Church, is evident by what they
said page 8. besides the Body his Church they grant him to have nothing more of
man then he had before the World was, and his Body the Church makes him not a
personal man, as for eating his flesh, what is that? His Flesh too must be
something of his Body the Church, except he has two Fleshes on his Body, and
another of it; they may grant he was a man and had Flesh, but that proves not
that they believe his humanity now to abide.

We said, Christ is not really and personally in the believers as he is in
Heaven, against that they pretend to argue, but leaving out the word personal,
they plead for a real presence only, and so plead not against our saying, for
we add the word personal, to distinguish it from all other manner of real
presences, a real presence we deny not by faith in and with the believers,
though such a real and personal presence as is in Heaven we do; Here then they
Fight with their own shadow.

How T. M. owned the Blood of Christ to be the foundation of faith, may be seen
in the Answer to what they noted in their Epistle as his Principles. It seems
it is not the foundation of their Faith, and so their faith is not the faith
the Apostles preached, for that was faith in Christ's blood, as the foundation
and ground of it, Romans 3. 25. and so Christ by virtue of his blood shed, but
neither T. M. nor any of us made the present being of the Blood of Christ or
simply its material substance the foundation of Faith, and therefore they play
the Sophisters in what they say.

And whereas they say that We now tell them that his blood was shed or powered
out for the Remission of our sins, and in the virtue of it is with the Father,
and so in and with Christ (they say) herein we confute our selves, but in what?
that we could not assert where the material blood (namely that issued out of
his side) is, and yet we say that the virtues of it are with the Father, and so
in and with Christ.

Reply. What gross deceit is here? As if this is our answer now and was not so
then; Whereas we call God to witness and the people that were present, that we
told them then the virtues of it are in the person of Christ, and so represent
it in our Narrative, as the answer we gave, What moved them else to dispute
against the virtues of Christ's Blood being separable from its substance, if we
did not so answer? And our answer then would not satisfy, which it seems now
does, because they cannot give a better; So that G. W. and G. F. may rather be
ashamed to insinuate to our hearers, that we confute ourselves, when we said
the same things then that now they would bring against us, as cross to what we
said, then we for any thing we have said to them, nor are the not being of the
blood materially in his Body (had we so said) and its being in the virtues of
it with the Father, and so in Christ at all contradictory to them that know
what contradictions mean, Why did they not charge us with falsehood, rather in
saying in our Narrative that we gave that for an answer that we did not, if
they know in their Consciences we did not then answer to, and if they know the
contrary, why do they dissemble it?

W. and F. They quarrel with us for saying That the dying and death of Christ
is the foundation of our faith, and yet it is not always in being, (that is,
he is not always dying) and that the blood is not simply the foundation of our
faith, and then tell us that we preach a foundation of our faith that is not in
being, whereas the foundation of faith is Christ who is ever in being.

Reply. See here their wilful fraud, for whereas we said the dying of Christ is
the foundation, or of the foundation of our faith (see else our book) these
words, or of the foundation they willingly leave out; And whereas we added to
what they repeat, viz. to that, the blood of Christ is not simply the
foundation, we added, but Christ himself by virtue of it, as it was shed for
us, and he raised from the dead, and he abides for ever; They have concealed
those words, which had they repeated, they had had no ground for their cavil;
Are not these mere Cavellers and forgers then that durst so wilfully create
cavels against us where was none, by curtailing and misrepresenting our sayings?

They say As for what he acted in his sufferings, that was done that through
his sufferings and works men might believe in him, etc.

Reply. What does this but in other terms (though but in deceit, for that faith
is that which is to be rooted up, as not grounded upon Christ's appearing in
them, that they might know him as he was before the world was and so to
Salvation) acknowledge what they would cavil at; for what does this differ from
being the foundation of faith, if they were done that through them Men might
believe in him? It seems without them then no ground of believing of him; They
say, They did not blame us for not asse^^ing the blood shed, not in his body,
but for calling it the foundation, The former part of which appears false by
their often twitting us with it, and yet it seems they do not assert otherwise
of it then we did, save that they believe no personal body for it to be in; as
for calling it the foundation of faith, we did it not, if either of us did it
in opposition to and beside Christ, but as that through which Christ is the
foundation, meaning by blood his sufferings to the shedding of his blood; nay
indeed his sufferings may in some sense be said to be the foundation of faith,
and Christ himself the foundation of his Church who are in that faith.

W. and F. They say T. M. his instance for Christ's being in Heaven with a body
of flesh and bones without blood in it was, that we do not read that there was
any blood in Adams body in Paradise, for which (say they) he might as well have
said that then Adams body had no life in it and such a body (they say) we
imagine Christ's to be, whenas the blood is the life, and all Nations are made
of one blood, Act. 17. 26. and they ask if we believe there was no blood left
in Christ's body when he was crucified?

Reply. T. M. brought forth indeed such an observation as a conception or
thought of his, which rendered it probable to his apprehension, that a glorified
spiritual body needs not the being of material blood in it, that he reads not
that Adams body had blood in it before the fall, in which he conceives what
before was more purely spirits was changed into blood, and therein the body
became mortal, but this is but his private conception, which he gives not forth
as an Oracle to be believed as an Article of Faith; We read that Paul himself
in some things propounded to him gives forth his advice and thoughts, which he
says the Lord commanded not but he, and speaks therein as one that thought he
had the Spirit of God to guide him therein, 1 Cor. 7: 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 25,
26, 40. and when he wills Believers not to despise prophecyings, he bids try
all things and hold fast that that is good, as implying that even in those that
prophecy according to Truth, as to the main fundamentals of it, (for others
prophecyings are to be despised and rejected, and counted accursed, Gal. 1. 8,
9.) yet there may be possibly some things of man's thoughts and mistakes creep
in; and therefore from such we ought not to swallow down for Truth all that
they say or conceive because they say it, but to try what is said, and
accordingly as we see Truth in it, receive it; but their trial of what T. M.
said does not discover it to be unsound, only they discover themselves void of
judgment; for may it be as well said Adam had no life in Paradise as no blood?
Is there no more said of his having life then of his having blood? Is it not
said he breathed into him the breath of life, and he became a living Soul? Is
it not said, God gave him commandment what to eat and what to forbear? And he
called the beasts by their names, and slept, and waked, etc. Are not these
certain demonstrations that he had life? But is there any such saying, that
demonstrates he had blood, he said not of his wife, this is flesh of my flesh,
and blood of my blood, had it been so said, T. M. would have been as far from
supposing him to have had no blood then as now he is from supposing him to have
had no life; But how prove they that Adam had Blood? Why (Blood is the Life) T.
M. may answer, it is so in the fallen state follows it, it was so there? Is
there no difference between is now and was then? They add, he made of one blood
all Nations, but neither does that cross T. Ms. apprehensions, for there was no
Nation nor man made of Adam before his fall, he fell before he propagated, and
so by T. Ms. conception too had Blood for them to be made of before they were
made of him, and as to that question, Whether we believe there was no blood
left in Christ's Body when crucified. How should we certainly believe what is
not revealed? some judge it probable there was not, because it is said after
his side was pierced, forthwith came there out Blood and water; water is
mentioned last, as if the Blood might be all drained out till water followed
it, but we do not make that an Article of our Creed that it was so, we find
some good men that had the oversight of the Churches here in Queen Elizabeth,
and the following days did not dis-believe or deny such a conception, for it
is Printed amongst those Songs and Hymns set before or after the Psalms in the
Complaint of a Sinner, thus,

The Scripture does declare, no drop of blood in thee;
For that thou did not spare to shed each drop for me.
It Is probable had they thought it an error, they would scarce have let it be
printed there; But this is of those things, of which it use to be said,
quisquis suo sensu abundet, let every man judge as he is persuaded in his own
mind.

What they say of T. Ms. denying Christ's Body to be a carnal Body, and opposing
hereto his own words and the Priests, mentioning Priest Higginson and others,
affirming that Christ is in Heaven with a Carnal Body, is erroneous too.

For though T. M. denied his Body to be carnal as he did well to do, yet that
did not contradict his saying, it is a Body that has Flesh and Bones in it
glorified, for fleshly and carnal are not always one and the same, carneum and
carnale differ, as (...) and (...) in the Greek; sure an heart of flesh that
the Lord promises is not a carnal heart, Ezekiel. 36. 26. What Priest Higginson
and others affirmed we know not, its probable they belly him and them, as they
stick not to do us, That the Body of Christ is seen and known, only with that
by which God is seen and known, has this unsavory conception intimated in it,
that Christ's Body is as spiritual and invisible to a bodily eye as God who is a
Spirit* and not a Body is; But how then did Paul see him raised, and could
witness it, if he be as invisible to the humane eye as God is? Or if he see
nothing that ever was dead, and that he was seen of Paul as a person raised
from the dead, is plain, in 1 Cor. 15. 4, 5. 8. and 9. 1. sure Paul was not the
last to whom Christ was seen by Faith, and as spiritually demonstrated to the
Soul, no nor the last of those to whom Christ was so seen in those times;
Therefore when he says he was seen of him last, he must needs mean it of his
Body seen and seen by Bodily sight, as the other Apostles see him by Bodily
sight, or else he must speak very inconsistently with himself, which we may not
grant.

In our page 12. I mistook in my have, and writ Job for Elihu, which with my
Pen I corrected too in diverse Books, before I gave them out after I minded it,
yet they declaim against this, as if it was some heinous fault.

They say, It was Elihu who was one that spoke against Job, for Job knew God,
when they that came against him did not.

And so they mention (with an addition of a lie of their own) that I pleaded
for sin in it, a Lettter to Elizabeth Underwood, where I brought Eliphaz his
words that say, His Angels he charged with folly, for which G. W. charges me J.
H. because Eliphaz was one against whom Gods wrath was kindled, and who spoke
not the thing of God that was right.

To which charges I say, to the first of them; First, I confess my self a man,
and subject to forgetfulness and oversights, especially when in have with
business, and so I did in my forgetfulness write the word Job for Elihu,
because the Book does wholly bear the Title of Job; But Secondly, what great
error was in that, seeing Elihu was an holy man as well as Job, and came not
against Job otherwise then God himself after did to reprove him for some rash
expressions which Job also afterward acknowledged his evil in, and Job as much
employed his not knowing God in the sense Elihu speaks of, in Job 42. 3. I have
uttered, says he, that I understood not, and things too wonderful for me, and
Elihu speaks as much of his knowing God as Job, Job 32. 18. I am full of
matter, the spirit within me constrains me, etc. and 33. 3. 6. my words shall
be of the uprightness of my heart, my lips shall utter knowledge clearly, which
he could not have done, had he in no sense or in no good sense known God.
Thirdly, Nor does God at all reprove Elihu as speaking a miss in any thing of
him, as he did Job and his other friends; So that the matter was not material,
only it showed that I was forgetful, and are not these men so too? Or are they
more then men? Sure they would be thought so, and not to be of them of whom
James says, my Brethren be not many masters (that is, be not censorious and
harsh, lording it over men, as if you were without Spot or failing) knowing we
shall receive the greater condemnation, for in many things we offend all; the
people must conceive that all they write and say is by infallible inspiration;
To this purpose was it that George Fox, happening to come by a letter I writ in
answer to G. W. in which (being the first draught of it) upon some revievv,
finding some things spoken to in the substance of them in two or three places
as I was occasioned by diverse passages of like import, in G. Ws. Letter I had
blotted out in one place 2. or 3. lines as sufficiently spoken to in another
place, and instead thereof, write some other things that came to my mind that I
judged meet; now G. Fox, finding this, writes in the margin of my letter this
or the like question; whether what I had first written and blotted out, I was
led to write by the Spirit of God, etc. and yet in Geo. Ws. Letter there were
many blottings out of words, as for Ministry of sin which he had writ he
blotted it out, and writ sinful Ministry, and in one place interlined a whole
line, are not these right Pharisees and Hypocrites, that will fault failings of
Memory and such corrections of mistakes as pass in us, and therein glory and
pretend to others as if all they writ and spoke was by the Spirit, and yet
wherein they glory they are found even as we, as is said by Paul of the false
Apostles, 2 Cor. 8. 11. As for God speaking against Eliphaz, as not speaking of
him the thing that was right as Job did, it was after Job had humbled himself,
and confessed his fault, and God had forgiven him, for before God faulted him
also as not speaking rightly of him; See else Job 38. 1. 2. and 40. 2. Shall he
that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him, he that reproves God let him
answer it, sure he that reproves God does not speak right of him; So ver. 8.
will thou disannual my judgment, and condemn me that thou might be
righteous? But again, does it follow that because Eliphaz spoke not rightly of
God in some things, therefore he speak not right of the Angels, or nothing at
all right of God? Is not this a right thing that he said of God, that he does
great things and unsearchable marvilous things, and without number, and that he
gives rain upon the Earth, etc. Job. 5. 8. 9. Beside that what Eliphaz said of
the Angels as charged with folly is related by Eliphaz rather as a thing
revealed to him, and said to him in a vision by a Spirit, then as any saying of
his own, see else Job 4. 13. 14. 15 16, 17, 18.

But would ye know why G. W. made this exception against my quoting of Eliphas
his words, it was because I said it was the good Angels way to abase themselves
in Gods presence, and not to proclaim themselves holy but God, as not judging
themselves pure in comparison of him, whereas the evil Angels use to proclaim
themselves as Gods, and desire to be worshipped; and because I compared the
Quakers practice to that of the evil Angels and not of the good, therefore
George would put that off by saying those were Eliphaz his words that spoke not
aright of God, but I mentioned also Isa. 6. 2. 3. 4. which he fairly past over
with silence, thinking his exception against that in Job. 4. and 15. was enough
to blind his seduced Disciples eyes that they would never mind what Isaiah
said; as for my belying the Servants of the Lord (as he falsely calls the
Quakers) in my Book, and false Letters sent abroad into the Country as he
charges me; thou may judge of the truth of that ( Reader) by the truth or
falsehood of these Quakers in all hitherto discovered, its no discredit to be
called a liar and deceiver, by liars and deceivers, they say [ I have often
belyed them and they could produce them] it is well they do not produce them
though, but only say what they can do, thinking you will call them Masters
therein and take it for a truth upon their bare say so; But can you think their
charity such to me, as to have mentioned no one thing I have belyed them in, if
they had many to produce? What they say about our probable Arguments on both
sides, about the reuniting of the blood of Christ, with the body in his
Resurrection needs no answering; The impartial Reader of our Book may observe,
that there is only mentioned what might be alleged on either part of the
question, without any determinations; and so that they say falsely, that we
guessed it either way, that a Schoolboy could have given as good an answer as
we gave above, (against which they are able here to except nothing, save to
dissemble it that we gave not that answer then) is not very credible; but if
so, it seems these Prophets could have given no better neither, for they fault
us not, they say, for not asserting it in the Body of Christ; their revilings
and reproaches we pass over in silence, only whereas amongst those probable
arguments, we said about that in 1 Cor. 15. So (Flesh and Blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God) that in the changed state, what was blood before might be
changed into Pure Life and Spirit, the thing or substance remaining, though not
in the same form of Blood, which yet we conclude not, but lest to the judgment
of the able in the Church.

They say, This is a mere dream, and one of J. Hs. divinations, and
contradicts Moors words, for he said, that the Life of Christ is not in his
blood.

We Reply, That it is a dream or divination of J. Hs. cannot be, because its
not his assertion that it is so, but so it may be for ought they or I can show
to the contrary, nor contradicts T. Ms. words, for if it be changed into pure
spirit and life, yet not in the form of blood (which last words they crastily
left out, the better to deceive the simple, and make it seem a contradiction)
then is not his life by that supposition in his blood, in the sense he spoke it
in, that is the life of his glorified body is in not in the Blood (if it be not
Blood, but pure life and spirits) so as to be nourished by the supply of blood
as the natural body is, the Scripture they allude to, speaks of the mortal life
of the natural body preserved by food, turned into blood, and not of a
spiritual and raised body as his Speech was.

To their Question, What is the Body of flesh and bones turned into then?

We Answer, His Body had flesh and Bones in it, in the raised changed state as
he showed his Disciples; And therefore that they are changed into any other
thing, or that the bodies of the Saints raised shall not have Flesh and Bones
in them as his had, follows not.

What they say in the remainder of page 17. is all spoken to before.

W. and F. Whereas p. 18. they say, That they believe not that when Christ
after the Resurrection showed his Disciples his Hands and his Feet, his Body
then had no blood in it.

We will not contend with them about it, for neither is it an Article of our
Faith, though their conceit proves not that it had, nor can it be any thing
more then a mere guess, though they are so infallibly led, they pretend that
they must not be thought by their Disciples to guess at any thing, as if they
knew it not.

They allege, that he eat before them of the broiled Fish and Honey Comb,
which is nourishment both to flesh and blood.

Reply* It Is so to our Natural Bodies, follows it that it was so to his raised
spiritual Body?

They say, The Blood is the Life of that that has need of such nourishment,
yea the life of all flesh is Blood, Genesis 9. 4, 5. Levit. 17. 14.

Reply* This is true of mortal flesh in its natural state, but that Christ eat
because he needed such nourishment after his Resurrection for his raised body
we believe not, but to demonstrate by infallible proofs, that he was truly
raised in a real and not a fantastical body; And therefore all this is to no
purpose.

As for what they prate of The Body of Christ in Glory, and the Bodies of the
Saints in the Resurrestion, that they shall as far exceed in Glory, these our
earthly bodies, as the Sun, Moon and Stars do exceed the bodies of birds,
beasts and Fishes.

These are but Visors to hide their ugliness, for what resurrection is there
of the Saints, if that body that dyed shall never rise? Can any thing be said
to rise again that never fell or dyed? as they say, The body that dies shall
not.

But therefore they tell us, The mystery of these things is for ever sealed up
in Parables from such blind guides as they reproach us to be who have long
abused the Truth; etc.

It seems Reader, they would have thee know that whatever they seem to say
fairly, they have another meaning couched under it, and so they walk in hidden
things of dishonesty, and deal deceitfully, and would make us believe the
Apostles did so too, who commended themselves to every man's Conscience in the
sight of God, and did not hide their meanings, but speak openly what Christ
spoke to them in parables, but these have usually another meaning for the
Apostles sayings, because they believe them not in their own meaning in which
they uttered them; understand Reader that (as Joseph Fisher a Quaker in a Paper
to us implies) the change of the Body is made by the Babe within here, before
the separation of the Soul and Body, and so that their spiritual bodies are
those that excel so in glory above the Bodies of Beasts and Birds, that is,
those that are not in and of the same corrupt mind with them; Some such mystery
they put upon the Apostles plainest sayings to make them Parables.

To justify their corrupt Doctrine, that the Scriptures are not the Medium of
Faith (which we disproved from John 17. 20. Acts 17. 11, 12.)

They allege, That no Scripture says the Scriptures are the Medium of Faith.

Reply. Nor say they Christ is the Medium neither, though the word Medium be
not expressed, the sense of it is, as (through their words.)

They say, The Apostles were not Ministers of Letter.

Reply. If by Letter they mean the writing of words as in Epistles and Letters,
its false, for they Ministered the Knowledge of God, both by Vocal Preaching,
and by writing it in Epistles and Letters, so as men in reading their writings
might see the Truth and acknowledge it, and understand their Knowledge in the
Mystery of Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 13. Ephesians. 3. 4. 5. and though their words however
Ministered by them, whether by audible voice or writing, our Savior supposes
men should believe, for he limits it not to any one way of Ministration; Are
not the sayings of the Apostles their words because they be written? The Letter
of which the Apostles says they were not Ministers, is clearly the Law opposed
to the Gospel, which is a Ministration of Spirit, whether spoken or written.
Now (through their words) is all one in sense, as to say their words are a
Medium of men's believing.

To that of the Bereans they say, That the Bereans first received the Word with
all readiness of mind, and then searched the Scriptures.

But this they say of their own head, for the Scriptures say not so, but that
they received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scripture,
and that therefore many of them believed, which implies their searching the
Scriptures and finding them to agree with the Apostles words was a Medium or
mean of their readier believing; But of those words urged by us, they take no
notice, they could once and again make something of there, when it signified
nothing but hereof, but hereof therefore, when it signifies or points to a
mediate cause they make nothing. Oh perverse and crooked generation! nor does
the mentioning their searching the Scriptures after the mention of their
receiving the word imply that they first received the word, and then searched
the Scriptures, no more then the mentioning of men's confessing with the mouth
the Lord Jesus before the believing him in the heart, raised from the dead,
Romans 10. 9. implies that the confession must be first in being before believing
in the same person. Nor does the Greek mention any ( and) but reads it thus,
these received the word with all readiness, searching the Scriptures, and that
manner of phrase usually signifies the latter as a means to the former, as may
be seen, Acts 8. 3. 6. 9. 13. Heb. 12. 1, 2. etc. their confounding the Author
with the Medium is a piece of their confusion, though Christ be the Author of
Faith, and bring to believe, that hinders not, but the Scriptures and the
Doctrine therein declared may be and is the Medium; but these are truly Blind
guides that are destitute of understanding; woe to the people that are led by
them.

Page 19. John Whiteheads witnessing against our charge of him with saying,
That the Apostles were not bringers of light, but only pointed to what they
had before, is of no credit with us, because we know it to the contrary in his
speaking, and so do the Auditory if they remember what was spoken by him,
though yet their defense That the light was the same in nature in both the
Apostles and them they preach to, is unsound too. For what Light was in the
Ephesians who were darkness before the Apostle preached to them? The Light the
Apostles Preached was the Light of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ,
that the Ephesians while darkness had any measure of that in them, we want
their proof.

G. W. Should have done well to have vindicated his own corrupt Gloss upon that
saying, Ephesians. 5. 8. ye were sometimes darkness, viz. they had some darkness
in them, but he sneaks away from that* and takes no notice of it; Sure here it
behoved him to have proved what light the Ephesians had in them (of the same
nature with what the Apostles brought them) before their coming to them.

We accused them that as a main piece of their corrupt Doctrine, that they say,
All have the Light of Christ in them, and that that is whatsoever reproves any
sin in men, to which they bid men look for all their Light and teaching. To
this they say, We might as well have accused Christ and the Apostles, but
mention not one Saying of theirs that jumps with their Doctrine; for though
Christ Says I am the Light of the World, yet he says, Not every man in the
World has me or my Light in him, and that's it that reproves and checks them.
John says, Christ is the true Light that lights (it is not enlightneth)
every man coming into the World. But he says, Not that that light is in every
man that comes into the World and continues in him so long as he is in the
world, and whatsoever he find reproving sin in him, is that Light? The Apostle
Says, That which may be known of God, was manifest in them that detain the
Truth in unrighteousness, but that it still continues in them that like not to
retain it, but put it from them, and say to God, Depart from us, we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways (somewhat like these men's saying, That they desire
not the Knowledge of that Christ we look for from Heaven) and whose minds are
(...) without judgment, the Apostle says not Can they be without judgment,
that have Christ's light in them, seeing its his judgment that he makes to rest
for a Light of the People, Isa. 51. 4.

The Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared to all men, its said.
But that all receive, and so have it abiding in them, its not said, much less
that whatsoever reproves sin in them is it, that its given to all we deny not;
And therefore men are condemned, because when given them they accept it not.

They ask, What it is in men that must leave them without excuse?

And we say, but what of it have they in them whom it has left or leaves
without excuse, is that in a man which has left him?

They ask, How can we show, that have not a Light of Christ in them to reprove
them?

And we say, George Whitehead, George Fox and such impudent liars, if they be
as much without reproof within as they seem to be without in their brazing out
their lies before men, and in the Scriptures, those that being past feeling,
have given over themselves to all licentiousness, to work iniquiry with
greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19. But they say, We have wickedly wronged them, for they
do not say what soever reproves any sin is the Light of Christ. But that here
they themselves are the liars and do wrong, we appeal to those that heard and
remember what John Whitehead said in his discourse at Gedney about the Covenant
of Light; how after he had told them it is given to every man, and that that's
the word in men, by the hearing of which comes Faith [corruptible enough] then
propounded where it is? and asked if they found not something in their
consciences reproving them for sin, and told them that was it they should heed;
that was that light, and much to that purpose; which when we opposed and said,
Satan transforming himself into an Angel of Light, could for his own ends
reprove for sin, they exclaimed of us till we brought diverse arguments from
Scripture about it; And surely if Satan know that men have such principles, he
is so Subtle as to put himself into the form of a Reprover for many evils,
that so he may gain credit with them to receive his delusions, as the run-about
Pharisees also could do, many of these steps these men walk in, whether their
way exposes men to follow their own Spirits on the Grounds aforesaid, or only
to follow the the Light of Christ, we leave it to the judgment of all that
understand things that differ, or that have read the relations of John Toldervy
and John Gilpin and others of that way.

They charge it as a lie of ours, that we say Geo. Whitehead derided at men's
faith, in the Death and Bloodshed of Christ beyond the Seas; We added, as if
that was a good foundation of faith, which they subtly suppress, and herein
we appeal to all that heard our dispute, that remember and have the honesty to
say what they heard, and what else do they in their Book, when they say, our
faith that is not grounded in Christ's appearing in us is to be turned up by the
roots; Yea, and again in p. 15. in what they say against our affirming the
Death and Bloodshedding of Christ to be the foundation, or of the foundation of
our faith, yea and here they show their corruption in saying, that the faith
they own they know the word of it to be in the heart (they mean before outward
Preaching heard) and that they have it not to fetch from beyond the Sea, nor
from above, nor from beneath, but its nigh in the heart and in the mouth,
refusing still to take notice of what follows, though with that we charge them
in our Book, and showed from what follows the scope of the Apostle therein, and
how it favors not their corrupt conception, which here they have clearly past
over as not daring to meddle with it, we refer the Reader then to what our Book
says about it, as being left unanswered by them.

That the light wherewith Christ lights every man is both Natural and
Spiritual in diverse streams of it, we said and explicated largely, which here
they dissemble, here they cavil, that we called not the light he lightens men
with lights, but light; If a man should ask what peace God is Author of, and we
should say of all true and good peace, both Temporal and Eternal, outward and
inward, Were not he a very caveller that would cavel at us for not saying all
peaces, but all peace? such is their folly here; As also in faulting us for not
proving one light to be both Natural and Spiritual, when as we never affirmed
it, no more then one peace to be both Temporal and Eternal; Are not these
pretty men that accuse us for not proving what we never said, and then charge
that as an error which is a most undeniable truth? Is not Christ the Author of
all Natural light as well as Spiritual? And is it not a gross error in them
to deny it? They say the life in him is the Light of men, and that is not
Natural but Spiritual; But therein they confound the Light lighting, and the
Light streaming from that Light, and so prevaricate, as if they should say
Christ is our peace, and he is not Temporal but Eternal, therefore Temporal
peace is not given by him; Does not Life in Christ produce both Natural and
Spiritual good to men? Let all that understand judge.

We said, for so much as all men receive not Christ and his Light, therefore all
have not him and his Light in them; This they say is a poor Argument, lets see
how they prove it so; The Spirit of the Lord, they say, and the Grace of God
has appeared in many that have resisted it and not received it, and a measure
of it is in such to condemn them, as the Kingdom of God was in the Scribes and
Pharisees, and yet they received him not, nor Christ when they heard him, a
poor answer; For beside that they say what the Scripture says not, as that the
Spirit and Grace of God appears in many that resist it, and a measure of it is
in such to condemn them; They take hold of a dubious saying to confirm it, for
the words ((...)) signifies as well among you as in you, and Christ and his
Church which is called his Kingdom was amongst them. Again 2. Gods providential
Kingdom is over all and rules in all things, men and devils, though they come
not voluntarily under it, follows it therefore that his Light his Spiritual
Light, (for of that they speak) is in them? 3. His Kingdom may be in men in its
strivings in them for admission, and yet upon their rejection God may take it
from them, as he threatened the Pharisees, Mat. 21* 43. And that's sufficient to
justify our Argument, that it is not in all men forasmuch as all men receive
it not, God by way of punishment taking it from some for their rejection of it,
for it is still in them from whom it is taken? Surely not; To their exceptions
about the morning Light (not in some Isa. 8. 20.) we said Christ is called the
morning Star, and therefore if no morning light in any man; then none of his
Light who is the morning light.

W. and F. They tax herein our Ignorance, for say they, that Light of Christ
shines in darkness in some before the morning, and that led some to the
arising of the Day Star in their hearts; And so the Light of Christ who is the
morning Light^, to some appears as a Candle, in the darkness to others* and is
not the morning light to them, till they by it see the morning in them; And the
Light that has shined in darkness arising out of darkness. So that the Light
of Christ is both the evening Light and the morning Light.

Reply. Herein they allude to 2 Pet. 1. 19 and so they imply that the word of
Prophecy (the Scriptures of the Prophets, for it appears clearly by the next
verse that he speaks of them, as more sure to others, for their faith because
more abundantly confirmed then the Apostles, saying that they had such a vision
then was) is not the morning Light, and that the believers that had like
precious faith with the Apostles had not the morning Light in them, and so were
like those that peep and mutter and Preach false Doctrine, such as Isaiah
speaks of, Isa. 8. 19, 20. But, 2. What if the morning Light appears (as they
say) to some as a candle light, is it not therefore the morning Light? Has not
a Star sometimes seemed to some to be a candle, was it therefore not a Star? 3.
Metaphors are not to be strained, David says the Lord shall lighten my candle,
was not that light that lighted him the morning Light, because it is compared
in him to candle light? So the Apostles are compared to a candle, no man lights
a candle and puts it under a bushel, etc. Mat. 5 15. Were they not therefore
lighted with the morning Light, because they were like candles to the World?
Will ye say the Apostles were like the peepers and Mutterers in whom was no
morning Light.

4. Is it enough for them to say, the light that appears to some as candle
light is not the morning light to them, till they by it see the morning in
them, etc. Is not the morning Star the morning Star till men see the morning by
it? Does its being so depend upon their seeing it?

5. In their conclusion from all this that Christ's Light is both morning and
evening Light, do they not imply that Christ shines with two Spiritual Lights,
the morning and the evening lights. But,

6. And chiefly, might not this gloss of theirs upon Isa. 8. 20. afford a way
to the deceivers to encourage themselves in their deceits, and imbolden the
people to listen to them though they peep and mutter, and speak not according
to the Law and Testimony, for would it be a sufficient reason to avoid such
that no morning light is in them, if there gloss be true that they have the
Light of Christ in them though as candle light, or evening light; Or should men
listen to the morning Light of Christ, and them that speak according to it, but
not to the evening light or candle light of Christ? And was not the Apostle
Peter out then that said the believers did well to take heed to the candle
light or light shining in a dark place, if that was not morning light till the
day dawned? Yea did not Peter by the gloss contradict Isaiah, commending them
for that that Isaiah would not have them to do? Or might not that be replied to
that Prophet, your counsel is not good to will us to turn away from men
because there is no morning light in them, seeing though that be not in them
that speak not according to the Law and Testimony, yet the Light of Christ may
be in them, the evening light; sure the morning light is not in these men, for
they speak not according to the Law and Testimony, as appears in the
particulars above; Would they persuade men that Christ's Light is in them,
notwithstanding his evening light? Well but the Prophet would not have us
inquire of such or listen to them what ever light they pretend is in them.

They call J. H. impudent liar, for charging them with a passage about Mr.
Townsend.

To that J. H. says he cannot be guilty of impudent lying, for he followed the
Cambridge Queries, and what was attested in them, judging the Author of them to
set down the words punctually, seeing the Scholar that disputed with and
baffled them (as there it appears) had the Book out of which it is quoted; If
it be not so as he sets it down, let the fault lie at his door.

For J. H. never see the Book though he sent for it that he might have seen it,
he might be too rash in taking it upon trust, and not fathering it upon him
whence he had it, in that he confesses himself faulty, and craves forgiveness,
yet it appears that they were not herein led by an infallible Spirit, for then
they would have known J. H. was guilty only of overcredulousnesse, not of
impudent lying; he would be loath wilfully to belly the Devil, much less any
man though his instruments.

What follows in p. 21, 22. sufficiently speaks out their deceitful way to the
intimate denying of Christ come in the flesh as the Apostles preached him to
them that can understand truth from deceit; While they justified James Naylors
deceitful and erroneous sayings alleged by us out of his Book called Love to
the lost, never taking notice of, or giving any answer to what was said in our
Book to confute them. Reader I pray mind it, James Naylor in the Book
aforesaid (as I Jo. Horn testify by my own sight of it) treating of
Redemption, says few know the subject of it, the seed to which the promise (
viz. of Redemption) is made, but says it is a certain seed or principle in men
groaning for liberty from sin, etc. Now here G. W. and the rest say, that seed
of God is Christ, and wherever he is known in such a low measure as a seed that
suffers, and is burdened in man by corruption, there he desires to be free
from the burden of sin, and always to do his Fathers will. Now mind what the
Apostles say, they say Christ is the Redeemer and Redemption, but never that he
himself is the thing to be redeemed, as these say he is, the Redeemer, says
Isaiah shall come to Zion, Isa* 59. 20. And Christ has redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, etc. says Paul, but they never
say Christ himself is to be redeemed, or that he is burdened in men by
corruption, and it has power over him to binder him from doing his Fathers
will always as he desires to do; And so makes him a sinner contrary to 1 John
3. 5. but on the contrary, Death has no more dominion over him, and so by
consequence not sin, for if it had Death would, it being the wages of sin.
Well, but see yet further their corrupt mystical stuff^, the mystery of
Iniquity that is in them.

They say, And this seed the power reaches to where it is begotten, and in the
power it arises in them that believe in the Light for their Redemption.

Reply. Was there ever such confused stuff heard of? One while it is the seed
which is Christ that is burdened in man by corruption, that is to be redeemed,
and another while its the believer in the Light for the Redemption, so that
both Christ and the believer are to be Redeemed; But who must redeem the Seed
which is Christ? That's but darkly and confusedly hinted, Babel like, The power
sure that reaches to the seed, but what is that? Is it Christ? Then Christ
redeems Christ, is it the Spirit? Then the Spirit redeems Christ where he is
begotten; So that here is Christ begotten, and Christ suffering, and burdened
with sin to be redeemed by the Power or Spirit, and all in them that believe in
the light for Redemption, but what is that light they believe in? Sure that
must be Christ too, unless it be something from him less then Christ; but how
should a Believer believe in a Christ for redemption that wants it himself,
and is the subject of it? The Apostles preached a raised Christ for men to
believe in? These men a suffering and burdened Christ that wants Redemption
himself; And is not here too Christ and corruption both in the believer, are
they both Natural or both Spiritual heritages think we? But in them that
believe in the Light it rises say they in the Power, etc. and this is Christ's
dying in men for their sins, and rising in them for their justification, that
believe in him that's dying, and rising in them for redemption, in their
Language rare Mysteries of confusion, confounding the Spirit of man with
Christ, and putting it for him. The Apostles preached Christ dead and raised for
all, never that he is yet dying and rising for and in some. But,

They say, The Apostle traveled again for the Galathians till Christ was
formed in them, who first is known as one without form or comeliness.

Reply. That the Apostle traviled again in birth of the Galathians till Christ
was formed in them, is true; But even as the Galathians were not personally and
carnally in Paul, though he traveled again in birth of them, but only in his
love and affection: So neither are we so carnally and fantastically to conceive
of Christ's forming in them, as if he was a seed or principle to be begotten and
redeemed in them, and suffering, and burdened in them, and to be brought forth
into form in them personally, but only the knowledge and faith of him was to
be brought forth or formed in their hearts.

2. Nor is it true but very false, that Christ is first known as one without
form or comeliness, but rather while he is so apprehended he is not known, its
men's ignorance, unbelief, and wrong thoughts of him makes them see no beauty in
him; Isaiah speaking of the Jews, and in their person as one of that body, and
prophesying of the mean appearance of Christ in the flesh, signifies how he
should through Ignorance and unbelief be rejected by them, and they should see
no form or comeliness in him, wherefore they should desire him as the verses
following also show, not that any knowing him, first know him so.

They proceed thus, And so the seed of God suffers in some, and in others it
reigns and is known to be Prince of Peace.

Reply. Here is their sense of Christ's death and Resurrection, Christ's dying
and rising in men, and this is the word that they say is in every man before
outward Preaching; The word of Faith nigh in the heart and in the mouth, but
what need Preachers be sent then to preach this, or who be the Preachers sent
of God in men to declare it, without whose being sent of God they could not
Preach it, and without whose preaching men could not hear and believe! Yea in
this Mysterious and Babylonish stuff, here is Christ forming, suffering and
rising at once; Suffering in some and rising in others, and so the Apostles
doctrine is turned up by the roots, as not grounded in Christ's appearing in
men; Where he says, Nor yet that he (Christ) should offer himself often as the
High Priest enters into the holy Place every year with blood of others, for
then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the World; but now
once in the end of the World has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself, Heb. 9. 26. Where the Apostle counts it absurd to say Christ has
suffered often since the foundation of the World: and behold this new Mystery
(I suppose the everlasting Gospel so called, composed by the Friars about King
Henry 3ds. time) tells us boldly Acts, and Mon. vol. 1. p. 416.
and roundly he is yet suffering and suffers daily and reigns daily, in every
age suffers in some and reigns in others; And so Christ himself was out that
said, I was dead and am alive, and live fox evermore; but for that of the
Hebrews, I suppose if these new but not true prophets and Apostles would speak
out they would tell us the foundation and the end of the world are both in
them, but remember still that they are not the true Apostles and Prophets
whatever they say.

They say, This is no Mystery of deceit as we say of it, but a Mystery that
has discovered our deceits, who know not the seed of the Kingdom nor the power
wherein it rises.

Reply. Yes, yes this is the Mystery of deceit, the strong delusion long since
prophesied of that men should be given over to for not receiving the love of
the Truth, that they might be saved; But counting the Preaching of the cross
foolishness, as in truth this people do, and that makes them turn it into a
fable or Allegory; but we know the end of these men, and them that follow them
wilfully and pertinaciously too, as the Apostle has foretold; For this cause
God shall send them strong delusions to believe aly (and they believe it indeed
that will deny the True Christ and his sufferings, and Sacrifice, and Gospel
for it, and run into hazards and sufferings like mad men to promote it) that
they might be all damned that have not believed the Truth, (as indeed these
heartily have not, for had they, they would not easily have entertained such
deceits and fancies) but have pleasure in unrighteousness, etc. 2 These. 2. 10,
11, 12. Woe, woe to this people and their followers, for however they are entered
in for this condemnation or contention, their damnation slumbereth not; Flee
from their tents and Teachings, their deceits and underhand denyals of the only
Lord God and the Lord Jesus Christ that bought them all, yea that would escape
utter ruin and destruction, for here we have the Spirit that confesses not
Christ come in the flesh, but making him the figure of a Spiritual
wickedness, or Mysterious deceit that works in them that perish; For even in
that clause last mentioned by them too, the seed of the Kingdom is made all one
with the Son of man that sows it, for both are Christ with them; but they ask,
Have we never known what Christ is without the Camp? Surely we know he is a
reproach and scorn to such as these are that are not of the Camp of Israel, and
thither must we follow him bearing his reproach for owning and acknowledging
his simplicity.

But they say, That before we who are neglecters of Christ and abusers of his
Truth can know the seed of God, and what it is in us, we must come to the Light
which will condemn us for our deceits and lies wherewith we have abused the
Truth, and then learn to know what and where the grave is which Christ has
made with the wicked.

Reply. Their reproach we shall bear and show their evil in it by and by, but
this we say, That by the light that reproves and condemns all neglects and
abuses of Truth in us or them, we are helped to see the Mystery of their
deceits and Spiritual wickednesses in Heavenly things, and how they turn his
words of truth into a lie, not only neglecting but wholly trampling the true
Christ under their feet, that they might make way for and introduce their own
fancies.

Toward the end of our discourse, turning our speech to the people, we desired
them to take heed of these men as a heavy judgment of God that he has
ordered to us, (joining ourselves therein with the people as part of the
National Body, as the Apostles and Prophets use to do) to punish us for our
neglect of Christ the Salvation of God, and abuse of his Truth; And here they
think they have gotten a great advantage, and their mouths are exceedingly open
upon us, wresting our words and loading us with reproaches, twitting us over
and over that we are neglecters of Christ, and abusers of Gods Truth by our own
confession, blessed be God that we are counted worthy to suffer reproach for
his Names sake, for that's the thing they are mad at us, for though they take
occasion from our confession of our own and the peoples sins, therein showing
themselves the right brood of evil doers, such as David of old grappled with in
his age, as in Psalm. 38. 17, 18, 19. For I am ready to halt, said David, and my
sorrow is continually before me; For I said I will declare mine iniquity, I
will be sorry for my sins, but mine enemies are lively (as if they had no sin
to own and confess, or were none of the body of the people that had deserved
judgment,) and they are strong, (in their delusion, and confidence in evil)
and they that hate me wrongfully are multiplied, so these men thus triumph.

W. and F. Here have ye made manifest your selves indeed, ye Hypocrites, what
have ye been crying out against the Quakers, calling them deceivers, warning
the people to beware of them, writing against them and judging them to be in
delusion and errors, when you your selves neglect Christ the salvation of God,
and have long abused the truth, as ye are made to confess; consider your own
condition, you are in great delusion and error your selves who neglect Christ,
etc. and ye are not like to bring people, nor can, to Christ the Salvation of
God and his Truth, who are neglecters of Christ, and abusers of his Truth, etc.

Reply. To which we say, 1. They wrest our sayings as if we spoke only of our
selves, when we speak evidently of the Nation in general, and of our selves as
part of them, as having our share also too much in their pollutions. And is it
not evident that the Nation is too full of neglect of Christ, and abuse of his
Truth, nor do we exempt our selves from all faultiness therein; Even as the
Prophets of old joined in themselves with the people, whose sins they
confessed, as knowing, should the Lord have been severe to mark their
iniquities, they could not have stood; Therefore they said not (as the
Hypocrites) stand apart, we be holier then you, as those do that are a smoke in
Gods nostrils, a fire that burns all the day, Isa. 65. 5. For,

2. The Hypocrites be those that spy moats in their brothers eye, but see not
the beam in their own, that justify themselves before men, and stand by
themselves, and say God I thank thee, I am not as other men are, I am not as
this Publican, etc. The Hypocrites use not to be sencible of and own their
sins, but rather boast themselves to be holy, as if they had no sin; Search the
Scriptures, and see if the Scribes and Pharisees Hypocrites, or the true
Apostles and Prophets rather use to confess their sins, and take shame to
themselves for them. You may find David, Solomon, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel,
Paul, James, John, etc. but never the Scribes and Pharisees so doing, let all
see whether they or we be in the steps of the Hypocrites, then do they walk
directly in them, lifting up themselves as if they had no sins to confess,
when indeed they be most deceitful and abominable Hypocrites, in the inside of
their Doctrine, turning the Truth of God into a lie. But,

3. What would they have done had they lived with the true Apostles, and
Prophets, from whom they distinguished themselves above? Would they not have
fallen fowlly upon them, and reproached them as they do us? Had they heard
David's saying* innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have
taken such hold upon me that I am not able to look up, they are more then the
hairs of my head, therefore my heart fails me; Would they not have called him
Hypocrite for faulting his enemies and persecutors as evil doers, and yet he
himself so burdened with iniquity? Had they heard Isaiah say, we grope for
the wall like the blind, we grope as if we had no eyes, we stumble at noon day
as in the night, etc. Isa. 59. 12, 13, 14. for our transgressions are
multiplied before thee* our sins testify against us, for our transgressions
are with us, and as for our iniquities we know them, in transgressing and lying
against the Lord, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and
revolt, etc. Would they not have said, Oh thou Hypocrite! have thou been crying
out against us as blind and brutish, and such as have no understanding, and
do thou grope like a blind man, and as if thou had no eyes, people had
need take heed of thee, least thou lead them blindfold into the ditch? Do you
lie and transgress, and speak words of ravolt from God? Should we or any of us
then take heed to you? Consider your own conditions, etc. Do not those words
speak as high as neglect of Christ and abuse of his Truth? Revolt from him
signifies more then simply neglect of him, and how would these have reproached
him, had they heard him say* we are all as an unclean thing, and all our
Righteousnesses are as filthy rage, etc. Isa. 64. 6. Would they not have cried
out upon him unclean wretch, and bid him leave preaching, and told the people
they had need to take heed of following such an unclean wretch? Had they lived
in Agurs days, and heard or seen him publish his prophecy with Jehiel, etc.
and how he begins with this confession, Surely I am more brutish then man, and
have not the understanding of a man, I neither learned wisdom, nor have the
knowledge of the Holy; Would not such proud Pharisees as these have cried out
upon him for a beast, what should he be heard for? And warned people not to
take heed to his sayings, seeing he confesses he has not the knowledge of the
holy, Prove. 30. 2, 3. The like I might observe of Ezra, and Nehemiah, and Job
confessing their sins, and Daniel, that they had done wickedly and rebelled by
departing from Gods precepts and judgments* and Daniel, says expressly that he
confessed his sins as well as the sins of his people, Dan. 9. 20. Yea and this
too after they were holy men, and Prophets, and born of God, as was made good
lately against G. W. at our later dispute with him, he not being able to
maintain the contrary; What would they have said had they lived when Paul that
wrote against the Antichristians, (that made a fair show in the flesh and
gloried in appearance) comes out with an acknowledgement that he was a chief of
sinners, and less then the least of all Saints? Ephesians. 3. 8. Would they not have
concluded him to be an Hypocrite to give out himself to be an Apostle, and
Preacher of Christ, and yet not so much as the least Saint? Would they not have
concluded him then one of the World, and so led by a worldly deceitful spirit,
not to be believed and followed? Reader judge indifferently between us if they
in thus reproaching us for joining our selves with the people, and confessing
our selves faulty in that we have too much neglected Christ, and abused his
Truth, not so contended for Christ against these deceivers and false prophets
as we should, nor so used and walked in his Truth as we ought, and are not like
the Pharisees that pretend themselves perfect and to have no sins to own and
confess? Judge whether of us tread more in the steps of the Prophets and
Apostles, who said if we confess our sins he is faithful and just to forgive
us, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; Judge whether of us have the
beam in our eye to hinder us from seeing, we that pull it out by owning and
confessing our evils with the evils of the people, or they that hide their
wickednesses and justify themselves as no sinners, though guilty of such
horrid damnable deceits, as we have herein in them discovered.

They bid give over our Teaching of others.

Reply. Ay that's the thing they would have, that's it grieves them, that the
sheep should not be left to the Wolves that they might devour them; but is that
wholesome Counsel and the way for us to do better; we confess we have too much
neglected Christ, and they would have us neglect him more, let him look to his
own affairs, etc. We confess we have been guilty with the Nation in the abuses
of truth, and they would have us abuse it worse by suppressing it, that God
might take it from us and give us up to their delusions; Nay, nay, that's not
the way to do well, that's counsel from the Devil; Did not the holy men above
mentioned condemn and reprove the false Prophets and enemies of the Truth of
Christ in their several ages, because they confessed themselves guilty of such
evils, bruitishness, iniquities, no whit below our expressions?

See what Agur says, notwithstanding his foresaid confession, Prove. 30. 12,
13. There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes (are not these
Quakers such?) and yet are not washed from their filthiness. There is a
Generation, Oh how losty are their eyes, and their eyelids are lifted up: Are
not the Generation of the Quakers such haughty and proud boasters? Did not
David, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Paul, John, etc. Preach against and reprove the false
Prophets, hypocrites and Antichrists of their times too, though they confessed
sins in themselves? Should they not have done thus? Or should not the people
have listened to and followed their doctrines because of those their
confessions?

See then people that we may reprove and cry out against the Quakers and warn
you of them, though we consess we have been too guilty in not arming you as we
ought against them. The Apostle Paul intimately faults the generality of the
believers and Teachers of his time, as too much guilty of neglecting Christ and
abusing his Truth, when he says, he had none naturally minded, as Timothy, for
all seek their own and none the things that be Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2. 20, 21.
Did he say therefore that they should leave preaching Christ? Surely not;
Christ also faults the Church of Laodicea* for the like evils contained in
lukewarmness, did he bid them therefore not preach his truth? Nay, but to be
zealous and amend, Rev 3. 14. 15. 19.

W. and F. They ask if they be a judgment of God upon us, why we do not bear
the Judgment of God more patiently, seeing we have sinned so against him; why
we rage so against God, and say all people may be satisfied that we be not
contended with Gods Judgment.

Reply. All this is but deceit; For First, what impatiency or rage do we
discover against Gods judgment? Is that rage or impatiency to reprove and warn
men to beware of deceivers? Were not the false prophets and deceivers always a
judgment? And did not the Prophets and Apostles always reprove them and warn
People of them? Did they therefore rage against Gods judgment?

Secondly. Had God sent us instead of these some judgment of Savage Beasts,
Lions, Wolves, etc. might we not have used our best diligence to sray them
away and destroy them without impatience under Gods hand or judgment? Or if
God should send an Army of Turks or Spaniards to punish us in this Nation for
our neglect of Christ and abuse of his Truth, may we not fight against them
what we can, and endeavor to beat and destroy them, and yet not rage against
Gods Judgment, but bear patiently what he orders to us? So if God send strong
delusions, is not that a Judgment? Must we be content and satisfied with them,
and not discover and resist them for fear of being impatient under his
Judgment? Even so may we and ought we to be diligent against these by word and
writing, to oppose and discover their filthy dreams and deceits, and yet we may
be patient under his hand, and have no grudge in our spirits against him, as
the Prophet Micah who was exercised in his days with some such evil
generation, Mic. 7. 8, 9. he resolved to bear the indignation of the Lord,
because he had sinned against him (he owned himself a sinner though the
hypocrites his enemies rejoiced against him) till God should plead his cause,
etc. and yet he ceased not to reprove and endeavor to keep people from being
harmed by such enemies.

They threaten They will be an heavier judgment and a burdensome stone, etc.

Reply. We bless God we see in some measure what they are, and we are above
their reach, and the more they strive against the Truth of Christ with us, we
are sure the more to discover and lay open their wickedness, we shall be able
through the strength of Christ to scatter their mists and fogs, and their
weapons of deceit shall have no force upon us, the more we strive with you (ye
Quakers) the more (through Gods help) we overcome you and get above you, so as
to be strengthened in our Spirits against you, and your swelling words of
vanity that you think to fray the simple with.

And where as they bid us Learn to prize Christ the Salvation of God and Truth*
and believe therein, and fight no longer against the Lord, and his Truth, and
his Servants, least he shorten our days, etc.

Reply. We hope we prize Christ, so as we think all our service for him against
them and for his Truth, against their destructive deceits too little to be
performed to him, and that our greatest diligence to know and serve him, is so
far below his excellency, as that we judge our selves guilty of neglecting him,
in serving him no more, and our greatest services for his Truths and Servants
too much abusive of them, as Job confessed (though he spoke many excellent
things of God) that he but darkened Counsel by words without Knowledge, but far
be it from us to fight against the Lord or his Truth or Servants, it is against
their errors, and in them that serve another Master then the Lord (as through
Gods strength we have made them manifest) that we fight, and we say, they that
have their life in heaven, and their hope steadfast for the Resurrection of
their Bodies and the Glory of Christ's Kingdom, fear not either that God will
shorten their days for their service against his adversaries, nor what death
can do to them if it shorten their days in the flesh; and we bless God that
we have thriven the better both in Souls and Bodies since we contended against
them and their errors.

W. and F. They say, The Lord has searched and tried our Hearts, and found us
guilty of much ungodliness, and his Light has often made us sensible of it,
etc. and we have long slighted his call, and hardened our Hearts against his
reproof.

Reply. Herein they set themselves above their places, and makes themselves
knowers of our hearts, of which they are ignorant; It were better for them to
judge themselves and repent of their own errors and deceits while there may be
space of repentance; as for Gods searching and reproving us, we bless him for
it, and desire him yet in mercy and faithfulness to search us, and see if
there be any way of iniquity in us, and purge it out, and lead us in the way
everlasting, but should we not search and try our hearts if God have searched
them? had not God often searched the Prophet Jeremies, heart, and reproved him
too? Yet he says, Let us search and try our ways and turn unto the Lord, Law.
3. 40. But as for their self-exaltations and vilifying and reproaching us, we
shall leave them and bear their Rabshekah-like language, knowing that he that
abases himself shall be exalted, when he that lifts up himself (as they proudly
do) shall come down with a witness.

That their prevailing is not of the Lord otherwise then was foreshewed, the
strong delusions be should send should prevail upon them that perish, is
evident from what we have discovered; And therefore all those
self-commendations of themselves, are but so many deceitful words of vanity, we
know they tread much in the Pharisees, and salse apostles steps, they compass
Sea and Land as much to make proselites, and served their Master therein as
freely as they do, and bragged of it too as they do (as the Apostle implies, 2
Cor. 11. 10, 11. and yet they lead people to destruction.

Whereas they reproach us for laying open one another nakedness, and prophecy
we are not like to stand.

Jeremy was a Priest and a Prophet, and yet he laid open the nakedness, and
reproved the evil of many other Priests and Prophets, and yet Jeremy stood
against all their endeavors; and so though we see and bewail other men's faults
in the things we mention, and our own too, where we be convinced of them, that
shall neither hinder our standing or prevailing either against these or others.

They charge me J. H. with being one of the Dogs, that they say I say, look for
their gain from their quarters.

I answer, I charged none so, nor says Isaiah so, but they are shepherds that
cannot understand, they all look to their own way, every man for his gain from
his quartor.

They say, I look for my gain from my Quarter, and am an hireling who plead for
and take Tithes.

Reply. Alas, the beam of error in the main fundamental Doctrines of Christ is
in their eyes, and how can they see moats in mine? They that err in the
foundation have no right judgment in any thing, but put light for darkness and
darkness for light, though I do accept and take with thankfulness what God by
his providence has provided for my maintenance without my foreseeing, and
though that be Tithes or rather something in liew of Tithes, and plead for the
lawfulness of them as neither repugnant to Gods Law nor man's, yet does it not
thence follow that I am guilty of what the Prophets changes them with; the
Priests also had their several Suburbs and Quarters, whence God allowed them to
take their provision; But that the Prophets therefore faulted them, or that
they fell under that reproof is not to be thought, for Gods Prophets never
faulted people for doing that which God allowed them, but for their looking for
other unlawful gains, or for setting their hearts upon their gains or profits,
and not upon or more then upon their service, which that I do is more then
these can tell, they and I must be judged by a more equal Judge. But I pray
what Law of God or men makes it unlawful for the Nations that receive the Name
of Christ to give the Tithes or Tenth for the maintenance of those that Preach
the Gospel, or those that Preach it to take them if given by them? Seeing the
Rulers are to serve the Lord, and both Rulers and People not to muzzel the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn; When they can prove that is not
lawful for the Nations that receive the Scriptures and Gospel Doctrine, to give
that honor and maintenance which the Scriptures require, by allotting the
tenths, if they please, both before and under the Law given, 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18.
or that in case they do and may do so, yet its not lawful for those that Preach
the Gospel to receive them, then I shall leave off to plead for Tithes; in the
mean time I shall bear their reproach as a piece of persecution from them, such
as their power and malice can reach to, I doubt not but that they would deprive
us of such maintenance too if they could.

Again whereas they say, People may see how they have given their money to
uphold a company of ignorant blind watchmen.

I Answer, This reproach they may cast upon the Lord himself at the rate they
write at, for by their inference, when God gave the Tithes and offerings to the
Priests and Levites by a Law for ever, he gave them to uphold a company of
blind watchmen, and ignorant profane persons, because many of them proved such,
as appears in Mal. 1. 2. 3. and yet even when such, the Lord faults the people
for not bringing in and giving them that which he by his Law made theirs, and
charged them with robbing him therein, Mal. 3 8, 9, 10. but even as their God
could not be truly charged with giving them the tenths, to uphold blind and
evil persons, because he gave them them to another end, though to that end they
abused them by not being such as they should have been; Even so now what was
given by former Kings, People, and Parliaments, was given to better ends then
to uphold blind ignorant and profane watchmen, though too many that receive it
prove such, and yet as then though the Priests proved bad and evil, the people
were thieves in detaining their Tithes; So are they now in detaining from the
Ministers what the Law of the Nations in subordination to the Law of God has
made theirs for better ends then to what they use them. As for their reproaches
we leave them to God to clear our innocence; That our principles are corrupt
(as they slander us) and that they are made manisest to be so in their book is
false, and I hope the Reader hereof is without all peradventure satisfied
therein, and that the false and wicked principles are with themselves, as we
have clearly discovered; To their self-commendations for their Preaching so
freely, enough is said above, the false Apostles were never the better for
their preaching freely but the worse, as the Devil is most pernicious when most
Angel-like.

W. and F. They accuse us (p. 27.) of ignorance in pleading, that all are not
hirelings that take hire, telling us that what is said, Zach. 11. 12. is spoken
prophetically of Judas demanding hire of the high Priests for betraying Christ.

Reply. Herein the minding of the words will discover their ignorance and
mistake, for it is said, I took my staff beauty and cut it asunder, that I
might break my Covenant which I had made with all the people, (did Judas ever
make a Covenant with all the people which he break?) And it was broken that
day, and so the poor of the people that waited upon me knew that it was the
word of the Lord, (*did the poor of the people wait upon Judas, and therein
know the word of the Lord?) And I said unto them, if ye think good give me my
price, and if not, forbear* So theyweighed for my price thirty pieces of
silver, a goodly price that I was prized at of them, Mark, Was Judas prized at
thirty pieces of silver, or did he leave his price to the High Priests till he
had done his work, and demand it so indifferently then? Is it not plain that
the Prophets speaks of a price of one as a shepherd undertaking to feed the
flock of the slaughter (and not as a Traitor to the shepherd) and taking to him
two staves of a shepherd, one called beauty and the other bands, and so feeding
the flock, and then demanding his price when he had so done, nor does Mat 27.
say the Prophet Zechariah spoke of Judas demanding his price, but what is said
he says was by the Prophet Jeremiah, and though the sum of the price (Christ
was prized at, not Judas) agree, yet the rest of the expressions agree not, the
one says cast it to the Potter, and the other they gave it for the potters
field; Christ is clearly in the Prophet, the shepherd feeding the flock, and
asking the price and not Judas, as ye have falsely supposed; but you to cover
your deceit, read only so far, then was fulfilled that which was spoken by the
Prophet, and there stop, knowing in Matthew it is Jeremiah and not Zechariah;
Judas his saying was what will ye give me and I will deliver him to you, and
the Prophets saying is give me my price, and a goodly price that I was valued
at by them, it was Christ that was valued sure, and not Judas, the price had
been good enough for Judas to be valued at; But Christ ought to have had a
better reward from them, and to have been far otherwise valued, even to have
been honored and believed in by them, and served with all they were and had;
he that says in the Prophet give me my price, is the same that says, he was
valued at a goodly price, which agrees not to Judas. For taking Tithes of all
people in the Parish bounds, we have said enough above, the Nations are to give
maintenance to the laborers amongst them, the Nations giving it in this or
that manner in such or such bounds, there the laborers may lawfully take it.

That the hirelings and devouring beasts are in one Nature, is said by them not
proved, the hireling is set by him that hires him to keep the sheep, men do not
use to hire the Wolves and Foxes to do it, though yet as we noted the hireling
is not discribed by our Savior to be one that takes hire (for the labourer is
worthy of his hire, and may take it, yea Christ hires all his servants, Mat.
20. 1. 15.) But he that when he sees the beasts come, leaves the flock to them
to be devoured, which they that are hired ought not to do, though such as are
all for their hire, or prefer that before the flock (as too many do) will do
so, but they have found us hitherto (blessed be the Lord) resisting the Wolves,
and stopping their mouths, though with the hazard of our lives.

That the sheep are ever bid to leave the hirelings if with such, they say by
their Magisterial Authority, but bring no proof for it, that they will hear
Christ's voice proves not that they should not hear those that are hired by him,
for they that bring another voice are the Wolves not the hirelings that are
distinguished from them; Did not Judas (who proved covetous and a thief, and
who they said above was an hireling) when sent forth to preach the Gospel,
carry Christ's voice or Gospel with him: Though his end in preaching it was not
sincere, yet the people were never faulted for hearing him, but woe denounced to
them that heard not Christ's Doctrine by any of them, Mat. 10. 4, 5. 14, 15. And
Paul rejoiced that Christ was preached, though by such, Philip 1. 16, 17, 18
Therefore that proves not that the hireling is to be fled from, but the Wolf
that comes to devour from Christ's voice, and brings a strange voice, as these
men most manifestly do. Besides, they are out again, (as in nothing almost are
they right) in saying, Such as Christ sends to feed his sheep in the pastors
of Israel, are no hirelings, for in some sense he sends none but such, if by
hireling they mean one that is hired by him, or receives his hire, his
laborers are all hired into his Vineyards, Mat. 20. he is no such master as to
send any to keep his flock for nothing, yea in the worst notion of an hireling,
such as he hires and sends to keep his flock, may and sometimes do prove
hirelings, as Judas by their own sayings was such a one, and yet he was of
Christ's sending.

W. and F. That the law for tithes with us in Eng. is corrupt and unjust, and
made by Apostates is rashly and hastily spoken and without proof as all things
else they say, and being said by them who are Apostates from the faith indeed
(as what we have seen of them above sufficiently discovers) is the less to be
regarded, as also their proud boastings of themselves as Servants of the Lord,
etc. when as the Lord that bought them they have denied, and openly said they
desire not to know him whom we expect from heaven to save us.

W. and F. They charge the faultiness and evils in the people reproved by us
as evidences of our being false prophets, that have not profited the people,
nor stood in Gods Counsel; for had we (say they of us) we should have turned
the people that receive our Doctrine from the evil of their way.

To this we say, First, That most of the people we so reproved are such as
receive not our Doctrine, and so their faults are no evidences that we are like
the false prophets.

Secondly, That many that did receive Christ's Doctrine and his Apostles, were
such as we fault, and guilty of such evils, for some received it as the way
side, some as amongst stones, some as amongst thorns, and so some that received
the Apostles Doctrine received but the form of it, not the power, received the
Grace of God in vain, and these ran into such evils as we faulted, as pride,
covetousness, etc. yea and such had Ezekiel though a true Prophet as heard
him, and he was to them as one that could play well on an Instrument, and
showed much love, yet their hearts went after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 31,
32. will they say their hearers faults so often faulted by them were evidences
that they were false prophets, and so condemn Christ and his Apostles as false
Prophets that stood not in Gods Counsel? what strange inferences make they, and
how rash are they in their censures not to spare Christ or his Apostles at the
rate they argue at.

Thirdly, We say, such as receive our Word and Doctrine heartily, are such as
heartily received the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, fearers of God and
workers of Righteousness, though they have their imfirmities as they also had,
and are confessors of their trespasses as they also were, approved of God
though railed at by those who endeavor to pervert them, because they will not
be perverted by them; as for our wearing Cuffs and Ribbonds, and white
boot-hose-tops (which we wear not) etc. Therein they show themselves right
Pharisees, that strain at a Gnat and swallow Camells, deny the Resurrection of
the Body, and say the coming of Christ (that in which the dead in Christ are to
be raised) is long since past, and make a stir about trifles and lawful
Ornaments, concerning which Christ has not put us in bondage or forbid them to
us. We know that all (such) things are lawful, though all things not expedient,
but where expedient we may wear any of them with sobriety, that leads between
both extremes of others pride in them, and these men's superstitious condemning
them as unlawful. The Israelites were not faulted of God for wearing Jewels
Exodus 32. 2, 3, 4. 25, 26.
and Ear rings, and Ornaments, they were faulted, and Aaron too for their
casting them off to make an Idol of, and sure men and women had better wear
such things soberly, as these men Pharisaically condemn, then make an Idol, or
false Christ, or righteousness to themselves of their casting them off as they
led them to do, as the false Apostles led their Disciples to do with their
observations of times and days, etc.

What they say of J. H. he leaves to the Lord to judge the truth of; and as
for condemning our selves in what we judge others, we say, we desire to judge
our selves and them too in what we are guilty, but not in what they foolishly
fault us, like the Pharisees superstitiously faulting Christ's Disciples for
things he faulted them not*

That the Deceivers and Subverters of Souls spoke things that the peoples
Consciences became in bondage to, and many things that through the effect of
the Law in their Consciences, they could not deny but close with, is falsely
denied by them.

For how else were they transformed into Ministers of Righteousness, if they
speak nothing suitable to the Letter of the Law of Righteousness, so as that
the Consciences of people bearing witness to the truth of some of their sayings
might be brought to listen to them and receive also their delusions?

They say* The Law in men is Light, and it is the Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus that freeth men from the power of sin and death.

Wherein still they play the juglers; for First, neither does the Apostles say
the Law is in every man, or in all the Gentiles, but he says, the effect or
work of the Law, Romans 2. 14.

Secondly, The Apostle says, The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus had
made him free from the Law of sin and death, not only from the power of sin
and death, but from the law that convinces of sin, and holds in bondage for it,
and sentences to death, as Romans 7. 4. Gal. 3. 13. and 4. 4. clearly show, even
from under that Law that is in it self holy, and just, and good, yet by reason
of the flesh could not justify or save; Now these to hide their deceit, seeing
that had they cited the Apostles words, they insinuate that something reproves
of sin that is not Christ (as we said) they subtly change his phrase and turn
it into another thing. How they set themselves masters in men's Consciences, for
all their feigned humility in denying that title we have before showed often in
this Treatise, and therefore here shall wave it.

W. and F. They say, They suffer much for righteousness sake, and for bearing
Testimony against unrighteousnes, and we often cause it, etc.

Who do they here commend? themselves and the Jesuits; for we said to get
themselves a party (as the Jesuits do) they expose themselves to some
sufferings, etc. and they deny not (for they know its true) that the Jesuits
do so too, and think we they do not say its for Righteousness sake, and for
witnessing against unrighteousness, and that they may thank the Teachers often
for it? It Is likely the Quakers and they are either the same, or of very great
affinity, yet both their ends shall be according to their works as well as
other false Apostles and false Prophets, who have exposed themselves too to
great sufferings, partly of voluntary devotion and will worship, and partly
from people against their wills, for their falsehood, as Baals Priests and
Prophets did, 1 Kings 18. 28. 40. 2 Kings 10. 25. Collossians 2. 20. 21. 22.

W. and F. That we have not God nor abide in the Doctrine of Christ, they
endeavor to prove against us, because we say we (of this Nation joining our
selves with them, as not without guilt) have neglected Christ and long abused
the Truth.

But we deny their inference, for every neglect of Christ and abuse of his
truth, deprives not of God, nor is accompanied with such transgression, as not
to abide in his Doctrine (for who then should stand? as Psalm. 130. 3.) the
Apostles had fellowship with God and Christ, when yet they had sins to confess,
and so neglects of Christ and abuses of truth to be cleansed from; for in every
sin is some neglect of Christ sure and abuse of Truth in some degree or other,
and such things David, Daniel, Isaiah and others confessed in effect, and yet
in so doing, that is confessing their sins kept in with God, receiving daily
forgiveness of them, and cleansing from them, and though they had some failings
in the way yet they abide in it, and transgrest not so as to leave the way. It
is the Deceivers and deceived Generation, who leave the Doctrine of Christ for
some corrupt mystery and false imagination, that are guilty of such
transgressions, and abide not in the truth, nor have either Father or Son;
whatever their false boastings be or self justifications, they are fallen from
Christ and be accursed. And G. W. knows that the Quakers were proved to be such
in our late dispute with him to that purpose. The Pharisee that pleaded no
sinner was out of the Doctrine of Christ, when the Publican that durst not look
up because of his sins was nearer in it, they that say they have no sin deceive
themselves, and the truth is not in them, and so they have not God and Christ,
when they that confess their neglects of Christ, and abuses of his truth shall
find him faithful to forgive their sins and to cleanse them from all
unrighteousness, they are in Gods Doctrine and way to life when the others are
far wide of it, for he that humbles himself shall be exalted, he that
acknowledges his sin shall find Mercy, when he that hides and dissembles it,
and lifts up himself as if innocent, is out of God and Christ, and shall be
abased and confounded.

The rest being frothy and disdainful reproaches, we leave them to the
judgment of the Lord, and shall look to him to plead our cause against them
(which also blessed be his holy Name, he has in some measure done since the
first draught hereof, in our latter conflict with G. W. to his no small
confusion) and to keep people from their strong delusions and specious but most
pernicious deceits, having we trust so laid open their nakedness, that all
that will may see their folly manifest, and avoid them and all their
Serpent-like windings and insinuations. Nor fear we to proceed against them in
Print, for ought that they threaten us with or can do against us, for the more
they Print, the more shall their folly be made manifest, as the Spirit of God
has before signified, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. In the strength of God therefore
and of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall stand against them and all their
assaults that their printing can make against us, blessing him that he has
counted us worthy (who in our selves are most unworthy) to be made his
instruments to draw out their deceits into light, that people might be warned
of them and so avoid them.

To their foolish Questions in their Postscript, we say,
First, That they begin their questions with a falsehood, for we are not called
Moorians or Manifestarians that we know of, nor are so; for we call no man our
Father or Master after that forbidden manner, nor own we any such callings as
they do that own themselves Calvinists, Lutherans, etc. nor are we Authors of
what they say we hold forth in either the first or second branch of it; The
first is, Paul's flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, nor can
corruption inherit incorruption; And as to the second, that flesh and bones
may; We say not that flesh and bones as natural in natural bodies may; we say
that that Body of Christ which had Flesh and Bones, after the Resurrection of
it, is taken up into heaven, and is in heaven, and the Scripture is clear for
it, Luke 24. 39, 40. 51, 52. what change or transmutation further it had in its
ascension and Glory we know not, but we believe that as the Apostles see him
taken up into Heaven (and they see him taken up in that Body in which was Flesh
and Bones) so he shall come again in like manner, Acts 1. 11. their reproaching
us for that faith shall not drive us from it, because they are none of the True
Apostles and Prophets, nor if they were might we give credit to them, bringing
a contrary Doctrine to what we have from the Holy Apostles received, Gal. 1. 8,
9.

Quest. 1. THey ask if Eliahs flesh and bones could enter into Gods Kingdom,
when he was taken up, and if his blood could not; Then when, where and how, and
by whom was his blood taken and separated from his flesh and bones, and what is
become of it?

Ans. Secret things belong to God, things revealed to us and to our children
that we might believe and do them. Whether Eliahs body is in Heaven, or in what
form or manner, we neither read it nor can determine nor they neither.

Quest. 2. And what is it that hinders the blood that it cannot enter the
Kingdom as well as the flesh and bones, which ye say may; is the transgression
of the blood greater then the transgression of the flesh and bones? And shall
the flesh and bones be redeemed from corruption, and shall not the blood? What
is the cause? For though the Lord does what he pleases, yet does he do any
thing without a cause?

Ans. These are profane Scoffs and Reproaches against Gods Truths, that the
body which is sown a natural body, shall be raised a spiritual body after the
pattern of Christ, who is the first fruits of them that sleep we believe, and
that the Body of Christ raised had Flesh and bones in it we read and believe
also, and that flesh and blood shall not inherit the Kingdom of God we believe
too, but profane and vain bablings we are to shun, which will increase to more
ungodliness, and eat like a Canker, especially the Word and Doctrine of such
as Hymeneus and Philetus who erred concerning the Truth, and said, the
Resurrection is past or made already, and that's these men's error as above
showed, when they said, The coming of Christ spoken of 1 These. 4. 15, 16. (in
which the dead are to be raised) was while the Apostles and believers lived and
remained. Therefore these words and profane bablings of theirs, we and all
people are to avoid, being wise to sobriety, knowing that God has no cause
higher then himself, and his own good pleasure in what he does, and that he
gives not an account of all his matters, and what he keeps secret is not for us
to search.

Quest. 3, Whether do you own that Doctrine, that when Christ appeared amongst
his Disciples after his Resurrection, when the doors were shut, John 29. 19.
that then his body being spiritualized, it glided in at the keyhole of the
door? Which Doctrine Thomas Moore Senior has formerly preaobed as some has
affirmed who heard him.

Answ. No, but we own that this is a slander raised maliciously against Thomas
Moor Senior, either of their own heads, or by some that render him evil, for
good and hatred for his love, to whom appertains, and upon whom will fall Judas
his curse and portion if they repent not, mentioned Psalm. 109. 5, 6, 7. etc.

Quest. 4. And where do the Scriptures say that flesh and bones may inherit the
Kingdom Heaven?

Answ. Where do we say so or in any terms but what the Scriptures own? The
Scriptures say, Christ shall so come even in like manner as his Disciples see
him go up, and he was taken up in that Body, in which was flesh and bones as
before, which Body is now his Glorious Body; further we affirm not or inquire
not.

Quest. 5. And whereas you John Horn and Thomas Moor in page 16. say, That
Satan doubtless may reprove of some sins, and press to some duties; now have
you not herein showed your selves to be ministers of Satan and not of Christ,
etc?

Answ. No, no more then Paul was in saying, Satan himself is transformed into
an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14. sure an Angel of light will reprove of
sin and press to duty, and if Satan do not so as to form or outside at least,
he is not in the form of an Angel of Light.

Whereas they ask further, What duties or any things that are duties does Satan
press men to? bidding us answer directly, or let shame cover our faces, which
(they say) will at length come upon us for our deceits.

We answer, To such duties as in which his Ministers may be transformed into
Ministers of Righteousness, which they could not be if not Zealous for some
things that are in their place and order in duties, 2 Cor. 11. 14. as to be
diligent to go up and down, and preach Righteous Works or Works of
Righteousness together with their own evil mixtures, and to evil unrighteous
ends, that he might by drawing them from gross evils (as the Pharisees their
Proselites from Heathenism and gross idolatry) make them more Children of hell
by spiritual iniquity and wickedness, and so more serviceable to his designs;
and so he presses the Quakers to reprove many fins and evils (which indeed is a
duty ought to be done in Gods way, but as they do it they serve Satan in it,
making it a means) to beguile unstable souls to their delusion. The Lord stop
their mouths, as he has promised in Psalm. 63. 11.

A multitude of Questions under 26. Heads, sent by George Whitehead, and since
owned by him, and by John Whitehead and George Fox the younger, as sent by them
all, to John Horn, and Thomas Moor junior,
for this they say in their pretended Answer to us subscribed by all the three,
that they sent queries in Manuscript to John Horn and Thomas Moor, (see the
latter end of their 33. page) meaning these, they are as follows.

For John Horn, and Thomas Moor (both Teachers) who disputed against George
Whitehead at Lin, the 15. th. day of the 7th. month (59.) A few questions of
concernment for them, or any that own them to answer directly.
1. WHether do you own that Christ has two Bodies, one in Heaven, and another
on Earth, yea, or nay? 2. Whether the body of Christ which is the sulnesse of
God, whereof the Saints are members, is a Body of flesh and bones in the
Heavens, yea or nay? 3. Whether did the body of flesh and bones, wherein Christ
suffered, descend from Heaven into the lower parts of the Earth, yea or nay?
Seeing no man has ascended up to Heaven, but the Son of man which came down
from Heaven; And it is the same that descended into the lower parts of the
Earth, that ascended far above all Heavens, that be might fill all things. Ephesians.
4. 9, 10. Psalm. 68. 18. 4. What and where are the lower parts of the Earth
whereinto Christ descended from his Father? 5. And if he which descended into
the lower parts of the Earth, be a person of flesh and bones, which ascended
far above all Heavens, what is that place he is in far above all Heavens, which
is not Heaven? 6. Whether do you believe, that all the Heavens are local places
one above another, and above the Firmament called Heaven, yea or nay? 7. Can a
body of flesh and bone be both in the Heavens, and far above them all, and fill
all things at one and the same time, yea or nay? 8. Seeing Thomas Moor did not
own that Christ's body is a carnal body in Heaven, how is it that you say his
body is a body of flesh and bones (or a humane body) without blood in it, is
not a fleshly body Carnal? 9. Can any local place contain that Glory which
Christ had with the Father before the World was, wherein he is Glorified? 10.
Where, or how came Christ into the house where his Disciples were met, after
his Resurrection, the doors being shut, John 20. 19. 26. Have not some of you
said that then his body, being Spirituallized, it glided in at the Keyhole of
the door? for so it has been spoken concerning some of your way. 11. Whether
the same Christ, who in the days of his flesh suffered persecution, whose body
was subject to hunger and afliction, be not made a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor.
15. 45. And yet his flesh and blood is so nigh to every true believer, that his
Flesh is his meat indeed, and his Blood is his drink indeed? 12. And if the
Blood of Christ that was shed be the drink indeed, and the purger of the
Conscience, where is that blood if not in Christ's flesh, as you affirmed?
Seeing that men must drink the Blood of Christ, as well as eat his Flesh, or
else they have no life in them. 13. And was the Blood of Christ that was shed
separate from his Body, and then bearing Record in the Earth, when John wrote
these words in 1 John 5 8. 14. And how can the Blood of Christ, either cleanse
away from sin, or give life to any, if the Life of Christ be not in it, as
Thomas Moor affirmed? 15. How many comings of Christ do you own, seeing you yet
have his second coming without sin unto Salvation to look for? 16. What are
these seeds that must every one have its own Body in the Resurrection, and
whether are they Natural, or Spiritual? 17. And must not every seed have a body
of its own nature? 18. And whether the wicked upon whom after Death Judgment
is come, whose souls are in Hell, must afterward come out of Hell again to
receive a second Judgment? 19. Whether the receiving Bread and Wine, to show
the Lords Death, be to continue an Ordinance in the Church, till the end of the
World, yea or nay? 20. And whether does the receiving Bread and Wine alone,
without an outward Passover, really figure forth the Death of Christ? 21. And
how must the life of Christ be shown forth, and when, if People must receive
Bread and Wine, as a continuing Ordinance in this Life, always to show forth
the Death of Christ? 22. What is your ground for sprinkling the Children of
them you count believers, have you ever a command from God, or evident example
for it, if you have show it? 23. Whether do you own such Teachers as take
Tithes, or Preach for hire, or for gifts and rewards, yea or nay? 24. What is
the Soul of man, which the Word of God is to save, and what is the difference
between the Soul and the Spirit, seeing the word of God divides them asunder?
25. Whether men must be justified by the same Righteousness of Christ in them
which sanstifies them, yea or nay? 26. What is that Light with which Christ
lights every man that comes into the world, which Thomas Moor said is both
Natural and Spiritual? Name one Light that every man is lighted with that is
both Natural and Spiritual, or else let your silence be an acknowledgement of
your Ignorance touching the Light, and that you have confuted your selves; for
Thomas Moor would not acknowledge that every man has a Spiritual Light in him,
or is enlightened with a Spiritual Light; But that every man should in due time
be enlightened with such a Light, when the seed is sown, or by the Preaching of
the Gospel, what says he then to this, the Gospel is preached in every Creature
under Heaven?


Answer directly, in simplicity, without evading from these things propounded
to you, as you did evade and cavil at the dispute, and Thomas Moor several
times fled from his own words, and John Horn (when you could not answer to our
Question, where the Blood of Christ is, which you say is the foundation of
Faith) in his deceit asked us the same question again; leave off such deceit
for shame, and come down to the simplicity of God in you, and speak not evil of
the things you know not; And if you answer these questions, send, or give your
answer to some of our friends in Lin to be conveyed to me,

Who am a friend to the Truth, But a witness against all Deceit, Hypocrisy,
and dead formality that is among you. George Whitehead.


An Answer to the Questions forementioned.
THese Questions give so full intimation of their Antichristian Spirit, and
give us such occasion to discover it to others, and so evidence the Truth of
God in the great things of his Doctrine against their endeavors to make it
void, That since all the three forementioned have owned them, as sent by them
all, We have judged it seasonable, and tending to the profit of many that they
may be saved, to make them with this answer public, which answer is owned by
John Horn, and Thomas Moor senior, and Thomas Moor junior.

And in it we desire the Readers to note, that we direct not our speech to
them, because they have been already discovered, and proved deceivers, and
Antichrists, and as such rejected by us; But in this we apply our selves to the
Reader in general, intending herein a farther discovery of that mystery of
iniquity and spirit of deceit and Antichrist, that works privily in and by
them, to a denying the Lord that bought them, and that by a manifestation of
the Truth, without hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness as
they have done; That so we may be instrumental in instructing the Ignorant,
strengthening the weak, and edifying and preserving believers in their most
holy Faith; And if yet it might be to any of them in undeceiving the deceived,
that are already turned aside after Satan, to follow the pernicious ways of
this spirit of Antichrist, as found in this people called Quakers, or in any
other that appear not under that name or form with them, for the same spirit is
working in and walking in by many others.

1. Que. Their first question is, whether do you own that Christ has two
Bodies, one in Heaven, and another on Earth, yea or nay?
Answ. Here are two questions in this one, Namely, Whether we own that Christ
has two Bodies? 2. Whether one in Heaven, and another on Earth, and in both
parts ambigiously propounded in such general and doubtful terms, as are
capable of diverse acceptations, without declaring in what sense they use any of
those general terms in the query, so that it is not capable of receiving a
single and direct answer as propounded by them. For 1. The word body is used
diversely in Scripture, sometimes for diverse members of flesh and bone compact
together, and united in one Person to one personal Head, 1 Cor 12. 12. 14. 20.
Romans 12. 4. And in this sense the man has a body of his own distinct from his
wives, and the woman a body of her own distinct from her husbands, 1 Cor. 7. 4.

Sometimes for diverse persons compact together and united in one politic or
mystical body under one Governor as their head, or for such society, union and
fellowship made up of diverse persons, as in which they are jointly set and
compact together for the good of each other, and therein for others benefit. So
the man and his wife are one flesh, one body (who yet in the sore mentioned
sense of the word Body, have each their distinct body of their own, as we
showed) see Mat. 19. 5, 6. Ephesians. 5. 28. 29. 33. 1 Cor. 6. 16. So also diverse
persons united, and set in order in a Commonwealth, or corporation, under one
Head or Government, so as each may serve for the good of the other, and all
jointly for the good of the whole; are one body not personal, but politic,
where every member has his particular personal body, distinct from each
other, as Ephesians. 2 12. with Cap. 3. 6.

In some answerable sense likewise, the words the Body of Christ are used in
Scriptures in a two-sold sense, as to say, 1. For that body of his flesh in
which the Word was made flesh, and came and dwelt among men on the Earth, in
which many members of flesh and bones, hands and feet were united in one
personal body, even in that one body, which as in the Counsel of God
foreordained from the beginning, so in due time was actually prepared for him
when he came into the World, by the gift and appointment of the Father, in the
power and operation of the Holy Ghost; In which he was made of a woman, made
under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, and in which himself
bore our sins on the Tree, dyed, and was buried, and the third Day rose again,
and appeared often to his Disciples, and affirmed and demonstrated himself to be
that very He, in the same body (having flesh and bones, hands and feet) which
they before had seen; yea, the same in which, while some of them beheld him, he
was taken up from them, and carried into Heaven, and there completed the
offering up of himself in that his own Body once for all; And in which he
remains on the right hand of God in Heaven it self, till the times of the
Restitution of all things, when he will come again, and appear in the same
body, as visibly as he went up, and in the Glory he now possesses for us in
Heaven with the Father, Col. 1. 22. with John 1. 14. Heb. 10. 5. 10. with Mat.
1. 18 22. Luke 1. 34, 35. and Gal. 4 4. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Luke 23. 46. 52. 23. and
24. 3. 6, 7. 36. to the end. John 20. Acts 1. 9. 11. and 3. 21.

His body in this sense of the word is called the body of his flesh as
distinguished from his body in such a sense, as his Church spiritually and by
Faith united with him are said to be his body, see Col. 1 22. 24. And as
distinguished from our personal bodies, that while in this mortal state are
vile, the Body of Christ in this first sense, as raised from the dead and
exalted, is called his Glorious Body, Phil. 3. last.

2. The same words, the Body of Christ, are also used to express to us a
society or Congregation of many distinct persons united to him by Faith, as
their Head and Husband; And so all those that by the love of God commended by
the Holy Ghost through the blood of Christ, and the Excellency of Christ
discovered in the Preaching of his Cross, are Redeemed and drawn off from
other objects, and brought in to believe in him, and so united by Faith to him,
and in love to him and one another, to be ordered by the Royal Law; These are
his Congregation, House, or Church, and so his Body, whereof he in his personal
body is the head. And they (each in their distinet personal bodies while here
on Earth) Spiritually, and by Faith members of him, and in love and fellowship
members also of one another; Even as he that is joined to a Harlot or Woman is
one flesh, and so they twayn are one flesh, and so one body in a fleshly union,
or union in the flesh; So in some answerable sense, he that is joined to the
Lord is one Spirit, and so of that one body in the unity of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.
3. 4. Yea even their particular bodies in this unity of the Spirit are the
members of Christ, and so of the one mystical body of Christ, of his House,
Temple or Church, yet each member has his distinct personal body, distinct
from each other, and all distinct from his personal body, in which he is the
head of his body the Church, 1 Cor. 6. 15. 17. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. with Act. 20.
28. 1 Cor. 12. 13. 27. Romans 12. 5. Again,

2. (To have) may be diversely said, As to say,

1. A man may have something as part of himself, and so our Savior even after
his Resurrection from the dead is said by himself to have flesh and bones,
hands and feet, (so as a spirit has not) and so to have them, as of the
essence of himself, handle me and see, that is I my self; For the Word was made
flesh, and therefore even that flesh or body could not be holden of Death, Luke
24. 39. John 1. 14. with Acts 22. 24. 31. etc. Or,

2. A man may have other things, or persons, as relations to him by marriage,
Covenant, or by Blood; So a man is said to have his wife, and the woman her
husband, 1 Cor. 7. 12. 13. and likewise instructed to have one another,
according to such covenant and relation, ver. 2. So persons are said to have
children, or nephews, as relation in the flesh, though neither is the husband
the wife, nor the wife the husband, nor is the child the father, or the father
the child, etc. But these are distinct relations, and distinctly related to,
and so had by each other as well as distinct persons; In some answerable sense,
it may be said, Jesus Christ has his Body the Church, as his spouse and
children, and they have him as their Head, Husband, Father and Lord, in that
Covenant and Relation that is in the unity of the Spirit, as appears by those
comparisons and instructions from them, Ephesians. 5. 23. 32. with Chap. 4. 4. 6.
etc. And yet Christ is not the Church, but the Head and Husband of it, and so
neither is he who is the head of his body the Church. A body in such a sense of
himself alone, without his members that are so Mystically and Spiritually, I
say, not in such a sense as they joined to him as their head, are said to be
his Body. Whence as he in his own personal body (now glorified) is the head of
a body in the last sense, namely of his body the Church, in such a sense, and
in such consideration of him, they are said to be his fullness, who yet
receives nothing from them, but fills all in all; But he as the head of the
body, and so that his body in the last sense is made up and completed of them,
by what they receive from him, and are made in him, Ephesians. 1* 22. 23. And so
neither are they any of them or all of them together the Christ, the head of
the Body, or Husband of the Church; But his Body, Church, or Spouse, as joined
to him Spiritually and by Faith, and members thereof in particular, 1 Cor. 12.
12. 13. 27. Ephesians. 5. 23. 25. 32. The having each other in this sense is not such
as confounds the distinction of persons or relations, or makes the one the
other.

3. One may also truly be said to have things or persons which yet he has not
in such relation, nor are so related to him, and that either in a propriety or
interest in them, by right of purchase, gift, or otherwise, or in possession.

And so according to these diverse senses in which these words are used, we
might answer to this first question, whether Christ has two bodies; In some
senses yea, and in others nay.

But for the help of others, we answer more fully thus.

1. If by bodies, be understood personal bodies, and also by having them be
meant as in the last mentioned sense in which one may be said to have things,
or persons, as we are left at liberty to take any sense in which the words are
used (whether they so propounded it out of weakness or wickedness we will not
determine) then thus we answer; Christ has an innumerable multitude of bodies
as well as souls, even the bodies and spirits of all men are his, and of right
in his dispose; For,

1. He has interest in them by creation, for all things were made by him, and
for him, John 1. 3. Col. 1. 16, 17. and by redemption, for he gave himself a
ransom for all, and has bought them all, even them that deny him, he has
redeemed them from the curse of the Law, to be under his Government, dispose
and judgment; and by means thereof,

2. He has the dispose and dominion of them committed to him; for the Father
judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, and has given him
authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.

All things are delivered unto him of his Father, even the Heathen for his
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for his possession. And
therefore also,

3. He shall inherit all Nations, yea all shall be raised and judged by him at
the last day, for to this end Christ both dyed, rose and revived, that he might
be Lord of both dead and living, whether we live therefore or die we are the
Lords, 1 Timothy 2. 6. 2 Pet. 2. 1, Gal. 3. 13. with Romans 5 18 Col. 1. 20. John
12. 31, 32. and 5. 22. 27, 28. Math. 11. 27. Psalm. 2, 6, 7, 8. Romans 14. 7, 8,
9. etc. who can number the bodies he has in this sense on the Earth, surely
even these deceivers, that privily deny the Lord that bought them, and those
deceived by them are all his, and shall be judged by him, even by the man
Christ Jesus, by whom God has ordained to judge the World in Righteouenesse,
whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead, Job 12. 16. John 5. 22. 29. Acts 17. 31. And as for the bodies of
those that with the heart believe on him, they are his in a more peculiar
manner, even members of him, as is before showed.

But, 2. If by Bodies be understood personal Bodies, and by having be meant, as
in the first mentioned sense, his having them as of the essence or being of
himself; Then our answer to the question is nay; There are not diverse personal
bodies of Christ, not two that may each properly and peculiarly be called the
Body of Christ, but there is one (which is more then these men believe, and
that which they privily endeavor to deny in these queries) and he has it and
continues in it for ever. And it is the same (and no other) that was prepared
for him in the womb of the Virgin, in which he appeared once in the last ages
of the World to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself; And in this his own
Body himself bore our sins on the Tree, and being raised from the dead the
third day, is now passed into the Heavens, and there received by the Father,
till the times of the restitution of all things; and because this man
continues for ever, therefore he has an unchangeable priesthood, and is now
appearing in the presence of God in the Heaven it self for us, the man Christ
Jesus, the Mediator between God and man, and great high Priest over the House
of God, even Jesus the Son of God passed into the Heavens for us; For if he
were on Earth, he were not such a Priest as becomes us to have, 1 Timothy 2. 5. 6.
Heb. 7. 23. 26. and 8. 1. 3 4* and 9* 24* and 10. 5. 12.

Again, 3. If Bodies be understood in the 2d. sense of the word body mentioned,
namely for societies or congregations of distinct persons united and gathered
the other under one head or Governor. And his having them be understood in the
second sense of having mentioned, namely by donation and Covenant as his
Church, or Spouses Then to the question, we further answer, That in such a
sense he has one body, and no more, forasmuch as he the Head and Husband, to
whom, being joined Spiritually, and by Faith they are of his Mystical body, is
but one, that body can be no more but one, for to them all there is but one
Head, Husband, and Lord; They are all built upon one foundation, even Jesus
Christ himself, he being the chief corner Stone, in whom the building fitly
framed together grows into an Holy Temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2. 18. 22. So
though there be many members, and also many particular societies of believers
upon Earth, yet they all make but one body, or general Assembly and Church of
the firstborn; Yea all believers now living upon the Earth, and all dead as to
the flesh, even all the dead in Christ that sleep in Jesus, whose spirits are
made perfect are but one body of Christ, in that sense of the word body, as
Ephesians. 4. 4. with 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13. with Ephesians. 2. 18. 22. Heb. 12. 22. 25. And
this his body may be said to be partly in Heaven, partly on Earth, for there in
Heaven with him are the spirits of Just men made perfect; Unto whom also, those
unfeigned believers living upon the Earth are come by Faith, which is the
evidence of things not seen, the confidence of things hoped for, and so
Spiritually and by Faith have their conversation in Heaven, from whence also
they look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change their vile
body, that it may be fashioned like unto his Glorious body.

So then, the body of Christ is but one in any one sense of the word body,
though as the word body is used in diverse senses, he has a body which is
peculiarly called his Body, or the body of Christ in two senses; As the head of
some believing women is spoken of in a threefold sense, 1 Cor. 11. her
personal head, her husband, and Christ; yet in proper and strict speaking she
has but one head, because her head is but one in any one sense of the word
head, but one personal head, but one husband, but one Christ, yet her head in
each of these senses is distinct, yea every member of the Body of Christ the
Church has a personal head of their natural body distinct from Christ the
mystical head of them all.

So has Christ a personal body, and members called the body of his Flesh, his
now Glorious Body, Col. 1. 22. Phil. 3. 21. Distinct from his body the Church,
Col. 1. 24. else he could be no meet or proper head for such a body, or
Congregation where every member has a particular personal body and members
distinct. But take body in any one sense of the word Body, and there is not two
but one Body of Christ, as before is showed, nor indeed are any of his Body the
Church, but such as are by Faith united and joined unto that one Lord in that
his one personal body now Glorified with the Father, as their Head, Lord, and
Husband, Nor are the head and members divided, but their union is spiritual,
and by Faith, not sensual; The head is the forerunner, and in that his own
personal body in which he bore our sins, and is the head of his body the
Church; He is already entered into Heaven, whether the members in their
particular bodies are not in a like sense entered, but by Faith and hope do
enter, and so have their conversation in Heaven from whence they look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change their vile body, that it may
be fashioned into the likensse of his Glorious Body, for here they walk by
Faith, and not by sight. And while they are at home in the clay Tabernacle,
flesh, or natural body, they are absent from the Lord, in a like sense as at
home in the body, they are not otherwise present with him now, but in Spirit,
and by Faith, Heb. 4. 3. 10. 14. and 6. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 5. 6, 7. Heb. 10. 37,
38. Phil 3. 20, 21. Col. 3. 1. 4.

Such therefore are not of the true Church or body of Christ but of Antichrist
as are vainly puffed up with their sensual mind, not holding the Head, etc. Col.
2. 18, 19. And that these men are such appears in their seeking to insinuate
by this query, and the rest, that to believe and acknowledge that the man
Christ Jesus continues, even in that body of his flesh now Glorified with the
Father, as the Head of the Church, in a personal being distinct from his body
the Church, and from every member thereof, is to make Christ to have two
Bodies, one in Heaven, and another on Earth; and therefore they endeavor
privily to make a nullity of his personal body, the body of his flesh, or to
deny his still having it, and possessing now in it that Glory which he had with
the Father before the World was, and so hold not the head, forasmuch as he is
not otherwise the Head of his Body the Church; But as now he is in that
personal body Glorified, and because this man continues ever in that Name and
Glory of his Father, which through sufferings in the same Body he has obtained
for us, that by him our Faith and Hope might be in God.

We have been the larger in this first Answer, as well to help the weak in
understanding things that differ, or are distinct, that so they may discern and
approve things that are excellent, as also to show the corruptnesse of their
way, in confounding things clearly distinct and distinguished in the Scripture,
and seeking by such confusion, to work their ends in deceiving the simple,
which also may further appear in their following Queries, and the more easily
by the help of what has been said in answer to this.

W. and F. Quest. 2. Whether the Body of Christ which is the fullness of God,
whereof the Saints are members, is a Body of Flesh and Bones in the Heavens?
yea or nay.
Answ. This Question also is foolish, and unlearned; for besides that it
privily pursues the same design of denying the remaining of the being of the
personal Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that in the same way with the
former, by confounding things clearly distinct, etc. as aforesaid. It also
takes that for granted as the ground of it, which is not granted by us in those
expressions, it being no where so expressed in the Scripture, of the body of
Christ in either sense; Namely, That the body of Christ is the fullness of God.

Of him in his own personal body, in which he is the Head of his body the
Church, the Scriptures says, in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, Col. 2. 9. with Capter 1. 19. Not that his body is the fullness of God,
or of the Godhead, but that dwells in him bodily, that so of his fullness, we
might receive.

And of his Body the Church, he says it is his fullness, namely, the fullness
of Christ, as he is the Head of a Body, viz. of an union of many persons in one
Body; now although that head be God blessed for ever, and he and the Father are
one (though distinct in respect of the manner of their being in the Godhead,
and as so distinct as Christ is the Head of the Church, so the Head of Christ
is God, 1 Cor. 11. 3. So although Christ who is the Head of the Church, be God)
yet the Church is not said to be his fullness simply as he is God, but as he is
the Head of the Church, and that is, as he is God man in one Person, the Man
Christ Jesus now raised from the dead, and continuing ever with the the Father,
even as so considered he is the Fountain of all fullness for us, and fills
all in all, compare Ephesians. 1. 20. 23. with chap. 4. 8, 9, 10 etc. and Col. 1.
13. 19. and 2. 9. 19. Heb. 7. 23, 24, 25. as so considered he is the Head of
the Church, and as he in that his personal body is the Head and Husband, so the
Church is his fullness, even as Eve was Adams, or as the Natural Body is the
Heads fullness, the Church is that in which is the fullness, or completing of
him as he is the Head of a body, viz. of an union of many persons in one body,
for so as we have showed before, he could not have a Body in such a sense, had
he not members, many Persons united to himself as their Head, Governor and
Husband. Further also their Querie is perverse and corrupt, in that it
intimately charges us, as calling the Personal Body of our Lord Jesus Christ,
now Glorified a Body of flesh and bones, which is a slander, for it is not our
expression, but theirs used often by way of derision and reproach of him; and
though possibly we may sometimes have let it pass without consideration or
particular notice of it, in some discourse that may have passed between us, yet
the expression we own not, but say with the Scripture, That the Personal Body
of Christ has flesh and bones, hands and feet, even the same in which he once
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, truly called the Body of his flesh,
and in that very body, he is now glorified; yea this we have diverse times
asserted to them in answer to such their deriding expressions, and still do
assert, that the Personal Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, for which we contend,
is not a body without a spirit, which a body of flesh and bones may be; yet we
are so far from being ashamed of the Words of Christ, and bearing the reproach
cast upon his Glorious Body by them; That as we know and believe as the
Scripture has said, so we confess that Jesus Christ was made of the Seed of
David after the Flesh, Romans 1. 3. made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4. and so took part
of flesh and blood with mankind, that through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is, the Devil, etc. Heb. 2. 14, 15, 16. and so he
dyed as man mortal, but he rose again the same body spiritual and immortal, his
Body not a spirit, though spiritual, yet truly a body, yea the body of a man,
and in that sense humane. The same he that dyed and was buried, is risen and
ascended, having flesh and bones, even such as before his ascension was seen
and handled by his Disciples, and so himself says of himself, and did walk,
speak and eat before them, and showed them his hands and his feet to confirm
the same, Luke 24. 36. 44. John 20. and 21. And while he blessed them and they
beheld him, he was parted from them, and carried up into Heaven, Luke 2. 50,
51. Acts 1. 9, 10, 11. And as his Disciples that saw were blessed, so he has
also pronounced them blessed that have not so seen and yet believe, John 20.
29. 1 Pet. 1. 8. so that though we call not his personal body a body of flesh
and bones, yet believing his sayings, we are not ashamed to confess he has
flesh and bones, though not carnal or mortal like mortal men, whole life is in
then blood, and may be let out with a Sword, and must die; But his, though
humane, yet spiritual and immortal, and because of that suffered, and done by
him in that Body in which he has overcome death, and so received gifts in the
man; its by way of Eminency and Peculiarity called his flesh and his bones, and
he in that body is in the Heaven of Heavens, nor is there any but the Spirit of
Satan in Antichrist that will move any to deny or reproach this as these do.

From all which considerations, we refuse this Question as thus stated by them,
as foolish, unlearned, corrupt and profane; But yet for the help of the weak,
if it be queried what is that his Body of which he is said to be the Head, and
which is said to be his fullness as he is the Head, Ephesians. 1. 23.

We answer, Not his Body in the first sense, but in the second, viz. not such
an union of many Members in one Body, as in which they are all united in one
person or personal body; but the union of many persons (believers or Persons so
imputed) that have each a distinct personal Body, in one mystical body, Church
or Congregation under that one head, who has also a distinct personal body of
his own in which he is the head, and also the Savior of that his Body, the
Church, see the Text, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. with chap. 5. 23. 28.

If it be further Queried, whether the Body of Christ in this sense or his Body
the Church have flesh and bones, its already answered,

1. He who is the Head of it has a distinct Body that has flesh and bones
(now glorified) in which he is the Head.

2. The members also that are living on the earth have each their distinct
personal bodies that have flesh and bones, yea they are yet partakers of flesh
and blood, in weakness and mortality, and their bodies vile, Phil. 3. 21. Romans
8. 10. 23. Heb. 2. 14.

If yet further any Querie whether this Body be in Heaven, it is likewise
already answered,

The Head who is their forerunner is already entered, and so they in him as in
their head, and with him by the faith of the operation of God who has raised
him (he says not them) his own personal Body (not theirs) from the dead, see
Col. 2. 12. with Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22. and Chap. 2. 6. Heb. 6 19 20. with Chap.
4. 3. But they in their particular bodies are not so entered, but while at home
in the flesh or natural Body, in its mortal state are absent from the Lord (as
is showed in the Answer to their first Queries) nor are they meet so to enter,
for flesh and blood (man in his present mortal and unchanged state) cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does corruption inherit incorruption, and
they are yet dead (though Christ be in them, and the spirit made alive in a
first fruits because of Righteousness, yet) the body is dead because of sin;
and so even they that have the first fruits of the spirit, are yet waiting for
the adoption, that is, the Redemption of the Body; for their life is yet hid
with Christ in God, when Christ who is their life shall appear, then shall they
also appear with him in glory, having their vile bodies fashioned into the
likeness of his Glorious Body, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8. Phil. 1. 23, 24 and 3. 21.
Romans 8. 10. 23. with Col. 3. 1. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 15. 50. 53.

W. F. 3. Querie, Whether did the body of flesh and bones wherein Christ
suffered descend from Heaven into the lower parts of the earth, yea or nay?
seeing no man has ascended up to Heaven, but the Son of man which came down
from Heaven, and it is the same that descended into the lower parts of the
earth, that ascended far above all heavens, that he might fill all things,
Ephesians. 4. 9, 10. Psalm. 68. 18.
Answ. In this Querie is first an intimate acknowledgement (though it may seem
in a deriding way of Christ's suffering in a Body of flesh and bones) But the
intention of this Querie with the following, is to deny and reproach the
acknowledgement of the Resurrection of Christ and his ascension into Heaven in
that very body in which he suffered, dyed and was buried, in the denial of
which his personal Cross of sufferings is made of none effect. The Apostles
Preaching rendered vain and false, and faith in him of no effect, yea the
general Resurrection of the dead is also herein denied, 1 Cor. 15. 13. 19. etc.
And to this purpose there is an Argument contained in this Querie, by which
they would enforce the denial of the foresaid acknowledgement of the
Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus the Lord, in that body of his flesh in
which he suffered, viz. That that body in which he suffered in the flesh, did
not descend from Heaven into the lower parts of the earth, and therefore
neither is that ascended up to Heaven, seeing no man has ascended up to
Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, etc. So that here is more then a
Querie, even an Argument from their intimate and employed denial of the
descension of that body, to enforce the denial of his ascension, the corruption
and foolishness of which we shall show in our answer to the Querie; to which
we say,

1. The Scriptures they mention give this plain answer, That he, even the Son
of man came down from Heaven and descended into the lower parts of the earth,
which we believing do therefore confess as the Scripture has said; for
although that his personal Body in which he was made man and became the son of
man was actually prepared for him, or the preparation of it was made in the
earth, according to that prophetical speaking of it long before (in which by a
word in the time past first, and another expression in the time to come
following, it is signified to be then vertually, but not actually done) the
Lord has created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a man, Jer.
31. 22. for he was made flesh of a woman, John 1. 14. Romans 1. 3. Gal. 4 4 and
therein curiously framed in the lower parts of the earth, Psalm. 139 15. And so
as to the matter of his Body, as of the Seed of David, it was not before
materially existent in Heaven, otherwise then in the Counsel of God decreeing
and fore ordaining it, and power effecting it, and word made flesh in it, yet
the Son of man is truly said to come down from Heaven, to have come forth from
the Father.

Because that Eternal Word, the only begotten Son of God, that was made flesh,
in that one body prepared for him, and is now become the Son of man, He came
down from Heaven; for the Word was in being before he was made flesh, he was in
the beginning with God, John 1. 1, 2. And that word not only took or entered
into flesh, but was made flesh, verse 14. So as the Word that was in the
beginning, and the flesh which in due time he was made (and so is not now in
making) is one person, one Son, who is both the Son of God, and the Son of man,
yea the two natures, that of God and that of man (though distinct and not
confounded) are united in one person, so as what is said of either nature, may
(though not in respect of the nature, yet) in respect of person be said of
both. As for instance; In respect of the nature of man, and as man, and as
pertaining to the flesh which he was made, he dyed, 1 Pet: 2. 24. and 3. 18.
and 4. 1. (not is dying or suffering in that personal Body of his, Rev. 1. 18.)
yet in respect of the person, and because of the union of the two natures in
one person, his sufferings or blood is truly called Gods own Blood, Acts 20.
28. and so its said, God laid down his life for us, 1 John 3. 16. so in this
business, the Son of man came down from Heaven, in as much as he, that person,
that is the Son of man, the Eternal Word and only begotten Son of God that was
made flesh, he descended and came forth from the Father, and came down from
Heaven; Yea also, when he was on earth in his Body, and not as then in that
respect ascended, yet then when he as God, the Son of God, the word (that was
made flesh) in Heaven with the Father, yea likewise in the virtue and
preciousnesse of his being the Son of man, and what he had undertaken to do in
that Body on the Earth, John 3. 13. with chap. 6. 62. and 20. 17. had these men
known and believed, that very Jesus of Nazareth of the Seed of David, Abraham,
etc. after the Flesh, to be indeed the Lord from Heaven, God blessed for ever,
and yet also true and very man, both in one person, and so Emmanuel, God with
us or in our nature for us, they would not have made this querie.

2. But for further answer, we add, That the Scriptures alleged by them give
no ground for their Querie, whither that body did descend from Heaven, because
they spoke not in such phrase or manner of speech as might be limited to one
of the natures only, for he says not simply it or the same thing that
descended (as they would insinuate) but he or that person that descended, he is
the same that ascended up, and the person that descended is, God man, the word
made flesh in an insepable union, for God sent forth his Son made of a woman,
and he humbled himself to death in the flesh, Ephesians. 4, 9, 10. Further also,

3. He says, That he that ascended is the same that descended into the lower
parts of the earth, he says, not simply, or only that he is the same that
descended or came down from Heaven, but further, that he is the same that
descended into the lower parts of the earth.

Now though in that first act of his descention and abasement in which he was
made flesh of a woman, he might (as we hinted before) be said to descend into,
and be curiously wrought or framed in the lower parts of the earth, yet did he
also descend into the lower parts of the earth, in other and further senses,
and in further and following acts of his abasement, in all which he was abased
and humbled in that body of his flesh which he had taken or was made in the
womb of the Virgin; Now his descention into the lower parts of the earth was
first, even to the utmost step or point of it before his ascension there spoken
of, and after the Declaration of that it is said, He that descended (namely into
the lower parts of the earth, even in the utmost sense in which he did so) he
is the same that ascended up far above all Heavens.

Now he that was made sin and made a curse for us, that humbled himself and
became obedient to the death of the Cross, that dyed and was buried, all which
(as we shall further show anon) is evidently included in his descending into
the lower parts of the earth, he is Gods Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, not only
as the eternal word simply considered, but as made flesh of a woman, and so
made of the Seed of David after the flesh, and made under the law for us; And
that he that so descended into the lower parts of the earth, and after the same
consideration of him, even Jesus of the Seed of David according to the flesh,
that that very he was raised in that very Body in which he Suffered, having the
same substance, flesh and bones, hands and feet (though not in the same
quality) and therein mightily declared to be the Son of God in that raised Body
Spiritual and immortal and carried up into Heaven; yea that this man continues
for ever, we have already particularly proved and showed by the Scriptures, and
shall further do it as we have occasion in answer to these Queries; nor are
they able to resist the wisdom and Spirit in the holy Scriptures, by which this
great thing of Gods Doctrine concerning Christ is evidently set forth, and
therefore seek privily to undermine and deny it by this snaring querie (with
the Argument annexed as before expressed) whither did that body descend from
Heaven? etc.

To which likewise we give this further answer; 4. He, even the Son of man, yea
that body of his flesh in which he was made and became the Son of man might be,
and is truly said to have come down from Heaven, thus, or in these
considerations.

1. In that the grace, appointment and gift in which he was given and sent
forth to be so made flesh and humbled in that body was from Heaven, the Father
gave and sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law, and so to be
the propitiation for our sins, and he came forth from the Father, and came into
the World, Joh. 3. 14. 16, 17. Gal. 4. 4. 1 John 4. 9, 10 John 16. 28.

2. In that the power by which he was made flesh in that one body prepared him
was from Heaven; for the Birth of Jesus was on this wise, The Holy Ghost did
come upon a woman, a Virgin that had not known man, and the Power of the
Highest did overshadow her, and she was found with child of the Holy Ghost, and
so that which was conceived in her was of the Holy Ghost; Therefore also that
holy Thing that was born of her was called The Son of the Highest, Mat. 1. 18.
21. Luke 1. 31. 35.

And so even the Son of man, yea that body of his flesh prepared for him on the
earth, in which he was made and became the Son of man, descended and came forth
from Heaven and came into the world; forasmuch as he so came forth and was made
flesh by the grace, gift and appointment of the Father, and by the operation of
the Holy Ghost, and in that body of his flesh he descended into the lower parts
of the earth, and he that descended is the same also that ascended up, etc. as
before.

W. and F. 4. Qu. What and where are the lower parts of the earth whereinto
Christ descended from his Father?

Answ. We find in the Scriptures of Truth, 1. That sometimes the Mothers womb
is called the lowest parts of the earth, as being a place of secrecy, darkness
and obscurity, Psalm. 139. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. and so he descended into the
lower parts of the Earth, when the Word was made flesh in that one body
prepared for him in the Womb of a Virgin, in which also he was made lower than
the Angels, even partaker with us of flesh and blood of our nature in its
mortal state for a time (as has been showed) that by the Grace of God he might
taste death for every Man.

2. As men in all the ends of the earth are sometimes called all the ends of
the earth. Isa. 45. 22. and 49. 6. so men of the lowest rank, poor despised and
of mean esteem (as Romans 12. 16.) may be as properly called the lower parts of
the earth, and may be included with those that sleep in the dust of the earth;
as those that also in a metaphorical sense dwell in dust, Isa. 44. 23. with
chap. 26. 19. and in that sense also he descended into the lower parts of the
earth, for though he was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be
equal with God, yet having his body prepared for him of the Father, subject to
all our infirmities that came by sin (yet without sin) and living amongst men,
he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, he
became as a worm and no Man, a reproach of men and despised of the people,
Psalm. 22. 6, 7. Isa. 53. 2, 3. Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7.

3. The words likewise are used to express a place and state of darkness,
Banishment or Separation from God (the portion of the wicked transgressors,
such as among whom he was numbered in his humiliation for us) Psalm. 63. 9. as
also those equivalent expressions, Psalm. 86. 13. and 88. 5, 6.

4. Likewise the grave or place where the dead body or bodies are buried,
appears to be clearly meant and expressed in those terms, as in that
figurative speech, Isa. 44. 23. as compared with chap. 26. 19.

And in these two last senses, especially that of Ephesians. 4. 9. speaks of his
having descended into the lower parts of the earth, as may further appear by
comparing it with that prediction of our Savior, Mat. 12. 40. as the
fulfilling of it is opened by Peter, Acts 2. 24. 27. 31. He was made sin and
made a curse for us, yea he dyed and was buried, wonderful was his abasement
and humiliation for us, and the more wonderful, considering the excellency of
the person who so willingly humbled and abased himself, and what we were for
whom he did it, the greater the sin of the enemies of his Cross that seek to
render it as a common or profane thing, as if of no more worth or
preciousnesse then the blood or Sufferings of, or sustained in and by other
persons may be, and so wretchedly strive to abase him that abased himself for
them, But God has mightily declared him to be the Son of God, by raising him
from the dead in the same body the third day, for his Soul that was made an
offering for sin, was not left in bell, neither did his flesh see corruption,
and in that body he is ascended, and the Father has exalted and received him,
even him whom they crucified, slew and hung on a Tree, the same that these men
also crucify to themselves and put to an open shame, seeking to cast him down
from his excellency.

Q. 5 W. and F. And if he which descended into the lower parts of the earth, be
a person of flesh and bones which ascended far above all Heavens; What is that
place he is in far above all Heavens which is not Heaven?
Answ. It is not so hard to find confusion and nonsense in this Supposition
and Querie grounded upon it, as it is to find so much plainness and honesty,
as by which it may be understood what they mean or require answer to. But the
intention of this Querie (by comparing it with the rest of their confusions of
this nature) appears to be,

First, To suppose or implie this as the question, Whether he that ascended up
far above all Heavens be a person of flesh and bones, the same that descended
into the lower parts of the earth; and then by that which follows as the main
querie in this question, to enforce a Negative answer, by rendering the
acknowledgement of that Person, as being in that his own body in Heaven it self
absurd and foolish, because they think in their foolish imagination, that to
acknowledge him to be so in Heaven, and yet also far above all Heavens, cannot
stand together.

Their inward thought (its like) is by these perverse disputings, to draw us
into some snare or confusion, that they may glory over us and get advantage to
insinuate to such as will listen to them, that the plain declarations of these
things concerning the Man Christ Jesus in the Scriptures are but cunningly
Devised fables, that must have some other Moral or Mystery according to the
Sensual or fleshly mind, in which they are vainly puffed up, not holding the
head; however we shall put it to the issue, giving our answers plainly and
without hidden things of dishonesty, as those that have received a word of
truth, a faithful saying worthy to be stuck too, and of which we are not
ashamed.

And so first to their supposition laid down as the ground of their following
querie. If he which descended, etc. be a person of flesh and bones.

To this we say, first we know no person made up or wholly consisting of flesh
and bones, much less is his who is God man, the only begotten Son of God,
even as now made flesh and so as the Son of Man, John 1. 14. now glorified with
the Fathers own Self, as the Fruits of his Sufferings, for in him Col. 2. 9.
dwells all the fullness of the God head bodily, Joh. 17. 4, 5. Therefore we
reject their absurb expression as foolish and impious, proceeding from their
scorn of him and enmity to him, though they in reproach and derision of us for
his Sake would intimate it as ours, as a little before that other expression
(not altogether so gross as this) a body of flesh and bones, to which having
spoken already, we add no more to this, But further assert in answer to their
querie employed in the Supposition.

That the Son of Man, even Christ of the Seed of David, Abraham, yea of Noah
and Adam after the flesh, in that body of his flesh (prepared for him when he
came into the World) in which he was sent forth, made of a Woman, made under
the Law, he being found in fashion as a man in the likeness of sinsul flesh
(though without sin) and in the form of a Servant, did also descend into the
lower parts of the earth, even in the two last senses of the lower parts of the
earth before mentioned; For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the
belly of the Whale, so was the Son of Man (in his finishing the works the
Father gave him to do on the earth) three days and three nights in the heart
of the earth, Mat. 12. 40.

In that Body of his flesh he bore the Judgment of this World, even that due
to us for sin, in which he was made for a time the banished or forsaken one,
and his Soul therein made an offering for our sin, John 12. 27. 31. with Isa.
53. 10* Luke 22. 42. 44. Psalm. 22. 1. etc. with Mat. 37. 46. Mark 15. 34. in
that his own Body, himself bare our sins on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. and 3. 18.
and once Suffered for Sins, the just for the unjust, being put to death in the
flesh, he dyed for our Sins according to the Scriptures, and was buried, 1 Cor.
15. 3, 4. yea farther we assert with the Scriptures, that Christ of the Seed of
David after the flesh, he even the same that dyed and was buried, rose again
the third day according to the Scriptures; for if the dead rise not, then is
not Christ risen, for though it was in or after the flesh that he dyed and was
buried, yet by reason of the inseparable union of the two natures in one
person, the word being made flesh, It was Christ that died and was buried, and
therefore also it was not possible that he should be holden of Death, 1 Cor.
15. 3, 4. 12. 16. Acts 2. 22. 24. His soul was not left in hell, neither did
his flesh see corruption as David's did, but God raised him the third day (even
him whom they flew and hung on a tree, and took down from the tree, and laid in
a Sepulcher, God raised him from the dead) and showed him openly, not to all
the people, but to witnesses chosen before of God, even to those last Apostles
who did eat and drink with him after he rose from the dead, Acts 10. 39. 40,
41. and 13. 29. 30 31* 37.

To whom he showed himself alive after his passion (even himself that suffered
to death in the flesh, alive after his suffering) by many infalible proofs,
(being seen of them forty days, etc.) In all which he demonstrated himself to
them, to be the same person, and in the same Body, yea to have the same flesh
and bones, hands and feet in which he dwelt among them, and walked up and down
with them, in the days of his flesh (or weakness) and in which he was
crucified through weakness; And that now in the same Body he did live again,
by the Power of God, and in the Glory of his Father, and did or presently
should ascend up, and go away from them to the Father, to appear in the
presence of God* in Heaven it self for them, to prepare a place for them, etc.
And that from thence he might even in the same body, in the Name and Glory of
his Father, descend, or come down again, and receive them to himself, with all
else, who through his Grace (bringing Salvation to all men in due time) do love
and wait for that his Glorious appearing, that they may be with him for ever;
See the Scriptures before mentioned to this purpose, how after his Resurrection
he did evidently demonstrate himself to them, Luke 24. 36. to the end. And to
Thomas particularly, who not being with the rest when they had seen the Lord,
had said to them, except I shall see in his hands, and put my finger into the
print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe; See
what follows, John 20. 24, to the end. For even those things are written, that
we in after ages that have not so seen him might believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God, and that believing we might have life through his Name;
See also how further he asserts concerning his Ascension and going away from
them to the Father, John 20. 17. with Chapter 14. 3. 28. and 16. 5* 9. 28.

And that the same Jesus of Nazareth, even Christ of the fruit of David's loins
after the flesh, (for the name Jesus was not given him, or not so as that he
was called by it, till he had taken and was made flesh, and it always
signifies that person as so made, and includes the body of his flesh.) That he
in the same Body did Ascend and was parted from them, after he had so showed
himself unto them, and was carried, and received up into Heaven, even as he had
said unto them; See the Scriptures, Mark 16. 19* Luke 24. 50. 51. Acts 1. 2, 3.
9, 10, 11. and 2. 22. 36.

As likewise that the Heaven must receive him, till the times of restitution of
all things; And then, and to that, God shall send him from thence, in the Glory
he now possesses for us there, Acts 3 13. 21. Mat. 16. 27. In the mean time he
appears in the presence of God for us, even in Heaven it self, there possessing
Bodily, even in the man, the Glory he had with the Father, as his only
begotten Son, before the World was, Heb. 9. 24. John 17. 45. Col. 2. 9, Acts 5.
30, 31. Heb. 7. 23. 26. with Chap. 8. 1. 3. 4.

So that this Jesus is the very Christ, Acts 9. 22. and 18. 28. with Chap. 17.
3.

And the man Christ Jesus is the one Mediator between God and men, even he the
same, who gave himself a ransom for all, and is not any more to be offered in
Sacrifice, or to give himself a Ransom for us; But to be testified to us in
due time.

We come in the next place to their query under this 5th. head, viz.

Quest. What is that place he is in, far above all Heavens which is not Heaven?
Answ. This question is foolish, and unlearned, for as much as it takes for
granted either as our mind, or saying, or as the expression of the Scripture,
that there is some place far above all Heavens which is not Heaven.

Whereas neither is this any saying of ours, nor any where in the Scripture,
but their filly inference; Nor is there any ground for their question in the
words of the Scripture, which they seem to allude to. For that, Ephesians. 4. 10.
speaks not expressly of a place far above all Heavens, but of a person; He that
descended is the same also that ascended up far above all Heavens, etc. And
sure its understandable enough, that a person exalted to great Glory and
dignity may be far above the place of his Habitation, where he possesses it;
Yea is it not said of God that made the Heavens and the Earth, that Heaven is
his Throne upon which he sits, Mat 23. 22. the place of his Habitation,
Psalm. 33. 14. And yet sure the Creator is infinitely above and greater than the
Creature, yea he has set his Glory above the Heavens, Psalm. 8. 1.

This Question therefore as stated by them, we may justly reject as a foolish
and perverse disputing of men of corrupt minds destitute of the Truth.

Yet we shall here also, as always by the Grace of God with simplicity and
Godly sincerity clearly assert, and show by the Scriptures the Truth of God
against their privy endeavors to cast down the man Christ Jesus from his
Excellency. And so we say,

The place or places where he now possesses his Glory in that body of his
flesh for us, is the Heaven it self, Heb. 9. 24. (The place of the Habitation,
or Throne of God, Psalm. 33. 13. 14* Isa. 66. 1. Mat. 23. 22. For he is with him
appearing in the presence of his Glory for us in Heaven it self, when we cannot
in such wise appear for our selves, nor in our own persons, while at whom in
the body in its mortal state) he is set on the Right hand of the Throne of
Majesty in the Heavens, Heb. 8. 1. into which he is passed, and gone up, Heb.
4. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 22.

And yet therein, he may be truly and properly said to be ascended, or gone up
far above all Heavens, not only in respect of Glory and Dignity, but even in
respect of place, or local height also; When it self the Heaven, or Heaven of
heavens, the place, or places on high, whether he is gone up, is distinctly
mentioned in the same Scripture and speech, as it is in that Ephesians. 4. 8. 10. He
ascended on high, says ver. 8. far above all Heavens, says ver. 10. Now as
the Apostle teaches us to argue, 1 Cor. 15. 27. But when he says, all things
are put under him, its manifest that he is excepted that did put all things
under him; So we may say here when he says, he is ascended on high far above
all Heavens, it appears that the place, or places on high where he possesses
this Glory for us, is excepted from those all Heavens far above which he is
locally ascended, or gone up; And so we read of the Heaven of heavens, 1 Kings
8. 27. Neh. 9. 6. Sometimes also called the Heavens of heavens, Psalm. 148. 4.
And also that Christ of the fruits of David's loins after the flesh is ascended
on high far above all Heavens, even into Heaven it self, the Heaven or Heavens,
of heavens where he is received till the times of restitution, now to appear in
the presence of God for us, Acts. 2. 30. 32. 34. and 3. 21 Heb 9 24

Again if we take in a figurative sense of the word Heavens as included in
that, Ephesians. 4. 10. that is to say, if we understand them to signify not only
the Heavens or heavenly places, but those that dwell in them, in any sense one
or other, as well we may yet in saying he is ascended far above all Heavens in
such a sense, namely exalted in state and dignity far above all Principality
and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and every name that is named, etc. as,
Ephesians. 1. 21. We or the Scripture do not therein say, either that he is exalted
above the Father that exalted him thither, or that because he is exalted far
above all principality and power, and every name, etc. Therefore he is set in
no principality or power, or has no name; But that God has given him a name
above every name, as Phil. 2. 8, 9, etc. Namely above every other name, and so
that he is gone into Heaven, and is on the Right hand of God, Angels,
Authorities and Powers, yea all things being made subject to him by the Father,
but still its evident he is excepted that made all things subject, 1 Pet. 3.
22. with 1 Cor. 15. 27.

We may see the darkness and confusion of the Light in them, by its dictating
to them, and leading them into such corrupt and foolish inferences, as that
because he is ascended on High far above all Heavens, therefore the place he is
in must be no Heaven. The same (as to the nature or manner of infering) with
such as these that follow; That because God preferred Israel above all Nations
on the Earth which he had made, Deuteronomy. 14. 2. and 26, 19. Therefore they were no
Nation on the Earth, or of his making; And so because the Lord is above, and
greater then all gods, Exodus 18. 11. Psalm. 97. 9. and 135. 5. Therefore he is
not God; who sees not the weakness and corruption of such reasoning? If any
say, that Israel in other places is called a People, and a Nation, And the Lord
in other places is called God.

We answer, Its as evident that the place or places on high where the raised
body of Christ entered and is received, and remains until the Restitution of
all things, is in other places frequently called heaven, the Heavens, the
Heaven it self, as in the Scriptures forementioned and others.

But it may seem their understandings told them a body must have a place, and
therefore that they might privily deny the being of his personal and now
Glorious Body, and so that this man continues for ever, they devised this
inference to see if they could drive us into a confusion about the place where
he is, as also the two following questions.

Quest. 6. Whether do you believe that all the Heavens are local places one
above another, and above the Firmament which is called Heaven? Yea or nay.
Answ. This querie has three parts; To the first, whether all the Heavens are
local places? We answer, if places, then local, seeing local signifies places.

To the 2d. part, whether one above another? We answer, all the Heavens cannot
be one above another, for those that be the lower cannot be above the higher,
but there are lower and higher, there are heavens, and the Heaven of heavens,
as we showed before. Yea Stephen (being full of the Holy Ghost) saw the Heavens
opened, and the Son of man standing on the Right hand of God in Heaven, Acts 7.
55, 56.

To the last part, whether above the Firmament called Heaven? If they mean
whether they be all above it, we Answer, Nay; seeing that is one Heaven, and it
is not above it self; But if they would querie, whether any be above it? We
Answer, yea. And might show it in that, Psalm. 8. 1. 3. Deuteronomy. 33. 26. with other
Scriptures.

But all this question upon question is nothing to the purpose as to the thing
aimed at by them, nor would it if it had been more properly propounded, or
stated; as to say,

If this be the question, whether the word heaven or heavens be always used in
a proper sense, to express to us some place or places of Glory above the Earth,
and one above and exceeding another? and if to this we answer, as well we
might, Nay; the words are sometimes used figuratively, to express to us the
dwellers in heaven of diverse sorts and degrees, as likewise we find other
proper names of places frequently used figuratively, as the house for the
household, etc. And sometimes Metaphorically.

What then? Does it follow hence that such words are never used in Scripture in
their direct and proper sense, or that they are not so used, and so to be
understood in those Scriptures that treat of the matter under consideration?

Is this a good Argument? That if it be not evident that the word heaven, or
heavens, does always signify some place, or places of Glory distinct from,
and above the Earth; That then it must not be so understood when Christ's being
ascended up, and gone into heaven is spoken of* And that this is the thing they
drive at in this and the last question is evident; But what their arguing
availes to it, let the Reader judge.

Their question (but that they have a design in hand they are ashamed of, or
afraid to discover) should have been plain and direct to the business, viz.

What is meant by heaven, or heavens, when Christ's ascending up thither, or
being gone, or taken up into them, and received, and set down there on the
Right hand of power is spoken of, as Heb. 8. 1. and 4. 14. and 9. 24. Mark 16.
19. Luke 24. 51. Acts 3. 21. with other like Scriptures.

And to this our answer is, that then by heaven, or heavens, is meant a place
or places on high, distinct from other places, yea distinct from and above the
Earth, and these heavens within our sight, or that we are capable of
considering sensibly in our mind.

Yea though as we have said, where it is said he is ascended on high far above
all heavens, there a figurative sense of heavens is included, yet in such
places where his being gone up into heaven, and there received, and set on the
Right hand of Majesty even in the heavens is spoken of, there such a
figurative sense cannot be included, as in the other saying forementioned; for
he is not in such a sense received into or being in the dwellers in heaven as
he is said to be received into, and to be in heaven it self. 1. Not in
believers here on Earth, who having their conversation in heaven, may yet be
said Spiritually to dwell in heaven; But Christ is not in or among them bodily,
in his Glorious body, but Spiritually, and by Faith, nor does he so appear in
them, with or among them as in beaven, for there he appears in the presence of
God personally, in that his own body, the body of his flesh, in which he bore
our sins on the tree, not so in, with or among them now, but by his Spirit
which he calls another Comforter, as distinguished from his own person, John
14. 16. 18. 26. They see him not as the Apostles and first witnesses, Acts 1.
3. 1 Cor. 15. 5. 8. John 20. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 8. But in the evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit through their Doctrine.

They have him not with them, as, or in such a sense as they have the poor with
them, viz. in bodily presence; Yea, they are absent from him, while at home in
the body, even in a like sense (as aforesaid) as at home in the body.

2. Nor is he gone up into, or received in Angels, and so set on the Right hand
of Power in them, but passed and gone into Heaven far above all Principallity
and Power, Angels and Authorities being made subject to him.

Nor can Heaven in such places as forementioned mean any State of Glory, or
Dignity, as distinct from the place where he possesses it; for it is said he
shall descend or come down from heaven, (where he is now received till the
restitution of all things) 1 These. 4. 16. Phil. 3. 21. Acts 3. 20. 21. But in
respect of state of Glory, he shall not descend, he shall never more lay aside
any of that Glory or Dignity he now possesses for us, or be abased or humbled
for us, as before; But shall still sit on the Right hand of Power (which
expresses the state of Glory and dignity he now possesses for us, which he
shall still possess) even when he comes down from heaven, and appears
personally on the Earth the second time, Mat. 26. 64. Yea the words in the
Heavens do plainly express the place where he now possesses his Glory in the
man, as distinguished from the Glory he there possesses with the Father, which
is expressed in other expressions distinct, as his being set on the Right hand
of God, on the right hand of Power, on the right hand of the Throne of the
Majesty in which he is now exalted and glorified in the man, and that in the
heavens, or heaven it self, as Heb. 8. 1. 1 Pet. 3. 22.

And so in all such Scriptures as before, by heaven, and so by the heaven or
heavens whether he is gone up, and where he is received and possessed of that
Infinite Glory in the body of his flesh for us is evidently meant, according to
the most direct and proper sense of the word, the place, or places on high,
where he is so received, and appears in the presence of God for us; And to
this we gave these demonstrations in our discourse in their hearing, to which
they have answered nothing.

1. It is called Heaven it self, Heb. 9. 24. To distinguish it from heaven
after any figurative, Typical or other sense of the word.

2. He is said to be ascended up thither, passed and gone into Heaven, yea
received and taken up, Ephesians. 4. 10. Heb. 4. 14. 1 Pet. 3. 22. Mark 16. 19. Acts
1. 2. 9, all which expressions plainly import, a place or places above, whither
he is so taken up. Yea,

3. It is likewise said, that in being so taken or carried up, he was parted
from them, Luke 24 51. And after that was no more so with them in the World,
John 17. 11. 12, 13. Mat. 26. 11.

4. The Heaven into which he was taken up from his Disciples, was the same, or
Heaven in the same sense as of which it is said, the Apostles and disciples
stood steadfastly looking toward it, as he went up, Acts 1. 9, 10, 11.

5. The same from whence he shall descend, or come again in like manner, as
those chosen witnesses saw him go, when he comes to restore all things in their
individuals, Acts 1. 11. and 3. 20, 21. Phil. 3. 20, 21. 1 These. 4. 16. And
that cannot be his Church, for he shall not then go from them, but come to
them, nor his Glory he now possesses (as before said) for he shall not come
from that, but in it, even in the Glory of his Father, and with his Holy
Angels; But is evident to be only the place or places on high, where he now
possesses that Glory for us, from whence he shall descend, or come down
again, still sitting on the Right hand of Power.

6. Its that Heaven, or heaven in such a sense as it is properly opposed to the
Earth, where and on which the former Priests served, yea it is expressly said,
If he were on Earth, he were not a Priest, such a one as becomes us to have,
Heb. 8. 1. 3, 4. and 4. 14. with Chapter 7. 26. In which its plain, that he is
not on Earth in his personal and bodily presence, as he is in Heaven as
opposed to the Earth.

And the necessity of his going away thither, and being received and appearing
there in the presence of God for us, and of what usefulness it is to us, and of
what concernment, the holding fast the acknowledgment of it is, such as know
the Grace of God in Truth do know something may be seen of it in Tho. Moor
junior, his Antidote, page 41, 42. and 43. And in his instruction to the
living, pages 39. 51.

And they that deny it, do deny Jesus to be the great high Priest, yea they
deny his being already come in the flesh, so as that the works given him to do
on the Earth in that his own body for the expiation of sin are finished, as
John 17. 4, 5. with Heb. 1. 3. and 7. 26, 27. and 9. 24 26.

And so in sum deny Jesus to be the Christ, and therein show themselves liars,
Deceivers, Antichrists, and are therefore and as such to be turned away from,
and held accursed by us.

7. Que. Can a body of Flesh and Bones be both in the Heavens and far above
them all, and fill all things at one and the same time? Yea or nay.
Answ. Nay, but the man Christ Jesus in that body of his flesh, in which he
bore our sins on the tree, and has flesh and bones now raised, and gloryfied
with the Fathers own self, being ascended on high, and set down on the Right
hand of Majesty in the Heavens, and so being with the Father and in his Name,
God over all blessed for ever; He may from thence and in that Name, Power and
Glory fill all things, and fulfill all things too (as that Text also may be
read) in his time, and according to his Word.

And the Text says not, that his body fills or might fill all things, but he
for whom God prepared that body, and who in that body is ascended up far above
all Heavens, and is not now on the Earth in his Glorious personal Bodily
presence, nor says it that he does fill all things, but he is ascended that he
might fill or fulfill all things.

The intention of this query with the former, is to deny the being of the
perscnall Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, or that this Man continues for ever,
so as the former priests did not by reason of Death.

And the Argument here from which they would urge that denial is, because it
is said, he is ascended that he might fill all things, but a body of Flesh and
Bones cannot be in diverse places at once, and so not fill all things, therefore
hence they would imply, That he has no such body, the corruption and folly of
both which, their employed denial and Argument intimated is already manifest, in
what has been said to their deriding expressions, a body of flesh and bones.
And in the answers already given, and in what has been said to this query
where is showed, that Christ of the fruit of David's loins after the flesh, who
has a Glorious personal body (having flesh and bones) in heaven with the
Father, he may be in diverse senses, in diverse places at one and the same time,
and so may fill all things, though as to his personal bodily presence, he is
not on Earth while the Heavens receive him, which is till the times of
restitution of all things; So while yet we have not Jesus Christ in his
personal Bodily presence with us, yet he is in his Gracious and Spiritual
presence and virtues in the hearts, Societies and works of them that wait for
him. And in his inspections, influencies and operations he is every where, and
so in a sense filling all things now, though also in a more full and Glorious
sense, he shall fill and fulfill all things (as before hinted) in his Season.

And surely such a question concerning him (whom they reproachfully call a Body
of flesh and Bones) as this can He, etc. Does very much manifest not only the
Insidelity, but also the absurdity and gross sensuallity of the Interrogators;
For is not the visible Sun in its body set or fixed in the Firmament of heaven,
a place above the heavens where fowls fly, and Clouds ride; And yet so
Glorious in Light, Brightness and extention of Light, that it fills with its
light and influences the heavens and the earth and all in it, and yet this is
but one of his creatures that has its being, glory and standing off, and from
him; for by him were all things made that were made, and in him was Life, even
life from the dead, by way of Redemption, even from the beginning of man's need
of it, by virtue of what he had then undertaken to do, and to become for fallen
mankind; And that Life in him was the light of men, the Fountain, Original
cause, and producer of all that is truly Light and good unto them, for by him
do all things consist even by him, as now in that body in the fullness of time
prepared for him, he is the first begotten from the dead; For so is he
glorified with the Fathers own Self, in that his own personal body in which he
bore our sins on the Tree, that he even the Son of man, the man Christ Jesus is
the Image of the invisible God, the brightness of his Glory, the express
Image of his Person, upholding all things by the word of his Power, John 1. 1.
3. 14. Col. 1. 14, 15, 16. 19, 20. Heb. 1. 1. 3. etc.

And cannot this man who is King of Righteousness, and King of Peace, Heb. 7.
2. An hiding place from the wind, and a Covert from the Tempest as Rivers of
Water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary land, Isa. 32. 2
Immeasurably full of Grace and Truth, Spirit, Power and Authority, John 1. 14.
and 3. 34. Mat. 28. 18. Glorified with the Fathers own self, so as in him
dwells the fullness of the Godhead Bodily, John 17. 4, 5. Col. 2. 9. Cannot he
(we say) in that Glorified body of his be in the Heaven of heavens, that is
above all other heavens, and in the fullness of his Power, Excellency and Glory
above all Heavens, and by his Glorious all-seeing Spirit, discern and see into
allthings, even the secrets of every heart, and so into all the evil thoughts
and windings in the Imaginations of these men, striving to mar his vizage; Is
he a God at hand, and not afar off, can any hide himself in secret places that
he should not see him, does not he fill Heaven and Earth, Jer. 23. 23, 24. with
Heb. 4. 12, 13, 14, 15. Does he not by the Power and fullness he has received
in the man rule for ever? Oh let not the Rebellious exalt themselves! Psalm. 66.
7. with John 5. 22. 27. 1 Pet. 3. 22. Does he not by the fullness of gifts
received in the man, and for men, even send forth Spirit to the Rebellious, and
load us with his benefits, Psalm. 68. 18, 19, 20. with Ephesians. 4 8, 9, 10. Is not
the Earth upheld by him and the Inhabitants thereof, Psalm. 75. 3. with Col. 1.
16. 17. and Heb. 1. 3. Is he not nigh to all, in giving them their being, Life,
Breath, and Moving, and his good Spirit therein discovering his gooduesse,
instructing and moving to Repentance, that they might seek the Lord, Acts 17.
27. 28. 30. 31. John 1. 9. 10. etc. and 8. 12. and 12. 46. etc. And is not he
by his Spirit, with the Riches and influences of his Grace in unfeigned
believers, and so in and unto them the hope of Glory, Col. 1. 26. 27. Surely he
is, and does all this in every age, and so is filling all things, and will in
his time fill or fulfill all things (as aforesaid.) And had these men been of
any judgment concerning the Faith, they would not have propounded this query
with the former, or following; But against what Christ, what Gospel, and what
Faith they fight, their queries discover to those who have their Spiritual
senses exercised.

8. Que. Seeing Thomas Moor did not own that Christ's Body is a carnal body in
Heaven: how is it that you say his Body is a body of Flesh and Bones (or a
Humane Body) without Blood in it; Is not a Fleshly body Carnal?
Answ. 1. That the Body of Christ in Heaven is not a Carnal body in Scripture
sense, yea that it was not a carnal body when on Earth, we did and still do
assert; for Carnal as used in Scripture when applied to man, signifyes sinful
flesh, or Natural sinfulness and emptiness of good in mind or members, and so
he was not made, though for a time in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 7. 14.
23. with Chap. 8. 3. Phil. 2. 7. Heb. 4. 15.

2. As for their reproach, in saying that we say that its a body of Flesh and
Bones without Blood in it; Its already answered, we say a body having Flesh and
Bones, though not now weak and mortal as ours, whose natural bodily weakness
and mortality is signified by those expressions Flesh and Blood, when put
together, of which he also was partaker for a time, that he might die for us,
That through Death he might destroy him that had the power of Death, etc.

3. To their parenchesis (or a humane body) we further say, Does the Light in
them tell them that carnal, and a body of Flesh and Bones, and a humane body is
always one and the same? Let us see if it be not darkness.

Humane is always used for the Nature or kind of man, as Gods Creature, as
distinguished from other kinds of Creatures; And so a humane body is the body
of a man, one that is verily a man, whether sinful and mortal, or not so,
either the one or the other.

And so the Body of Adam in his Innocence was humane, the body of a man, he was
verily man, yet sinless, and so not subject to or in a state of Death (though
capable of becoming Immortal, or mortal) but when by sinning he fell from God,
then he became sinfult and mortal, And such are all that by natural propagation
come from him, as of and from him while in this body not changed by Death, yet
still humane, the nature or kind remains though degenerated and corrupt; God
made man upright, and it is man still that has sought out inventions and is
become carnal, sold under sin, Ecles. 7. 21. with Genesis 5. 1. 2. and Chap. 8. 21.

But the second Adam our Lord Jesus Christ is not a carnal, but Spiritual man,
even from the first of his being made man, for though his Body prepared for and
taken by him when the word was made flesh, was humane of mankind, and so he
was a very man, Yet he came not by propagation from Adam, but though made of a
woman of the seed of Abraham, and so of Adam, of whom Abraham was, yet it was
in a supernatural way, a work of new Creation by the operation of the holy
Ghost in the womb of a Virgin that had not known man, and was holy, being
anointed of God with the Holy Ghost, and power even in and from his conception
and Birth; And so that holy thing, even before born of her, and when born, and
always without sin, yet not Immortal, but for a time partakers of Flesh and
Blood, as the Natural Children of Adam, and because therein he was made subject
to our infirmities that came on us naturally, or as a natural heritage from
Adam, by reason of sin (yet without sin) he was said to be made in the likeness
of sinful Flesh, and his body might be said in some sense to be made a natural
body (as being partakers with us of Flesh and Blood, and so mortal) though not
in every sense or in a full sense, as the natural Children of Adam are. Yet to
esteem him sinful Flesh, or his body a carnal Body, even then when he was on
Earth partakers of Flesh and Blood, and suffered in the Flesh, we account
blasphemy; much more to esteem his raised and Glorified body in Heaven a
carnal body. For in his Resurrection form the dead, all that weakness and
mortality of the Flesh that came on the Nature of man by the first Adams sin
and fall, which he for a time was subject to, in being partakers with us of
Flesh and Blood, it was put off from him, that he should no more return to it;
And so his body is become in a full and Glorious sense Spiritual, Gloriously
filled with the Spirit of Life and Power, yea Immortal, a Glorious body, he
being therein glorified with the Fathers own self, and all by virtue of that
his once suffering for our sins in the F^esh, in which he shed his blood, and
therein powered out his Soul unto Death, laying down his Natural, Mortal, and
Adam-like Life in the Flesh, that he might take it again in the Spirit and
Glory of the Father, by which he was quickened, raised from the dead, now no
more to return to corruption.

Yet still this raised and Glorious body is humane, the body of a man, even the
man Christ Jesus having Flesh and bones, hands and feet, which by way of
distinction from others, and eminency above them, is called his flesh and his
bones.

And had these men believed either the great Mystery (as now revealed) that God
was manifested in the flesh, in the words being made flesh, and dwelling
amongst men, or the Resurrection of the body of Christ that dyed, they would
neither have cavelled at the denying his body to be carnal, as if it could not
stand with the acknowledgement of this man continuing for ever, nor have spoken
so contemptuously of the Glorious body of Christ; And so neither would they
have added this following query,

Is not a fleshly body Carnal?

To which we further Answer.

1. Fleshly and carnal, do not always signify the same thing in Scripture; for
we read of a heart of flesh, and fleshly Tables of the Heart, Ezekiel. 36. 26. 2
Cor. 3. 3. whereby fleshly cannot be meant carnal, but tender and fit to
receive his impression or writing, as opposed to a stony, hard or carnal heart.
And though sometimes such expressions, as to be flesh or fleshly named after
it, may be used to signify the weakness and brittleness of the outward man, or
a helpless, withering, worthless and decaying state (which may stand with
carnality in Scripture sense, though distinct from it) because all flesh in its
present state is as Grass, and the goodlinesse thereof as the flower of the
Field fading and withering, but the word of the Lord that was made flesh, who
is the spiritual and heavenly man, and he abides for ever; Yea though also
sometimes a fleshly Mind and fleshly Lusts are equivalent with carnal
mindedness and lusts, as Romans 8. 5. to 8. Col. 2. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 11* Yet

2. To have flesh and to be fleshly or named after it, is two things, whether
we take flesh as signifying the outward man, or body of man that has flesh and
bones, and that whether as natural from Adam, or as raised from the dead, for
there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body, and both have flesh,
though not of or in the same quality, or if we take flesh as Signifying the
natural Sinfulness, or carnal mind, as the word is used for both, yet to have
flesh in either sense, and to be fleshly or named after the flesh, are not the
same, nor always meeting in the same person. The Apostles did live and walk in
the flesh or natural body, yet did not war after the flesh, nor was fleshly or
carnal in their knowings, speakings or actings, 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4. with chap. 1,
12, 13 and 5. 16. Gal 2 20. with Phil. 1* 2^. 24. and yet also they had flesh
in the last sense, even natural sinfulness and carnality still dwelling in
them, in their flesh, members or outward man, as from Adam, though they were
not reckoned after it, nor did walk in or after it, but did mind and walk in
and after the spirit, and so were not carnal but Spiritual. And if to have
flesh and to be fleshly be not the same, nor does the latter at all necessarily
follow upon the former in mortal men, How durst these men speak of them, as
necessarily one in him who is raised from the dead in the Glory of the Father,
and who saw no corruption, as if his having flesh and bones should render him a
fleshly man or body; but that they are vainly puffed up with their fleshly mind,
not holding the head, etc. Yea

3. Neither is his body a fleshly body, nor any where by us or the Scripture so
called, for though sometime (as we showed) it was subject to the weakness and
infirmities of the flesh that are natural to us from fallen Adam, and so in
some sense might be said to be a natural body, though he was therein made that
which naturally he was not, and that in a supernatural way (as aforesaid) and
was therein as always perfectly without sin, yet taking part with us of flesh
and blood, that he might dye our death, etc. as before is hinted, yet now being
raised from the dead, even that body of his flesh which God has raised up from
the dead is now in Heaven with the Father, a spiritual, heavenly and glorious
body, so as yet the bodies of any of his members on earth are not; But their
bodies also that now are vile, and see corruption as his never did, even the
same that are now living on the earth or sleeping in the dust, shall be raised
by him in the first Resurrection at his appearing, not carnal bodies or vile
and corruptible as now they are, but fashioned into the likeness of his
glorious body, when this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal
immortality.

Quest. 9. Can any local place contain that Glory which Christ had with the
Father before the world was, wherein he is glorified?
Ans. Nay, but the heavenly places or places on high where he is received till
the times of restitution, may contain his Glorious Body, though they cannot
contain the glory wherewith he is glorified and which he possesses therein;
for place cannot contain infinite power, wisdom, eternity, glorious Majesty,
etc. The heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain that glory of the Fathers
own self, which is the glory that Christ had with him before the world was, and
wherewith he is now glorified in the Body of his flesh (how much less can
earthen Vessels or Clay Tabernacles contain that Glory that is set above the
Heavens) we say the heavens cannot contain it, so that it should not Shine
forth and operate in heaven and in earth, and in all places, yet the heaven is
his Throne, the earth his footstool, yea the heaven of heavens is that place of
his habitation from whence he beholds all things and does whatsoever he
pleases in heaven and in earth, and in all places, 1 Kings 8. 27* Isa. 66. 1.
Eccles 5. 2. Psalm. 33. 13, 14. And so the personal body of Christ in which he
bore our sins on the Tree, being now raised from the dead, is received and
taken up into heaven and set down on the right hand of the Majesty and Power of
God in the heavens, and not now on the earth personally, yet the heavens cannot
contain his Glory from Shining forth to us and operating in and with us, and in
all things and places in the influences thereof, because the fullness of the
Godhead dwells in him bodily; and all power is given unto him in heaven and in
earth, yea because he is in heaven with the father, therefore he is able to
fill all things with the fruits of his mediation and influences of his power,
for if he were now on earthor had not been received up into heaven and set down
on the right hand of Majesty, upon his finishing the Works the Father gave him
to do on earth, and offering up that spotless body of his flesh to God, he
could not have been such a Priest, and such a mighty King of Righteousness,
Prince and Savior for us and to us; And therefore those that deny his being in
heaven in that body of his flesh, his now glorious body (in which he is the
head) distinct from every body and spirit of his members, and as their
forerunner entered before them, as these Spirits in all their discourse and
perverse disputings against it (at least privily) do and have done, they do
therein as much deny that Jesus is the Christ, and so are the great liars, and
Antichrists foretold to come in the last days that deny the Father and the
Son. And surely in frameing this query to that purpose, not only their wicked
enmity against the man Christ Jesus as in the former appears, but also in this
their brutish folly (to which God justly leaves them) is so made manifest, that
all of any understanding in natural things or things within the reach of man's
reason, may easily see it; For in such things its evident, not only that the
power, excellency and efficacy of some man or men on earth may reach much
further then his personal body, or then the place in which that is, yea the
farther and the more fruitfully, for his standing or abiding in some one place,
where he may be more profitable and fruitful to others then if he were
personally with them, according to which our Savior instructs his Disciples in
the necessity and usefulness to them* ward of his leaving the World, and going
away from them to the Father, to appear in his presence, and stand in his Name
for our help, John 14. 2. 3. and 16. 7. 28* with Heb. 7. and 8. and 9. and 4.
14. etc. 1 John 2. 1, 2.

But farther also its evident to all that know anything (and therein may be
also some resemblance of this business) that even the Visible Sun is placed in
the firmament to run and keep its course there, yet those heavens cannot
contain its glory that it should not Shine to us and have its effects on the
earth, nor could it so generally Shine and have such Universal influences and
effects, if its body were not set or placed at such a distance from us.

Quest. 10. Where or how came Christ into the house where his Disciples were
met after his Resurrection, the doors being shut? John 20. 19. 26. Have not
some of you said, that then his body being spirituallized it glided in at the
key hole of the door, for so it has been spoken concerning some of your way.
An. This has two or three questions in it, the two first are foolish and
unlearned and to be avoided by us; as where he came in or how, it being not
revealed otherwise or farther then thus; That the same Jesus that dyed and
rose, did, when his Disciples were in a house together, come, the doors being
shut, and stand in the midst of them, even in that body of his flesh that saw
no corruption, having flesh and bones, hands and feet, the same body that was
crucified, nailed to the Cross, and pierced with a Spear, as himself then did
expressly demonstrate to Thomas, see verse. 27. This revealed we believe to be
true, because spoken by the Truth of God that cannot lie; But where or how he
came in further then revealed in his Testimony already given, we desire not to
be wise in knowing or carnal in seeking sensually to immagine, for secret
things belong to the Lord our God, but things revealed unto us, etc. Deuteronomy. 29.
29.

To the last we say, None of us have said as is related, nor matters it what
has been said concerning some of our way, that's not the only falsehood that
has been forged concerning us by some of their way. They might have heard such
imaginations and inquisitions reproved by us, as too sensual, in seeking to
bring down the great things in the Revelation of the Mystery of God manifested
in the flesh to the sensual mind or comprehension, and favoring of pride and
vanity of mind, in desiring to be wise above what is written, and so we still
look upon them, and therefore own no such thing. But believing the Scriptures
and the great power of God, and that the Body of the Lord Jesus risen from the
dead is Glorified with the Fathers own self; we know he could come in where and
how he pleased, whether there was any such way for him or no, and needed no
passage to be opened or made or for him; Yea further also we are assured, that
even the Children of the first Resurrection, when they shall attain to that
Resurrection of the dead, and have their bodies that now are vile, fashioned
into the likeness of his Glorious Body; they in those very bodies b^ing
Spiritual, Immortal, Powerful, Incorruptible shall be equal to the Angels, who
cannot be hindered from passage by any corruptible things, as Doors, Walls or
the like, but can make their own passage through any such obstacles, more
easily then mortal bodies through the air; And why should it be thought a thing
incredible that the Creator of all things should make man's nature partaker of
such Glory? It is so only to the sensual and carnally minded, who do therefore
err not knowing or believing the Scripture and the great Power of God.

And that these are such appears by this manner of questioning; Do they not
secretly imply in this question, that such a thing could not be done according
to the proper and natural sense and import of the words, unless some mortal man
can tell where or how? And do they not therein signify that they count the
plain sense and clear import of the Evangelists words to be a lie? And that
either Christ had not a Body having flesh and bones after his Resurrection as
himself said, or if he had he could not come into the house and be in the midst
of them, the doors being shut? and so by rendering the expressions of the Holy
Ghost, such as can have no truth in them in their litteral sense and plain
import, but are rather a cunningly devised fable, they would insinuate a
necessity of seeking the truth in some fancied moral or Allegorical
interpretations of theirs. Besides, they intimate pride and high thoughts of
themselves, for sure they would have us think they are so wise above what is
written that they can answer their own Querie; what less can be thought in
their thus propounding it to us? But till they have answered the Questions put
to Job chap. 38. we will not believe them, for we know neither they nor any
other mortal man can by searching find out the Almighty to perfection, Job 11.
7, 8. nor yet find out the Work of God from the beginning to the end, Eccles.
3. 11. no not the Works of God done under the Sun, Ecles. 8. 17. He is no true
believer on God, that will believe no more of his Works then he can tell how,
where, and in what manner they were done, and he is foolish and proud that
conceives himself able to demonstrate to reason every such thing in every Work
of God.

Quest. 11. Whether the same Christ who in the days of his flesh suffered
persecution, whose body was subject to hunger and affliction, be not made a
quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 49. and yet his flesh and blood is so nigh to
every true believer, that his flesh is his meat indeed, and his blood is his
drink indeed, etc?
Answ. This Question also may be divided into two parts.

1. Whether the same Christ who in the days of his flesh suffered, etc. be not
made a quickening spirit.

2. The following part is in the form of a proposal, yet is signified to be
part of their question, by the interrogatory point, it is thus, And yet his
flesh and blood is so nigh to every true believer, that his flesh is his meat
indeed, etc?

To the first part, Whether the same Christ, etc. be not made a quickening
Spirit, We answer, Yea he is, or rather (to use the expression of the
Scripture) he was so made, for he is not now making or to be made so.

And further we say, We truly believe and propofess without hidden things of
dishonesty, That it is the same Christ who in the days of his flesh suffered,
etc. Now that was the word made flesh, and so Christ of the fruit of David's
Loins after the flesh, who had both Spirit and Body, and if he were without
either now he could not be the Christ, much less the same Christ, yea the
Scripture quoted by them, 1 Cor. 15. 45. says, That as it was the first man
Adam that was made a living Soul, so it is the second Adam that was made a
quickening Spirit. And therefore as the first Adams being made a living Soul,
hindered not his having a natural body, yea it was the man that was made so; so
neither does the second Adams being made a quickening Spirit, hinder his having
a Spiritual and Glorious Body that yet has flesh and bones, yea its the man
Christ Jesus the second Adam, Christ, of the fruit of David's loins after the
flesh, that was made both Lord and Christ, and so a quickening Spirit; It is
the same Jesus that suffered, and so in the same body in which he once (not
only suffered, but) suffered for our sins and bore them on the Tree, the just
for the unjust, etc. (which also is more then they include in their
acknowledgement of his Sufferings) it is this Jesus who was both dead and
buried, whom God has raised up and made both Lord and Christ.

They would seem to grant that the same Christ who in the days of his flesh
suffered, etc. is made a quickening spirit, yet privily deny it, while they
confess not Jesus to be the same and very Christ that was so made, which they
do not while they acknowledge him not to be so made in the same body of his
flesh in which he once so suffered; For the Name Jesus always signifies Christ
as come in the flesh, and so takes in that body of his flesh, upon the taking
whereof that Name was given him (as is before noted) yea he whom God has
raised from the dead, and made both Lord and Christ, and so a quickening
spirit, is said to be Christ of the Seed of David after the flesh* Romans 1. 3 4
with Acts 2. 30. 36. the same that dyed and was buried, 1 Cor. 15 3. 4 45. The
last Adam (as also before is hinted) in not confessing which they privily deny
what they pretend to grant, and their seeming grant is like John VVhiteheads
concerning the Resurrection of Christ, who at our meeting with him at Gedney,
pretended to believe that the same Christ that took flesh in a body prepared
for him of the Seed of Abraham and David, and in that body served and suffered
for at a time, that the same Christ was raised and glorified with the Fathers
own self; And yet then would by no means acknowledge (though often entreated and
urged to speak plainly to the Question) that he was raised and did live again,
and continue for ever in the same body in which he so served and suffered, or
that the same body that then once in the last ages suffered and was hung on the
Tree, was raised again from the dead, and is now alive for evermore; yea at
last he deneyed that the same dead bodies of men that dye in Adam shall be
raised and made alive again from the dead, that even the same that sleep in the
dust of the earth shall come forth of their Graves by Christ, and so
consequently that Christ is raised; for if the dead rise not, then is not
Christ raised, for Jesus Christ was dead and buried, as before we have showed.

So then their immagination or meaning in this equivocal grant appears to be
this, That the same Christ that had a body distinct from all other, in which in
the days of his flesh he suffered, is now raised, ascended, and gone out of
that body of his flesh into some (imaginary) spiritual being, which in that
body of his flesh he could not be made, yet that in that his spiritual being,
he is in the bodies or bodies and souls of diverse persons, working, doing or
suffering the same things in them which were typically or as a Pattern suffered
and done in that body of his flesh, and so they neither confess him already
come in the flesh, or as having finished that his coming in the flesh, or first
appearing, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, and so the works the
Father gave him to do on the earth, in that his once suffering for sin; nor do
they confess, yea they deny Jesus to be the very Christ who is made a
quickening spirit, and therefore we have laid down our answer plainly and
distinctly, that its not only the same that had a body and therein once
suffered, but also that its he in the same body of his flesh in which he once
suffered for sins, even the same Jesus whom they crucified, slew and hung on a
Tree, that God has made the Lord and Christ, and so a quickening spirit, and
have explained and confirmed our answer in the expressions of the Scripture
quoted by them, that its the last Adam, etc. (of which they take no notice) for
that fully shows the fullness and ungodliness of their immagination, which
therefore we again desire the Reader to mind, viz. that that Scripture, 1 Cor.
15. 45. speaks of two Adams, the first Adam the last Adam; so then they were
both men, and had each the personal body of a man, when those things there
spoken of were verified in them, yea so expressly called; verse. 47. the first
man, the second man.

It was the first man Adam that was made a living Soul, and so it is the last
Adam, the second man that was made a quickening spirit.

The Lord formed the body of the first Adam of the dust of the earth, and then
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, Genesis 2. 7. and man became a
living Soul; the breath of Life did not annihilate the body formed of the dust,
but enlive and quicken it, by possessing it and defusing it self in and through
all the parts and members of it, so that that breath of Life and the body of
the man united, the man became a Living Soul; it is not said it, or the breath
of life became so, but the man, upon Gods breathing in that breath of life, he,
even the first man Adam became a living Soul; And had he abode in that
uprightness and innocence in which he was made, he might have lived for ever;
but as there was then none dead for him to quicken, so neither was he fitted
for such a work, so that when he (this first man Adam) not keeping his first
estate, but seeking out inventions, sinned and fell from God under the Sentence
of and into a state of death and Separation from God, and so death passed upon
all men, and they are all partakers of flesh and blood, forasmuch as all have
sinned in that offense of one, they must all have been shut out and perished
for ever in that loss and misery, if God had not found out and prepared a
second man Adam and made him a quickening Spirit; for as by man came death, so
by man also the abolishing of and resurrection from the dead, such was man's
condition by reason of sin entered and overspreading the nature, and death
already passed on him in the Sentence of God, that without another man, a
second Adam in whom Gods Truth might be fulfilled and his Justice satisfied in
the punishment of sin and death of the sinner, and through whose Sufferings by
his overcoming death, the Righteousness of God might appear and shine forth
therein, we could not have been quickened or made alive; Therefore for the
recovery of fallen man, that he might not be utterly expelled or shut out in
the first death and banishment, but such Redemption wrought and obtained for
him, that through the Redeemer he might be saved, and that they might be all in
due time made alive or raised from the first death, to appear before the
judgment Seat of their Redeemer, therefore God found out and prepared a second
Adam, and made him a quickening spirit. Now this second Adam was even his only
begotten Son, the Word that was in the beginning with God, and so before the
first Adam, and he by whom and for whom the first Adam and all things were made
that were made, the proper Lord and Heir of all things, for he only was able
and meet to undertake such a work, and to have help laid upon him for us, but
he was made flesh of a woman, and so made man, the second Adam in the fullness
of time once in the end of the World, and that by a wonderful work of new
Creation, by the Grace, Gift and Appointment of the Father, and by the
Operation of the Holy Ghost (as is foreshewed) and so was the Lord from Heaven,
Heavenly even when he was made flesh in that body so prepared for him, yet very
Man made of the Seed of David after the flesh, and therein partaker with us of
flesh and blood, and so like to natural and fallen sinful men, from birth to
death in all things except sin; This second man, the last Adam, because he so
humbled himself in that body prepared for him, to that purpose God has raised
from the dead and exalted with his Right hand, and Glorified him with his own
self, in that body in which he bore our sins with the Glory he had with him, as
his only begotten Son before the World was, and therein actually made him in a
full and Glorious sense a quickening Spirit, to quicken and raise others, as is
fore-shew'n; So that his being made a quickening Spirit, no more Annihilates his
risen and Glorified body, having flesh and bones, from being truly a living,
Spiritual, and personal body, then the Breath of Life did Annihilate the first
Adams body; yea without that body he is not the man Jesus Christ, us he is
affirmed to be that was so made, whereas if he were only a Spirit, without the
body of a man, the assertion must have been contrariwise thus; He that was the
last Adam, is now the quickening Spirit, and not Adam; But the Text serves not
these men's turn, for it says,

The first man Adam was made a living Soul, the last Adam (who is also called
the second man, ver. 47.) was made a quickening Spirit.

Nor was, or is there any other man made a quickening Spirit but He, in that
his own personal body only, the second and last Adam, or public man, who
being made perfect through sufferings, offered up himself once for all, through
the offering up of which body of Christ we are sanctified, Heb. 10. 5. 10.

For it pleased the Father that in all things he might have the pre-eminence
that in him all fullness should dwell, even the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, Col. ^. 1^. 19. and 2. 9. It Is of his fullness that his members receive,
and that of this measure which they here receive from him, they have it in
earthen vessels, and though by what they receive from him, and are made in him,
their spirit is made alive for Righteousness sake, yet the body is still dead
because of sin, and so vile while in this Mortal state, that is, while not
changed in the natural and bodily Death, that in the Resurrection it may be
fashioned into the likeness of his Glorious body, John 1. 14. 16. 18. 2 Cor.
4. 7. Romans 8. 10. 2,. Col. 3. 3, 4. Phil. 3. 2.

The second part further shows their Ignorance, and being void of judgment in
the things about which they query, as also their sensualnesse not having the
Spirit.

1. Their Ignorance and being void of Judgment appears in their saying, and
yet, etc. Or notwithstanding that he is made a quickening Spirit, yet his flesh
and blood is so nigh to every true believer, that his flesh is his meat indeed,
etc. In this saying, and yet, they imply that his being made a quickening
Spirit renders it more difficult to understand that his flesh should be meat
indeed, and his blood drink indeed, whereas our Savior when he had affirmed
his flesh to be meat indeed, and his blood to be drink indeed, and some thought
it a hard or difficult saying, John 6. 55. 60, etc That he might demonstrate,
and make it more easy to their understandings, he says, what and if ye shall
see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before; It is the Spirit that
quickens, the flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak unto you, they
are Spirit, and they are Life, in all which he signifies (as is more fully
opened by the Apostles, after his having finished the works the Father gave him
to do on the Earth) that even the flesh of Christ (as in its mortal state) and
so all his abasement and sufferings for us in the flesh could not have profited
us, and so not have been bread of life for us, if he in the same body of his
flesh, the Son of Man had not risen from the dead, ascended, and offered up
himself to his Father, in and by the Power of the Eternal Spirit, according to
that, 1 Cor. 15. If Christ had not risen from the dead, even Jesus Christ, of
the seed of David after the flesh, that was dead and buried, we had been yet in
our sins, and the Preaching of him, and Faith in him had been vain; But he
being in due time, by means of his once suffering in the flesh for sins,
quickened raised from the dead, and Glorified by the Power of the Eternal
Spirit, and so made a quickening Spirit; He therefore in that body of his flesh
which saw no corruption, and so his once suffering in the flesh for sin, by
means of which he was so Glorified, is spiritual meat indeed, the Bread of
Life, and was vertually so before, but is now fully made so for us, and also
manifested so to us by that Spirit that raised him from the dead, breathing in,
and present with the Preaching of his Cross, in which Preaching the
preciousnesse of his Cross is commended, in this, that he that suffered is
raised and Glorified in the same body, and now appearing in the presence of God
for us, by virtue of which it is made in the Preaching of it Bread of Life
indeed, and so his words declaring him that once suffered in the flesh to be so
raised, and glorified (as aforesaid) are Spirit, and life, as also Romans 10. 9.

These men therefore are of no Judgment concerning the Faith, forasmuch as
that which our Savior gives as the Reason* why his flesh is meat indeed, and
his Blood drink indeed, namely that God would give him Glory as the fruit of
it; they imply at least as a thing rendering it more hard to be understood, yea
secretly they imply it as a reason against the understanding Christ's flesh, and
Christ's blood (that is meat indeed and drink indeed) according to the plain
import of his words

And so in this implication they signify, not only (as we have noted of them
upon the first part of this question) that in his being made a quickening
Spirit, they fancy a nullifying of the real being of that Body of his flesh in
which they grant he once suffered, but also that by his flesh and his blood
which is meat and drink indeed, they mean not that flesh once given for the
life of the World, nor that blood once shed for the Remission of sins, or his
once suffering in the flesh, to the sheding of his blood, as also more plainly
appears in their next question.

2. Their sensuality, not having the Spirit, appears (at least if we consider
their sense of its being nigh,) in their saying, that the flesh and blood of
Christ is so nigh to every true beliver, that his flesh is his meat indeed,
etc. In which they imply, that it cannot be meat to them, and so not fed upon
by them, except nigh to them, and explain not themselves in what sense they
mean nigh, which had been very needful in such a case, when they lay so much
stress upon its being nigh, especially seeing the expressions are not found in
the Scripture, that the flesh and blood of Christ is nigh to every true
believer, much less, that its being nigh is the cause of its being meat and
drink unto them, the Scripture says that the word of Faith which the Apostles
preached, the Preaching of the Cross, declaring Christ to be risen from the
dead, was made nigh to them in and through the Preaching of it, even so in
their mouth and and in their heart, that it might be believed and confessed by
them, but he says not that the flesh and blood of Christ was nigh to every
true believer, yea doubtless, even that flesh and blood of Christ vertually,
of which our Savior speaks, was meat and drink indeed Spiritually and by Faith
to Abraham and other true believers in Moses and the Prophets times, and yet
they received not the promises in which they were actually brought forth and
manifested, but saw them afar off and rejoiced in them; We say therefore,
seeing the expressions are not found in the Scripture, there was the more need
for them to have explained in what sense they mean, that it is so nigh them,
which though they do not, yet the whole question compared with the former, (yea
the following Question more clearly) shows their meaning to be, that except
the flesh and blood of Christ be nigh them, as to time and place, in a present
sencible being, it cannot be meat and drink indeed to them; By which it
appears, that that which they mean by the flesh and blood of Christ, which is
meat and drink to the believer, it is something always in a present and
sencible being nigh to, with, and in them, in which they show themselves
sensual, not having the Spirit, living by sense and not by Faith, which is the
evidence of things not seen, as also the ground or confidence of things hoped
for.

We shall here therefore for the help of others, and that none may be beguiled
with enticing words, positively assert, and show by the Scriptures,

1. What is meant by Christ's Flesh, and Christ's Blood, that is meat and drink
indeed.

2. How or wherein that was actually so made, and from what reason it is
evidenced to be such meat and drink indeed.

3. How and by what means it is brought to us, that it may be fed on by us.

1. By his flesh and his blood when mentioned together, and so by each and
either of them, when expressed by it self, as the Bread or Drink of Life is
meant Jesus Christ and him crucified, himself as come in the flesh, and having
finished the the works the Father gave him to do on the Earth, in his whole
abasement, and humiliation in which he once suffered for sins, the Just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God; Our Savior comprehends both his flesh,
that is meat indeed, and his blood, that is drink indeed, in those sayings, the
Bread of God is he which comes down from Heaven, and gives life unto the
World.

I am the living Bread that came down from Heaven, and the Bread which I will
give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the World, John 6. 33. 48.
50, 51. Whence also both the eating and drinking in the Supper of the Lord is
appointed to be done in remembrance of him. Now remembrance implies something
actually done, finished and passed through in and by him (as he is the object
of remembrance) which is therefore always to be remembered, because of its
infinite and abiding virtue, and usefulness, (he being by means thereof made
both Lord and Christ) and so that which is remembered, and showed forth, is the
Lords death, the whole abasement, humiliation, and sufferings sustained and
finished by him in that body of his flesh, the Cross of Christ, with the
glorious ends, virtues, and preciousnesse thereof, 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26.
Therefore the whole Gospel of Christ is called the preaching of his Cross,
even of Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 1. 17. 18. 23. and 2. 2.

Yet in the distinct mention of his flesh and his blood, there is some distinct
considerations of him, and him crucified, or of the Cross of Christ (as he is
so, and by means thereof the Bread of God) signified to us; And that both in
his Humiliation and sufferings, and in the ends of them, and their powerful
efficacy with the Father to those ends for us.

First, Distinct things considerable in his Humiliation and sufferings for us,
and so by his flesh, as distinguished from his blood is meant, His whole
abasement in being made flesh, and sufferings in the flesh, unto the shedding
his blood, or laying down his Life, even all that sustained and endured by him
in the days of his flesh, or weakness, for he was crucified through weakness
of which he was made partaker, that therein he might be capable of suffering
and dying our death, as well as that he might bear our infirmities and
sorrows. And so his taking man's Nature or kind, in being made flesh of a
woman, so as in that preparation of his Body, he took part of flesh and blood,
like as the Children of men are partakers of it, as the fruit of sin, and so
was made in the likeness of sinful flesh, subject to all our infirmities that
came on us by reason of sin, yet without sin in that body of his flesh,
therefore his flesh so prepared, and given him of the Father, was meet to be
given by him for the Life of the World, whereas in our flesh, as we are
partakers of it in its mortal state, there dwells no good thing, therefore
nothing that can be done or suffered by us in our flesh is in it self clean or
meet to be offered in sacrifice to God; But his flesh as distinguished from,
and in some sense opposed to our flesh, as we in our particular persons are
partakers of it, and so his humbling himself to be made flesh in the likeness
of our sinful flesh, and to come as a weak and dispicable man in the form of a
Servant, and being therein made a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs,
and giving his flesh to be broken, bruised, torn, wounded, and pierced for our
transgressions, this is that which God has accepted, and therefore crowned him
with this Honor, when made flesh, and in that body of his flesh lower then the
Angels, even partaker with us of flesh and blood, that his sufferings unto
death and so his death in the flesh should be by the Grace of God for every
man, therefore his flesh is meat indeed for us, even his flesh given for the
Life of the World, his body given and broken for us, and so always to be
remembered, and fed upon by us, Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11 24. John. 6. 5^.

Again, by his Blood, as distinguished from his flesh, is meant that blood of
his Cross, which was shed for us for the Remission of sins, Col* ^. 14. 20.
Mat. 26. 28. Not only nor so directly his being sometime partakers of material
and mortal blood in that body of his flesh, that is included in the
forementioned sense of his flesh, as distinguished from his blood, and when
mentioned together with it (such blood being in and with his flesh, all the
days of his mortallity, until his death, in which it was so fully shed forth
and powered out, that water followed) but by his blood as distinct from his
flesh is directly, meant his humbling himself to that death in the finishing of
his sufferings, wherein that blood, in which was his natural life in the flesh,
as of man was shed, and so therein his Soul, or Life in the flesh powered out,
yielded up, and laid down for our sins, that were caused to meet together upon
him, that so he might by means of that his death in the flesh, take his Life
again in the Power of God, and live for ever in the Glory of his Father, even
in that raised body of his flesh.

And this is very usual in the Scripture, by blood, to signify the shedding of
blood to Death, or the natural and bodily death by any other means, so Abels
death by Cain, called his blood, Genesis 4. 10. with Heb. 12. 24. So Naboths death
by stoning called his blood, 2 Kings 9. 2^. and generally the Martyrdom and
death, of the Servants of God for his sake, 2 Kings 9. 7. Deuteronomy. 32. 43. Psalm.
72. 14. with Psalm. 116. 15. Yea the natural or bodily Death, however it come on
a man, is called his blood, Psalm. 30. 9. Heb. 12. 4. So also that by Christ's
own blood, the blood of his Cross, by which peace was made, Redemption
obtained, and so by which he entered into Heaven it self, and so by the
Spiritual sprinkling of which in the Preaching of the Cross he purges the
conscience, is meant his Death, his shedding of his blood, his once suffiring
even to the death of the Cross, his being put to death in the flesh; see it in
the foreceited Scriptures, Col. 1. 14 20. Mat. 26. 28. with Phil. 2. 8. 1 Pet.
2. 24 and 3. 18. so also in Heb 9. 2. 14. with ver. 15, 16. 22. 26.

Again, Secondly, By the distinct mention of his flesh and blood is signified
some distinct considerations of the ends and powerful efficacies of his own
suffering in that body of his flesh for our sins. As,

1. For making peace and atonement with God for our sins, in which we have all
sinned in the disobedience of one, and in which we are from thence become
altogether filthy, and as such justly banished, and dead at Law, and so its
said, he gave his flesh for the life of the World, and by suffering the
judgment of this World, and being made a Curse for us, he has abolished
death, obtained a Redemption, and release of mankind from under the power of
that judgment that came on all in and by the first man Adam, and so from the
curse of the Law, to be under his dispose and judgment, by whom the Kingdom of
God is brought unto us, that through him we might be saved; As the offense of
one was unto all to condemnation, so the Righteousness of one, in laying down
his Life that he might take it again, is unto all to Justification of Life from
under the power of the first death and banishment, that they may not perish
therein, or be held out from God thereby: but that they might live to him that
dyed for them, and rose again, Romans 5. 18. 2 Cor. 5. 1^, 15. 19. Col. 1. 20.
John 6. 51. and 12. 31, 32. Gal. 3. 13. 11.

His shedding of his blood, laying down his Life, or powering out his Soul unto
death for our sins, was also to obtain into himself for us a better life, yea
better then that we lost in the first Adam, even Eternal Life; Yea all fullness
of all things pertaining to life and Godliness, even the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, that of his fullness we might receive. And so the immeasurable
fullness of that Holy and Eternal Spirit, to rest upon him in that body in
which he so suffered, that he should Teach sinners in the way, and guide the
meek in Judgment; Yea further, he has by his blood, or by means of that his
death which was for the Redemption of the Transgressions under the first
Testament, obtained plentious and Eternal Redemption, even the forgiveness of
such sins as are after the similitude of Adams transgression, he has received
power in the name of the Father, and as the fruit of his sufferings, to take
away such sins by his daily appearing in the presence of God for us, and so all
such gifts as may serve for the good of the Rebellious while it is to day, for
forbearing and renewing mercies to them, that yet through him they might be
saved, and that he might be just, and the Justifier of him that believes in
Jesus even from such sins, yea from all things from which they could not be
justified by the Law of Moses; And so he is a Savior from the wrath to come,
being now by means of his death, a Mediator and propitiation for such sins as
deserve it, John 17. 4, 5. 1 John 5. 11. Heb. 9. 12. Col. 1. 14. 19. and 2. 9.
Acts 2. 33. Psalm. 68. 18, 19. with Ephesians. 4. 8. 10. Heb. 9. 15. 1 These. 1. 10.
1 John 2. 2.

He was bruised, wounded, and put to death in the body of his flesh for our
transgressions, that through death he might abolish death in his Resurrection,
and make such peace and healing for us, that through him we might be delivered
and saved, that were all our life time through fear of death subject to
bondage; Yea therefore, also he shed his blood and powered out his Soul unto
death, that he might by virtue thereof obtain and receive into himself a
better even Eternal life for us, with all such gifts for men, yea for the
Rebellious also, as was needful, that yet while it is to day they might be
brought back to God, and that he might be able to save to the utmost them that
come to God by him.

2. This his flesh and his blood was evidenced to be meat indeed, and drink
indeed for men spiritually to feed upon, by the Resurrection of Christ from the
dead, and his offering up his spotless body a Ransom or price of Redemption
once for all, as being made perfect through sufferings, and his being accepted,
and set down on the Right hand of God, and Glorified with the Fathers own self,
Immeasurebly filled with all gifts in the man for men, (as before we have
showed) all as the fruit of his precious blood, sufferings and death; Yea
therein was he, and so his past and finished, sufferings actually and fully
made, and mightily declared to be such bread of Life; For if he had not rose
and revived or lived again in the same body in which he bore our sins, to offer
himself to God in Heaven it self, and there to appear in his presence for us,
his flesh could have profited us nothing, but now its profitable to all things;
If he had been still and often suffering for sins, or could die, or shed blood
any more, then had there been no such virtue in that which he has already
done, if therein he had not finished the works of abasement, and bloodshedding
the Father gave him to do on the Earth, and thereby obtained the Resurrection,
and Glory of Eternal Redemption, and Life in himself for us, we had been yet in
our sins, and the Preaching of his Cross and Faith therein had been vain,
which is not in blood now shedding, but shed, the sufferings, and Death
finished and past, as to the acting, or actual bearing or sustaining them, but
God has raised him from the dead, and given him Glory, because he so humbled
himself, and c. That by him our Faith and hope might be in God, and so the
virtue or preciousnesse of his blood, the love testified in it, the peace made,
and Redemption obtained by it remains ever with the Father for us, treasured
up in him, even in that his now Glorious body in which he once suffered for our
sins, that in his name it may be Spiritually shed forth upon us, which precious
virtues and fruits of his blood may be also called his blood in a like sense,
as the water fetched out of the well of Bethlehem with the jeopardy of their
lives that fetched it is called the blood of those men, 2 Samuel 23. 15, 16, 17.
And as that which is bought with a man's money may be called his money, yea his
having obtained by shedding his blood the Spirit of life in the man more
excellent in degree then the breath of Life first breathed into Adam, with all
power, Authority, and fitness to send forth thereof to men, and having also
confirmed the Precious promises of it in his blood; This his fullness and
fitness to dispense is Wine mingled, and so that Spirit powered forth in and
with the Preaching of his Cross, opening and making known his words, is drink
indeed, John 6. 27. to the end. with Prove. 9. Jer. 15. 16. Psalm. 119. 103. And
may be called his blood, as being the precious fruit of it, but still that
which Originally and properly bears that Name, and from whence such precious
fruits of it may be also so called, is as before, that blood, bloodshedding or
Death of his Cross, and that being the Root and foundation of all these
precious fruits, is the drink indeed, the bottom, matter of all Spiritual
quickenings and retreshings, because by means of it Christ is raised and
Glorified in the man for men, and made such a quickening Spirit, as has been
showed before, therefore we shall add no more to it here.

3. This is brought to us, that it may be Spiritually fed on by us, not in the
material or sencible being of that flesh and blood in us, or sencibly nigh to
us, nor in a daily coming in the flesh, and so suffering for sin, and offering
himself often, either within us, or without and before us, that we might be eye
witnesses of these things, as those that lived in the days of his flesh, or
being manifested in the flesh were; For then must he often have suffered from
the foundation of the World, but now once in the end of the World has he
appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, he once suffered and died
for sin, and can die no more, either in his own Person, or for sin, and for the
putting away sin in any other person; But that which he has already done and
completed in himself by means thereof is brought to us by the evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit in the Gospel, and other witnesses of his goodness
and Name given us, in which he that was dead is witnessed by means thereof to
be alive for ever*more, and appearing in the presence of God for us; Therefore
its said, that he gave himself a Ransom once for all, not that he should offer
himself often, or any more, but to be testified in due time in what he has
already done, and is become thereby, or that he should now be a Testimony
thereof to men, and of the Grace and Glory of the Father therein, 1 Timothy 2. 6.
So that now for the making us partakers of the blessed benefit, and fruit of
what he has done and is become for us, he is not doing the same things over
again once finished on the Earth; But first executing the office of an Apostle,
Messenger, or Preacher of the peace that ho has made thereby, therein showing
his sulnesse and fitness for us by means thereof, and commending the Grace of
God through it, and then also executing the Office of a great high Priest,
appearing in the presence of God for us, that we may not fail of his Grace
through our manifold weakness and follies; But still, that his appearing there
as a Priest and Advocate, and so as the propitiation for our sins, is by virtue
of and with that one offering of his one body perfected through sufferings once
for all, whence we are exhorted to consider the Apostle and high Priest of our
profession Christ Jesus, who was faithful to him that appointed him, even in
the finishing those works, of which he is an Apostle to us, and by which he is
an high Priest for us, and that laid down as the ground of our confidence of
his goodness and faithfulness in what remains, Heb. 3.

And so (as we have before hinted) the Scripture says not, as these men, that
the flesh and blood of Christ is nigh them, but the word of Faith which
declares it and its virtues and efficacies with the Father, in showing himself
in that body in which he so suffered by means thereof, to be risen from the
dead, made both Lord and Christ, and appearing in the presence of God for us,
that Preaching of the Cross is made nigh to men in the Proaching of it
vouchsafed, they being in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, with
power revealing the object, and opening the eyes, and strengthening the heart,
that they might believe and confess that God has raised Christ from the dead,
and so that Christ might dwell in their hearts by Faith of him, in what he has
done, and is become for them, yea it is the Power of God to Salvation to them
that believe, though foolishness to them that perish from it, Romans 10. 6. 10. 1
Cor. 1. 18. etc.

12. Query. And if the blood of Christ that was shed be the drink indeed, and
the purger of the conscience, where is that blood, if not in Christ's flesh as
you affirmed, seeing that men must drink the blood of Christ, as well as eat
his Flesh, or else they have no life in them?
Answ. They have hitherto intimated their corrupt mind against the personal
and now Glorious body of Christ, and against the heavens in which it is, as
only designing to cast him down from his Excellency; now they proceed to
imply, and privily cast out their venom against the blood of Christ, as if that
blood that was shed, is personal sufferings to the sheding of his blood, and
death of the Cross, were not the drink indeed, and purger of the conscience,
for so in their supposition, they imply that as a question, whether that blood
of Christ that was shed be the drink indeed, etc. And then frame their
following question of purpose to deny, or make it void from being so, for if it
be so (say they) then where is it, etc? In which as in the former they imply,
that men cannot eat his flesh, and drink his blood, except it be in a sencible
being present with them, nigh to, or in them, and so consequently deny that
blood of his Cross that was shed for the Remission of sins to be the drink
indeed and the purger of the conscience, because it is not now shedding, and so
as much deny his flesh that was broken, and the preparing and giving it to be
bruised, wounded, and broken for our transgressions, to be meat indeed, because
those works and sufferings therein are finished and past, and not doing, or to
be done over again in that person, or any other, and so cannot be in a present
or sencible being nigh to, in or with any man.

2. They still to cast reproach upon it, further imply, that if that blood that
was shed be the drink indeed, and so consequently, if that body of his flesh be
meat indeed, then the eating or drinking must be in a natural or sensual
manner, like as natural meat and drink is eaten and drunk; For this they fully
signify, the blood that was shed cannot be drunk except in its material being,
it be in Christ's flesh, or somewhere else nigh to men in a present material
existence; For if that blood that was shed (say they) be the drink indeed, then
where is it, if not in Christ's flesh, as they say we affirmed, but they say
falsely, for we often declared, that as the Blood of Christ is the bottom, ground
or foundation of our Faith, or that by means of which he is so, and so as it is
the drink indeed, etc. Even so it is in Heaven with the Father, even in Christ's
personal Glorious Body; But that is not in a material and mortal existence or
being of it in his flesh, and with it as here he was partakers of Flesh and
Blood, but in the infinite virtue and preciousness of its being shed, and so
his sufferings once suffered in the flesh, are for ever accepted and remembered
with the Father, and his Body Glorified, and immeasurably filled with the
Eternal Spirit, yea he therein made a quickening Spirit for and to us, and all
by means of his death, the virtue and preciousnesse of which remains for ever,
and so the Fruit of it and grace in and through it, which also as we hinted
before, may be called his Blood, as being the Fruit of it, and things procured
and purchased by it; But then also in this their reproach,

3. That which they add as a Reason why Christ's Blood that was shed must be in
his flesh, if it be the drink indeed, etc. Namely that men must drink it,
shows their folly, for the necessity of drinking his Blood can be no Argument,
that his Blood is in his flesh as before it was shed, for as so it was in a
material being in his flesh and mixed with it, it cannot be drunk in a
sensual or natural way of drinking as they would signify it must, if that be
the drink indeed, it is rather to be drunk as shed and powered out for us; We
read of eating flesh with the Blood in it, a thing forbidden in the Law, but of
drinking Blood in the flesh, we read not, but in their nonsencical language.
Yea,

4. In the whole of this question, they imply an immagination that there is
some other Blood of Christ besides that which was shed, or his Blood shedding
and death once suffered in the flesh, and that that other Blood is the drink
indeed, and the purger of the conscience, and so consequently that there is
some other flesh, or Body of his flesh besides that which was broken for us,
which, and not the former, is the meat indeed; And so they in their
immagination make void his once suffering in the flesh, in that one body so
prepared for him, (as before) as of no abiding virtue or efficacy with the
Father for the taking away our sins, and so for the Spiritual feeding of the
believer now, to this they render the Cross of Christ of no effect, that they
may lift up something else in the name and place of it; For further answer
therefore to this Question, and for the help of others, we here add to what
former demonstrations we have given of the flesh of Christ that is meat indeed,
and of his Blood that is drink indeed.

1. That there is no other flesh of Christ that is meat indeed, but that one
Body of his Flesh, that was prepared, given and broken for us, even his Flesh
that he gave for the Life of the World, nor any other Blood of Christ that is
drink indeed, but that Blood or death of the Cross, that shedding of his Blood,
and powering out his Soul unto death, which he once suffered in that his own
Body for our sins, (without which we could have had no remission of them) that
he obtaining by it plenteous Redemption even the forgiveness of sins, might
therein also seal and confirm the new Testament of precious promises, and
become himself in the man the Mediator of it, and so an high Priest for ever,
after the order of Melchizedeck. It is only his being made flesh in that one
Body prepared for him, and his works and sufferings finished in that his own
body, in which he appeared once in the end of the World to put away sin by the
Sacrifice of himself, which the Father has found out and accepted as a ransom
or price of Redemption for sinful and fallen mankind, and by means of which he
has given him glory in that his own Body in which he so Suffered, that our
Faith and Hope might be in God, and therefore also it is only that Cross of
Christ, because of the infinite grace therein testified, which is commended and
shed abroad by the Holy Ghost in his evidencing it as already past, as to the
actual enduring and suffering it, in that in due time Christ dyed for the
ungodly, etc. Romans 5. 5. 10. and because of the Infinite virtue and
preciousness thereof for our help, which is showed in the discovery of him, as
now raised from the dead in the same body in which he Suffered those things,
and standing by means of that his death, the prOpitiation for our sins, and our
advocate with the Father, etc. (as before) in which all True Believers have the
ground of their peace rejoicing and hope, and so in Christ Jesus, all other
rejoycings are fleshly and after the sensual mind, whence the Apostle
determined not to know any thing among believers, but Jesus Christ and him
crucified (not crucifying or often Suffering from the foundation of the world)
yea God forbid that we should rejoice in any thing save in the Cross of Christ,
by whom the world is crucified to us, and we to the world, for the Preaching of
that is to them that perish foolishness, but to us that are saved the Power of
God, 1 Cor. 1. 18. 24. and 2. 2. Heb. 9. 25* 26. and Gal. 6. 14.

2 That such things as are done and past as to the actual accomplishment of
them long before Men had their particular beings in the world, yet may be
spiritually fed on by those Men and so eaten and drunk in a like sense, as in
which the flesh and blood of Christ is said to be eaten and drunk, though not
remaining in a present or sencible being to them, or otherwise then in the
virtue and fruit of then; this might be showed in other things mentioned in the
Scripture as Types and patterns of this, as the Lords passing over the houses
of the Children of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians was to be
remembered and rejoiced in throughout their Generations, and therefore that day
to be kept for a memorial, a feast to the Lord by an ordinance for ever, Exodus
12. 12 14 27. So we also are instructed to keep the feast of rejoicing in
Christ in thankful commemmoration of what he has done, for says the Text,
Christ our Passover is sacrificed (not sacrificing or daily and often offering
himself, but this he did once, that is the ground of our rejoicing in him
evermore, he is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8.)

Again Gods dividing the Sea by his strength, and breaking the heads of the
Dragons in the waters, and so the broken heads of Leviathan, even Pharaoh and
his host as broken and destroyed in the Red Sea, was given for meat to the
people inhabiting in the Wilderness, Psalm. 74. 13, 14. though yet Pharaoh and
his host was not in a present sensible being, near that people all the time
they were meat for them, nor yet their drowning or destruction actually done in
their sight or before them all along but once finished, and therefore so worthy
to be remembered, and such matter of feeding and rejoicing to them in after
ages, Psalm. 81. 5. 10. and 78. and 105. and 106. but it is so clear in this
which is the Truth and fullness of all those Types and Patterns, namely the
flesh of Christ and the blood of Christ, and so evident in what is already said
of it, that more need not be said to show and prove that that flesh of Christ,
even the words being made flesh in the similitude of sinful flesh; and so his
whole abasement and sufferings in the flesh, the days of which are past, Heb.
5. 7. 1 Pet. 3. 18. and so his blood, his sufferings even to blood, to death in
the flesh, which as to the actual accomplishment and sustaining of it is now
past and finished, yea therefore because his sufferings and death is so
finished, that he is in the virtue and bye means thereof raised and glorified
in the same body for us (as is before showed) so that he can die no more;
therefore is his flesh meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed, the Lords Death
worthy for ever to be remembered and rejoiced in himself in the Infinite Grace
of it, and everlasting Virtue and Fruit of it, that Bread of God, the Bread of
Life, etc. As aforesaid.

But for a little further demonstration how such a thing may be and is, that
even his personal Sufferings and Abasement in the flesh, and so the Lords death
may be eaten and drunk; now so long after the actual accomplishment and
sustaining of it is past, as also that it might be so before its manifestation
or coming forth into actual and sensible being, for he did not often Suffer for
sin from the Foundation of the world but once in the end of the world, as Heb.
9. 26. 1 Pet. 3. 18.

For some further demonstration of this, we say, We shall here add a word or
two to show what the eating his flesh and drinking his blood is, or how and in
what manner it may be eaten and drunk; and so, how the Blood of Christ purges
the Conscience.

The eating and drinking here is not naturally or bodily with the mouth, but
mentally with the Mind, Spirit or inner man, and that not in or by a sensual
immagination or apprehension of seeing, feeling or proving the works,
Sufferings or things that are the bottom, matter of feeding and rejoicing to
the heart, as acted in them or in the present time before them, but it is by
faith, as Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. yea the eating and drinking is an act and exercise
of faith, as opposed to sight or sense, we walk (says the Apostle) ( and so
the Just shall live, Romans 1. 17. Heb. 10. 38) by faith, not by sight, and so
the life that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God
who loved me, and gave himself (note that he says not is giving or gives, but
gave himself) for me, the love that was manifested in that unspeakable gift and
perfect offering of himself already prepared and perfected, and so those works
already finished on the earth, through which that love is still manifested and
commended, are mentioned as the bottom, ground of his faith, and so matter of
his feeding, so that though the Apostles had seen the Lord, yet they did not
now live by that sight, but by faith as opposed to sight, yea blessed are those
that have not so seen and yet believed, (says our Savior.) And the Apostle
Peter says, That even those that were partakers of like precious faith with
them, yet had not so seen him as they had done, but did believe and rejoice in
him (though now they see him not) John 20. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 8. and it is in such
believing on him as the Scripture has said, that himself and him crucified,
and so his flesh and his blood is eaten and drunk, as may be seen in John 6.
35. with chap. 7. 37, 38, 39.

A man believing in and with the heart, the record that God has given of
Christ, that is, receiving withal acceptance, loving and closing with it
(according to the understanding given him) as a good and faithful saying,
letting it dwell in him, and so having his heart exercised in it and by it, to
consider him and stay on his Name as therein set forth, seeking Satisfaction,
Rest, Righteousness and Strength in him, in such believing, mindfulnesse and
dependence on him, and so believing on him as the Scripture has said, he is
therein said to Eat him and Drink him, or the Bread and Drink he gives,
because therein the heart and mind is so stayed in him, Isa. 26. 5 and
exercised with delight and well-pleasednesse about him, and the things of him
as to a tasting how Gracious the Lord is, and proving the sweetness, fitness
and excellency of him in and according to the knowledge of him, so Jeremy
says, Thy words were found and I did eat them, Jer. 15. 16. and because also
in such spiritual eating, a man certainly comes to taste, prove and meet with
such peace refreshing, joy, strength and blessedness (in the first fruits of
the Spirit) as answers to the instruction and ground therein set before him (as
also follows in that of Jeremy, thy word was to me the joy and the rejoicing of
mine heart, as David also professes, How sweet are thy words unto my taste,
yea sweeter than Honey to my mouth, Psalm. 119. 103) for the Word of God works
effectually in them that believe and receive it as such, 1 These. 2. 13. unto
them therefore that believe Christ is precious, for so Christ comes to dwell in
their heart, in or by the Faith of him, in what he has done and is become for
us, and in the hope set before us in him, yea he himself as so known and
believed by them is in their hearts by faith, the hope of Glory, the ground of
it in what he has done, and the thing hoped for, in what is further to be
revealed and done by him.

Now faith is the evidence of things not seen, as well as the confidence of
things hoped for, by it our fathers saw and rejoiced in the promises of the
Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should follow when both were yet afar
off to come, Heb. 11. with 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. And we have much more
advantage to behold and rejoice in him, the works being finished which the
Father gave him to do upon the earth, and now the word of faith manifested, the
Preaching fully made known with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven, yea
therefore because the works are now actually finished (as vertually they were
from the foundation of the world) because God has raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead, who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our
justification, therefore being Justified, by faith we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also having now received the atonement
(as already made by his blood) we have access by faith into this Grace in which
we stand and rejoice in hope of the Glory of God, and not only so, but we
glory in tribulations also, proving a blessed fruit of them, because the love
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given us in this
Preaching of the Cross, that when we were yet without strength in due time
Christ dyed for the ungodly, etc. see Romans 4. 22. 24, 25. with chap. 5. 1. 11.
And so the eating his flesh and drinking his blood, as we are now instructed to
it, since the works were finished in the Person of Christ which the Father gave
him to do on the earth, is signified to be in a believing mindfulnesse and
remembrance of the Lords death as already actually finished and past, and so of
him in what he has therein and thereby completed in himself for us, therein
considering him in the infinite and abiding virtue and preciousnesse of that
blood or death of his Cross, as mightily declared in his being raised and
glorified in that body, by means thereof, and as brought to us in the preaching
of that his Cross, with the evidence and demonstration of the spirit and power,
and so in seeking rest, righteousness, strength and rejoicing in him, in and by
such believing in him; So likewise the Blood of Christ purges the Conscience
through Faith in that his Blood, Blood shed or death, and not by shedding blood
again, or by doing or causing to be done, or (...) the ^ame o^ like things in
their persons that were done and suffered in his person for sin; for to him
give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever believes in
him shall receive remission of sins, while through his Name the heart is stayed
on him in a believing mindfulness and remembrance of him in what he has done,
and so closing with and considering him in what he is thereby become for
Sinners, he further powers out his spirit, opening and making known his words,
and so sprinkling upon the heart his Blood, viz. the discoveries and openings
of his blood shedding or death, the infinite virtue and pretiousness of it with
the Father; The Grace manifested in and through it, and so makes the Truth even
the Preaching of the Cross powerful, in their so knowing it to make them free
from the Law and from the Dominion of sin by it, John 8 32. 1 Cor. 1. 18. Acts
20. 32. and 10. 43. with Heb. 9 14. and this the Apostle confirms by his
experiment, Rom 8. 2, 3. for the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus
(which is no other but the Glorious Gospel, with the Light and Power of Gods
Spirit in it, Romans 1. 16, 17. 2 Cor. 3.) that (says he) has made me free from
the Law of sin and death; and then speaking to the reason of that efficacy, and
the means by which it did it, he shows that it was not by accomplishing those
or like works in him as was finished in the Person of Christ, in his being
delivered for our offenses, and raised for our justification, but in and by the
opening and spiritual sprinkling on his Soul that Bloodshedding, or Death and
Sufferings of Christ for the Remission of sins, and that in and through the
Preaching of it, showing the pretiousness, pertinency and fullness of that to
the purpose, for says he, What the Law could not do in that it was weak
through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and
for sin condemned sin in the flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, minding the
things of the spirit, who takes off the things of Christ that he has suffered
and done, and showing them glorifies him, as the end of the Law for
Righteousness to every one that believes, compare it with, Romans 5. 1. 11. and
chap. 1^3 John 16. 8. 10. 13, 14, 15. and so the Lords death, his once
suffering in the flesh for sins, the just for the unjust, which as to the
actual accomplishment or sustaining of it is over and past, but for ever
accepted, and had in everlasting remembrance with the Father, and in the
Fountain of its precious fruit abiding with him in the man Christ Jesus
glorified by means thereof, and so evidently set forth to us in the preaching
of the Cross, even this is in the Faith, and Believing remembrance of unfeigned
Believers and precious to them, and so in its precious Fruits in their mind and
conscience, working also through the whole man, through that Faith of the
Operation of God, which is the evidence of things not seen, the confidence of
things hoped for.

And had these men understood what it is to eat Christ's flesh and drink his
Blood, and to have the conscience purged with that, they would have been far
from so blaspheming it as a common or profane thing, as in this question with
the other (at least privily) they have done, nor would they have sought room to
lift up and magnify something else in the name and place of it; But they
clearly manifest to those of any right understanding and skill in the Word of
Righteousness, that it is not his flesh they eat nor his Blood they drink, for
they believe not that his once suffering in the flesh for sin to be so precious
with God as to have obtained such glory into him in the man for us (as before
is showed) and therefore neither do they believe that to be of such infinite
and abiding virtue, as to be the meat and drink of life, and purger of the
Conscience (as they signify in this question) and so they believe not on him as
the Scripture has said, as may appear in the answers given, nor is it the true
Christ that is in them, but something else in the name and place of him, it is
Swines Flesh they eat, unclean and forbidden things, and the broth of
abominable things is in their Vessels, nor are their Consciences truly purged
or made good (though they may be seemingly quiet) but still defiled according
to the corrupt and unbelieving mind, if not seared as with an hot Iron, for in
him whom the Father has sent and sealed they believe not, nor in the Lords
death, the Blood or Death of his Cross have they their peace, consolation and
rejoicing, as further appears in what follows.

Quest. 13. And was the Blood of Christ that was shed, separate from his body,
and then bearing record on the earth when John wrote those words, 1 John 5. 8.
A. The Blood of Christ, that is to say, his once Suffering in the Flesh even
to the shedding of his Blood, and so to the pouring out his Soul, or life unto
death, that blood or death of his Cross, as we have before fully showed that to
be meant by the blood of Christ, by which peace was made and redemption
obtained and he entered into heaven it self, etc. Yea it is evident to be meant
here, for the blood that bears witness in earth, is the same mentioned verse.
6. as that by or through which his having come in the Flesh to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself (compare with verse. 6. chap. 4. 2, 3. and Heb. 9. 26.)
was perfected. Now it is not simply his sometime having Material and Mortal
blood, or his being partaker of Flesh and Blood, but his suffering and enduring
even to blood, and so to death in the Flesh, by which together with the Grace
of God, he came as our Savior, and became a Captain of Salvation for us and to
us, as Heb. 2. 9. 10. 14, 15. and chap. 9. 12. 26.

That Blood of his Cross, his once suffering unto death in the Flesh, and so
his death is as we have before showed past and over, as to the actual
accomplishment and sustaining of it, yea so separated from his Personal Body,
as that all mortality was put off, in his Resurrection from the dead, he dyed
once and can dye no more, but the remembrance of it remains with the Father
who has received and accepted it, and him by means of it as a sacrifice for
ever, and so the infinite Fountain of the precious virtue and fruit of it is
treasured up in the man Christ Jesus whom God has raised from the dead, and
Flows from him in the influences and streams thereof unto men, in the Name of
God his Father, and so his blood is still bearing witness on earth, for God
has given him, as delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our
justification, for a Witness to the People, a Testimony in due time, Isa. 55.
3, 4. with Acts 13. 34. and 1 Timothy 2 4, 5, 6. and therein this is the first and
great thing witnessed by the Holy Ghost in which he commends his love to men,
and sheds it abroad in the hearts of believers, namely that when we were yet
without strength, enemies, ungodly, etc. In due time Christ dyed (not is dying)
for us, Romans 5. 6. 8. with 2 Samuel 14. 14. yea such the powerful efficacies of
this blood or death of Christ (that is so past that it can no more be suffered)
that where the preaching of it is with the Heart believed, it fills with peace
hope and joy through the power of the Holy Ghost in it, it purges the
Conscience from dead works to serve the Living God, and so also is bearing
witness on the earth, for he that believes on the Son of God, has the
witness in himself, in his understanding and heart by faith, through which he
proves its precious fruit and effecacy.

So that as the Blood or death of Abel whom Cain slew, when over and past, yet
witnessed against Cain, and cried unto God for vengeance, Genesis 4. 10. 14. so
the blood or death of Christ through which his coming in the flesh or first
appearing to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself was perfected, being
presented before the Father, in the appearing of the Man Christ Jesus in that
Body of his flesh in which he so suffered in the presence of his glory, does
speak better things for us in Heaven, and from thence also in the Name of the
Father, speaks good things on earth, even peace and good will to men, yea it
speaks and works effectually in the hearts of them that believe, Heb. 12. 24.
but these men, not only intimately show their counting this his suffering to
blood, to death a common thing, of no more virtue and efficacy then the blood
of another person may be, but they also manifest themselves unreasonable and
absurd, that cannot understand how a thing actually past and over may still
remain in its fruit and efficacy, which they might have seen in other things,
as in that of Abels blood forementioned, so also in Gods delivering Israel out
of Egypt, destroying their enemies, his answering Balaam, to the making void
the consultations of Balaak and such other wonderful works, being given for a
witness of his Righteousness unto the generations after, Mich. 6. 1. 5. Psalm.
81. and 78. and 106.

Quest. 14. And how can the blood of Christ either cleanse any from sin, or
give life to any, if the life of Christ be not in it, as Thomas Moor affirmed.
Ans. They wrest Thomas Moors words (as is showed in the reply to them, pa. 3,
and 4. therefore we shall say the less to it here.) What he said was by way of
return to their saying that the life is in the blood, as applying it to Christ,
in answer to which he spoke to this purpose, That those sayings, Genesis 9. 4.
Levit. 17. 11. 14 are spoken of other mortal Creatures distinct from mortal
man, and though it may be truly affirmed of mortal man also, as to the natural
life of the Body, Yet it neither is nor can be truly affirmed of him whom God
has raised from the dead, that his life which he now lives by the power of
God by which he was raised from the dead, is in (or by the supply of) material
blood, as the natural life of the natural and mortal body is, for in him being
raised from the dead, all mortality is put off.

But that the life he now lives by the Father, and in the Power of God for us
is by means (and in the virtue) of his blood, or death in the flesh once
suffered for our sins, by which he has obtained eternal redemption, and life
into himself for us, and is the Mediator between God and men, the Apostle and
High Priest of our Profession; And that the life he gives to the World is by
virtue of that his Blood; And the life he gives to them that feed on him by
faith, is not only by virtue of it, but in the Spiritual discoveries of it,
and love commended through it, in the Preaching of his Cross, as before showed,
this he also then and still affirms, as also is showed in our former Answers.

Quest. 15. How many comings of Christ do you own, seeing you have his second
coming without sin to salvation yet to look for?
Ans. Hitherto they have played the part of the false Christ's foretold by our
Savior, Mat. 24. 24. privily denying the Lord that bought them, as 2 Pet. 2.
1. in the excellency of his personal Body, and the works finished by him in
that his own Body on the earth, and in his infinite fullness and glory by means
of death possessed by him for us, in that body raised from the dead that so
they might make way for their lifting up something else in the name an^ place
thereof, as Mat. 24. 5. And now they proceed more plainly to act the part also
of the false Prophets there also foretold, verse. 11. 23. 26. scoffing at ^he
promise of his second coming, his glorious personal appearing, as it is owned
and acknowledged by all that believe through and according to the Apostles
Doctrine, as that which is yet to be looked and waited for all the time of this
present World, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. 10. 12. with Tit. 2. 12, 13. plainly implying
they have it not yet to look for, and so intimately saying, Lo here or lo
there, in this or that present operation (or sensual imagination) Christ's
appearing the second time without sin to salvation, and so consequently the
resurrection is already made and past to them, as Mat. 24. 23. 26. with 2 Timothy
2. 18. Nor is this any more then is expressly affirmed by them in their
pretended answer to J. H. and T. M. Junior, called A brief discovery of the
dangerous Principles of J. H. and T. M. etc. where page 9. They say, That the
Saints which then were alive remained unto that coming of Christ spoken of, 1
These. 4. 15. and Phil. 3. 20. 21. The groundlesnesse, falsenesse and
wickedness of which is shown in the reply to it; see the fuller discovery of
the Dangerous Principles, and lying spirit of the people called Quakers, page
to which we refer the Reader.

And here also, that we may further show by the Scriptures the Truth of God
reproached by them, and manifest the folly and wickedness of their spirit, we
further answer to this question,

1. There are comings of Christ in a diverse sense mentioned in the Scripture,
for there are comings of Christ, in respect of which it is said, he came unto
his own, even to Israel after the flesh, to gather them, etc. often from the
beginning of their being a people, John 1. 11. Mat. 23. 37. yea he was in the
World, and went by his Spirit in the ministration of Noah to the Spirits of men
then, John 1. 5. 10. 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20 And there are comings of Christ in such a
sense spoken of in Scripture, as in respect of which it is said, he appeared
and came into the World, not often, but once in the end of the World,
personally to Minister, and to give his life a ransom for many, and so to put
away sin by the sacrifice of himself, Matthew 20. 28. 1 Pet. 3. 18. with Heber.
9. 26.

There are providential comings of Christ to men, both more particularly and
more generally, and that both in more then ordinary demonstrations of his power
and goodness in special mercies and blessings, as John ^. 11. and in like
manifestations of his severity, in some great and signal corrections, or
judgments, as Rev. 2. 5. and 3. 3.

There are also spiritual comings and manifestations of himself to men
severally in their several times, to the opening and enlightening the blind
minds, and moving sinners to repentance, Isa. 50. 2 with c. 42. 1. 7 and 55. 1.
6. 1 Timothy 2. 6. and to the quickening, refreshing, and satisfying the souls of
such as hear and receive his sayings, with the further discoveries, openings,
tastes, and operations of his goodness, such as John 14. 16. 18. 21. 23. Rev.
3. 20. and of his comings in both these senses, there are more then can be
numbered, nor of these read we of first or second so called, but then there are
also personal and bodily appearances and comings of Christ into the World, or
his coming into the world, and appearing on the earth in a real body prepared
for him, spoken of in the Scripture, and called the comings and days of the
Son of man, of Christ, of the Seed of David after the flesh, and of these a
first and a second.

The first was when that Body of his flesh was prepared for him in the womb of
a Virgin, when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, etc. wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, A body have thou
prepared me, Lo I come, etc. Gal. 4. 4. Heb. 10. 5. 10. And so he once in the
end of the World (and not often from the foundation of the World) appeared to
put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, even by and through the offering up
his body once for all, which was therefore prepared for him, that he might
therein be capable of doing, and do the Will of the Father, for the Redemption
and sanctification of sinful men, even that he might in that body finish the
Works the Father gave him to do on earth, and offer up himself a perfect and
for ever acceptable Sacrifice, and abide a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedeck.

The second of these and that so called, is when God shall send us from Heaven
the same Jesus Christ that was made of the Seed of David after the desh, even
him whom they Crucified, slew and hung on a Tree, whom God raised up, whom the
Heaven must receive till the restitution of all things; And so when he the Son
of man shall appear on the Earth (where he was before humbled even to death,
made sin and a curse for us) when he shall appear in the same body in which he
so suffered, in his own Glory which he obtained for us by sufferings, and now
possesses for us, and so in the Glory of his Father, and with his holy Angels
without sin, or any such imputation or fruits of it upon him, as in his first
appearing was born by him, for though he knew not sin, yet he was then made sin
for us; When he shall so appear in his Glory to the utmost Salvation of those
that look for him, and restoring the Creation from under the bondage of
corruption under which now it groans, yea to raise and judge all men at that
his appearing, and Kingdom, and subdue all things to himself, Acts 1. 1^. and
3. 19, 20, 21. Mat. 16. 27. and 25. 31. and 26. 64. 1 These 4. 16. Phil. 3. 21.
Heb. 9. 26. 28.

Now of these personal comings of Christ into the World, their queries should
mean, because they speak of his second coming, as one of them about which they
query, how many we own, and his second appearing so called must be an appearing
in such a sense, as in which he once appeared, and but once before that, and
therefore cannot be understood o^ his appe^^rances or comings in the
formentioned senses, but in the latter only; But this we know, they cannot own
any such coming of Christ in such a sense a second time, or after his once
suffering in the flesh, they may have an immagination of his appearing, or
coming in the flesh often, and in other persons and bodies after, as before he
did appear in that one personal body, but they can have no expectation of his
appearing again from Heaven in that body of his flesh, his now Glorious body,
and in the glory now possessed by him for us, because they believe not that
this man continues for ever, nor believe they any such Christ that is the very
and the only Christ, that now has a personal body of his own distinct from
all other Spirits and bodies, and is therein not on Earth, but in the Heavens,
and therefore can have no expectation of any such coming of his from thence;
Their question therefore if plain according to their principles, and to what
they design to deny and make void should have been,

Whether we still expect a second or another personal and bodily coming of
Christ into the World, or other then has been already accomplished, and is, or
may be fulfilled in all ages, in Diverse persons? To which our answer is,

Yea, with much thankfulness to God, and rejoicing in him with joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory, we do; and though they scoff at us for it, he
shall appear to our Glory that so look for him, and they shall be ashamed. But
to their Question as it is, having thus distinguished the comings of Christ in
diverse senses.

2. We further answer, that of personal and bodily comings of Christ into the
World, we own two, and no more; the one past, the other yet to come.

1. The first was not often from the foundation of the World, but once in the
end of the World, Four thousand years and upwards from the Creation, and yet
now long since, for it was in the days of Caesar Augustus, when Herod was
Deputy King of Judea, and when Cyreneus was Governor of Syria, and when there
went out a decree from Caesar, that all the World should be taxed, and all went
to be taxed every one to his own City, Luke 1. 5. and ^. ^. 4. etc. And his
coming into the World was on this wise, his body in which he was made flesh of
the seed of David, and came into the World, was prepared for him, by the
Immediate and wonderful operation of the Holy Ghost, (not in the mind but) in
the womb of a woman, a Virgin, and not in any other womb, he was made of a
Woman, of one, not of many, a Woman that had not known man, Mary a Virgin of
the house of David, espoused to one Joseph a Carpenter, a man distinct from
other men, who yet had not taken her to wife, and feared to take her after she
was found with Child, till he was informed by an Angel, that that which was
conceived in her, was of the Holy Ghost, and his Name should be called Jesus,
(for he should save his people from their sins) of her he was born at Bethlehem
(where his birth was providentially ordered, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled) and so in his Birth of Mary, he came not into any man or woman, but
into the World, and unto men; And as his conception and Birth of Mary was
foretold by an Angel, so when born, his Birth in a Stable, in Bethlehem was
declared, and he, that very person then, and so born of her proclaimed (though
then a Babe) to be Christ the Lord, by Angels with great rejoicing, and when
eight days were accomplished for the circumcising the Child, his Name was
called Jesus, which was so named of the Angel, before he was conceived in the
womb, and when about a month after his birth, they presented him to the Lord,
in the Temple, he was witnessed unto by old Simeon, to whom it had been
revealed by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death, till he had seen the
Lords Christ; He then coming by the Spirit into the Temple, when the Parents
brought in the Child Jesus, took him up in his arms and said, Lord now let
thou thy Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation (even
the Lords Christ) etc. Likewise by one Anna a Prophetess, who coming in at that
instant, gave thanks likewise to the Lord, and spoke of him (even that Child
Jesus) to all them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem, Luke 2. After this
he was carried by Joseph with Mary his Mother into Egypt, till the death of
Herod, who sought to slay him, and to that end slew all the male Children in
Bethlehem, but slew not him, which he had certainly done in slaying them, if he
had been in every or any of them personally, or as in that body of Jesus, but
he was not so, he was carried into Egypt, and after brought back by his Father
and Mother into Nazareth of Galilee, that the Scripture might be fulfilled,
which says, he shall be called a Nazarene, and there dwelt with them sometime
(whence also he was called Jesus of Nazareth) and grew in body, and waxed
strong in Spirit, filled with Wisdom, and the Grace of God was upon him, Mat. 2.
13. to the end. Luke 2. 39, 40, etc. And when in that body of his, he was
twelve years old going up with his parents to Jerusalem, when they returned he
tarried behind them (Which he could not have done if personally or essentially
in them, as in that his own body) and after seeking him three days with
sorrow, at last they found him (not in themselves, or in other persons but,) in
the Temple sitting in the midst of the Doctors, and he went down with them, and
came to Nazareth, and was subject to them (which was part of his abasement and
service) and his mother hid or kept (not his body within her womb any more
after born of her, but) his sayings in her heart. And after John (the son of
Zachary, and Elizabeth) his messenger had been preparing his way, Baptizing and
Preaching the Baptism of Repentance, he himself came (the Text says not into,
but) unto John, to be baptized of him; And when he was Baptized, the Heavens
were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and
lighting upon him, and lo a voice from Heaven saying (not of John, but) of
Jesus; This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, (a like voice after
in his transiguration before three of his Disciples, they heard from Heaven not
speaking of them, but of him, whence they said, that he (not they) received
from God the Father Honor and Glory, when there came such a voice to him from
the Excellent Glory, 2 Pet. 1. 17, 18. with Mat. 17. 1. 5.) And so John his
forerunner having both seen and heard, professed (not himself, but) this Jesus
to be the Christ, and pointed to him, not as in himself, or as in other men,
but as a distinct person, standing (not in every of them, but) among them the
beholders, though they knew him not, and proclaimed him to be (and called men
to behold him as such,) the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the World,
John 1. 19. 36. and 3. 26. 36.

After this, the same Jesus of Nazareth manifested himself, and walked up and
down more openly and generally among the Jews Preaching the Gospel, and doing
good, calling and choosing Disciples, and was approved of God amongst Friends
and Enemies, by miracles and signs which God wrought by him in the midst of
them, such as none before him ever did, nor after any like works but in his
Name, but he was hated of the Sadduces that denied the Resurrection of the
dead, and of the Pharisees that trusted in themselves that they were Righteous,
and by their means of the chief of the People, and of many of the inferior
also; At last they arreigned and falsely condemned him, and delivered him to
Pilate, and so to the Gentiles to be Crucified, and he was by them hung upon
the Tree and Crucified, and when dead, was buried by two Honorable persons
(not in themselves, but) in a new Sepulcher, which was sealed and watched by
Soldiers, that he might not be stolen away, unto all which the Father
delivered him, and he gave himself for our sins.

But he in the same body that was dead and buried, even Jesus of Nazareth, rose
again the third day, and was witnessed by Angels to be risen, and not to be
there in the grave, the emptiness of which place and the orderly lying of the
clothes witnessing the same; And then he appearing to his Disciples, showed
himself alive in that very Body, having the very same flesh and bones, hands
and feet though now in another quality, [ viz.] Spiritual and Immortal, in
which they had foreseen him Mortal, then he acquainted them with the ends and
necessity of his Death and Resurrection, and showed and opened to them in all
the Scriptures the things concerning himself, opening their understandings that
they might understand the Scriptures, and gave them the Gospel which he had
received from his Father, and Commission with commandment to Preach it, and
make it known out of the Scriptures of the Prophets to all Nations for the
obedience of Faith, and having prayed for their Sanctification, and fitness to
that service, and for blessing on all that after should believe through their
word, he also promised his Spiritual presence with them in that Ministration to
the end of the World; After which while he blessed them, and while they beheld,
he was parted from them in that body of his, and ascended and was received up
into Heaven, and according to his promise did soon after send down and power
out upon them the Holy Ghost, to furnish and enable them to their Ministry; And
so he has already come in the flesh, and perfected all that he was to do in
his own body in his first coming, as all that read and believe the record God
has given of his Son, and caused to be written for our instruction, may
plainly and more fully discern.

Nor was this coming of his ever so seen, nor but by Faith of any before those
times, no though it has been desired by many of them, Mat. 13. 16, 17. Luke
10. 23, 24. But by Faith they saw it and rejoiced, John 8. 56. with Heb. 11. 1.
12. Nor yet has it ever been so seen of any since the Apostles so saw it and
him, 1 Cor. 15. 5. 8. and Chap. 9. 1. with Chap 4. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 8.

Nor will he ever come in that manner to suffer, and do over those things again
so to be seen, John 16. 10. Romans 6. 9, 10. Acts 13. 34. But these things are
written concerning him even this Jesus, that we may believe that he is the Son
of God, the Lords Christ, and that believing we may have life through his Name,
John 20. 31. And so our sight is only in believing by Faith, as Heb. 11. 1. 3:
Yea they are pronounced blessed that having not seen him, so as the Apostles
did, yet have believed, John 20. 29. In which believing to understand and know
him to have come in the flesh, and to have done and to be that for us, as the
Testimony recorded declares, is to know him not after the flesh, or carnal and
sensual mind, but after the Spirit, according to the Testimony he has already
given of him, and in his Light and Power shining and working in and with that
Testimony by which only these things now not so seen as before are made
evident plain and powerfully nigh, that they might be believed with the heart,
and confessed with the mouth, and still made further precious to and effectual
on them that believe, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15, 16, 17. etc. Romans 1. 16, 17. and 10. 6.
9, 10.

And whosoever now boast of having otherwise seen his first coming, his
appearance and Manifestation in the flesh, is a liar; Yea, neither is this
Jesus who is the very Christ now in that his own personal body in the World, we
have him not so with us as we have the Power, ( viz.) In bodily presence, the
Heavens do receive him till the times of restitution of all things, and from
thence he is in the name of the Father vertually and Spiritually among men, as
before is showed; And whosoever denies this Jesus to be the very Christ is of
Antichrist, and what do they less that confess him not, or do not Preach or
lift up the Son of man, as already come in the flesh, and having finished the
works in his own body the Father gave him to do on the Earth, and so as being
by means thereof glorified in that very body in the highest Heavens with the
Father (compare 1 John 2. 22. with Chap. 4. 3. and John 3. 14. 16. 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Heb. 3. 26.) But put the Name of Christ upon something that in their
immagination is daily coming in the flesh, and so appearing and suffering in
the flesh for the putting away of sin often from the foundation of the World,
and is not now in a real personal Glorious body in the Heaven of heavens above
the Earth, but in the immaginary heaven in them on the Earth, and call that
their Idol the good Seed, the Light, and that Jesus that is the Christ, as is
the scope of this and the former Queries; But our Jesus that is the very Christ
of God, who not often but once in the end of the World, has appeared to put
away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, and is now not on Earth, but in Heaven
with the Father in his spotless and Glorious body, appearing in the presence
of God for us, the great Apostle and high Priest of our profession he is
therefore, and from thence in the Name of the Father, sending forth his Spirit
in his Testimony to us, and therein Spiritually and powerfully present with us,
preserving us from their delusions, and strengthening us (in believing that
very Jesus to be the Son of God) to overcome their assaults, and still to wait
for that his coming again, which is truly and properly called his second coming
which we are sure they have never seen, nor is it yet come nor has been to
any, what ever any vainly imagine, and boast of For,

2. Of this next and second coming of Christ, it is affirmed by the Spirit of
Truth,

1. That it shall be in the same body in which he suffered, and rose from the
dead the third day, and showed himself to his Disciples alive after his
passion, even the same Jesus, which while they beheld, was taken up from them
into Heaven, Acts 1. 9. 10. and 3. 31. 15. 20, 21. Mat. 26. 64.

2. His so coming shall be (not a coming up in any man, but) a coming down from
Heaven, the Heaven above, as opposed to the Earth beneath, whence it is said he
shall descend or come down (which in respect of Glorious state, or dignity, he
never shall, as before is showed,) 1 These. 4. 16. 2 These. 1. 7. Phil. 3. 20.

3. In this his coming, all that sleep in Jesus with all of that body then
surviving, shall first see him, but not one of them before another, for in his
very descending from Heaven before he appear upon the Earth, by the sound of
his voice in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, the dead in Christ shall be
raised, and the survivers of that body shall then be changed, and all of them
suddenly caught up together to meet the Lord in the Air, 1 Cor, 15. 51, 52. 1
These 4. 14, 15, 16, 17.

4. This his coming then will be visible, as the lightning that shines from the
East, and comes even to the West, Mat* 24. 27. Luke 17. 24. So as every eye
shall see him, even those that shall wail before him, Rev. 1. 7. Mat. 24. 30.
and 26. 64. Mark 13. 26. and 14. 62.

5. This his visible coming shall be unto the Earth (not with some, but) with
all his Saints with him, (they being raised, and changed as aforesaid) and he
shall then fully deliver the oppressed, and slay all the wicked, even every one
that does not presently submit to serve him and his People, Zach. 14. 1. 5. 2
Pet. 3. 5, 6, 7. Psalm. 75. 10. and 149. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10.

6. Then not only all his Saints that come with him shall have Immortal
bodies, being as and equal to the Angels, Luke 20 36. But also he will then
restore all things, even the other part of the Creation distinct from man that
were made subject to vanity, delivering it from the bondage of Corruption,
renewing the face of it, for he shall make new Heavens and new Earth, and all
things new, Acts 3. 20, 21. Isa. 6. and 65. 17. 2 Pet. 3. 10. 13. Rev. 21. 1.
5. Romans 8. 19. 23.

And then shall he take to him his great Power, and Reign, sitting on the
Throne of David in Power and great Glory, and set those that have been his
suffering Saints on Thrones, and they shall Reign with him on the Earth, and
judge the World, until the final and Eternal Judgment seize upon all the
ungodly, at the last and general Resurrection, Isa 9. 7. Rev. 11. 15. 18* Luke
1. 31. 32, 33, with Mat. 25. 31. etc. Dan. 7. 13. 14. 18. 27. 1 Cor. 6. 2. Rev.
5. 10. and ^^. 4. 6, etc.

More might be, (but enough is) said, to show that his second coming (so called
in Scripture) his glorious appearing never yet has been to any, nor now is,
and though it be the day of the desire and longing of all unfeigned believers,
yet none of them shall see or enjoy it, otherwise then by Faith in the hope of
it, and powerful efficacies of that hope retained until they shall all see it
together, Luke 17. 22. 24. 37. 2 Timothy 4. ^, Heb. 11. 40. 2 These. 2. 1. with
Chap. 1. 7. Yea they are all looking and waiting for it all the time of this
present World, while also they are waiting for the Redemption of the Body, Tit.
2. 12, 13. Heb. 9. 28. Romans 8. 19. 25. Phil. 3. 20. 21. And if any say they
have it, or have seen it, otherwise then by Faith as aforesaid, and so lo here
is Christ or there, such are false christ's and false prophets, and we on such
grounds as forementioned or warned, not to believe or go after them, Luke 17.
23, 24. Mat. 24, 23, 24. As likewise, if they say with Himmeneus, the
Resurrection is past already, 2 Timothy 2. 18. Nor shall such scoffs or scoffers,
as 2 Pet. 3. 4. or as these appear in this question, make us ashamed to
profess We yet look and wait for this his second appearing and coming,
knowing that whatever reproach or denial of it such make, he that shall come
will come and will not tarry longer then the appointed time, which also
hastens; in his times God shall send and show him, etc. Acts 3. 20. 1 Timothy 6.
14, 15. Heb. 10. 37.

16. Query, What are those seeds that must have every one his own body in the
Resurrection, and whether are they Natural, or Spiritual?
Answ. Having fought against the being of the Glorious body of Christ and the
Excellency of his works done or doing in that body, which they privily deny to
be, and so also against the truth of his coming again, as before; They now
proceed to fight against the Faith and hope of the Resurrection of the dead,
which the Apostle affirms and largely proves shall be by Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 15. Calling it all along the Resurrection of the dead, yea when he speaks
of it, as denied by some among them, he says not simply, how say some among
you, there is no Resurrection, but how do they say there is no Resurrection of
the dead? It seems they did or might acknowledge a Resurrection so called by
them, such as might be made and pass upon them in this day, but the
Resurrection of the dead they denied, verse. 12. 16. 20, 21. 32. 35. 42. And its
not the Spirit or Soul of the man distinct that dies in the death spoken of, or
ceases to be in a sencible being, much less the new man, or mind, and Spirit of
Christ received by and in the believer, but its the natural body that dies, and
being dead is sown in the Earth, which is that of which these would insinuate
by these queries, that there is no Resurrection after the natural or bodily
death; And to that purpose here signify this as their notion, that the seeds
that must have in the Resurrection every one his own body, are not natural, but
Spiritual; For further answer therefore to their Query, and for evincing the
Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead, and manifesting the folly of their
subtilty in this question, and the following, we say,

1. This question is foolish and unlearned, for no Scripture speaks of seeds
that must have every one their own body in the Resurrection; But the Apostle
tells us of seeds that men sow, expressly of Wheat, or other Grain, to which God
gives a body as pleases him, and to every seed its own body, and they are
natural seeds.

Again they wrest the Metaphor, and Comparison, confounding it with the thing
to be set forth by it, not regarding or being willingly Ignorant, that
Metaphors and Comparisons hold not in every thing, but in such things only as
serve to set forth in some resemblance the thing for which they are used, and
its no wrong to answer them in this query according to their folly, as 1 Cor.
15. 36. etc. Thou fool, that which thou sowest (mark, thou sowest as differing
it from bodies sown by God, in his changing them by Death) is not quickened
except it die, nor says he that the same it, or seed is not quickened after it
dies, but it is not quickened before, or except it die; And that which thou
sowest, thou (he says not God, but still proceeding in the Metaphor, Thou)
sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or
of some other grain, (these and such are the seeds spoken of, of which he
says) but God (he says not thou) gives it a body as it pleases him, and to
every seed his own body, so then it is the same it which men sow a bare grain,
to which God gives a body for Glory, Beauty and Fruitfulness as it pleases
him; And had they understood the similitude and the end and use of it here, it
might have preserved them from denying the Resurrection, and living again
(after the natural and bodily death) of the same body that died or dies, either
of the person of Christ or of the persons of men, that shall by him be raised
from the dead, for it is used as a resemblance of both, as appears by
comparing it with verse. 20. 23. Where Christ is risen from the dead, in the
virtue and for the worth of his own righteousness, in laying down his Life for
us, that he might take it again, is mentioned as the first fruits of them that
slept, the first born from the dead (as also, Col. 1. 18. Acts 26. 23.) And
then the rest that die in Adam are mentioned, as afterward to be raised by him
in their own order at his coming, and Kingdom. Now this similitude follows as a
resemblance of the resurrection both of him and them, and in answer to a
sensual question, or cavil (like this of theirs) which he supposes some
ignorant and foolish men might make, how are the dead raised up, and with what
body do they come? And therefore he propounds the question and gives the answer
in terms of the present time rather then of the time past, or to come, because
he includes both the resurrection of Christ who was already raised, and the
resurrection of all men that now die in Adam which is yet to come, both being
well included and expressed under such terms, how are the dead raised, and
with what body do they come? That is, how is it both in that which is perfected
in him, and shall be afterward perfected by him, as ver. 23. and therefore also
he still speaks in such phrase or manner of speaking in the present tense in
the similitude, and further answer following.

And so we shall find our Savior sometimes using the same Metaphor in a like
similitude, to resemble the necessity, virtue and preciousnesse of his own
death for us, and the power and fruitfulness of his Resurrection by means
thereof, as in John 12. 24. Where after he has told them, ver. 23. that the
hour is come, that the Son of man should be Glorified, namely (as appears in
what follows) in suffering the judgment of this World, and on the finishing of
that, in being raised and Glorified (in that body) with the Fathers own self,
(compare ver. 23. with ver. 24. 27. 31, 32. and Chap. 13. 31, 32. and Heb. 2.
9, 10.) He then adds, verily, verily I say unto you, except a corn of Wheat
fall into the ground and die, it abides alone, but if it die it brings forth
much Fruit; its evident by what is before noted, that our Savior there in the
comparison points at himself, and his own death and resurrection. He only is
that man that without his abasement and death, might have abode alone without
us, in his own Excellence and Glory, but then he could not have redeemed
mankind, nor have brought many Sons to Glory; now as the corn of Wheat that
dies rises up after in its stalk to many corns, so he dying one for all, is
so likewise quickened, or raised from the dead for or in the behalf of them
all, that he is the resurrection and the Life for them, and they shall all be
made alive from the first death by him, some to Eternal Life, others to eternal
Damnation; The Wheat, they that have done good, shall be gathered into his
Garner; the chafe, they that have done evil shall be burnt with unquenchable
fire, and all by him, and as the fruit of his once dying for them, who
therefore died, rose and revived that he might be Lord of all, the Judge of
quick and dead, not so any other man, or men, and so he mostfully answers the
similitude or comparison as used in that, 1 Cor. 15. 36, 37. also.

But now Christ being risen from the dead, is become the first fruits of them
that sleep, and the first fruits and harvest must needs be both of one and the
same kind, as to the thing to be raised, though the first fruits be more
excellent and glorious in it self, then the following; His resurrection
therefore being the resurrection of the body, the resurrection of others by him
must needs be the resurrection of their bodies also, for since by man came
death (and was not that also the death of the Body) by man also the
resurrection of the dead, (and is not that the body) for as in Adam all die, so
in Christ shall all be made alive. So then,

2. We further say with the Apostle in his following answer, and application of
the comparison, the same body that is now a natural body, it, even the same
that is sown in corruption, it is raised in the Resurrection after Death, in
incorruption; it, the same it or body that is sown in dishonor (having neither
Life, Breath, Beauty, or Fitness for Society) it is raised in honor; it, the
same that is sown in weakness (so as it cannot help it self but moulders to
dust) it is raisin power (and so in Immortality;) It, the same It, or body that
is sown a natural body, it is raised a Spiritual body; For there is a natural
Body, and such are all men first, and there is a Spiritual Body, and such shall
the same bodies be that were sown natural Bodies in the resurrection, the same
shall be Spiritual Bodies, it is the same body in a new quality; And as it is
absurd and unreasonable to immagine that that Body that suffers much even to
death for the name of Christ, shall after death cease for ever, and another
Body that never so suffered, be raised and Glorified in stead thereof, or that
the body that runs on in wickedness, and is yielded up to unrighteousness
even to death, shall from thence cease to be for ever, and another Body rise
that never so acted the sin, nor was employed in the service of it, and suffer
the punishment for the former, for we must all appear before the righteous
Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive in his Body the things in
the fruit or reward of them done in his Body, according to what he has done,
whether it be good or bad, for what a man sows, that shall he the man reap,
be not deceived, God is not mocked, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Romans 14. 9, 10, 11, 12, Gal.
5. 7, 8. etc.

So likewise it is as absurd to think there can be a resurrection of that which
never died, or before it be dead; Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not
quickened except it die, etc. as before, it is the dead that rise in the
Resurrection, Luke 20, 37. Mark* 12. 25, 26.

17. Query, And must not every seed have a body of its one Nature?
Answ. In this question, that they may render absurd the belief and
acknowledgment of the resurrection of the dead body, which while it lives here
is vile and mortal in it self, and in death further corrupts and turns to dust.

They imply, that every seed must have a body of its own Nature, and so that if
the mortal and dead Body rise, it must rise the same, or in the same Quality,
or manner of being (for so much they include in its own nature) in which its
sown, namely Vile, Mortal, Weak, etc. In all which it clearly appears, they
therefore so greatly err, even as the Sadduces of old, because they know not
the Scriptures, as likewise, neither the Power of God, Mark. 12* 24 27.

For the Scripture says expressly in the forementioned similitude, that which
thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that it shall be, but bare grain, etc.
But God gives it a body as it has pleased him, and to every seed his own
body, the same corn is quickened after it dies in the ground, and so retains
its nature or kind, as Wheat or some other grain, but in the quickening is
changed into another quality or manner of being, and glory as in the blade, and
after the ear and fruit as aforesaid.

So likewise in the Resurrection of the dead (yea more fully and clearly, for
such resemblances have not the lively Image of such greater things to come as
yet are shadowed or resembled by them) the same Body of man that dyed and was
buried is raised, and so every Soul shall have its own proper Body which it
laid down or departed out of, but not in the same quality or manner of being
(which is all one with the nature or kind of beings in these men's confusions.)
But as we have showed already, its the same body in a new or other quality or
manner of being than that in which it was sown, for it is sown a natural body,
it is raised a spiritual body, etc. as before, yea Christ himself was crucified
through and in weakness, but he (even the same he that dyed and was buried as
before is showed) he was raised and lives in the Power and Glory of God.

But it appears in these Questions, and by their consounding the Seeds in the
similitude with the bodies of men resembled by them (and spoken of as sown in
death and raised in the Resurrection) especially if we compare these and the
next Question with their discourses and writings on this subject, that they are
of no faith or judgment concerning any other Resurrection either of the just
or unjust, then such an imaginary Resurrection, as is made or may be atrained
in this life, and that is not not a Resurrection of the man or dead body (that
cannot be except it first die, and so not before its death, nor is that in
their imagination) but of some Seeds sown in man distinct from the body of the
man, and so the resurrection of the just in their vain thought, is when that
they call the good Seed of which some of them dream, Christ takes flesh in the
man, and sometimes they call it Christ, and the light within, when this gets
above the other Seed, and gets victory over the lusts in the man, and that is
the Resurrection to praise and to life; likewise the resurrection of the unjust
is nothing else with these Dreamers but the rising or getting above of the evil
seed or seed of the Serpent in every or any man, distinct from the man or Body
of the man, and when that rises, it rises to condemnation and death, that is
[according to their meaning, that it may be condemned and judged to death by
the other Seed, yet can they not tell us who sew these Seeds, and when, nor
what Bodies they have before they die; yea, according to this their
imagination, the resurrection of the unjust is usually or often first, contrary
to the order of the Resurrection of the dead witnessed in the Scriptures of
truth, and there may be also many Resurrections of both the just and the
unjust, whereas the Scriptures mention but one, a Resurrection [not many
Resurrections] and that of the dead, both of the just and unjust, but every man
in his own order; but more need not here be added to show the filthiness of
this Satanical Dream, the mention of it is enough, with what has been already
said to show the Dreamers to be denyers of the Resurrection of the Bodies of
men that die in Adam, that is after the natural or Bodily death, and so of the
Resurrection of the dead affirmed and showed in the Scripture, and to evince
the truth of that Doctrine, against all their endeavors to overthrow it, ye^
something further we shall add to this subject in answer to their next Question.

Quest. 18. And whether the wicked upon whom after Death Judgment is come,
whose Souls are in Hell, must afterward come out of Hell again to receive a
second Judgment?
Ans. This Question needs no other answer but the mention of that Scripture,
Rev. 20. 12, 13. which speaking prophetically of the final and Eternal
Judgment, says expressly, That Death and Hell delivered up the dead which were
in them, and they were judged every one according to his works, there is death
and hell delivering up their Prisoners to Judgment.

But because in this last Question especially they manifest their horrible
Corruption and infidelity about the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead
and Eternal Judgment, and what Deriders and Scoffers of both they be, even
against the plainest assertions of Scripture, as in the fifteenth Question they
are of Christ's personal coming the second time; and that we may further bear
witness to the Truth (denied and reproached by them) for the good of others,
we shall here add something further in return to this Question; also noting the
palpable wickedness of the intention and scope of it, and the falsehood, and
folly they are found in, in their pursuit of such a wicked enterprise.

1. The intention and scope of it is to fasten an error upon the Doctrine of
the resurrection of the dead, and their coming forth to an Eternal Judgment
after death, viz. That if so, then the wicked must come out of hell again after
sentenced and sent thither, and thereby to give a total overthrow to that
doctrine of the resurrection of the dead Bodies of men, and their coming forth
to Eternal judgment after the natural and bodily death, and so to make God a
liar, even in those his most plain and full manifestations of the Truth, by the
Son himself, who having declared the powerful efficacy of his voice (as now
speaking from heaven in the glorious Gospel) for making those dead in sins and
trespasses to hear, and to the quickening and preserving in life those that in
hearing hear, and said, that hour is coming and now is, John 5. 25. he bids
them verse. 28. not marvel at that, for the hour is coming,) he says not as
before and now is, but only that it is coming, and in leaving out that clause
and now is, having mentioned it in the former declaration, he fully implies
that the hour here spoken of in the 28. verse. now is not, but certainly comes
after the forementioned hour or time that was then begun, even when God shall
send us Jesus who before was preached to us, as Acts 3. 20. with Mat. 24. 14.
See the instruction to the living from the consideration of the future state of
the dead by T. M. Junior, pages 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. the hour is coming, in the
which all that are in the graves (in the dust of the earth, and in the
disappearing state of death) shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, namely
out of their graves, they shall be wholly freed and made alive from the first
death, Hos. 13. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 22. they that have done good shall come forth
unto the Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil unto the
resurrection of Damnation, for even death and hell shall deliver up the dead
that are in them, and they shall be judged every one according to his works as
before is showed.

This is that which the scope of this question is to deny, and so consequently
that Christ is risen from the dead, for if the dead rise not, then is not
Christ risen, and so in the denial of this the Apostles whole Preaching is
rendered vain, and faith in Christ as Preached by them vain also, yea they are
therein proclaimed false witnesses of God, because they have testified of him,
that he raised up Christ whom he raised not up, if so be the dead rise not, 1
Cor. 15. 12. 15.

2. In their pursuit of this end, they make lies and mistakes their desence,
that which they first suppose and take for granted, as that in which their
chief strength lies, is neither granted by us nor so expressed in the
Scripture, but according to the import of it in their query very erroneous,
viz. that judgment is come upon the wicked after death, now that by is come,
they mean is now already come as soon as they are dead, and that by Judgment
they mean, the whole of the judgment, is clear by their bringing it to
disprove and deride a coming forth again to any other or further judgment, and
so its very false; for though judgment may come upon them in this life, and
their death is a terrible Judgment, it proves so accidentally to them, through
their misimprovement of their time, because it cuts them off from further space
of repentance, they being from thence sealed up and reserved as Prisoners in
the Pit, to the judgment of the great day of Christ, yet neither is the one or
the other, that great and Eternal judgment, unto which all the ungodly that
continue such till death are reserved to be punished, nor does that seize on
them till that day of judgment, whence it is always truly called the wrath to
come, and not that is already come upon any; and so much is plain in that, Heb.
9. 27. with verse. 28. to which they would seem to allude, especially if
compared with other Scriptures, see the text, as it is appointed to men once to
die, he speaks of men indefinitely, and so of the whole kind, for all shall
once dye, though some shall not sleep in death, but suffere a sudden change, in
which both death and resurrection shall be accomplished upon them in a moment.
But after this the judgment, he says not that then, or (as these) that after
this the judgment is come, as if it were already come upon such of them as are
dead, or should come upon any that die, before the rest (at least of their
generation or sort of men) have finished their course as well as they; But
after this the Judgment, even after this appointment of the whole kind once to
die, is fulfilled on all generations, then will be the general, final and
Eternal judgment; And though those that now sleep in Jesus and have suffered
with him, shall have their judgment come upon them, their Kingdom and glory
given them to possess, first before the rest of the dead, yet that will not be
till the time and state of the Resurrection of the just that have suffered with
him, for they shall first rise from the dead, neither will that be till the
beginning of that great day of Christ, when the days of sufferings and trouble
to that generation will be ended; So that the judgment that properly so
called, as distinguished from other Judgments in this life, that are temporal
and reversible, even the Eternal judgment that is after death, it is in the
time and state of the Resurrection, for there shall be a General Resurrection
of both the just and unjust, in which they shall come forth to their judgment,
and that shall be to both at the hour or day of Christ, even at his appearing,
and his Kingdom, Acts 24. 15. John 5. 28, 29. 2 Timothy 4. 1. and so much also
appears in that which follows, Heb. 9. 28. where after he has said as it is
appointed to men once to die, but after this the judgment, he adds as a remedy
against the evil that otherwise might be unto men in that death or that
judgment following; so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and
unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin to
salvation; now as his first appearing to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself answers to the first death and misery, and was effectual, that by
Christ we should be saved from perishing in it, and that through him we might
be saved, so his second appearing without sin to Salvation answers to the
judgment after death, and is such as by it all those that now through his
grace bringing salvation to all men in due time do look for him, shall be saved
from wrath through him, even from the wrath to come, when it shall come forth
in that judgment, so as they shall stand in the judgment even before the Son
of man when he appears, and the second death shall have no power on them, yea
they shall then be saved to the utmost by that his appearing, yea he shall then
appear to their salvation in that judgment which implies his appearing the
second time to be first, and the judgment after death following upon it, at
that his appearing and his Kingdom to come upon men in the time and state of
the resurrection as before is showed, compare with the forementioned
Scriptures, Heb. 6. 2. Rev. 20. 12, 13.

Again their folly is manifest in taking up a sense of the Word Hell, from some
common contradions without examination, as if in every place it signified that
place and state of torment in which the wicked are to be punished for ever
after the passing of the Eternal judgment upon them; whereas they might have
known the word Hell is used in Scripture generally for that which is deep and
low, obscure and dark; And so

1. Sometime for the Grave or disappearing state of death, whence it is often
translated grave, from which and from the power of it there is a redemption and
deliverance, though no man can redeem himself, etc. Psalm. 49. 8, 9. 15. and 89.
48. Job 17. 13. 16. with Hos. 13. 14.

2. Sometime for any such distress or misery as threatens death, and as in
which a man is in darkness that he can see no way out, or how deliverance
should come, out of which yet there may be deliverance, though he see not how,
as Jonahs being in the Whales belly, Jonah 2. 2, 3. etc. see also Psalm 86. 13.
and 88. 6. and 116. 3, 4, etc.

3. Sometime for that place and state of darkness and separation from God into
which the Spirits of ungodly sinners that die in their sins are cast and shut up
from the time of their departing out of the body, unto the judgment of the
great day; for when the body returns to its dust, then the spirit returns to
God who gave it, ( Ecles. 3. 21. and 12. 7.) by him to be appointed to its
proper place, by whom the Spirits of Believers, such as die in the Lord, are
received into Paradise, a place and state of pleasure and rest in heaven under
the altar, on which the perfect Sacrifice was offered, sometimes called
Abraham's bosom, it is such as in which they are from the time of their departure
out of the flesh or body with the Lord made perfect, (so much as the Spirit
without the body is capable) yet still waiting for the redemption of the Body
and Glorious Kingdom promised; And so likewise by him the Spirits of the
disobedient, that persisted in the refusal of him, till their sin was finished,
are when they depart out of the body, at the death of the body driven away,
shut cut from his presence, shut up as prisoners in some place and state of
darkness, where they are reserved to the judgment of the great day, Prove. 14.
32. Isa 24. 22. 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. And this is called hell, Psalm. 9. 17. Luke
16. 23. Rev. 20. 13. that hell that follows or goes along with the first death,
Rev. 6. 8. That might have been an everlasting Prison to the Souls or Spirits
of all mankind, had not Christ abolished death by his appearing, and obtained a
release of all Mankind unto him, and the Keys of Hell and Death into his hand.
But now by him, that Hell going with or pertaining to the first death, as in
this last sense is only appointed for a prison for all the ungodly, in which
they shall be reserved as in chains of darkness to the judgment of the great
day, where also they are filled with unspeakable horror and torment in their
spirit, in the remembrance and sense of what they have lost, and for what lying
vanities, and what they must shortly and for ever suffer in soul and body
together reunited; And out of this Hell there shall be such a deliverance, as
may be resembled by the deliverance of Prisoners to judgment, so Rev. 20. 13.
John. 8. 28, 29. in which yet they are not delivered out of darkness, but
still in a state of separation from God, and the Light of his countenance
brought forth to receive their bodies that slept in dust, and in them to
receive their final conviction and judgment. Again

4. Sometime (and but seldom the word Hell singly, but) Hell fire is used for
that wrath to come, the lake of fire prepared for the Devil and his angels,
which is to man the second death, into which they are not cast while the body
is held in the grave, and the spirit detained in prison in the first Death,
this is that unquenchable fire ever burning and that can never be quenched, no
not to them that are cast into it, the raised bodies of men being in that equal
to the evil angels, they can never more cease to be or be ever free from
sencible Suffering, nor will the Worm in their Spirits ever cease tormenting;
This is that lake of fire into which the first Death and Hell shall be cast,
when they have delivered up all the dead that was in them, and so shall be
destroyed and swallowed up in this that shall remain and burn on all the
ungodly for ever, see for this, and who they are, and when they shall be cast
into it, Rev. 20. 11. 15. and 21. 8. Mat. 25. 41. 46 with Mark 9. 43 48. so
that out of this, after men are in it, here is no deliverance in any sense; but
none are in this until they be brought forth of their graves, and delivered up
by Death and Hell as forementioned, except those that at his appearing shall be
taken and cast alive into that lake of fire, without being detained any time in
prison as the rest are, Rev. 19 20. with chap. 20. 10.

Now had these men understood the Scripture, and so these things as there
distinguished and set forth, they would not have counted it at all absurd, that
souls in Hell (bodies in dust, and spirits in prison) should come forth again
to receive their final judgment, yea had they in the least believed God to be
true in his sayings, they would not have dared so plainly to have contradicted
and blasphemed them, though they could not have understood them, seeing the
Holy Ghost speaks expressly of the Final and Eternal Judgment, when all the
dead that have died in their sins from the beginning of the World to the latter
end of it, shall at once be raised and brought forth to that judgment, and
there and to that faith, Death and Hell delivered up the dead which were in
them.

But they have clearly showed themselves to be of that sort that deny the
Resurrection of the dead, and the Eternal Judgment of all men witnessed in the
Scripture, as yet to come and to be passed and executed upon them by that man
Christ Jesus, whom God has ordained to judge the world in Righteousness,
whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead.

Question, 19. Whether the receiving Bread and Wine to show the Lords death, be
to continue an Ordinance in the Church till the end of the World, yea or nay?
Answ. This and the three following questions aptly follow the former to a
further discovery of their Antichristian Spirit. For

As Jesus Christ having ascended on high, and received gifts in the man, has
given gifts unto men, and therein set in the Church,

First Apostles, that were chosen witnesses of his personal body (in which he
the Word was made flesh, and humbled himself unto the death of the Cross as now
raised from the dead, and received up into glory, having finished the works the
Father gave him to do in that body on the earth, that repentance and remission
of sins should be preached in his name unto all Nations, and so as wise Master
builders, layers of the foundation Doctrinally; As likewise he has given and
appointed to be still in continual exercise, a gift and office (inferior to the
Apostles) for instructing in, and opening (out of the Scriptures of the
Prophets and Apostles) the foundation as already laid by them in the word of
the beginning of Christ, and for directing to and building on that foundation
in witnessing him as already come in the flesh, and having finished the works
(as aforesaid) and so for Doctrinal showing forth the Lords death, and the
pretiousnesse thereof with the Father for us and in his Name to us, and to
manifest the goodness and righteousness of God therein, Luke 24. 44. 48. John
17. 18. 20. etc. 1 John 1. 1. 5 Romans 1. 1. 5 and 16. 25 26. 1 Cor. 3. 10. 11.

Secondarily, Prophets, or the gift and office of prophecy, to show distinctly
out of the Scriptures, and from the foundation as already laid, the things to
come, even the Resurrection of the dead and Eternal Judgment, and so the grace
and glory to be brought to us at the glorious appearing of Christ from Heaven,
for encouragement to look to him, and for the edification and comfort of those
that wait for him, which gift and office was primely given to the Apostles, and
is also included in that inferior gift and office forementioned as given to
believers since, and the choice to be desired by them (whence that is called
prophesying, 1 Cor. 14 1. 3 and 12. 28. which also is called, Ephesians. 4 11.
prophesying and evangelizing) John 15. 26, 27 and 16 13, 14, Titus 2. 11. 13,
14, 15.

Thirdly Teachers, or the gift of teaching, for applying, instructing and
directing to the usefulness of both, namely of that which he has already done,
and is become for us in himself the ground of all the Redemption already
wrought and obtained by his Blood, and the infinite and abiding efficacy of it
in what he is now doing, and of that Salvation ready to be revealed in the last
time, as the end of all from both together, to teach Transgressors the way that
sinners may be converted to him, and to lead Believers into all truth, teaching
them that denying ungodliness and worldly lust, they should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope and
the Glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.
13, 12, 13. 1 Pet. 1. 10. 14. etc. John 16. 8. 14.

So on the other hand, Antichrist that was to come in these last days, and is
already come, he has his contrary gifts and work, yet coming in the name of
Christ, and as Apostles, and Prophets, and Teachers of Christ, but in a
directly opposite and contrary strain (though subtly and with hidden things
of dishonesty, for such are false Apostles, deceitful Workers, etc.)

They to prepare and make way for their false Apostolizing, in which they lift
up something else in the name and place of Christ, in respect of what he has
already done, and is become in himself for us and for their false prophesying,
in which they magnify something else in the name and place of him, in respect
of what he will do in his second and glorious appearing, and for their false
Teaching, in which they direct to another Light and Teacher, and teach
otherwise, not consenting to sound words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Doctrine according to goodlinesse; to this purpose we say, they
seek with design in the first place to cast him down from his excellency in his
person and works, and to render his Ordinances contemptible, and that they may
effectually pull down the house with both their hands (as the foolish woman)
they pursue their wicked enterprise in this order, as may be seen in these
Queries.

1. Seeking to make void and of no effect the Personal Cross of Christ in what
he has already done and completed in himself thereby for men, and so privily
to deny the Lord that bought them, and render the Preaching of his Cross and
faith in him of no effect.

2. To overthrow the Hope of the Gospel, even of the second personal coming of
Christ from Heaven, and the Salvation then to be revealed, and so to undermine
the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment by the
man Christ Jesus.

3. Thereby to render needless, useless and contemptible, those his ways and
Ordinances, in which he has appointed us to remember him in what he has done,
and thence to consider him in what he is thereby become for us and to us, and
to be exercised in our waiting for his second coming, and the salvation then to
be revealed, and surely where they can prevail in the two first, they may
easily prevail in the latter, for to what end or purpose should they observe
any of those his ways and Ordinances that are appointed for remembering and
showing forth the Lords death, and the infinite and abiding virtue and
pretiousnesse of that, and that in them we should be exercised to an
expectation and waiting for his second coming, who believe neither, so as to
have their faith in the first, and from thence their hope of the second; for if
the dead rise not, then is not Christ risen from the dead, and then neither can
there be any expectation of his coming again in that body in which he suffered,
or of any hope by him in or of another life after death, and then the Apostles
preaching is vain, and the Ordinances as delivered by them of no use or worth
to be kept by us, baptizing in the Name of Christ as delivered by them, and so
the Supper of the Lord empty and unprofitable things.

And doublesse if these men (as they seem to intimate) do grant any use of such
an Ordinance for showing forth the Lords Death at any time, yet then either
they mean it not otherwise, then as for commemorating and showing forth a type
or shadow, whose truth and body is to be sought for in something else, and not
in the thing commemorated, or else by the Lord they mean not that Jesus of
Nazareth, whom God has made Lord and Christ, and by that they call the Lords
death, they mean not that death of his Cross, which he once suffered in that
body of his flesh for our sins, and can suffer or die no more; And however that
they have no Faith in him, or these things of him, is fully manifested in their
former questions, but seek to lift up something else in the Name and place of
him, and then what profit can there be to them in treating with them about his
Ordinances, while they are so wholly void of judgment in the great things of
his Law, as before is showed.

But for the help of others, that are not yet wholly turned aside after Satan,
we answer to this Query,

That the taking, blessing, and breaking Bread, and the taking and blessing the
cup, and so eating and drinking of them, as Christ has appointed, to show
forth the Lords death, is an Ordinance to continue in the Church till the end
of the World, or (which is all one) till his coming again, 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24,
25, 26 and 10. 16. Mat. 24 3. and 28. 20. And for further helpfulnesse in the
understanding and use of it, we add

I. The thing to be commemorated, and showed forth in that Ordinance, is not
our Mortifications, sufferings, qualifications or works wrought in, or by us;
but the Lords death.

1. The death of him that was the Lord from Heaven before he died even in the
beginning with God the proper Lord, and heir of all the Kingdom and glory of
God; for the Father sent forth his only begotten Son, by his Grace to taste
death for us, which shows our sinfulness, misery and helplesnesse, and so the
necessity of his death for us in respect of us, as also its Excellency for our
help likewise.

2. Its the death of him that is the Lord, Gloriously made both Lord and
Christ, in that body in which he died, and by means of his death for us, for he
died once, and can die no more, but is now alive for evermore, and has the
keys of Hell and Death, which shows the preciousnesse of his death for us,
seeing by means of it he ever lives for us in the Power and Glory of God.

II. This is to be remembered, and so commemorated, and showed forth in that
Ordinance as that which is always and for ever to be remembered, and that
imports,

1. That the thing itself the Lords death, as to the actual accomplishment and
sustaining of it, is already past and over, being finished in his own body; For
remembrance is of things past (as is fore hinted.)

2. And that the precious virtue and efficacy of it abides for ever with the
Father for us, in his appearing in his presence in that body Glorified as Lord
and Christ by means thereof, and so remains in and through him (that is the
Lord) in the Name of the Father to us. Likewise,

3. That the virtue, efficacy and fruit of it is brought to us, in the Preachin
of his Cross, and through the witnesses of it, and of the Grace in and through
it, and to be met within the believing remembrance and acknowledgment of it,
for with the heart man believes unto Righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made to Salvation.

III. That therefore he has appointed together with the Preaching of the
Cross, this outward Ordinance for the remembering and showing forth the Lords
death till he come; Which implies, that there is even in believers, in their
several ages, till that his coming again, natural dullness and pronenesse to
forget it, and with that also a natural aptness to be either looking singly on
their sins, or enemies to their discouragement and fainting in the way, or else
on their personal Mortifications, Sufferings, Victories or Works, to a
rejoicing, and lifting up themselves in something that is not the Lord, and
therefore need of such mementoes.

And it shows the Gracious mind of God to us, that we should have the Lords
death always in remembrance, and in our acknowledgement (which only will keep
us from fainting in the way, and instruct and strengthen to relinquish all
rejoicing in the flesh, for the Excellency of the knowledge of him,) and
therefore he has appointed such means to stir us up, by putting in remembrance
often.

IV. This Ordinance is by the Lord appointed to the Church, and so to be used
in it, and in the societies of it, wherever two or three are gathered in his
Name, in the belief of his sayings, and of the Grace commended through his
death drawn into him, and knit together in the Unity of the Spirit, who yet
also in their Preaching the Gospel to all as they have opportunity, are to
instruct and invite others that hear or listen to their word, to come into his
house and rejoice with his People, even in observance of his Ordinances with
them, and this for one, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Romans 15. 9, 10, 11. Prove. 9. 1. 5.
Mat. 22. 1. 10.

V. That the way of this solemn public and professed remembrance and
acknowledgement of the Lords death, appointed to be used in his Church, or the
thing to be done therein, is, that in their assemblies together, Believers do
take the Bread, bless it in his Name, break it, and with instruction about his
sufferings, all of them take and eat of it in Remembrance of him; and in like
manner the Wine, so drinking in Remembrance of him, for as often as they eat this
Bread, and drink this cup they do so, and therein professedly commemorate, and
show forth the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 1. 23. 26. and 10. 6. For
otherwise, he that knows and believingly minds the Lords Death, does both
and eating and drinking, and in all mercies and chastisements, and in all his
approaches to God, remember the Lords death, as that by which all good was
procured for him, and all things are sanctified to him, and therefore in all
his demeanor is worthy to be acknowledged by him, though seducers would draw
him from it, which with the former considerations renders Ordinances for
stirring up by putting in remembrance the more needful.

VI. That this remembrance, and showing forth the Lords death is to be till he
come, is express in the Scripture their Query seems to alude to, even till
that his second coming, of which we have spoken before, for his first appearing
was actually past and finished, for of that, and the infinite and abiding
virtue and Grace of it, this was appointed to be a commemoration; And for his
Spiritual comings, he had already sent and powered forth the Holy Ghost,
according to his promise after his ascension, and these had received of that
Spirit, yea so as they were enriched in knowledge, utterance, Spiritual gifts,
coming behind in none, even as the Testimony of Christ was confirmed in them,
yet waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 5. 7. That
coming here spoken of 1 Cor. 11. 26. which is still to be waited for by all
believers, even all the time of this present World, and that in the use and
observance of his Ordinances each in their several times here, as Tit. 2. 12.
13. And that that his second coming, and the end of the World that now is, and
so the beginning of the World to come (of which Abraham and all the faithful
are Heirs, Romans 4. 13. etc.) Shall be together at the same time, is evident,
in Act. 3. 19, 20, 21. and Heb. 2. 5, 8. with 2. Pet. 3. to the end.

Yea further also, it is clear and express in the promise annexed to the
Commandment given by our Savior (after his Resurrection) to his Apostles, (and
therein, in a secondary sense to them that after believe through their word,
John 17. 18. 20.) That believers in and with the Preaching of the Gospel to the
Nations, after baptising them in his name, are to teach them according to their
capacity, to observe whatsoever Christ commanded his Disciples (to observe, and
do after his Resurrection, whereof this Ordinance is one) and this to the end
of the World; so much we say is clear in the promise annexed to that
Commission, Mat. 28. 20. And so I am with you always (that is, not only to
strengthen them to keep this charge, but also to make them successful and
fruitful therein) in their Preaching this Gospel, and keeping his Ordinances,
and Teaching others to observe them with them, even unto the end of the World.

Yea and they also kept and observed this charge unto the end of the World, not
only in that they kept it in their personal exercise throughout their
Generation, to the finishing their course, even until their disease and
departure out of their mortal bodies, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. 2 Pet. 1. 13. But also in
this that they have made known and given for the Preaching of Jesus Christ,
according to the Revelation of the Mystery, and have therein delivered the
traditions, or Ordinances, and things delivered over from the Lord to them,
even as they received them of him, unto all Nations or Generations of men in
this World, not only then in being, but then to come, for the obedience of
Faith, and that all the Gentiles might hear, Romans 5. 5. and 16. 25, 26. 2 Timothy
4. 17. with 1 Cor. 11. 2. 23. 27. and 14. 36, 37. And have also committed and
delivered the charge of this Ministry unto faithful men, with instruction and
charge to them to deliver and commit the same to other faithful men, that so it
may be remembered and kept after their decease, even unto the end of the World,
1 Timothy 1. 18. and 5. 21, 22. 2. Tim. 4. 1. 6. with Chap. 2. 2. 2 Pet. 1. 12.
15. with Chap. 2. 1. 2. and 3. 1. 3. And so Timothy is vehemently charged to
keep this Commandment without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ (which in his times he shall show, as Acts 3. 19, 20, 21.) 1 Timothy 6. 14, 15. Likewise also even such as are called to the obtaining of the
Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming, are still exhorted in their
several ages even until that his coming, when all his Saints shall be gathered
together unto him, to hold fast the Traditions which they have been taught by
the Apostles Doctrine, 2 These. 2. 14, 15. with ver. 1. 2. Heb. 3. 1. 7. and 4.
11. 14. and 10. 19. 25. And so to do this in remembrance of him till he come,
for till then they need such helps, for now in this time of their imperfect
state, till they shall all come together to the full stature, here they see
through a glass, but when he comes they shall no more need such helps, but see
face to face even as now they are seen and know as they are known, 1 Cor. 13.
12. 1 John 3. 2. Yea, until he come, those of them that live on the Earth are
mortal, as well as still encumbered with a law of sin in the members warring
against the Law of the mind, and so the body dead because of sin, and the rest
of them departed, the body is wholly dead, and turns to dust (yet sleeping in
the Lord) and so our body, or Cougregation in some sense vile, but at his
coming, our bodies shall be raised and made immortal, and every particular, and
so our whole body or Congregation together made like his Glorious Body, (who is
our head) and appearing with him in Glory, Col. 2. 3, 4. 1 John 3. ^. 1 Cor.
15. 48. 53. Romans 8. 10, 11. 1 These. 4. 14. 16. Phil. 2. 20, 21. Until he comes
there is much Hypocrisy and hidden things of dishonesty covered over with good
words, fair speeches and forms of Godliness, but when he comes, he will bring
to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the
hearts, so as there is nothing covered that shall not then be revealed, Mat.
10. 26. 1 Cor. 4. 5. until he come; The Earth and Air is corrupt, and the
Creatures subject to Bondage, but when he comes he shall restore all things,
Romans 8. 19. 22. with Acts 3. 19. 21. Until he come his Saints on Earth are
under reproach and persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. But at his coming he shall give
them full restand deliverance, that they shall so suffer no more, 2 These. 1. 7.
By all which it appears, that the second coming of the Lord, and the end of
this World contemporize, and so till both, the Ordinances are to be kept, as
delivered by the Apostles.

20. Que. And whether does the receiving Bread and Wine alone, without on
outward passover, really figure forth the death of Christ?
Answ. Having been large to the former Question, it shall suffice in answer to
this, to give some brief notice of their folly, Antichristianisme, and
profane scoffing at Christ's appointments here more fully manifest, and so we
say,

1. It is not the receiving of Bread and Wine alone, that is the supper of the
Lord, or his Ordinance appointed for the Church, to show forth his death in,
nor is it that about which they query, however their light failed them in
propounding their question. For,

1. That may be by them that do not then eat and drink them.

2. That may be done also in eating and drinking by such as these that do what
they can privily to hide and deny the Lords death, the ends, virtue and
pretiousnesse of it, as also by such as do it to gluttony and drunkenesse, and
by others more sober, who yet do it profanely, without belief or
acknowledgement of their Redeemer, as by his death he has procured these
mercies for them, and through it extends them; In all which receivings of Bread
and Wine, there is no commemoration of the Lords death, or showing it forth by
them: yea,

3. It may be by unfeigned believers for the preservation of their natural
life, and cheering and strengthening the outward man, (as 1 Timothy 5. 23.) And
this with belief and acknowledgement of the Redemption wrought, and obtained by
the blood of Christ, and of these Mercies as procured and Sanctified for their
(...) thereby, for which they give him thanks; And as through Christ every
Creature of God is good, and Mercy and Blessing in them for and unto men, the
use of them lawful and good in it self, so are they also in a peculiar sense
clean to them, 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4. Tit. 1. 14, 15. And in such use of them as
aforesaid, they do remember, and in a sort may show forth the Lords death (as
before is hinted) yet neither is this that solemn and professed celebrating the
memorial of, and showing forth the Lords death which is appointed to be done in
the use of the Lords Supper, or that his Ordinance to be observed in the Church
to that purpose, nor would an outward passover joined with any such receivings
as forementioned make it so.

But to eat the Lords Supper, and to do it worthily, or as is meet according to
his appointment is, for a man upon hearing and in minding the instructions of
the Gospel concerning the Lords Body, that was broken for us, examining and
judging himself as therein discovered, and reproved so to eat of that Bread,
and drink of that cup in remembrance and acknowledgement of the Lords death,
and in the Assemblies of believers when met together in his Name to that
purpose, and so celebrating that memorial according to his Ordinance and
institution, (as is before showed) see 1 Cor 11. 20. to the end, Chap. 10. 16,
17. compared with Acts 2. 42. and 20. 7. with the instructions about it, as
mentioned by the Evangelists; See the instructions to it also from the
consideration of Israel after the flesh, in their observance of the Ordinance
of the passover (unto which this of the Supper has much answerablenesse) as
in other of their typical Ordinanes, 1 Cor. 10 18. But,

2. They also show their Antichristian denial of Christ's being already come in
the flesh, and having finished the works given him to do on the Earth, in that
his first appearing to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, in their
intimation, that the Lords death cannot be showed forth in that Ordinance of
the Supper, appointed by him to that purpose, without an outward passover; For
in the Ordinance of the passover which was outward, there was blood shed, and
sprinkled, and the Lamb roasted and eaten, and so there was not only a
commemoration of that passing over them by the destroying Angel, and their
deliverance out of Egypt, but also a Type of Christ the Lamb of God, that
takes away the sin of the World, who then was to come, and to be slain and
sacrificed for us; And so his blood, his virtuous sufferings and death to be
presented to God, in his ascending in that spotless body, to appear in the
presence of God for us, that in his Name, it might be Spiritually sprinkled on
us, in the Preaching of the Cross, and so he fed upon by Faith as come in the
flesh; But this Grace was not yet so brought forth and manifested, the works of
the first appearing of Christ not finished, the offering of his body once for
all not actually perfected, and while they were not so, the first Tabernacle
and Typical Ordinances of Divine service had their standing and usefulness as
Types and shadows of good things to come, in which was not a lively Image of
them; But now he who is the Body and Truth of all, even the fountain of Grace
and Truth, being come in the flesh, and having been slain and offered up
himself in Sacrifice for us, and by his blood even by means of his death, and
with the virtue of it entered into Heaven it self, and there appearing, in the
presence of God for us, from thence to quicken, cleanse, and feed us with his
own blood as aforesaid; All such like bloody and Typical Sacrifices and
observances are taken away, that he may confirm the truth of all fullness and
compleatnesse now found in him, and establish his appointments, who (and not
Moses) is the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, yea there being herein
a change of the Priesthood, there must also be of necessity a change of the
Law, Heb. 7. and 9.

Therefore we are instructed to keep the feast, with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth, and to celebrate the memorial of the Lords death in such
manner, and in such an Ordinance as aforesaid, without any outward passover,
because Christ our passover is not now slaying or sacrificing, or to be slain,
etc. But is already sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7. With the Scriptures
forecited, nor could any such outward passeovers show forth the Lords death, as
past to be remembered; But the observance of it would be a denial of his death,
as actually sustained, past and finished, and a signification of it as yet to
come; therefore although it was very proper for our Savior to observe and eat
it with his Disciples at that time before he suffered, Luke 22. 15. Yet he left
no such commandment with them, that they should any more observe it, ye he
fully signifies to them, that they should no more observe it, or have any
occasion for it, but that the very thing shadowed, and Typically held forth in
it as to come, should now be accomplished and fulfilled in his personal body
through sufferings, and should be given them to remember and feed upon, as so
completed in him, whence after the eating of the passover with them, he took
Bread and blessed, and break, and gave to them, etc. Likewise also, the cup
after Supper, saying, etc.

And having so done and instructed them in the end and use of it; He then
speaking of that distinctly, and not of the passover, appointed them to do
this in remembrance of him, and so also the Apostle gives us to understand,
that it was of that and not the former Ordinance, but of that observed and
instituted after Supper, of which he said do this, 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24. Yea his
instituting that imediately after his eating the passover with them, and then
appointing them to do, that is as much as if he had said, Christ your passover
is now presently to be slain and sacrificed for you, and therefore you shall
have no more use or occasion for this observance, the thing typified and
shadowed by it being come; But instead thereof do you this, and teach others,
this observance in remembrance of what is done at this time for you, for now is
Christ your Passover sacrificed, my body given and broken, my Bloodshed, my
Life powered out for you; Do ye this (not that any more but this) in
remembrance of me.

3. But what means this expression in their Query, does it really figure forth?
As not liking the expressions of the Holy Ghost, that tell us, we therein show
forth the Lords death, they call it a figuring forth his death. Now this we
find in Scripture, that patterns, shaddows, and resemblances of good things to
come, were said to be figures of the true and Heavenly things themselves,
resembled, typified, or shadowed by them; for the time present they were
figures while standing of such use, which was until the first appearing of
Christ to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself was finished; So the first
man Adam was a figure of him to come, Romans 5. 14. The Ark prepared by Noah, and
their being saved in it by water. A figure, answerable unto which Baptism
(that of the Spirit) now saves, by the Resurrection of Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 20,
21. And so also, the first Tabernacle, and holy places made with hands, and
Ordinances of Divine service appointed therein, while standing, were figures of
the true and Heavenly things themselves, that were to come in and by the first
appearing of Christ, Heb. 9. 1. 9. 11. 23, 24. and 10. 1 etc.

And so the Ordinance of the passover, though that was a commemoration of
something over and past, as to the actual accomplishment of it, yet also (as we
noted before) it was a typical pattern, and so a figure of things to come, as
in the bloodshed, and sprinkled, and Lamb roasted, and eaten. Yea even the
thing commemorated in that Ordinance, as over and past, was but a pattern, and
figure of Christ our Passover, through whose being slain for us, Death is
abolished, destruction kept off, the Grace of God bringing Salvation But now
since Jesus Christ in whom the whole body of truth is, answering to all the
former patterns and figures of the Heavenly things, the shadows of good things
to come; Since that he is come in the flesh and has offered up the perfect
sacrifice of his own body once for all, and so has opened the way into the
holiest, being in that his spotless body entered into Heaven it self; We find
nothing of his appointments or in his Ministry, that he has left standing for
us to be exercised in till his coming again that is called a figure or Figures,
the body being come, figures and shadows are fled away, they are done away in
Christ, in respect of such use of them as they were appointed to, under the Law.

And now all his Ordinances show him forth, as already come in the flesh, and
being made perfect through sufferings, and so direct always to him wholly (in
and by all things) in what he has done, and is become as the fountain of all
Grace and Truth, for instruction and strength in the way, and to wait for his
coming again.

But these men putting no difference, but rendering the Supper of the Lord, as
well as the passover, a figure, and such as never stood, or was of any use
without it, do at least imply, that they make no more account of the Ordinances
of Christ in his Ministration now, then they do of the Types and Figures that
were under the Law, that are now done away in Christ, in whom their truth and
end is found; If not also that the thing commemorated and showed forth in that
Ordinance of the Supper, as already past, ( viz.) The Lords death once suffered
in that one body, is now of no more, or other kind of Excellency or use for us,
and to us, than the things commemorated in the outward passover, or not
otherwise then as a pattern and figure of some Heavenly or Spiritual thing yet
to come, or that is acted, or to be acted in men in their several ages and
times.

Yea that such are their corrupt immaginations appears, in their former
questions, in which they signify, that that Blood, Sufferings, and Death of
Christ that is over and past, as to the actual accomplishment and sustaining
thereof, and was so finished in that body, is not the Bread of Life, or the
Drink indeed, and the purger of the Conscience; But something else figured by
that which is now in a present and sensible being nigh to men, and in them, yea
all along they show, as may be seen in what we have noted, that the witnesses
and declarations of the Power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ both of his
first, and second personal appearing, as delivered by the Apostles, are of no
more esteem with them, than cunningly devised fables, that must have some
Mystery or meaning in which the truth must be found, other then what is held
forth in the plain import of the words, or at least, that they account them as
Allegories of some other and further things, which they call Christ, and the
things of Christ after the Spirit, while they render the knowledge of him as
Preached by the Apostles, and witnessed in the Ordinances as delivered by them,
fleshly and carnal, and so to be let go for the other. Surely Antichrist does
not only figure forth, but reveal himself in them by these Queries, as may be
seen in the light.

21. Query. And how must the life of Christ be shown forth? And when? If people
must receive Bread and Wine as a continuing Ordinance in this life, always to
show forth the death of Christ?
Answ. In the right showing forth the Lords death, the life of Christ is also
acknowledged, and shown forth; For therein we show not forth a dead Christ or
Death simply, but the Lords death, that is (as is showed before) the death of
him who by means of that his death, being raised from the dead in the Glory of
the Father, and made both Lord and Christ, in that body in which he died, and
was buried, is alive for evermore; And so that death by which Peace was made,
and Redemption, and life obtained in and by him for us, That with him it might
be given to us, and in receiving him be received by us, as he is received, that
is now by Faith; And in the first fruits of those Spiritual blessings we are
now blessed within him, and the hope of the fullness, with the Redemption of the
body at his second coming; and so it is that death, the excellency and
preciousnesse of which is showed in the testification of the glory God has
given him in his Resurrection and exaltation as the fruit of it, that our faith
and hope might be in God: And so that of which and the preciousnesse thereof,
he now lives to be an Apostle to us, as likewise by virtue of which he
appears in the presence of God, an High Priest^ for us, and therefore also is
able to save to the utmost them that come to God by him. And so in the right
showing forth the Lords death, all this is acknowledged, and showed forth, as
that in which his death is commended as therefore infinitely worthy to be
remembered, and the Grace and Glory of God therein displayed; And so in being
Spiritually baptized into his death, into the understanding and acknowledgement
of it, as declared in the Gospel, Therein a man is also risen with him, through
faith of the operation of God, and comes to prove the power of his Resurrection
in such fellowship of his sufferings, quickening to new and lively hope and
affections by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, Col. 2. 1^. Phil. 3.
10. 1* Pet. 1. 1. 3. etc. And is made a powerful Savior of Christ to others,
either of life unto Life, or of death unto Death; For the Preaching or showing
forth the Cross of Christ, (in which the whole Gospel of Christ, the Wisdom of
God, the Power of God is preached) that is to them that perish foolishness,
but to us that are saved, it is the Power of God; Whence the Apostled said God
forbid that I should glory in any thing save in the Cross of Christ, by whom
the World is crucified to me, and I to the World, yea he determined not to know
any thing in his Preaching among believers, but Jesus Christ and him crucified,
1 Cor. 1. 18. 23, 24. ^. and 2 with Gal 6. 14. And he had then the mind of
Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 16. and was therein rejoicing in, and showing forth the Life
of Christ, Gal. 2. 19, 20. holding forth, not a Ministration of death, but of
Spirit and Life, 2 Cor. 3. 1 John 1.

But this must needs be an offense and stumbling block to them, who deny the
abiding virtue and effecatious preciousnesse, for others of that death once
finished in that his own body, and believe not his being raised, and continuing
for ever in the same body in which he died; But set up an Idol in the name and
place of him that is often dying, rising, and offering it self, and in diverse
bodies; For they cannot show forth the death and life of their Immaginary
Christ in one and the same demonstration, because when he rises or is risen in
them, its another, and not the same body, that died which rises, or is risen.

22. Query. What is your ground for sprinkling the Children of them you count
Believers? Have you ever a command from God, or evident example for it, if you
have show it?
Answ. This Question is laid as a snare for such as differ from us in the
Ordinance of Baptising with water in the Name of Christ, as to the persons that
may be baptized, and the manner of baptising; And yet agree with us in the
acknowledgement of the Lords body, and of the infinite Grace and abiding Virtue
of his first appearing therein, and the hope of his second, and of the
Resurrection of the dead, and Eternal Judgment at his appearing to his Kingdom,
that so by seeming to take their part against us in this about baptism, they
may catch them in their net.

For why else do they not as well question our grounds for the continuance of
this Ordinance of Baptising with water in his Name, as they have done that of
the Lords Supper; seeing it is notoriously known, they make no more account of
the one, then of the other.

We shall therefore here say the less to this Hypocritical question. But if
any desire to understand the grounds of our practice in that, they may see them
at large, showed by the Scriptures in Treatises made public, the one by Joh.
Horn, called, Considerations of Infant Baptism. The other by Tho. Moor senior,
called, A brief discourse about Baptism. And if any that own the great things
of the Doctrine of Christ but different from us in such lighter things, will
propound their distractions, or reasons against our practice, in answer to what
is made public, or they have ours in manuscript (which yet they have not done)
or otherwise, we shall be ready to answer them, though we think it not
expedient here to speak to those things in which they differ from us, who yet
own the same Lord Jesus with us, and wait for his Glorious appearance from
Heaven: And though differing from us in the manner or outward form of an
Ordinance, etc. Yet do it to the same Lord whom we will neither judge, nor
despise, nor reckon them amongst or join them with such Enemies of the Cross
of Christ as prvily deny the Lord that bought them, and despise both his
sayings and Ordinances.

2. Why demand they a command from God, or evident example for what we do in
this, seeing they contemn both in the former, and in scorn reject the Ordinance
it self as unprofitable?

We might answer this demand, as our Savior answers a like Question, Mat. 21.
23, 24, 25. When they demanded of our Savior, by what Authority he did those
things; He answered and said unto them, I also will ask you one thing, which
if ye tell me, I likewise will tell you by what authority I do these things.
The Baptism of John, whence was it, from Heaven, or of men? So might we here
say, when they tell us, whether baptising with water (either by sprinkling, or
dipping) in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, be an Ordinance from Heaven, to be
still observed by believers, and by them to be administered on any, then we will
likewise tell them the ground of our practice in this.

But the Reader may be satisfied, that they make void the commandments of
Christ in this as well as in the former, by their traditions both by their
principles and practice; For first, in their principles, they deny that Jesus
to be the very Christ, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, and
so in whom the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is,
and then why should any be baptized into his Name.

And Secondly, in their practice, they wholly lay aside and reject that
observance as well as the other, as unprofitable and vain.

Therefore we reject their question; And yet for further help to the Reader,
add this word or two about Baptism, in which we hope few of our forementioned
dissenting brethren will much differ from us, waving in this place those things
in which they differ, for such reasons as is fore expressed.

1. That the command to disciple the Nations, baptising them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, was to be observed by the
Apostles, and by them that believe through their word, unto the end of the
World; See what is said in answer to their ^9. Question, from the consideration
of the promise annexed to the Commission, Mat. 28. 20. And lo I am with you
always (namely in the observance of this command) unto the end of the World.

2. That that baptising in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost is, in baptising in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, even of that
Jesus of Nazareth, whom God has raised from the dead, and made both Lord and
Christ, campare, Mat. 28. 19. with Acts 2. 22. 38. and 8. 16. and 10. 48. For
in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and in his Name as so
manifested, is the great Name of God come forth and declared.

3. That in that baptising, repentance, and remission of sins is Preached, and
witnessed as in his name for them, and through it unto them, as appears by
comparing, Mat. 28. 19. with Luke 24. 47, 48. and Acts 13. verse. 37, 38, 46,
47.

Like as John was sent baptising with water, that Christ should be made
manifest to Israel, as the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the World,
John 1. 29. 31. And not to make them, or something in them manifest to
themselves, or to Christ.

So the Apostles were sent baptising the Nations of the Gentiles also, that
they might therein witness as true to small and great, even every Creature of
mankind, that Christ had now suffered, and was risen from the dead, and become
in the man Gods Light to the Gentiles, and his Salvation to the ends of the
Earth, and so that there is Repentance, and Remission of sins in him for them,
and through his Name to them, compare with the forementioned Scriptures, Acts
26. 22, 23. Mark. 16. 15. Whence the Apostle Peter exhorting to repent, and be
baptized every one of them, gives this reason, for the promise is to you, and
to your children, etc. He says not the promise is in you, nor had they yet by
Faith received it; But it was in Christ raised from the dead, and through him
by the Gospel to them, as Romans 3. 21, 22. with Acts 13. 32, 33. 37, 38. 46, 47.
and Ephesians 3. 6. ^. Which was the thing they were willing to witness, and set
their seal too, in baptising them in that name, Acts 2. 38, 39.

4. That baptising with water in that name, is included in that baptising given
in commission; And (though as a lesser or lighter thing comparativly, yet) to
go with the Preaching of the Gospel, as an outward seal, or witness of the
Truth of God therein to every Creature of mankind, small and great. This
appears by our Saviors use of the word baptising, in that commandment given to
his servants, a word which when used to express a work in the Ministration of
the Servants, always includes that with water in his Name (though sometimes it
takes in more, and a more weighty thing in their service also.) And likewise by
the Apostles understanding it, as included in their Commission, which it is
evident they did, (see the Book of the Acts,) though but as a lighter matter,
to be used in subserviencie to the more weighty; see for both, ^ Cor. 1. 14. 17.

23. Query. Whether do you own such Preachers as take Tithes, or Preach for
hire, or for gifts, and rewards, yea or nay?
Answ. Here are three Questions in one, and of diverse natures, which is a
falacious way of querying; To the first we say, we own Melchizedeck, who
received Tithes of Abraham, and blessed him that had the promise, Heb. 7. 2. 6.
We own also the good Priests under the Law that were of the sons of Levi, and
had a commandment to take Tithes of the People according to the Law ( Heb. 7.
5.) such of them whose lips preserved knowledge; We likewise own such Preachers
now, as having the Doctrine of Christ with fitness to Preach it, do hold fast
that faithful word, and Preach not themselves, but Jesus (even that Jesus of
Nazareth whom God has raised from the dead) the Lord, and themselves servants
for Jesus sake; Such as Preach repentance and remission of sins in his Name,
who is the Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, the Fountain of Grace
and Truth, that of his fullness men might receive, and so do wait for, and in
showing those things of him, that is the ground of it, instruct others to look
for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God and our
Savior Jesus Christ; And to flee from the wrath to come in the Resurrection of
the dead, and Eternal Judgment by that man by whom he has ordained to judge
the World in Righteousness, whereof he has given assurance unto all men in
that he has raised him from the dead; And so with that Doctrine of Christ, and
in the Preaching of it do Administer their instructions, and reproofs to such
as are Ignorant and out of the way, and for conviction of the gainsayers, and
their exhortations to all, with consolations, and admonitions, to believers, to
the edifying and teaching them, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
they should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World, etc.
Such Preachers we own, whether they take Tithes or no. And further we say, the
Labourer is worthy of his hire, Luke 10. 7. And thou shall not muzzle the mouth
of the Ox that treads out the Corn, 1 Cor. 9. 9. etc. They may, if they see
it convenient, according to the instructions and liberty given them by him,
take such things as God by his providence orders to them, and sets before them;
Be it the Tenth, or what part it will that is appointed them by the Fathers of
the Country, of that which is at their dispose, or that is otherwise produced
to them by the Gospel; But all that take Tithes we own not, no more then we do
all that refuse them, we make not their taking or leaving them our rule for
knowing or owning Preachers, but leave that gross way of judgeing to such, as
being Reprobate concerning the Faith, have no better rule to walk by.

To the other two parts of this Question, we say,

1. We distinguish between taking Hire, Gifts, or Rewards, and Preaching for
them, and so being hirelings.

2. Such as Preach for Hire, or for Gifts, and rewards, and so for filthy
Lucre, in their so doing we own not, but are instructed to flee that vile lust,
and to warn others of it, 1 Pet. 5. 2. Yet it is not our parts, to judge the
hearts of men, yea though therebe some failings, (but rejoice if Christ be
Preached) and not to account any to be hirelings, until it appear by their
fleeing when the Wolf comes to devour the sheep of their faith, and hope of
the Gospel, and so of their fallowship in the Word and Ordinances thereof; he
that then neglects and flees from the sheep as not caring for them, but
leaving them to the Thief and Wolf, he flies because he is an hireling, and
by his flight may be judged so to be, John 10. 10, 11, 13.

3. Yet some that do or may receive hire and gifts we own, as being no
hirelings, but moved and carried forth by the love of Christ, constraining them
to Preach the Gospel, and persuade men to be reconciled to God, as the Apostle,
2 Cor. 5. 14* 15. 18, 19. and 6. 1. ^^. who yet receive hire or took wages, 2
Cor. 11. 8. and gifts, Phil. 4. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. as Elisha did, 2 Kings 4*
42. and Jeremiah, Chap. ^0. 5. But,

4. Such as bring another Doctrine then that which the Apostles have Preached,
and delivered, we own not, no, though they Preach it freely, as it may seem the
false Apostles boasted they did, 2 Cor. 11, 12, 13. Yea the Wolf comes without
hireing, desiring, or sending for to the sheep, and barks against hirelings
too; seeking to scare them away, yet is no better friend to the sheep, but a
far more dangerous and hurtful Enemy, for he comes not but to scatter, catch,
rob, and destroy, John 10. Yea further, if such persons coming to such a
contrary end, and with another message should not only scorn (...), but also
give rewards to hire others to come in to them; However Ignorant and Worldly
minded men may admire such, yet in the account of God and those taught of him,
it agravates their sin and shame, Ezekiel. 16. 31. 33, 34.

5. Its given us as a Character of false Apostles, and deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, to boast of, and commend
themselves to others, by their Preaching freely and great labors and
sufferings, and to seek occasions where they can, right or wrong, (for report
say they, and we will report it, Jer. 20. 10.) against the true Ministers of
Christ to reproach, and vilify them by their taking wages or gifts, see 2 Cor.
11. 8. 13. etc.

24. Query. What is the Soul of man which the Word of God is to save, and what
is the difference between the Soul and the Spirit, seeing the Word of God
divides them asunder?
Answ. This has two Questions distinct, the first is what is the Soul of man
which the Word of God is to save? To which we say,

Its the Soul of man that God has made, Isa. 57. 16. And that by sin was
defiled, corrupted and lost, for the Son of man came to save that which was
lost; But happily they think to intimate something in this to strengthen their
denial of the Resurrection and Redemption of the dead body, as to say* that
because the Soul only is mentioned as to be saved by the Word of God, Jam. 1.
21. and 5. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 9. Therefore the dead body is not to be saved, or
Redeemed from death after the natural and bodily death.

We therefore further say.

1. That the Soul of man is understood in Scripture in a twofold sense.

1 Sometimes for the Spirit, Soul, or inward man distinct from the body or
outward man, which at death departs out of the body, and returns to God that
gave it, to be appointed to its proper place, and still retains a sensible
being, either in prison or at liberty, even till the Resurrection of the body
when they shall be for ever reunited, Genesis 35. 18. Luke 12. 20. Eccles. 12. 7.
3. John 2. And this is that in which the saving work of Christ begins, and
especially has its efficacy now, while yet the body is mortal and decaying,
though it also works in and through the mortal body, to the devoting it to
Christ, and strengthening it to service, and suffering, and preserving
blameless.

2. By the Soul or Souls of men, is frequently meant the whole person, Soul,
and body, Genesis 12. 5. and 14. 21. and 46. 18. 22. 26, 27. Deuteronomy. 10. 22. Acts 7.
14. 1 Pet 3 20. Revel. 18. 13. with Ezekiel. 27. 13. And so in the Creation of man
it is said, the Lord God formed man of the dust of the Earth, and breathed into
his nostrils the breath of Life, and man became a living Soul; And these are
the Souls, even the whole persons of men, for every of whom Jesus Christ by the
Grace of God tasted death, and gave himself a ransom, that through him they
might be saved, yea when the Soul and Body are spoken of distinctly, they are
both mentioned, as bought with one price, that God might be Glorified in both,
1 Cor. 6. 20. And so that both even the whole man might be Sanctified and
preserved in Christ, and so blamlesse even to the coming of the Lord, 1 These.
5. 23. And as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive, and appear
before the Judgment, seat of Christ, to receive the things done in the body,
as before is showed at large.

2. By the Word (whose Name is also called the Word of God) is sometimes meant,
that Word that was in the beginning with God, which Word is God, one God with
the Father, and Eternal Spirit (though distinct in respect of manner of being
in the Godhead) the same that in the fullness of time was made flesh, and in
that body of his flesh, is now raised from the dead, and Glorified with the
Fathers own self, and made both Lord and Christ, John 1. 1. 2. 14. 1 John 1. 1.
2. and 5. 7. And sometimes by the Word of God, which also was called the Word
of Christ, of the Kingdom of Grace, of Salvation, of Life, is meant that
Declaration or Revelation of his Name and Grace in Christ, as witnessed and
spoken forth by the one mouth of his Holy Apostles and Prophets since the World
began, who have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, Psalm. 147. 19. Mark 7 13.
Acts 3. 21. and 10. 36. Tit. 1. 3. Col. 3. 16. John 5. 24 38. and 8. 31. Mat.
13. 19. Acts 20. 32. Phil. 2. 16. 2 Cor. 3. And it is the Word in this sense,
the Gospel of Christ or Preaching of his Cross that is the Arm or Power of God
to save, even to open the eyes of the blind, and turn them from darkness to
light, and from the Power of Satan to God, and to the further saving the
believers here in this Life, 1 Cor. 1. 18. Romans 1. 16, 17. This is made able
through him that is declared in it, and Spiritually present with it, to save
the Soul, to build up and give the inheritance in the first fruits of the
Spirit, to the making the Spirit alive for the Righteousness sake, while yet
the body is dead because of sin, and to preserve the whole man blameless to
the coming of Christ; For this is that which he the Son of man sowes in the
heart, and ingrafts there for the saving the Soul, Jam. 3. 21. Mat. 13 19.
Acts. 20 32. And so his faithful Servants (that have it in their hearts)
Ministering in this Word, are said instrumentally to convert and save the Soul,
Jam. 5. 20. Acts 26. 18. with 1 Cor. 3. 5. 11. and 4. 15. 2 Cor. 3. 3 And so
our further answer is,

1. The saving or Salvation of the Soul includes the Salvation of the whole
man, 1 Pet. 1. 9. Jam. 5. 20. with Psalm. 33. 19, 20. and 34. 22. and 72. 13,
14. For that which is not received now in some first fruits of enjoyment, yet
is assured in and with Christ, and received by Faith, and in the hope that is
by him, as Romans 8. 10, 11. 23. Col. 1. 27. with Heb. 6 19, 20. Besides some of
the forementioned Scriptures speak of the Redemption, and Salvation to be
revealed in the last time, (in which the body shall by him be redeemed from
death, and all deceit and violence, and their former sufferings be remembered,
as Romans 8 18. 23.) And do evidently include that under the redeeming of their
Soul, as Psalm. 72. 13, 14.

2. Though no Scripture says, the Soul only, as distinguished from the body,
is to be saved by Christ; But contrariwise, that through him both may be saved.
Yet in this saving work effected by his word, or through the Preaching of his
Cross, the Soul is only mentioned in diverse Scriptures, as the subject of it,
for these Reasons.

1. It is the Spirit or Soul distinct that is made alive, and so chiefly the
subject of the Saving, or Redeeming here effected in this day, while yet the
body distinct (though devoted and yielded up to his dispose, and so in some
(...) yet remains mortal, and so dead by reason of sin, and so even those
that have the first fruits of the Spirit, yet wait for the Adoption, that is
the Redemption of the body, and though the inward man be renewed day by day,
yet the outward man decays and perishes, Rom 8. 10. 23. 2 Cor. 4 16.

2. The saving which is now effected in them, is wrought mediately through that
word Preached in and by outward means, ways and instruments; whereas that
complete saving in which the dead body shall be raised, redeemed, and fashioned
in to the likeness of his glorious body, though it shall be by Christ, and by
his mighty Voice, which now breathes, and is put forth in and with the Gospel,
yet by an immediate and wonderful putting forth of it, without the use of
outward means, and instruments, according to the working whereby he is able
even to subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3. 21. Romans 8. 11.

The next part of their Query is, what is the difference between the Soul and
the Spirit, seeing the Word of God divides them asunder.

To that we answer, 1. The text says not that the Word of God makes a
difference between, or devides them asunder one from another; But that it
pierces, even to the dividing asunder both Soul and Spirit, and so of the
Joints and Marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart;
That is, it pierces through all, and so as much through Spirit as Soul, to a
discerning (and manifesting too at his pleasure) the counsels of the heart,
even after the similitude of a Sword that pierces through a man, which devides
not one part from another, but makes way for it self. Yet,

2. There is distinction between Soul and Spirit in the Scriptures (though
sometimes both are comprehended under either of the terms*) and as
distinguished, the Spirit of a man (his mind or understanding, with the
inclination or bent of his Soul) is the Candle of the Lord, which when lighted
by him (by his inspiration, giving understanding and fixing it) searches (or
the Lord by it searches) all the inward parts of the belly.

And the Soul is that belly, or inward parts (in Solomon's sense) searched by
it, Prove. 20. 27. Even all the faculties of the Soul and its exercises, with
the thoughts and intents of the heart, etc. as Heb. 4. 12, 13. Answerable to
which distinct sense of Soul and Spirit is that profession, Luke 1. 46, 47. and
calling upon both, Psalm. 103. 1. And the Apostles prayer that their whole
Spirit and Soul and Body might be preserved blameless, etc. 1 These 5 23. Both
which Soul and Spirit are often included in one of the terms, as 1 Cor. 6. 20.
and 3 John 2.

And so the whole Soul (or Spirit and Soul) may here be renewed, delivered and
preserved (through the Grace of God in Christ, bringing Salvation) from under
the guilt and bondage of sin, while yet the body is dead, and by putting on
that new man, the body also may be delivered and preserved from under the
dominion of sin, that henceforth it should not serve or fulfill it, though sin
be still in the members warring against that new Law of the mind, Romans 6. 12,
13, 14. 19. and 7. 15. to the end* and 8. 1. 13. and 12. 1. 2. Gal 5. 16, 17,
18. Ephesians. 4. 20. 24. etc. Col. 3. 1. 5. 10.

25. Question. Whether men must be justified by the same Righteousness of
Christ in them, which Sanctifies them, yea or nay?
Answ. The true Prophets and Apostles, never use the phrase of Christ's
Righteousness in men, when speaking of that by which men are Sanctified or
Justified, for though the sanctifying and justifying effecacies of it be in
them, as also in Heaven with the Father for them, yet that which has those
effecacies, and so by which they are sanctified, and justified, is the
Righteousness wrought and perfect in himself for them in whom they are
complete; For he who knew not sin, was made to be sin for us, that he might be
made the Righteousness of God in him, for all have sinned, and come short of
the Glory of God, being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption
(he says not that in us, but) that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth
to be a propitiation, etc. Yea, with his stripes it is that men are healed,
either in such a sense as in which it may be affirmed in all men, or in such a
sense as in which its only true of believers, in whom the healing effecacie
is; Yet that by and with which they are healed, is his stripes, his
Righteousness perfected in him through sufferings, 1 Cor. 5. 25. Romans 3. 23,
24. etc. Isa. 53. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 24. And so they are made accepted in him, Ephesians.
1. 6. Whence the Apostle desired to be found in him, not having on his own
Righteousness, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the
Righteousness, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the
Righteousness which is of God by Faith, Phil. 3. 9. For of God believers are
in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, that he that rejoices might rejoice in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. with Phil 3. 3. etc. But these men being so corrupt and
reprobate concerning the Faith of his Person, and personal sufferings, must
needs reject and deride imputed Righteousness ( viz. men's being the
Righteousness of God in him, in an answerable sense, as he was made sin for
us.)

Their Question therefore as an unlearned Question, the phrase of which the
Scripture owns not, we reject; and yet for the help of others further add,

1. That the Righteousness of Christ, by and with which he justifies and
sanctifies, is one and the same; And it is that Righteousness which he has
wrought for us in his own body, in his whole abasement, and laying down his
Life that he might take it again for us, and so that Righteousness of Christ
(and he himself as the Lord our Righteousness, and Captain of our Salvation)
was made perfect through sufferings, and in his Resurrection and offering up
himself in that body, through the offering of which body of Jesus Christ once
for all we are sanctified; for by one offering, he has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified, Romans 5. and 6. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Romans 3. 23, 24. 27. Heb. 2.
10, 11. 14. 15. and 5. 9. and 9* 12. 14. and 10. 5. 14. with Psalm. 40. 6. 9.
and 71. 15, 16.

2. This Righteousness of his in what he has already done, and by means
thereof is become for us, is brought nigh and made known to us, in the evidence
and demonstration of his Spirit by his Righteousness and Faithfulness, in
what he is now doing in the Name of the Father for us, in his executing the
Office of an Apostle, or Messenger of the peace he has made, and is become for
us, and the Office of an High Priest, making intercession, and appearing in the
presence of God for us, that Spirit may be sent forth in his Name to us, making
known his Words, and by or through the knowledge of his Name, Justifying and
Sanctifying, and so making free from the dominion of sin, that henceforth they
should not serve it, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. Heb. 3. 1. Isa. 53. 11. with 1 Cor. 6. 11.
and Acts 10. 43. John 8. 31, 32. Tit 3. 4, 5, 6.

3. The way of receiving this Righteousness, and so for experimenting the
Justifying and Sanctifying effecacies of it, is by Faith in Christ, even in his
Blood, or Death in belief of the Testimony God has given of him, and so in
believing in him, as the Scriptures has said, John 7. 38, 39. Romans 3. 21, 2^.
27. and 4, 5. 22. 25. and 5. 1, 2. Acts 26. 18. Now Faith is the evidence of
things not seen, or sensibly possessed, (as before is showed, see these things
more fully in the answers to their Eleventh and Twelfth Queries.) And as for
those renewing, sanctifying and justifying effecacies of this Grace in Christ,
which it has in the believer, and so in some sense he sensibly enjoyes, as
they are not the Righteousness of Christ by which he is justified and
sanctified, But the fruits and effecacies of that; so neither are they the
object or ground, and foundation of his Faith from whence it is begotten,
living, and working, but the fruit and end of his Faith Jesus Christ himself,
as declared in the Gospel, is the Object, and also the Ground and Foundation of
that Faith that is so fruitful, he dwelling in the heart by Faith, (and not
otherwise) works effectually to the fulfilling all the good pleasure of his
goodness, and the work of Faith with Power, Ephesians. 3. 17. etc. 2 These. 1. 11.
All other sanctifications are no better then those, Isa. 65. 3, 4, 5. and 66.
17.

26. Question. What is that Light with which Christ lights every man that
comes into the World, which Thomas Moor said is both natural and Spiritual?
Answ. They vary; Thomas Moors saying (as diverse times they did their own
Question about the light, at that meeting) his saying was in answer to their
Question as thus stated (after other forms of stating it before, which when
plainly and undeniably answered, they see would not serve their turn, they then
turned it thus.) What is the Light which Christ gives, or with which he
lightneth every man that comes into the World? Is it Natural or Spiritual; His
answer to this was, that he is the Author and giver of both Natural and
Spiritual light, even of all that is truly called light and good to men, Light
being opposed in Scripture as well to sorrow, affliction, bondage and misery of
the outward man, as to ignorance and darkness of the mind, and so any help or
refreshing in, or deliverance out of trouble, yea the mercies of the Natural
life, tending to the comfortable being of it, these are called light, Hest. 8.
11. 16, 17. Isa. 45. 7. and 50. 10, 11. And the contrary evils called
darkness, as in the two last cited Scriptures, so in Isa. 8. 22. And in every
mercy of that nature men's condition is bettered from what it must have been, if
Jesus Christ had not come into the World, the Life in him does and always did
produce the light of men, even that life that was in him, by virtue and by
means of his coming into the World, and being delivered to death for our
offenses, and raised again for our Justification, which was of virtue, force
and efficacy with the Father, before the actual accomplishment of it, even
from the beginning of man's need when it was undertaken, and he foreordained,
and the purpose and Grace given us in the witnesses and oracles of it, and so
by him and by means of his coming into the World, his appearing once in the end
of the World, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, The Earth and all
the inhabitants thereof that by sin were dissolved, and must necessarily have
been plunged into extreme misery, disorder, confusion, and darkness, are
upheld in some comfortable frame and order; by him all things consist, his
mercies to man-ward are overall his works. And that all this is included in his
lighting men is plain, in verse. 10. Where, by way of explanation of the former,
he says; He was in the World, and the World was made by him, that is, it was
always upheld, and comfortably preserved, and so made, after by sin entering,
it was or had been marred; For of that making in a second sense, and as the
fruit of Redemption in him for men, it is evident he speaks (like that Deuteronomy.
3^. ^.) Seeing of its being first created by him, he had spoken in the
beginning, and now also speaks of his continual being in the World, Vertually
and Spiritually from the beginning, even as the new Maker and upholder. And so
says, the World was made by him, though it knew him not, so then of all
Mercies of that nature and pertaining to the Life of the World, He (as now
delivered for our offenses, and raised for our Justification) is the Author and
giver, for He gave his flesh for the Life of the World, and upon whom does not
his Light arise, Job. 25. 3. Psalm. 75. 3. and 36. 5, 6. with Psalm. 145. 8, 9.
Col. 1. 16, 17. John 6. 33. 51. with Chap. 1. 4. 9, 10. As likewise he is the
Fountain and Giver of all Spiritual and Supernatural light, even of the
Supernatural light and Power of his Spirit, shinning to, and upon the spirits
men, discovering and making known the Grace of God in and through the Redeemer,
and opening men's understandings to receive it, and therewith moving to
repentance, and in this, he is a Testimony to men in due time, and that in and
through the forementioned outward mercies, 1 Timothy 2 6. Acts 26. 16. 18. 1 Pet.
3. 19. Romans 2. 4. with Chap. 1. 19. 28. And the substance of this was asserted
and thus explained by us at that meeting at Lin forementioned, as also is
showed in our first brief discovery of the People called Quakers, see Pages 18.
and 19. But they proceed thus.

Name one Light that every man is lighted with, that is both Natural and
Spiritual, or else let your silence be an acknowledgement of your Ignorance
touching the Light, and that you have confuted your selves; for Thomas Moor,
would not acknowledge that eveman has a Spiritual Light in him, etc.

To all which we Answer,

This demand is as foolish, as imperious, nor could our silence to it be an
acknowledgement of our Ignorance (but rather show our refusing to submit to
their imperiousness, who though they may Lord it over others, shall not be so
owned by us,) much less can it be a confutation to our selves; For our answer,
that he gives both, or lights men with both Natural and Spiritual Light,
and so is the Author, and Giver of all the Various streams of Light, whether
Natural, or Spiritual, gives no ground at all for such an inference, that any
one stream of the Light he gives, is both Natural and Spiritual, though diverse
of them may truly be said to be so indifferent, or diverse respects; As that
which is Natural, as to its matter and way of giving, even those things that
more directly pertain to the comfortable being, perservation and refreshing of
the Natural life of man, may be said to be Spiritual in their Original, and
Author; They come from God through Christ by the effecacie of his Spirit
(though in an ordinary and natural way of working for the most part) for every
good and perfect gift comes down from above, from the Father of Light, etc.
Jam. 1. 17. Psalm. 104. 27. 30. and 145. 13. 16. But the light in these men is
darkness, and has robbed them of all right understanding of Christ who is the
Wisdom of God. And the fool says in his heart, there is no God; Yea, Father,
even those Natural streams of Light, are also to men in due time Spiritual in
their end and effecacy, for they all come to lead to him, and so to the
enjoyment of that Eternal life in him, and to that purpose have the presence
and concurance of the supernatural Light and Power of his Spirit in and with
them unto men, witnessing his goodness leading to Repentance, Rom 2. 4. Acts
14. 17. Romans 1. 19, 20. etc. But our answer forementioned, as we said before,
gives no ground at all for any such inference, that any one stream of Light
that every one is lighted with is both Natural and Spiritual, nor did we at all
confute ourselves in what T. M. refused to acknowledge, nor had we, though he
had denied that every one that comes into the World has spiritual Light in
him, according to his sense of spiritual Light, which he then gave ( viz.) The
light of Gods Spirit in their spirits, giving the knowledge of his Grace and
Truth that is in and through Christ, and opening the eyes of the mind to
perceive and know it, yea though he had also denied, that every man that comes
into the World (or as soon as he comes into the World, which must be, if it may
be affirmed of every man that comes into the World) is enlightened with such
light.

Yea, this we say, (as was then urged) the Text says not, that he inlightneth,
but lights every one that comes into the World, or gives light to them; And
though that include his giving the light of the knowledge of the Truth, by his
Spirit to men's spirits in due time, yet it takes in more as aforesaid, and as
is also showed from the Tenth verse. And so we assert (as was then also
asserted) as plainly expressed in other Scriptures, that Jesus Christ is in the
Name of the Father, a Witness and Testimony of Gods goodness, that is in and
through him unto men in due time, 1 Timothy ^. 6. Isa. 55. 4. etc. even by his
Spirit unto their spirits (as 1 Pet. 3. 19. with Genesis 6. 3. Zech. 7. 12.) so
manifesting in them that which may be known, and is held forth in God in the
means vouchsated, Romans 1. 19, 20. 28. And while we so asert, we likewise assert
withal, as plainly showed in the same Scriptures of Truth, That when he does
thus witness or manifest the knowledge of his Goodness and Truth unto the
minds or spirits of men, then always he requires something of them according
to what he gives, namely, that they should know him, receive his sayings, or
witnesses of his goodness, and thence love him, and so glorify him in the day
of their visitation, according to the means used and manifestations of his
goodness therein vouchsafed, that henceforth they should live to him that died
for them, and rose again; See the forecited Scriptures, with Eccle. 9. 12. 1
Pet. 2. 2. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 5.

But of Children in their infancy no such thing is required expressly, because
they have not known, etc. Deuteronomy. 1. ^, 2. etc. Nor are any blamed for not
knowing to do good, till they are wise to do evil; And there is a time when
they know not to choose the good and refuse the evil, and no such knowledge
being given them, nothing of that nature is required of them, though the
declarations of Gods Grace in Christ are affirmed true concerning them, and his
free promises in Christ to them, and so to be witnessed by his servants

But so soon as God requires any hearing, knowing, or acknowledgement of his
Grace of any, he prevents them with his Grace, bringing Salvation to them, even
by his Spirit to their spirits as before, sowing his Words in their hearts, as
Mat. 13. 19.

And further we say, that when the light of the knowledge of God comes to them
it shines in darkness, it finds them in darkness, yea dead in sins and
trespasses, John 1. 5. and 5. 25. Ephesians. 2. 1. 4. Else no need of shining light
into them from without them at least, not of such light as in which is both
discovery of the objects, or things to be known, as also giving of
understanding, or opening the eyes of the mind to perceive what is discovered,
as Psalm. 119. 130. with Psalm. 19. 7. Acts 26. 18.

Again we say, that if when light comes, men love darkness, and like not to
retain God in their knowledge, they are still darkness, and have not the
knowledge of God; So the Ephesians were sometimes darkness, but now says the
Apostle ye are light, (yet he says not in themselves, but) in the Lord, who is
the Fountain and Original of their light, Ephesians. 5. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 34.

But if any persist in their choosing darkness when light comes, or on hearing
reject, or after receiving the knowledge of the Truth, put it away from them,
till his holy Spirit have done shining with them, and he take it away from
them; Then they are left to hardness and blindness, and have no true or
morning light in them, but a mind void of Judgment, Romans 1. 28. with Psalm. 8.
12. 2 These. 2. 11. with 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2. Jude. 12.

And so we read of many that under one or other of these considerations, that
is either not having heartily received, or not retaining, or having rejected to
the utmost, are truly said to have no morning light or knowledge of Christ the
morning Star in them, (as Isa. 8. 20.) no truth in them; Yea, that is expressly
affirmed of such as say they have no sin, as 1 John 1. 8. 10.

But if so (say they) what says he then to this, the Gospel is Preached in
every Creature under Heaven.

Answ. To that he says,

1. Where read they those words, that the Gospel is Preached in every Creature
under Heaven? The Apostles were commissioned and instructed to Preach the
Gospel to every Creature, namely of all the Nations or Generations of mankind,
as appears by comparing the three Evangelists Relation of the Commission, Mat
28. 19. Mark 16. 15. Luke 24. 47, 48. And accordingly the Apostle Paul says,
having obtained help of God, he did continue witnessing both to small and great
(not of any thing in every of them, but) saying none other things then what
Moses and the Prophets did say should come to pass, and so witnessed them as
things not actually accomplished in their day, (as 1 Pet. ^ ^, 12.) And then
not in any person to whom they Preached, how that Christ should suffer, and
should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should show light to
the People and to the Gentiles, these things the Apostles Preached, as now
manifested by the appearing of Christ, who had now suffered and risen, and
ascended, and received the promise of the Holy Ghost, in that body prepared for
him once in the end of the World, and therein abolished Death, and thereby
brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. with
Acts 2. 22. 36. And so in that, Col. 1. 23. The words are (as in our reading)
the Gospel, which they the Collosians had heard, and of which he was made a
Minister, was, or had been Preached to every Creature, and that reading agrees
with verse. 6. where he says, it was now come unto them as in all the World,
and did bring forth fruit, it was now come unto them in the Preaching of it, it
appears it was not in them before, for then it could not have been said to
have come unto them; the Grace of God brings Salvation unto men, it finds it
not in them before; And though in its being brought to them, by the Preachings
and witnesses of it in the Light and Power of his Spirit accompanying them, it
came into many of them, such as were capable of hearing, and so was manifested
in them, as Romans 19. Yet still the thing manifested was not any thing
essentially in them, but that which may be known in God, and of his Grace and
Truth in and through Christ's Repentance, and Remission of sins in the Name of
that Jesus of Nazareth, and not in any other Name, Luke 24. 47. with Acts 4.
10, 11, 12. That Christ had now once in the end of the World suffered in the
flesh for our sins, and that he was risen from the dead in that body in which
he bore our sins on the Tree, and is now become therein Gods light to the
Gentiles, and his Salvation to the ends of the Earth, Acts 26. 22, 23. with
Chap. 2. 22. 36. and 13. 23. 38. 4^. and 17. 3. This was the thing brought to
them in the witnesses of it, which was also evidenced by the Spirit to their
spirits, and so manifested in them; Yea further, he only that believes on the
Son of God, is said to have this witness in himself, (and neither is he said
to have the thing witnessed in himself, otherwise then by Faith receiving the
Testimony God has given of Christ, which witness he has in him.) But such as
like not to retain God in their knowledge, but on hearing reject, are not yet
said to have it, though it be still manifested by his Spirit to their spirits,
and so in them working and striving for reception and entertainment, as is
foreshewed.

Yea, neither was it so manifested in or to the minds or spirits of all to whom
they witnessed it, to an opening of their eyes, and moving to Repentance; for
they witnessed to small and great, to every Creature of mankind, and so unto
such as yet were not capable of hearing, or attending to the things spoken by
them, and so of whom therefore no such thing was required, yet they witnessed
it unto such, in as much as they so Preached it, as all their hearers might
understand the latitude of the Grace of it that it reached to, and included
their Children as well as themselves, and was tidings of great joy to all
People, Acts 2. 39. and 16. 31, 32, 33. Ephesians. 3. 6. 9. The truth of which they
was also before instructed to witness, as in this their following
Ministrations, even in receiving the little Children, or Infants that were
brought to them in his Name, as the price of his Blood, and subjects of the
gracious Kingdom of God brought to us by him, Mark 9. 37. and 10. 13, 14. with
Luke 18. 15, 16. Yet had not they the Light of the knowledge of God in their
hearts, or capacity to understand or perceive the shinings forth of it in the
Face of Christ, so that Light, and capacity to such understanding in every of
them to whom their Preaching came or witness reached, nor in the real being of
the thing witnessed (otherwise then by Faith) in any. But further he faith,

2. That as by the Gospels being Preached in Creatures, may be meant, its being
witnessed in, by and through them to others, so as by Gods making use of them
to man-ward, as witnesses for him, and of him, and his things to men, in such a
sense he grants and asserts, that the Gospel is Preached by God through Christ
in every Creature under Heaven without exception, even in all his works of
Creation and Providence, as Romans 1. 20. For so the Gospel of the Grace of God,
which is his Glory to man-ward, is declared and showed forth to men, that it
may be seen and understood by them, in and by the things that are made and
preserved, for them and to them by and through Christ, as the Heavens, the
Firmament, the Sun, Moon and Stars, Psalm. 19. 1. 6. and Psalm. 8. Yea, all his
works, in and over all which his Mercy and Truth to man-ward is witnessed,
Psalm. 145. 9, 10. 15. and Psalm. 136. and 148. His preserving man, and other
Creatures for his use, and so his giving Rain from Heaven, and fruitful
seasons, etc His patience and bounty to sinners, yea his forbearance, and long
suffering to rebellious sinners, Psalm. 36. 5, 6. and 68. 18, 19, 20. Acts 14.
16, 17. Mat. 5. 45. with Luke 6. 35. Romans 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9. 15. Though of men,
his Saints do only truly bless him with the Mouth or Tongue, and from the
Heart, where the understanding and knowledge of his Goodness is received and
precious; Yet also all his works do, and more Gloriously shall praise him, he
never left himself without witness in them, to make known to the Sons of men
his mighty Acts, and the Glorious Majesty of his Kingdom; Yea so wonderful is
he in working, he knows how to make the wrath of man, which of it self works
not the Righteousness of God, yet turn to his Praise; But what is this to
their purpose? What makes this for proving such Spiritual Light (as aforesaid)
in every man more then in every beast, or plant? Do these men suppose that
every thing that may be a witness for God unto men, has the understanding of
the witness they bear, or of the thing witnessed, or Light and capacity to
such understanding in them? Surely when God opened the mouth of an Ass, she
spoke more truly and to purpose then these men; Yet who will say, she had in
her the understanding of the warning and reproof God gave to Balaam therein, or
light and capacity thereto, Numb. 22. 28. 30. Or that the Pillar of the Stones,
Genesis 31. 45. 48. 52. had in them the understanding or light of the Covenant of
which they were a witness, or that all the things that are made, as the Sun
shinning, the Rain falling, etc. have the light or understanding in them, of
the things witnessed in them to man-ward, and that may be clearly seen and
understood by them; Doubtless they are brutish that would so infer.

But it is no strange thing for men that have no Faith in Christ, but are void
of Judgment concerning that, to be also unreasonable, or absurd, 2 These. 3. 2.
Nor for such as are seeking after, and professing to be wise in themselves, to
become most foolish, Romans 1. 22, 23. 1 Cor. 1. 22, 23.

Thus have we answered in simplicity and plainness, and not with hidden things
of dishonesty, but by a plain manifestation of the Truth in the words of Truth,
have declared our mind and meaning in our words, That others when they read may
understand our knowledge in the mysteries of Christ, According to our measure,
as 2 Cor. 1. 2, 13. and 2. 17. and 4. 1, 2. Ephs. 3. 4. And have been the
larger for the helpfulnesse of such as will read and consider our Answers,
Desiring them to search the Scriptures whether these things be so; And so far
as any in reading, and by searching and comparing the Scriptures, may be helped
to understand the things that we have written to be contained in, and confirmed
by the words of Truth, let them so receive them as the Word of God and not of
man. And if in any thing they find we speak not according to that word, let
them refuse it, and show us in love by evidence of Scripture, our mistake, and
we shall thankfully accept it, (for we dare not make our selves of the number,
or compare our selves with some that commend themselves, etc. See 2 Cor. 10.
12, 13. for not he that commends himself, but whom the Lord commends is
approved, verse 18.) But let none be either overhasty to believe every word
before he find it contained and confirmed in the words of our Lord Jesus, and
in the Doctrine which is according to godliness, nor yet to speak evil of the
things he knows not, That is, if he cannot yet see it to be according to that
word already delivered in the Law and Testimony, and yet neither can be thereby
satisfied, that it is not according to it, or that the lip of knowledge is not
in it, let him suspend his judgment, and still wait in the believing
mindfulnesse of the great things in the Doctrine of Christ for further
understanding, for so its meet to be said unto God, what I see not teach thou
me. Nor have we in our answers to these queries, or in any of our dealings with
these men, walked according to any other Rule, or done by them otherwise then
we would that men should do by us; That is, we have not declared and protested
against any of their corrupt principles as evil and Antichristian, further then
we have been fully assured by the word of God, that they are such as may be
seen by our showing them thereby to be such; for so such instructions as have
not the lip of knowledge in them, but do cause to err from the words of
knowledge, they may be by the light of the Lord known and discerned to be such,
and as such to be avoided; though the depths of Satan in them; what their lip
is, and whitherto it tends, their ways being moveable, and their Depths in the
bottomless pit, we cannot know them, Pro. 5. 6. And therefore it is not our
work to search or enquire into them, Rev. 2. 24. 25. But in the holding fast
that which we have heard from the beginning of the word of the beginning of
Christ, So soon as ever we perceive and know by the light thereof, that the lip
of knowledge is not in any Doctrine or spirit that comes to us, That it lifts
not up the Son of man, by taking of his things, and showing them; but tends to
render him undesirable in what he has done, is doing and will do, and to
withdraw from the words of knowledge, we are then presently to depart from
such, to cease to hear them, and let them be to us as an accursed thing, not
further to be considered, or pondered by us, and so to warn others of them, for
with good words and fair speeches, even such may easily deceive the hearts of
the simple; that in confidence of their own strength, and out of an unstable
mind and itching ear will be often tempting God, and trying and pondering their
moveable paths, after they have perceived that the lip of knowledge is not in
them, but the Preaching of the personal sufferings of Christ, foolishness to
them; We have therefore left this for an instruction and warning to others,
that the Truth of the Gospel may remain with believers, and that such as are
Ignorant and out of the way may be recovered.

And further we desire of the Reader, if ever he see any reply to this of ours,
he would distinctly observe, if they pervert not, or alter our sayings, by
taking them in pieces, and changing expressions to mar the sense, if also they
give not a go-by to the matters of the greatest weight and importance, and
only lie at the catch to get some by-matters or words to strive and snarle
about, which can tend to no profit, but to the subverting the Reader from the
things chiefly to be minded; And in observance of this caution, we doubt not
but the Reader will be satisfied even from themselves, concerning their
Antichristian spirit, without our adding any more by way of return to theirs;
Which though we will not bind our selves from, yet we do not resolve to do,
though they should give us occasion by such sorry shifts and pretended answers
as hitherto they have returned.

As for their slanders and revilings that follow, we weigh them not, but commit
our selves to him that judges Righteously, who will at that his second coming
(which they scoff at) when He the Son of man shall appear in his Glory, make
their folly manifest to all men, and bring to light the hidden things of
darkness; Then it shall fully appear who have walked in craftiness, Pride,
Hypocrisy, and hidden things of dishonesty, in the mean time we are during his
good pleasure, in his Name and strength, his witnesses against it all.

JOHN HORN. THOMAS MOOR. Senior. THOMAS MOOR. Junior.


FINIS.

