A Defiance and Indiction OF WAR Sent by Sultan Mahomet IV. TO LEOPALD Emperor
of Germany, WHEREBY He does determine the Confusion and Ruin of the Empire, and
of the Princes of Christendom, and the Destruction of Vienna the Imperial City.
BY the sufferance and power of the great God, We Sultan Mahomet, God on Earth,
High and Omnipotent Emperor of all the World, Defender of the Mohammedan Faith,
Patron and Protector of all Christians which submit and give obedience to our
Imperial Commands, We send and declare unto thee Leopald, all wrath, calamity
and infelicity, and a total Ruin and destruction to all thy Princes, Subjects
and Abettors; We Publish, and truly declare unto thee, and to the whole
Universe, That we by the sufferance and power of the great God, styled and
named the Omnipotent and Universal God on Earth, most High and Mighty Emperor,
Sultan in Babylon, Lord of America, the most mighty in Persipolis and Numidia,
the great Assistant and helper of God, Prince from the Road of Barbary unto the
Mountains of Achaia, King of Kings from the Meridian to the Septentrian of the
Earth, from the rising place of the Sun to the setting of it, supreme Commander
of all the Seas in the Universe, the first and chiefest placed in the Paradise
of Mahomet, the Calamity and destroyer of Christendom and of all Heretics,
Infidels and Christians, the keeper and defender of the Sepulcher of thy
Crucified God, the only victorious and Triumphant Lord and Sovereign of all the
World, and of all the Dominions and Territories thereof, Thou Leopald, which
stilest and writest thy self King of our Kingdom of Hungary, which is under our
Obeisance, We will visit thee again for that cause, and also with our strength
and might of thirteen Kingdoms, with the power and force of our Janissaries,
Saphies, Asaphies, to the number of 300000 as well Horsemen and Footmen
prepared for War, with all the power and strength of Munition, and with such
power as thou nor none of thy Servants have seen, heard, or had knowledge of,
even before thy chief City Vienna, and the Country thereabouts. We Sultan
Mahomet, supreme God on Earth, against thee with all thy Aiders, Helpers and
Abettors which our Warlike strength do pronounce, declare, and protest your
uttetmost destruction, ruin and depopulation, as we can by all means possible
devise and contrive: And this we do signify unto thee, to the which thou and
thy inseparable people may prepare your selves. With us it is determined, with
our men appointed, thee and all thy German Kingdoms, Territories and Dominions
finally to confound and destroy: This Misery and Calamity we have consented
unto against thee and thy Princes; and have thou no doubt but we will come. And
We the Almighty God of the whole Universe, do hereby further declare, That all
those who shall submit themselves to our Omnipotency, and yield obedience to
our Commands, shall not only be protected and rewarded with Territories and
Lands according to their respective Merit, but shall have Liberty of
Conscience, and a free exercise of their Religion, let them be Jews or Greeks,
Otocompadians or Lutherans, or Calvinists, or of any other Persuasion, other
than Idolaters, and Jesuits whom we do abhor, and do propose to prosecute with
Fire and Sword. In these Resolutions we doubt not of the Concurrence,
Affection, and well wishes of all good People.

Dated in the City of Constantinople, out of which we did banish your
Predecessors, their Wives, Children and Friends, and made them most miserable
Slaves and Captives, the Year of our Reign Thirty Sixth.
LONDON, Printed for A. Banks, MDCLXXXIII.


