A Brief REPLY To a Late ANSWER TO Dr. HENRY MORE HIS ANTIDOTE Against IDOLATRY.

Showing That there is nothing in the said Answer that does any ways weaken his
Proofs of IDOLATRY against the Church of ROME, and therefore all are bound to
take heed how they enter into, or continue in the Communion of that Church as
they tender their own Salvation.

1 Corinthians. Chap. 5. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers shall inherit the Kingdom of God. LONDON, Printed by I. Redmayne,
for Walter Kett^lby at the Sign of the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCLXXII.

THE PREFACE,
Chiefly consisting of an Answer to the Answerers Advertisement, and the
Preface or Introduction to his Answer.
WHAT my Antagonist gives notice of in his Advertisement, ^ partly know to be
true. For it is about two years ago, that the perusal of this Answer of his, in
M. S. was offered me; but I was then wholly taken up in writing my Enchiridium
Metaphysicum, but yet promised that if he thought he had said any thing that he
in his own Conscience judged to be material against my Antidote and would
publish it, I would lay all aside and Answer it forthwith so soon as it should
come out. And whereas I was Informed that his language in several places was
not so civil to me, I added this also, that my Reply to him should be without
the least ill word, but be made only to matter of Argument. Wherefore since
this Answer is come out, besides other Obligations, I am by virtue of my
Promise obliged to Reply to it; as also with the least offensive language that
may be. Which Promise I hope I have abundantly performed.

But there is a passage or two more in his Advertisement that I cannot but take
notice of, as where he says, But now whereas, besides Dr. More, Dr.
Stillingfleet has thought it not below his name and abilities to descend to
the like foul and injurious Calumnies, in his late book Concerning the Idolatry
practiced in the Church of Rome, etc. I grant if they were Calumnies it would
be a very vile condescension indeed in either of us to debase our selves so
low, as to the doing of so great a wickedness. But when you speak of its being
below my Learned friends abilities to descend to such a charge, methinks it
seems to imply, that any man of meaner Parts might easily make that charge
good, you being so manifestly guilty thereof. Or as if you would complement us
out of the strongest hold that we have, viz. this just and true charge of
Idolatry; that quitting this Castle you might the easilyer, as you think, take
hold of us for Schismatics and carry us back captive again into that Land of
Egypt or Babylon. But this charge being true, as most certainly it is, it can
be neither below the dignity of my worthy friend Dr. Stillingfleet, nor any one
else, to insist thereon, unless it be below any ones person to endeavor the
saving of multitudes of Souls from eternal death, and the bodies of many
innocent and conscientious men from those barbarous Cruelties your Religion
exercises upon them, when you get power to do it with security. See the Preface
of my Idea of Antichristianism, Sect. 4. 5, 6.

And whereas he says, He thinks the publishing of this his Answer seasonable
for the undeceiving of the many unfortunately misguided Souls, whose leaders
(to speak favorably) seem not to understand what themselves Object; it is a
Dilemma of two hard Imputations, that pretends to gore us one way or other; as
if we were either such dishonest persons as to speak against our own
Consciences, and pretend we have reason when we know we have none, (which were
it not the fault of your party, Controversies betwixt us would soon cease, and
you would be no longer able to deceive the people) or else were at least very
silly fellows, and understood not what we say. Which my Reply, I hope, will
abundantly confute, and undeceive those unfortunately misguided Souls, which
your arts and slights have really imposed upon. But for us, how can we mislead
any, who send them to the ancient, Primitive and Apostolic Constitution of our
Christian Religion, and such as your selves cannot deny to be true? We lead
them only from the errors and corruptions that since have crept into the
Church. But thus you bemoan and weep over poor deludible Souls, whom you would
make Proselytes, till you have devoured them.

What you threaten of abler pens against Dr. Stilling fleet, and boast of your
own performance against Dr. More, as if there were nothing in Dr. Stilling
fleet on this Subject, but what might be Answered out of this of yours against
my self; when it shall so manifestly appear that your Answer is so insufficient
to weaken any of the Evidences of my Charge of Idolatry against your Church,
certainly then it will be easily concluded, that it can do no execution against
his. And then for your threatening of abler pens, I do not fear their being
overproportioned to the Ability of the Person they shall grapple with; Whose
vigor of Youth, Wit, Parts, and copious Reading and Learning, might make him
even heartily wish for such an Encounter.

Optat aprum, aut fulvum descendere monte leonem. I pass now to my Antagonists
Preface or Introduction, I know not whether to call it. But I had almost
forgotten his Titlepage, A brief Answer to the many Calumnies of Dr. Henry
More, etc. Which language is too too harsh and false. I might indeed truly have
entitled my Book, A Brief Reply to the many Cavils, etc. but I thought it not
so advisable, because the firmness and solidity of my Replies to his Answers
do perpetually demonstrate them to be but Cavils no true Answers to my charge.
But it was the great prudence of my Adversary to call my charges of Idolatry
upon their Church, Calumnies, because he might be conscious to himself that his
Answers to my Charges, whereby he would transform them into Calumnies, were so
weak and dilute, and my Replies to them might be so strong, that unless himself
called them Calumnies the slow witted people might not easily take them to be
so, no more than they can tell what to make of a bad picture, unless the name
be writ under it, a Cock or a Cow, or the like.

There is but one thing more that I shall take notice of in the Title Page,
which is the omitting to set his Name to his Book; so that I am as it were to
combat with a Spectre in the dark. I could never learn any more concerning my
Adversary than that he was a Doctor of the Roman Church. For what reasons he
conceals his name I know not, I suppose he is not ashamed of the Cause he
undertakes, and I speak ingenuously and as I think the Cause need not be
ashamed of such an Advocate, so far as I can judge of him by his performance.
For it is the Fate and nature of this Cause, that no man can maintain it by
Truth. And therefore to bring a true Argument against us in defense of it,
would be to bring an impertinent one. For (...), Truth always agrees with,
never clashes with Truth, as Aristotle has noted. And therefore it is not to be
imputed to the weakness of my Antagonist, but of his Cause, that with
undeniable evidence I have perpetually confuted his Answers; though I believe
he has brought as good as the Cause is capable of, and managed them and
intermingled them with such circumstantial Rhetorical humors, slights and
tricks, to make something of nothing, and to make a show of Answering and
confuting me, that I must freely confess he is a complete Artist in that Roman
Sophistry, whereby they become cunning Anglers for poor deceivable Souls. And
thus much in short upon his Title Page and Advertisement.

We come now to his Introduction, which I shall cast into so many Paragraphs,
and so Answer them in order.

Paragraph the first.
Dr. Henry More is a Person whose Learning and Parts have brought him into a
name, among the Professors of the refined Arts and Sciences. Fame speaks him a
great Philosopher, And his Public works are said to avouch no less. Nay some
have passed so far in favor of his Character as to term him, The great
Restorer of the Platonic Cabbala. And truly, if this be so, I conceive the
Gentleman had done himself a great deal of right, if he had still kept to his
own Element; for as much as his late unlucky engaging in Controversial
Disputes, cannot but prove a blot to his former undertakings: For the Learned
world must needs acknowledge that Dr. More the Controvertist, is much
degenerated from Dr. More the Philosopher.

The Answer.
Here* observe the art and smooth cunning of my Adversary, who drives at these
two things: First to make show of a great deal of equity and candor of
judgment, in acknowledging, notwithstanding the Controversy betwixt us, that I
am not altogether nothing in matters of Philosophy, but have writ with some
success and acceptance on such Subjects; that he thus seeming so impartial and
indifferent a man, and so readily acknowledging any thing well done by me, he
may the more easily be believed where he gives judgment against me, and says,
That though I be something succesfull indeed in Philosophy, yet I am very
unlucky and unskilful in Theological Disputes, a tolerable Philosopher, but a
very mean Controvertist in points of Divinity. The other drift is, to make me,
if it were possible, to melt and relent, that I have thus lessened my credit in
the world by my unfortunately ingageing in Controversies betwixt us and the
Church of Rome, as if he bemoaned my misfortune therein; who if I had kept to
my own Element of Philosophy, might have been gracious and acceptable with all
the world, with the Pontifician party as well as with the reformed, and kept
up my Credit in force with all, when as now I have hugely impaired my repute,
at least with those of his Party.

But to the first I Answer, That though this Intimation of his own Impartiality
be craftily enough managed, yet that general acknowledged Testimony of my
suffering in Philosophy is a witness against himself. For if I have been so
useful and succesfull in my Philosophical demonstrations of the existence of
God and Immaterial Beings, in the vindication of Divine Providence, in the
proving of the Immortality of the Soul, and in finding the ancient Iudaical
Cabbala, (which the Platonic Philosophy is so near akin to,) so artificially
couched in the Text of Moses, and the like, all which tend to the honor and
safety of the Christian Religion, the same clearness of sight which helps me to
discern and judge of these things, cannot but enable me to judge also in those
concerning points that are betwixt you and us; As that eye that can see one
color right, is not confined to that color, but by the same faculty and
soundness of sight can see another. And it is more my impartialness and
unprejudicedness than any thing else that makes me see so clearly and so truly
in any thing.

As to the second, my Adversary has suggested no more, nor so much as I have
diverse times reflected upon my self, and was well aware of before I meddled
with these kind of Controversies: namely that it would lessen my repute and
favor with many. But if I seek to please men, how shall I be the servant of
Jesus Christ, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 1. 10. And as for the business of
Repute and Esteem in the world, I thank God I am convinced even from my very
Heart and Soul, that I ought to be utterly dead to all Self-joy and
Self-gloriation, and therefore if any thing happen cross to that life, that
ought to be mortified in me, if it moves me not, I am at peace; if it does, it
is yet the gift of God to me, and I am admonished thereby to advance furth^r
into that death, by the power and Spirit of Christ, that will at length lay
asleep all such disturbances in my Soul for ever. And there are greater matters
than the esteem of men, which I am not insensible, but have always been well
aware that I run the hazard of, and such as that wisdom, which is according to
the Spirit of this world, sets the greatest esteem of all upon. But this I
thank God could never affright me into the neglect of so undispensable a duty,
as the declaring so important truth, so exceeding clear to my self, and of so
unspeakable consequence for the Church of God, and for the settling of a true
grounded peace in the Christian world, That there might be truly one flock and
one Sheepfold, and Jesus Christ the true Shepherd over all; which cannot be
till such Barbarous and Idolatrous Laws and Institu^es be reversed as obtain
still in the Papacy. But for my part, my great Fort and Shelter against all the
Inconveniences I expose my self to, by my just liberty of speech, is to keep as
near as I can in that frame of spirit which our Savior commends to us in that
Precept of his, Matthew. 5. 44. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despightfully use you and
persecute you. Father forgive them for they know not what they do, Luke 23. 34.
This is the Sanctuary I desire to take shelter in, even in that ineffably
profound and humble Spirit of unself-interessed Love, which I infinitely prefer
before all the keenness of wit and crafty prudence of the Spirit of this world,
that so subtily shifts for it self, which I envy no man's use or enjoyment of,
may but my Soul sufficiently incorporate with this lovely Spirit of our Lord
Jesus Christ, may that be the lot of mine inheritanec, both in this life and
for ever. For this is that which is truly invincible indeed, and will easily
put by any such thrust as my Adversary has offered at me in this Paragraph.

Paragraph the second.
He has lately set forth an Exposition of the seven Epistles to the seven
Churches of Asia. The whole piece is of a pure Romantic strain, wherein the
Authors fancy being broken loose from the command of Reason, and leaping over
all boundaries of Church Authority, and the faith of his Ancestors, runs on at
elevenscore, as if he were upon a warm scent, giving chase to some of his
Platonical Idea's.

The Answer.
This is indeed a pretty pleasant Rhetorical career, but what it would affirm
in plain English is this, That my Exposition of the Epistles to the seven
Churches is but a mere fancy. And the Arguments he offers at to prove his
Assertion are these, That it is against Church Authority, against the Faith of
our Ancestors, and that I have brought no Reasons to prove it. As to the
Authority of the Church, there was never any general Council, nor any other
that I know, that ever declared that such a Prophetical sense as I have given
of these seven Epistles is false, nor for any doctrine that clashes with any
thing supposed in my Exposition, while the Church continued Symmetral, I mean
before her Apostasy. But in that the ancient Fathers declared, upon the removal
of that which hinders, 2 These. 2. 6. that the Apostasy of the Church would
ensue, and the appearing of Antichrist, they expounding also the (...) of the
intireness of the Roman Empire, that is consonant to my Exposition of those
seven Epistles and to the assigned Interval of Pergamus.

But now in that he insinuates I have brought no Reason for my Exposition, I
think I have brought no less then demonstration for it. And I think any one
that has a Genius to read and judge of such things will easily acknowledge it
upon the considerate perusal of my Exposition, and serious pondering the tenth
Chapter, wherein the strength thereof is more briefly represented. If we can in
the contemplation of Anatomy in the body of an Animal, observing how all the
parts conspire to one end, (the convenient functions of life for such an
Animal,) conclude a Providence therein; certainly upon taking notice, that the
whole frame of all these Epistles and the order of them, the notations of the
proper names not excepted, do all entirely tend (as all the flesh of an Animal
is made into muscles for fit and due motions for that Animal) to set out the
state of the Church in seven entire Intervals from the beginning to the end,
this is as certain a sign that these Epistles are such a Divine Prediction or
Prophecy, as such an Anatomy is of such a piece of Divine Providence in that
Creature.

Paragraph the third.
To this he has adjoined a pretended Antidote against Idolatry, with
Application to the Council of Trent, and for the putting a stop (as he phrases
it) to the Romish Infection. His most formidable weapon is that harsh and
unmanly Rhetoric called Railing. His phrase is rough and clogged with much
dirt, which he throws too bountifully upon persons which never deserved it at
his hands. His Objections are bold, uncivil, irreligious; not without a deep
tincture of Geneva.

The Answer.
My useing nor affecting any other Rhetoric but plain propriety of Speech or
Scripture phrase, applied to things that are true, that is that which makes it
both harsh and formidable to those that are friends to falsehood. And this it is
which they call Railing: Such as when I call Idolatry, Idolatry, and Pagan-like
Idolatry, Pagan-like Idolatry, and the unjust and cruel killing of innocent
men, barbarous murder. But that it should be unmanly to speak truth I
understand not, or yet ungentile in such necessary occasions as these* (...),
to speak Truth was one of the main characters of a Gentleman amongst the
Persians though Pagans, so that it is a sad thing that it should be ungentile
so to do amongst Christians. And why is my phrase said to be rough and clogged
with much dirt, but that it expresses such things as are scabrous and dirty. A
Poet or Painter describing a Leper or a man newly taken up out of a pit of
mire, if their pens or pencils describe true, by you they must be called rough
or clogged with much dirt or mire. In the mean time it is a sad case that the
constitution of your Religion is such that we cannot set it down in proper and
significant language but we must seem to rail at you in your own judgments,
though we speak only the Truth. And for his talking of my throwing dirt upon
persons, For my part I have no personal controversy with any, but only
declare against the corruptness of the Roman Religion, with which they
endeavor to infect the people, and against their Idolatry in particular. Which
I do out of a spirit of common charity both to them and our selves, wishing not
the least hurt to them in any regard, but being ready to serve them in what is
fit and in my power to serve them, in any thing.

My Objections indeed are bold because I have clear truth on my side, but they
can seem uncivil and irreligious only to your selves, because it is a ruffling
as it were, by rude reason, of your trim Formalities in your superstitious* and
Idolatrous Worship which you call Religion. But as for the deep Tincture of
Geneva, I am as much a stranger to it as to Rome, but ready to receive of
either any useful truth I am as yet unacquainted with. But where they offer
Errors I am as little concerned in the one as in the other.

Paragraph the Fourth.
And therefore were it not, that the Opinion of his supposed Abilities, may
cast a favorable reflection upon all that issues from his brain, and gain
Credit to his Antidote amongst his vulgar Zealots, to the irreparable damage
of their Souls, his work might have lain neglected, as without a Reader, so
without an Adversary. But in regard the Doctor has prefixed his Name to the
Book as Author, and that a great Name is a great Argument with some to evince
the truth of the Contents, and that no doctrine is so absurd but may spread
under the professed Patronage of a famed Divine; therefore some things must be
said by way of Rejoinder to the Antidote, least some unwary Readers seeing the
Doctor so full gorged against Popish Idolatry, and repeating his Invectives
almost in every page with endless tautologies, should tamely suffer themselves
to be borne down the stream with big words, and think all is Gospel and
well-grounded, that falls with so much noise and confidence from the mouth of a
Doctor.

The Answer.
The brief account of this long Paragraph is this: That he would make his own
believe, that there is nothing but my Name, my degree in Divinity, and the
confidence of my affirming those things whereof in my Antidote I do pronounce,
that makes my Book taken notice of, but that it would be of it self the weakest
and most worthless thing that ever was penned. Which if it be so, my Antagonist
has had a fair opportunity with ease to raise his Trophies on so great a Name,
as he is pleased to call it, and so mean Performance. And my Arguments being so
plain, and such as are not above the meanest Capacity, if his Answers are as
plain and bear covincing truth with them, he need not fear but he will take
away all the credit he says my Antidote has obtained amongst my vulgar Zealots,
to the irreparable damage of their Souls. But in the mean time that is either
perversely or unskilfully insinuated; As if there could be no zeal against
Idolatry but it must be a sign of a vulgar Spirit, (so gentile a thing is it in
contempt of God and his holy Commandments to complement Idols or Images) or as
if their being reclaimed from or fortified against Idolatry could be any
prejudice to their Souls.

Paragraph the fifth.
And indeed I am already informed that some well-meaning Protestants, who have
a great kindness for the Author and no less value for the Work, have called for
an Answer to it with a kind of insulting accent, as conceiving no such Answer
could be given. They (poor Souls) thinking, that surely the Doctor would never
have been so positive in his Assertions, if the strength of his evidences were
not such as might bear all the stress he lays upon them.

The Answer.
It was but a plain expression of their confidence I dare say, which the
height of my Adversaries Rhetoric calls Insultation, in that they professed
they conceived my Antidote to be a Book unanswerable. And it is a sign to me
that they duly understood the weight and solidity of my Arguments, that they
did with such confidence pronounce them unanswerable. And I hope upon the
perusal of my Reply to my Adversaries pretended Answer, not only those that
have a kindness for me, but all lovers of the Truth will acknowledge them
unanswerable; And that those are no such poor Souls in his sense, in that they
deemed my Arguments no less strong than my self was positive in asserting of
them, but that they are persons of a clear and perspicacious Judgment.

The sixth and last Paragraph.
Wherefore seeing the concern of Souls is at stake, whom he seeks by a
pernicious wile to seduce, venting poison gilded over with the specious title
of an Antidote; the design of these few pages is to sum up briefly the Doctors
Arguments, allowing to each a due reflection, and to represent the nullity and
inconclusiveness of all that is material in him as to his foul and odious
Charge of Idolatry, drawn up against his, and our common Mother Church.

The Answer.
This is fine Rhetoric again, and an high boast, as if he could so easily
bring the solidity and firmness of my demonstrations to a mere Nullity. Some
men build Castles in the Air, and others think they can batter down Castles on
the Earth though built on Rocks, although they have nothing but water-squirts
or elderguns to discharge against them. But it is a pious design he undertakes,
as if it were the concern of Souls not to be sufficiently heedfull how they
commit Idolatry; or as if I could seek by pernicious wiles to seduce them into
the ancient pure Apostolic way, unto that faith and practice which was in use
and the known way to Heaven before that grand Apostasy into these gross
Idolatries seized the Church. And why should any Soul be afraid of being
deceived by me, when I show them no other way then what upon a free and
impartial search I find to be true and go in my self, driving on no worldly
Interest at all in my choice thereof, or in my charity of showing it to others,
I getting not a penny for my pains, nor expecting nor desiring any thing, nay it
being even according to my Adversaries own acknowledgement, against my worldly
Interest. But the love of Christ constrains me, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor.
5. 14. which extends it self to your Church as well as to my own. For He
would all men should be saved and leave those ways that lead to eternal death.

Nor would our charge of Idolatry, being true, prove odious to you, but that
you hate the light that would convince you, because your deeds are evil. But
for drawing any such Charge against my own Church, I am so far from it, that I
have clearly Vindicated her from all suspicion of Antichristianism, of which
Idolatry is no mean part, at the end of my Synopsis Prophetica. Nor know I what
common Mother you and I can have, unless you would become a Convert to the
Truth, and forsake all the gross corruptions and Idolatries of the Church of
Rome. For so we may be both members of the ancient Apostolic Church, and Sons
of that Jerusalem which is above, which is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26.

And thus I have Answered each Paragraph in my Antagonists Preface or
Introduction. In my Replies to his Answers I shall not always covet to set down
his Text so entire, For it would swell the Volume into too big a bulk; but for
both shortness and perspicuity disenveloping what pretended strength of
Argument there may be, from the manifold heterogeneous humors and strains of
Art and Rhetoric, I shall bring the bare edge of his Objections against my
Antidote and then Reply to them, which I suppose will be less tedious to the
Reader. For if I should bring in such things as are not essential to the Cause,
I must also be so impertinent as to Answer them, and so we shall make so long a
story of it betwixt us that the Reader may fall asleep before he gets half way,
which is ordinarily the fate of these Books of Answers and Replies.

But this Volume consisting of the Text of my Antidote, each Chapter being
prefixed before his Answers to the Conclusions or Paragraphs of them, and my
Replies set under each Answer, I hope it may prove as little tedious, and it
may be more pleasant than if I had done all along as some do in their own
Treatises, raise Objections at the end of each Chapter, or upon each Point, and
so Answer them.

And I will assure thee, Reader, that with all possible faithfulness and to my
best skill I have represented the utmost strength of his Answers where I have
not brought his Text entire. Of which if thou have any doubt, his Book is not
great so that thou may satisfy thy scrupulosity at a very reasonable rate.

As for his harsh language to me, I very seldom take notice of it in my
Replies, nor will I here concern my self to collect any specimens of it. For I
have no mind to quarrel but only to defend the Truth, let people reproach my
Person as they please, and am at perfect peace with my Adversary, even while I
am enforced to enter this Combat with him. Of which I desire thee, Reader, to
be a diligent and impartial Spectator. For there is not a more material point
can be controverted, nor of greater necessity thoroughly to be understood, than
this charge of Idolatry upon the Church of Rome.

The more considerable ERRATA Correct thus.
Preface p. 16. l. 6. for suffering r. sufficiency. p. 21. l. 12. r.
inheritance.

PAge 17. l. penult. r. as well as. p. 21. l. 30. for must r. most. p. 24: l.
18. for ruin ^. mince. p. 25. l. 21. r. (...). l. 25. for application ^.
appellation. p. 32. l. 16. for empty r. imply. p. 35. l. 18. r. as ridiculous
p. 37. l. 12. for as r. if. l. 31. for Now r. Nor. p. 43. l. 23. r. so say ^.
p. 65. l. 24. r. chanceableness. p. 66. l. 11. for the r. that. p. 69. l. 6.
for none r. not. p. 88. l. 3. r. (...). p. 89. l. 20. for thirteen r. nineteen.
for all r. most. l. 21. for toward r. at p. 98. l. 3. (...). p. 101. l. 10. for
commemoration r. commemorative. p. 142. l. 6. r. perfect. p. 187. l. 23. r. on
him. (John 7. 37, 38.) p. 207. l. 10. ^. God. p. 208. l. 25. r. imbued. p. 218.
l. ^. for it r. is. l. 20. for induing r. ^nding. p. 241. l. 9. r. through. p.
296. l. 4. for them r. there. p. 312. l. 23. r. Dialog^^s. p. 314. l. 7. r.
enervate.

THE ANTIDOTE AGAINST IDOLATRY.
CHAP. I.
what is Idolatry according to Divine Declaration.
1. THere are two ways in general of discovering what is or ought to be held to
be Idolatry amongst Christians; the one, Divine De^laration, the other, clear
and perspicuous Reasons: Which though they may happily reach the one no farther
than the other, that is to say, that whatsoever may be concluded to be Idolatry
by Divine Declaration, the same may also by unprejudiced Reason, and vice versa
yet their joint concurrence of Testimony is a greater assurance to us of the
Truth; and two cords twisted together are stronger than either single.
Wherefore we will make use of both, and begin with Divine Declaration first.

2. The first Conclusion therefore shall ^e, That as in civil Governments it is
the Right of the Supreme Power to define and declare what shall be or be held
to be Treason, and punishable as such: so it is most manifestly the Right of
God Almighty, who is also infinitely good and wise, to define and declare to
his people what shall be or be held to be Idolatry, which is a kind of Treason
against God, or crimen laesaa majesta^is Divinae. And what is thus declared
Idolatry by God is to be held by us to be such, though the Ludicrousness and
Fugitiveness of our wanton Reason might otherwise find out many starting-holes
and fine pretenses to excuse this thing or that action from so foul an
Imputation.

But as in civil affairs the declaring such and such things to be Treason, does
in a Political sense make them so ipso facto; so God's declaring such and such
things to be Idolatry, they do to us ipso facto become Idolatry there^y: though
to an ordinary apprehension, perhaps, neither this would have seemed Treason,
nor that Idolatry, without these antecedent Declarations. But where the
Lawgiver is infallible, there is all the reason in the world we should submit
not only to his Power, but to his Judgment in the Definitions of things, and
rest sure that that is Idolatry which he has thought fit to declare so to be.

3. The second Conclusion; That what is declared Idolatry by God to the Jews
ought to be acknowledged Idolatry by us Christians. The ground of this
Conclusion is fixed in the nature of the Christian Religion. For Christianity
being a far more spiritual Religion than that of Judaism, and therefore
abhorring from all Superstition, there cannot be the least Relaxation to the
most rancid of all Superstitions, Idolatry it self. Wherefore whatsoever was
accounted Idolatry amongst the Jews, and so defined by a Divine Law, must be
reckoned much more such under Christianity, there being not the least pretense
for any Relaxation.

Besides, there was nothing under the Jews (or can by any people be) rightly
deemed Idolatry, but it is carefully enough cautioned against and plainly
forbid in the first and second Commandments of the Decalogue. But the whole
Decalogue is Moral, and so declared by God, in that it is said to be writ by
his own finger on the Tables of stone, Exodus 31. 18. (which are Symbols of the
permanent substance of our Souls, on which all the general Precepts of Morality
are engraven as innate Notions of our Duty.) And therefore it is hereby
intimated that the Precepts of the Decalogue are just and fitting, not only
(...), but (...), not only by an external Law, but engraffed in our very
Nature and Reason; and that the root and ground of them will easily be fetched
from thence.

To which you may add, That it were a very immethodical and heterogeneous
Botch, unworthy of the Wisdom of God and of his servant Moses, when as all the
rest of the Decalogue is Moral, to fancy one or two of the Commandments of
another nature. This is so rash and gross a Reproach to the Divine Wisdom as
truly, in my judgment, seems unexcusable.

But besides this, The Morality of the Decalogue is also acknowledged by the
Church, it making part of their Liturgy everywhere, and we begging an ability
of obeying the Second Commandment as well as the rest: and Christ also refers
to the Decalogue for eternal life, Mark 10. 18, 19.

And lastly, It seems as it were singled from all the rest of Moses Laws, as a
lasting and permanent Law to the Church of God, (whence it is entered into our
very Catechisms,) never to be abolished, or rather vigorously to be kept in
force, for the Second Commandment's sake particularly, that it might strongly
bear against those Invitations to Idolatry, that may seem to offer themselves
in the nature of our Religion, or reclaim the Church from it when they were
fallen into it, as well as it was to keep back the Jews from joining in Worship
with their Idolatrous neighbors round about them. Wher^fore all manner of
Idolatry being cautioned against by the Moral Decalogue given to the Jews,
there are no kinds thereof that ought to be entertained or allowed of by any
Christians.

4. The third Conclusion; That whatever was Idolatry in the Heathen, the same
is Idolatry in us, if we commit it. The reason of which Assertion is this,
Because the Heathen had not so express a Declaration from God against all
manner of Idolatry as the Jews and Christians have: and therefore wherever
they are guilty of Idolatry, the Jew and Christian, if they do the like things,
are much more.

The fourth Conclusion; The Idolatry of the Pagans consisted in this, viz. in
that they either took something to be the supreme God that was not, and
worshipped it for such; or else worshipped the supreme God in an Image; or gave
religious Worship, that is to say, erected Al^^rs, Temples and Images, offered
Sacrifice, made Vows to, and invoked, such as they themselves knew not to be
the supr^me God, but either the Souls of men departed or other Demons, or else
particular Appearances o^ Powers of Nature.

The fifth; That both Divine Declaration and the common Consent of Christendom
do avouch to us, that all the aforesaid Pagan Modes of Idolatry practiced by
them were in t^ose Pagans practices of Idolatry. And therefore, by the third
Conclusion, they must be much more so i^ either the Jew or Christian.

5. The sixth; That giving religious Worship, that (...) to say, erecting
Temples, building Altars, Invoking making Vows, and the like, to what is not
the suprem^ God, though not as to him, but as to some inferio^^ helpful Being,
is manifest Idolatry. This is plain out (...) the precedent Conclusion; and may
be farther confirm from this Consideration, That Idolatry was very ra^ amongst
the Nations, especially the Romans, if thi^ Mode of Idolatry be not truly
Idolatry. And scarce any thing will be found Idolatry amongst them, but taking
that to be the supreme God which is not, and worshipping it for such. But if
any Being on this side the supreme God may be worshipped with religious Worship
void of Idolatry, all things may, though some more nonsensically and
ridiculously than others. Wherefore to use any of the abovesaid Modes of
Worship to what is inferior to the supreme Being, though not as to the supreme
Being, must be Idolatry; or else the Roman Paganism it self is very rarely, if
at all, chargeable therewith, they having a Notion accurate enough of the
supreme God, and distinct enough from their other Deities; so that unless they
chance to worship him in an Image, they will ^eldom be found Idolaters, or
rather never, according to the opinion of some, who say, none that have the
knowledge of the one true God can be capable of Idolatry.

6. The seventh; That to sacrifice, burn Incense, or make any religious
Obeisance or Incurvation to an Image in any wise, as to an Object of this
Worship, is ^dolatry by Divine Declaration. This is manifest out of the second
Conclusion and the first, as may appear at first sight. For it is plainly
declared in the second Precept of the Decalogue touching Images, Thou shall not
bow to them, nor worship them: Of which undoubtedly the sense is, They shall
not be in any wise the Object of that Worship which thou performest in a
religious way, whether by Bowing down to them, or by what other way soever. For
the second Commandment certainly is a Declaration of the mind of God touching
religious Worship, let the Ceremonies be what they will.

The eighth* That to erect Temples, Al^ars, Images, or to burn Incense, to
Saints or Angels, to invoke them, or make Vows to them, and the l^ke, is plain
^dolatry, This is apparent chiefly out of the third, fourth, fifth and sixth
Conclusions of this Chapter. For the Pagans Demons exquisit^ly answer to the
Christians Saints and Angels in this point; saying that this spiritual
Fornication is a Rape upon our Saints and Angels, but simple fornication in the
Heathen with their impure Demons.

The ninth; Religious Incurvation toward a Crucifix, or the Host, or any
Image, as to an Object, and not a mere unconsidered accidental Circumstance, is
Idolatry. This is manifest out of the seventh and eighth Conclusions. But the
Worship of Latria exhibited to the Host upon the opinion of Transubstantiation
is Idolatry by the third and fourth.

7. Conclusion the tenth; To use on set purpose in religious Worship any Figure
or Image only circumstantially, not objectively, but so as to bow toward it,
or to be upon a man's knees before it with Eyes and Hands devoutly lifted up
toward it, but with an intention of making it in no sense any Object of this
religious Worship, yet if this were in a Country where men usually and
prof^ssedly do, it were notwithstanding for all this intention a gross piece of
Idolatry.

But if the whole Country should conspire to make this more plausible sense of
those Incurvations and Postures; admit we might hope it were not Idolatry, yet
it would be certainly a most impious and wicked Mocking of God, and ^luding his
mind in the second Commandment, (that naturally implies the forbidding any
Worship or Incurvation toward Images in a way of Religion,) and a crime as
scandalous and near to Idolatry as the going into bed to another man's Wife,
with chaste pretensions, would be to gross Adultery.

Nay, indeed, it is very questionable, if he knowingly and deliberately put
himself into these postures before an Image, whether the Image will not be the
Object of th^se Postures and Incurvations whether he will or no. Or rather it
seems plain, beyond all questioning, that it will be so. For there is a
corporeal Action significative of Honor and Respect corporeally (though not
mentally) directed toward and received by the Image, and this at the choice of
the Religionist, which intitles him to the fact.

But we need not labor much touching this last Conclusion, the two former
abundantly convincing the Church of Rome of multifarious Idolatries, if they
will stand to Divine Definitions, or the Declarations of Holy Scripture
touching this point.

ANSWERS AND REPLIES On CHAP. I.
His Answer to the first Conclusion.
To this Conclusion, says my Adversary, I only return this Remark; That the
learned Simile, wherein the Doctor spends many words, might very well have
been dispensed with, without any offense to Logic or impeachment to the
Authors judgment. For the Simile seems to aim at the clearing and setting the
unquestionable Prerogative of an increated Power, upon the right of a mere
humane Jurisdiction: which is in effect, an unskilful piece of Hysteron
p^oteron, making a truth of the highest rank to truckle under an inferior
Principle: Which, considering there is no Power but of God, ( Romans 13.) can
have no truth in it, but by presupposing that very truth which it pretends to
illustrate and establish.

The Reply.
THis is a very remarkable Remark indeed, and (...) as g^ves timely notice of
the design of my Antagonist, which is to make a show of saying something to
every Conclusion, though he knows in his own Conscience, being of that wit and
parts that he is, that it is really nothing to the purpose, as most certainly
this is not. For I do not go about to establish the Prerogative of an uncreated
Power upon the right of humane Jurisdiction; but the Argument is a Comparatis,
That if the supreme Power amongst men, have the right to define and declare,
etc. Then much more or most abundantly clear it is, that it is the right of God
Almighty, who is infinitely good and wise, to define and declare, etc. Our
Savior ( M^t 7.) argues thus, If men being evil give good gifts to their
children, how much more will our Heavenly Father give good gifts to them that
ask him. Does he there establish the bounty of God on the bounty of evil men;
but argues a Minori, if they that are less willing and able to do good,
notwithstanding do it, much more will God who is goodness it self, and
infinitely able and willing to do good, be sure to do good to those that call
upon him. And so say I, If it be the right of finite Mortals, that have the
supreme Power, to define and declare, it is much more, or most of all true in
God Almighty, who is also infinitely good and wise, that he has the right to
define and declare, etc. So that my Antagonist, without any Offense against
Logic or impeachment to his Judgment, might have saved himself the labor of
this assault upon my first Conclusion, and ingenuously confessed it as it is,
impregnable and inexpugnable.

His Answer to the second Conclusion.
His assault also on my second Conclusion is very oblique and elusory. Now,
says he, that the whole Decalogue is moral he makes some needless attempts to
prove, chiefly for the second Commandments sake. All which proofs it is easy to
take off by this single Answer: I say then, as to the second Commandment, if he
expound it so as only to Prohibit the making or worshipping of Idols or Images
of false Gods, I shall readily grant it to be moral and strictly binding both
the Jews and Christians: But if he puts any other meaning on the Text, he begs
the Question, and he must excuse me if I call for ^is further proof, etc. The
sense of which Answer in brief is this, That though he acknowledge the whole
Decalogue moral, (Else why does he say I make needless attempts to prove it?)
yet if I expound the Morality of the second Commandment so as that I would
thereby show it unlawful to worship any Images saving of false Gods, which he
calls Idols, that it will not go down with him, unless I more fully prove the
Morality of this Commandment to extend also to the Prohibition of worshipping
any Image suppose of the true God, or of Saints and good Angels: This is the
full sense and scope of this first Answer. But he comes in also with a
secondly, That some both Catholic and Protestant Divines own no more then a
Ceremonial Precept in the second Commandment, if extended to any Universal
Prohibition of all Images, and under that notion given only to the Jews.

The Reply.
In Reply to the First; I first take notice, That he is fain to pass over my
first ground of this second Conclusion as too hard for him to deal with, namely
the Spirituality of our Christian Religion. Which ground being unshaken, the
second Conclusion remains firm, from Instances of Jewish Idolatry in Scripture.

But now for the extent of the Moral sense of the second Commandment of the
Decalogue, that it should forbid the bowing to any Images whatsoever in the way
of Religion or Devotion, the words aptly spreading to that latitude; In the
first place I say, My Adversary should bring reason to the contrary: For we are
with fear and reverence to receive the Laws of God in such an extent or
latitude of sense, as, it being natural, will be most effectual to keep us from
sinning against them. Otherwise, if my Adversary would be still more humoursom,
and would say, That stealing from a man of another Religion, killing of him, or
covering his goods were Lawful; and I should produce those Commandments
against him, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not covet,
etc. He might roundly reply after his Fashion, that if I understand them of
stealing from, killing or coveting any ones goods but theirs of our own
Religion, I beg the Question. Which consideration alone, methinks, should make
any one senside of the great absurdity of his Answer to the present case of
worshipping of Images.

But yet again in the second place, I say it is necessary and inevitable to
understand the second Commandment in that extent of sense that I suppose it to
have: For it is manifest, that the second Commandment as well as the first,
treats of Religion and our Worship of God. The first is, Thou shall have no
other Gods but me, that is to say, We shall exhibit Religious Worship to no
other Beings besides himself, and so make as if they were Gods. For the
all-wise God knows there is really no other Gods besides himself, nor any can
really make them so. But men may make as if there were, by giving Religious
Worship to them, though they be no Gods. So that here all false Deities,
whether Angels, Demons, or separate souls of men, or what ever Powers of
nature, are plainly forbid to be worshipped or made Gods of, or acknowledged to
be Gods by any Religious Worship. Which therefore a fortiori takes away all
erecting Images to be bowed to or worshipped in reference to them. In so much
that the second Commandment seems Tautological, or at least superfluous, if it
be merely to forbid the making of Images of Worship for those Gods, whose at
all having, or any way worshipping is already so plainly forbid.

Whence it necessarily follows, that at least chiefly, though not only, the
making and worshipping of Images, in reference to the true God, is forbid by
the second Commandment: Whom the Commandment strictly forbids to be worshipped
in any Image whatsoever, that represents any thing in the whole Universe,
Heaven, Earth, or Sea, etc. This I say, is plainly the principally intended
sense, according to free and unprejudiced Reason. But yet the Precept is so
penned, that in a secondary scope it forbids the Religious bowing to or
worshipping all Images whatsoever. Thus plain is it, that the worshipping any
Images of the true God is here strictly forbidden, contrary to what our
Adversary pretends.

Which Interpretation the Lawgiver himself, who best knows the meaning of his
own Laws, does plainly ratify, Exodus 32. where Israel worshipping God himself
in a visible Image the Golden Calf, provoked Gods wrath so as t^ere fell thirty
Thousand of them by the Sword, for so heinous a crime of Idolatry. So that the
true Exposition of this Law, as Draco's Law was said of old to have been, was
written in blood. So solid and authentic is this sense thereof, namely, That
as he will have nothing else besides himself worshipped with Religious Worship,
so himself will not be worshipped in an Image or Similitude of any thing in
Heaven, Earth, or Sea, that is, in the whole Universe.

But then thirdly out of my Adversaries own Concession; As it is already
manifest, that the erection of an Image to the true God is forbidden by this
Commandment, so is the worshipping of Images in reference to Saints and Angels
here also forbidden. For my Adversary does readily grant, that the Precept is
Moral and strictly binding as to the Prohibition of the Worship of the Images
of false Gods. Now I say, There is no more than one God; and the rest no
otherwise made Gods than by giving Religious Worship to them, of which erecting
consecrated Images to them and bowing to them is one mode. And therefore these
Saints and Angels, to whom Religious Worship is given by a Law, do ipso facto
become Gods, but not true Gods but false Gods; and therefore the worshipping of
their Images is forbidden, yea strictly forbidden even in the Moral sense of
this Commandment, according to the very concession of my Adversary, whom no man
will question in that point to have Pronounced right.

And lastly, That there may be no Creep-hole left, whereas my Adversary would
weaken my Argumentations taken from the Morality of the Decalogue in general,
and of this Precept in particular, by supposing that I will not stick to grant,
that one and the same Precept of the Decalogue (considered under a double
respect) may be both Moral and Ceremonial, I do absolutely deny that any
Commandment in the substance thereof (and I think I have sufficiently proved it
in the third Section of this Chapter) is Ceremonial or Temporal, but of Eternal
obligation to the Church of God. As for Example in the fourth Commandment, the
substance is the keeping of every seventh day, as an holy Commemoration of the
Worlds Creation by God, declared by himself, finished in six days space,
himself also sanctifying the Seventh day and Hallowing it. So that it seems to
me, that every seventh day for a memorial of the Creation, and in such a way as
may further our Contemplation in Divine things in reference to God our Creator
and Redeemer, is perpetually to be observed. But to keep the self same day with
the Jews is but Circumstantial, or to keep it in that strict resting, ab
omnimodo opere seculari, in such a Superstitious way as they do. But now for
the second Commandment, if the forbidding of the use of Images by way of
Religious Worship, that is by way of bowing to them and worshipping them any
how, be not the substance of it, it has no substance at all, but is wholly
Ceremonial. Which is very gross and absurd as I have already proved in this
Section. So sufficiently firm is our proof from the Morality of the Decalogue,
for any thing my Adversary has alleged or can allege.

For as for his Secondly, That some both Catholic and Protestant Divines own
no more than a Ceremonial Precept in this second Commandment, etc. I answer,
that I think the Jews themselves are not really concerned in the Commandment as
to the mere making of Images, nor is the Commandment against that, but the
making them in reference to Religion and the worshipping of them. This is
plainly the scope of the Commandment, as any one that does not wilfully wink
cannot but see. And I am confident no Protestant Divine will ever acknowledge,
that the Prohibition of making Images in reference to Religion and the Worship
of them, to be merely Ceremonial in this Precept. He must be a Papist under a
Protestants hood that can ever assert this. And this shall serve by way of
Reply to what ever is material in his Answer to my second Conclusion.

His Answer to the third Conclusion.
With my third Conclusion he plays at Bo-peep, on this sort, feigning the sense
of it to be either this, That we are guilty of Heathenish Idolatry, if we
commit Heathenish Idolatry, which he wittily calls an Identick Proposition
surfeiting of too much Truth: or else, what ever external Act of Worship was
Idolatry in the Heathen, is also Idolatry in us, if applied to any Being on
this side God.

The Reply.
To the first I say, That my Conclusion is not an Identick Proposition, because
that though the Acts of Idolatry be of the same Nature, yet they are not from
the same Party. A Pagan worships a Consecrated Image; A Christian worships a
Consecrated Image; are these two but one Identick Proposition surfeiting of too
much Truth? If you espy any overplus, I pray you take it to your self to line
your Propositions with, which I usually find too lank and devoid thereof. But
it is no vain assertion, nor so plain to every one at the first sight: That
acts of the same nature committed by several parties, are still of the same
nature. For there are some high-flown Illuminado's, that hold that lying with
another man's wife is not Adultery in them though it be so in others: And I wish
it were not so in the Spiritual Adultery, I mean the ^dolatry of too many
Christians; They do not think they commit it, when the same things done by
Heathen they will readily acknowledge to be Idolatry.

But now to the second part, I answer, That I do not restrain Idolatry in this
place to External acts of Worship only; but it comprehends any External,
Internal, or mixed act consisting of both, which are held Idolatrous in the
Heathen. Which quite breaks in pieces the insnaring case my Adversary offers to
me; of a converted Christian begging St. Paul's blessing on the knee as his
father that begat him in Christ; and of an Heathen of Lycaonia on his knees
adoring the Apostle at the same time for the God Mercury, Act. 14. For every
External act of Worship is not Idolatry. Nor was it Idolatry in the Lycaonian
to be on his knee to Paul, but the intended adoration of him for the God
Mercury. This mixed action of genuflexion and Internal Religious adoration
together was Idolatry, but the External alone had not been Idolatry. And if the
new Convert had given inward Religious Worship adjoined to the External
genuflection unto St. Paul, then it had been Idolatry in him also as well in
the Lycaonian. So little hurt has this assault done my third Conclusion, which
is not restrained to External act of Worship, but asserts only, All acts of
Worship, Internal, External or mixed, that are Idolatrous in Heathens, to be so
also in Christians when they commit the like.

Answer to the fourth Conclusion.
In his Answer to my fourth Conclusion he hales in Preposterously my eight
Conclusion out of time and order, and so confusedly speaks to them both. But I
am such a lover of Method, that I will only reply to what belongs to my fourth
Conclusion here, and defer the answering to what is mentioned under my eighth
Conclusion till we come thither. What therefor he Objects against my fourth
Conclusion is only this: First that it is proofless and false that the Pagans
worshipped the supreme God in an Image. Secondly, that I omitted one branch of
the Pagan Idolatry, the worshipping of the very Images for Gods. They called
them Gods, says he, they took them for Gods, sacrificed to them as Gods. And
the same is to be said of those souls of men departed, Demons or other
particular Appearances or Powers of Nature, all which they took and worshipped
for Gods, For Gods I say, which this mincing Conclusion seeks most warily to
conceal. This is the utmost of the force my Adversary sums up against this
Conclusion.

The Reply.
To the first thing Objected I answer; That he must understand by his Assertion
either, That the Pagans had not the knowledge of the supreme God, and so could
not Worship him at all, and consequently not in an Image; or else that having
the knowledge of the supreme God yet they did not Worship him in an Image. If
he means the first it is a notorious untruth, as may easily appear out of
Plato, Plutarch, Aristotle, Homer, Tully, Plotinus, Jamblichus, and many other
of the Heathen Writers, who were clear asserters of the supreme Godhead, and
many of them notable skillful describers of the same, This is a thing so well
known among the learned, that it is enough to mention it only. But if he mean
the second, that is also a mistake. For the Inhabitants of Thebais worshipped
the maker of the World, in the Image of a man with an egg coming out of his
mouth. Dion Chrysostomus also, and Maximus Tyrius do profess, that in their
Images of Gold and Silver and Ivory, they worshipped the supreme God the maker
and Governor of all things. And what was more frequent than the Images of
Jupiter, who is the supreme Deity, whom Aratus invokes in his Phanomena, and
St. Paul speaking of the supreme God, ( Acts 17. 28.) In whom we live and move
and have our being, alleges out of Aratus in that very place, these words of
his, (...) For we are his offspring, namely (...) of Jupiter, and ^heon the
Scholiast on the place, (...). We must understand, says he, here by Jupiter
the maker of the World. So that that part of the Heathenish Idolatry is plain,
that they worshipped the supreme God in an Image: But suppose they did not,
were it, not then a shame, that the Church of Rome should be greater Idolaters
than they, that stick not to Worship the supreme God in an Image, and a shame
for my Adve^^ary who contends, that the worshipping of the true God by an Image
is not forbidden in the second Commandment; and so proves himself a patron for
greater Idolatry than he acknowledges to be among the very Heathen.

To the second thing Objected, I answer, That I might very well omit that
branch of Idolatry, the worshipping of their very Images for Gods, because I
did not intend any such charge upon you, as if you worshipped Images taking
them for the very Saints or Angels themselves, because I hope that seldom
happens even amongst the most ignorant of your Pl^beians; as I believe it very
seldom happened amongst the Heathens themselves. And the force of my arguing
from this fourth Conclusion will never Iye upon the plenary enumeration of all
the sorts of Pagan Idolatry, but on my true application to those that are
mentioned there. So be they be there I refer to in my Arguments, it is enough;
others not being there, or there being more than I refer to, neither strengthen
nor weaken my Applications and Arguings, so framed as I have intimated.

So that it is a superfluous thing for me to go about to disprove your
Assertion, That they called their Images Gods, that they took them for Gods,
that they sacrificed to them as Gods; Only I shall return thus much, That Dan.
5. 4. does not prove that they themselves called their Images Gods, but that
the Holy Penman styleth them so. As the Spirit of Truth also styles them, or
rather styles their Gods Images, which is all one. Isa. 46. Psalm. 115. Habac.
2. Act. 19. 26. the very places you quote to prove they took their Images for
Gods. Which places yet do not at all prove it, but only prove what the
sentence of the true God is, touching the Gods of the Heathen, in reference to
their Images they worshipped complexly with them, upon a supposal that upon
their Consecration, some invisible Power was conveyed into them, and was ready
there to hear and help all supplicants to them. But now God who is the Prince
and Commander of all Spirits knows, that this their Religious Consecration has
no such Power to convey any such assisting Spirits unto those Images, so that
they may be assured of their presence and aid, and therefore he must justly and
truly, contrary to their opinion of them, who took them to be inhabited by some
D^mons, calls them mere stocks and stones as they really are. But to take the
mere stock or stone which they saw hewed into such a form to be a God, is so
excessively sottish, that it is not credible, that it ever fell into the mind
of any number of the lowest dregs of the Heathen Common People, or that they
intended their sacrifices to them. But that they phancyed the presence of some
Demons that received the Nidour and Odor of their Sacrifices, is a thing so
Vulgar and Trite, that I hold it needless any more than to mention it.

And now whereas he says, That the souls of men departed, their Demons, and
particular Powers and Appearances of Nature they took them, and worshipped them
for Gods, and calls my Conclusion a mincing Conclusion, because it does not
mention that? This omission was no intended cunning of mine to ruin the matter
at all. For I thought I spoke sufficiently home in saying they gave Religious
Worship to these, which is at least equal to the calling of them Gods,
especially in Greek and Latin. For as much as (...) and Dii in the Greek and
Latin signify as large as Elobim in the Hebrew which signifyes Angels or
particular Spirits as well as the eternal God the maker and Governor of all.
And so does (...) and Dii signify all invisible Spirits, (...) particularly
separate souls from (...) to divide or separate, because they are separate from
the Terrestrial body. And (...) also is said of a separate soul amongst the
Pythagoreans; and Synesius himself also says, (...), That he would be an Angel
or a blessed Spirit amongst the blessed Spirits. Wherefore Dii, (...), which we
usually translate Gods, the words of themselves imply no more than Angels or
souls separate. But if Religious Worship be given to them, then they become
Gods: Nor can any thing beside the supreme God be properly called God, unless
Religious Worship be instituted for it; and then be it what it will, the Notion
and name of a false God properly belongs unto it: so that in reality in saying,
They give Religious Worship to the souls of men, or Demons; I say also, That
they were their Gods, and that they worshipped them for such; So that my
Adversary has what he would, and yet my Conclusion remains as strong as ever.
But in the mean time let me Observe, That the calling of the Canonized souls of
Holy men (...), (and Saints answers to it, and consequentially is of the same
sense so far forth as it respects their Canonization) from the propriety of
notation from (...), whence is (...), and (...), which implies Religious
Worship, is the calling of them by an higher Title than if they should call
them (...). So little mincing is there in the application of Saints, from that
of Gods signifying in the same latitude that (...). But S^ints as it signifies
only Pious or Holy, there sounds nothing amiss in it.

Answer to the fifth Conclusion.
All the Answer, says he, That truth can allow to this fifth Conclusion, is
Nego suppositum; For the Doctor here supposes, that he has given us a true
and adequate division of the Pagan Idolatry in the precedent Conclusion,
according to Divine declaration and the common consent of Christendom; whereas
I have showed his Hypothesis to be false, and laid open his foul and gross
mistakes, ('it is a favor to call them so) which indeed are such as might invite
a modest man to wipe his pen and lay it aside, till he had taught it a more
awful regard to Ingenuity and Truth. This is his whole Answer Verbatim.

The Reply.
Upon which truly I have much ado to forbear from more than smiling, to
observe the art of my Adversary in making the greatest noise and boast where
there is least of all at the bottom; he speaking such a perfect nothing with so
great a grace. If he has showed any Hypothesis to be false, it must be an
Hypothesis of his own making. For I did not, nor do suppose my fourth
Conclusion to be an adequate enumeration of all the Idolatries of the Pagans,
but only as many as I have enumerated to be real Paganical Idolatries; which
my Adversary himself cannot deny. And I intended no more than thus, nor is any
more than thus serviceable to my design: For I shall not refer to that
Conclusion for any more modes of Idolatry than are mentioned there. Nor does
this fifth Conclusion pronounce of any more than are there mentioned. So that
this Conclusion is as firm as a Rock of Marble. Let any man therefore consider
his long flourish at the end of this Answer, and he will observe what an
excellent Artist my Adversary is, in making a show of saying something, when
the matter does not afford any thing to be said. But such sleights serve to
keep the people in their bondage of Error. And yet he wipes his mouth, who
ever should wipe their pen; and presumes he has done nothing amiss, it being in
so Pious a Cause, and for the interest of his Church. For I must confess, I
think it impossible but himself should here clearly discern, that he says
nothing at all to the purpose.

Answer to the sixth Conclusion.
This sixth Conclusion, says he, looks back upon the fifth, and calls to it for
help; but till the fifth has learned to stand upon its own legs, it is not in a
condition to lend any proof or support to its neighbors. This to the sixth
Conclusion as demonstrated from the fifth. But my Adversary is very pleasant
upon the Confirmation annexed thereto, of which I shall give a taste in my Reply.

The Reply.
I appeal to the Reader, If the fifth does not stand very fast and unmovable
for any thing my Adversary has brought against it, or indeed can be brought
against it. To make a show of undermining it, he seigned a false Hypothesis of
his own, which he would have fastened upon me, as if I had need of it, when as
I have most manifestly proved to the contrary: So that this sixth Conclusion
also is as firm as need be desired. But he assaults the further Confirmation
of it, (which I added ex abundanti) with a pleasant freak fetched out of
Eusebius, his mentioning of thirty Thousand Deities of the Heathens reckoned by
Hesiod, which he brings in a Maurice dance against my Confirmation to make it
Ridiculous; nay many more Gods of wood and stone noted by Eusebius himself, he
like a second Amphion makes to dance after his pipe; but all his Music is
spoiled by my freely acknowledging, that by ^ome inferior helpful Being: I
understand such a Being as he may if he will call an inferior Deity; and is so
in as good a sense as any can be upon the suppo^al I mean; namely, that
Religious Worship is given to it. So that the uncertainty of the sense of that
phrase shall be no matter for his Antic Sophistry, or Distorted Raillery. But
in the mean time, this numerous rabble of inferior Deities he has conjured up,
I shall make discharge their force against himself, illustrating the strength
of my Confirmation from hence, viz. That if the giving Religious Worship to
what is not the supreme God, though not as to him but as to some inferior
helpful Being, which they judge worthy of Religious Worship, and so make an
inferior Deity of it, be not Idolatry; the Pagans, who as my Adversary affirms
out of Eusebius worshipped thirty Thousand such like Deities and more, were
seldom or never to be found Idolaters; which I think is absurdity enough. So
little has my Adversary got, by attempting to raise a disjunctive Quibble out
of that ancient Father of the Church E^sebius, to blind the eyes of the
Populacy.

Answer to the seventh Conclusion.
In Answer to this seventh Conclusion, he first Proposes some things as
Preparatory thereto. Afterward, he brings in the Answer it self. The
Preparatories are these

I. That Catholics usually distinguish two parts of Worship. The first Latria
which is the highest Religious Worship possible, due to God alone the Creator
of all Things, and that Examples of this kind of worship are, Sacrifices, and
the erecting of Temples and Altars.

II. That neither Sacrifice it self, nor dedication of Temples and Altars
excludes a secondary Remembrance, or Titular honor of Saints.

III. That there are other Acts of an inferior respect which without any
offense to the Catholic Divinity, we may choose whether we will call Religious
worship or no, as burning Incense, lighting up Candles, and bowing our bodies
to the Saints and their Images. These Acts he calls indifferent and variously
determinable according to our intention to either a Divine or Civil Worship.
As was Abraham's incurvation of his body to God, Genesis 17. to Angels, Genesis 18. to
Men, Genesis 23. This is the sum of the force and strength of his Preparatories.

The main strength of his Answer it self, is contained in these few things;
namely, That all my Instances of Idolatry in this seventh Conclusion are not
true Instances of Idolatry, but that I do as unskilfully, as if a Lawyer should
define murder to be the wilful taking away a man's life without cause, or
cu^ting a limb or drawing of blood. So says he, sacrificing to an Image and
bowing to an Image suits not well together, as if they were both Acts of
Idolatry, any more than all those are of Murder. His great exception therefore
against this seventh Conclusion is, that I make bowing to an Image Idolatry,
which he endeavors to disprove.

First from the Jews bowing toward the Ark of the Covenant, over which were
the Cherubims of Image work; which, says he, could not be done without bowing
before Images. Secondly, from Christians bowing at the name of Jesus. Tuirdly
and lastly he adds, That the Worship done to their Saints and Images, is not
by the Catholic Church commanded to be called Religious Worship, which he
applies to the proof of my seventh Conclusion. This is the main of what he
brings against this seventh Conclusion: For it were tedious to take notice of
what things are so little pertinent to the purpose, but only brought in for a
blind to the people. And I have neither leisure nor any list to meddle with
such things. In which notwithstanding I acknowledge my Adversary an Egregious
Artist for the imposing on poor Souls to use his own Phrase.

The Reply.
As to the first of his Preparatories, that tells us Catholics usually
distinguish two sorts of Worship; I wonder then that he has so soon forgot to
be a Catholic himself, as to assert there are three; from that Instance of
Abraham's bowing to God, to Angels, and to Men, by a different Application of
the heart, viz. to be Divine Worship in respect of God, an inferior kind of
Worship in respect of Angels, and a Civil Worship as referred to men.
Wherefore, says he, he that would speak distinctly to the Catholic Tenet, must
distinguish these several modes of Worship one from another, or else show cause
why he ranks them all under one and the same species of Religious Worship, else
he will not Cope with his Adversary like a Scholar. Namely, Unless contrary to
the current of Catholics he make three kind of Worships instead of two, or
take not heed of making all three one kind of Worship, that is, Religious;
which is impossible for any one to do that is not a mere dotard. So perplextly
and confoundedly does he speak of his sorts of Worship by reason of the
tenderness and unsoundness of the cause he undertakes.

But if he would make any sense of the two sorts of Worship usually
distinguished by the Catholics, he must either understand that general
bipartition of Worship into Religious and Civil. Or else that bipartition of
Religious Worship into Latria and Dulia, which later may again be subdivided
into Dulia major or minor; Major that which is given to the blessed Virgin, and
is particularly called Hyperdulia; Minor, that to the rest of the Saints and
their Images. But this he durst not speak out explicitly, that he might not be
found to allow Religious Incurvation to Images, which is so manifestly
forbidden in the second Commandment, as is intimated in this seventh Conclusion.

Now to his second Preparatory, That neither Sacrifice it self, nor Dedication
of Temples and Altars, which he says are Acts of Latria, excludes a secundary
Remembrance or titular Honor of the Saints; I say, as it is little to the
present Conclusion, so it is in it self plainly false; For it is expressly said,
Thou jhalt have no other Gods besides me. And God himself knows, and God be
thanked we all know, that it impossible there should be any Gods besides Him,
and that therefore we can have none but Him in any other sense than in doing
some actions in honor to that which is not God, which is proper to be done to
God alone. And therefore to make any Thing or Person to Communicate with God in
these actions of honor, is to have other Gods besides Him, as much as it is
possible to have any other.

Nor will it excuse the fact, that this honor is but secundarily intended to
the Saints, or what ever else is thus worshipped besides God. For besides, that
the direction of our intention will not change the nature of the proper Notes
of an external Latria, these can be no other than secondary Deities which are
forbidden; for as much as there can be no other but these besides him to be
forbid, and therefore no other than a secundary Honor or inferior kind of
Religious Worship can be possibly intended to them, by those that institute it
or do it to them; they retaining as the Jews did, the supreme God still for
their God* and therefore even that honor is also forbidden, in that it is
forbidden that we should have any Gods besides Jehovah himself. And besides,
can be that is a jealous God endure that any other should any ways partake of
that honor that is proper to Him even of Latria, which these Acts are
acknowledged to be by my Adversary; whose insensibility therefore I stand
amazed at in this point. For he flatly affirms this to be warrantable Religion,
viz. That this Temple and this Altar be erected and dedicated to God and St.
Francis; That this or that Sacrifice be offered to God and St. Francis; To God
primarily as the supreme God, to St. Francis secundarily or as to a Saint, not
as to the supreme God. But does not Temples, Altars and Sacrifices, make a
secundary or inferior Deity, as much as any Thing or Person can be made a
Deity, by them that hold one supreme God; which was the case of the Jews. And
therefore thus having or making a secundary Deity is palpable Idolatry.

To the third Preparatory, I Answer, first, That it is hard to conceive, that
we may choose whether we will call these acts of inferior respect Religious or
no, without any offense to his Catholic Divinity; when as the Catholics, as
he calls them, distinguishing two sorts of Worship, it is necessary to make
such bipartitions of them as I have hinted; if they will have them run by twos,
which will empty these acts of inferior respect, as he Terms them* to be
Religious; and himself plainly intimates they are so toward the end of his
Answer to this seventh Conclusion. For he says, But if nothing will serve my
turn, but Religious and Divine Worship must be all one, then we utterly deny
that we are in any wise concerned in his Objection, for we give no such
Religious Worship to the Saints themselves much less to their Images; that is,
no such Religious Worship as is Divine and is properly Latria; but it implies,
that an inferior Religious Worship you do give; nor do I contend for a
Latria, but Religious Worship in general.

Secondly, I deny that burning Incense, lighting up Candles, bowing our bodies
to Saints and their Images are acts indifferent, determinable as our intention
shall be to either a Divine or Civil Worship, as Abraham's incurvation of his
body to God, to Angels, to Men; For bowing the body is a vulgar Ceremony of
Civility, known up and down in the World to be so; and does not become a
Religious Ceremony, till it be applied to an Object of Religious Worship, or
in such circumstances that it is understood to be so: but the bowing the body
to the consecrated Image of some invisible Power or Spirit, is as notoriously
all over the World known to be a Religious Ceremony, and to signity Religious
Honor and Worship. And we may as well, or rather better, call the Saints
Gods, and pretend only a Civil sense by it, as bow to the Image of a Saint set
up and Consecrated for the purpose, and pretend we intend only a Civil
Worship by it. For this was the Universal Mode of acknowledging any person a
God, by erecting an Image, and Honoring him in it by the above said Ceremony;
as it was the Universal Phrase of calling that a God which was so honored. And
what is said of bowing the body to the consecrate Image of an Invisible Power
or Spirit, the same is also to be said of lighting Candels before the said
Image; it is an Universally well known Ceremony of Religion amongst the
Nations, not a Civil Ceremony, whereby they acknowledged that to be a God whom
they so Honored. And lastly for burning of Incense, the Learned are agreed,
that it is a Sacrifice, and therefore an act of Latria according to my
Adversaries own Concession. And the Primitive Christians were so sensible
thereof, that they would rather die than fling a few grains of Incenfe into the
fire in honor of the Emperor, they looking upon it as a Sacrificing to him.
And truly it is a very noble kind of Sacrifice, as may be seen by the Altar of
Incense next the Holy of Holies, and highly significant of Honor; that is, of
sending up prayers, and Devotionally spending all the Powers of our Souls and
bodies as an acceptable service, and of a sweet smelling savor to him we thus
Worship: Which is the highest Worship imaginable, so far is it from being
determinable to a Civil Worship, I mean the Type thereof, from either custom or
the nature of the thing it self.

Its Preparatories being thus swept away, let us consider the Answer it self:
In which he lays to my charge, what himself was just now so manifestly guilty
of, namely of mingling things of an Heterogeneous nature, he making the burning
of Incense to a Saint, which is a Sacrifice, a Civil Worship, as well as the
bowing of the body. And he blames me for making, Sacrificeing to an Image, and
bowing to an Image, both of them acts of Idolatry. Whenas notwithstanding, I do
not say, that simply bowing toward an Image, suppose to take up a pin, or a
glove, from off the the flour betwixt the Image and us, is Idolatry, but a
Religious Incurvation to the Image is Idolatry. So that my Adversary is
disingenuous in not representing my A^sertion such as it is, which adds
Religious to that bowing or Incurvation to an Image which I pronounce to be
Idolatry. And all Incurvation is such, that is made to a consecrated Image, as
to an Object of this Worship.

I but he has two proofs to evince, that even Religious Incurvation to an Image
is no Idolatry. For the name of Jesus is Religiously bowed to, and the Jews
were commanded to bow toward the Ark of the Covenant over which were the
Cherubims of Image-work. And therefore they were commanded to bow to Images by
God himself, which therefore can be no Idolatry.

To the first I answer, That a name or voice is no Image or Similitude,
accordingly as it is written, Deuteronomy. 4. 12. ye saw no Similitude, only ye heard
a voice. And besides it is ridiculous to infer, that we bow to the name of
Jesus when we hear it named, because we bow at the naming of it, as to infer
that those of your Church say their Ave-Maries to the Ave-Mary-bell, because
they say them at the tinkling of it; neither the Ave-Mary-bell, nor the Name or
word Jesus are the Objects of our Devotion, but only the Occasions of it.
Besides, they whose backs are turned off the Priests or Reader when he names
the name of Jesus, what a ridiculous bowing were that in them, if they bowed to
the name sounding behind them. Therefore these are poor and weak shifts to make
a show for the worshipping (...) Images; from an Example where there is neither
any Image* nor any bowing to that which they would fain fancy to be one.

To the second I Answer, That be it so that there is a command to bow toward
the Ark of the Covenant where Images are, and consequentially toward Images;
and that this Incurvation is Religious, yet the command to bow toward these
Images is only ex accidenti: And mark the cunning of my Adversary here again,
(my words are, or make any Religious Obeisance, or Incurvation to an Image in
any wise, as to an Object of this Worship) which last words he craftily leaves
out; Which are of ^ssential importance to this act of Idolatry. But God was so
far from commanding the Jews to bow toward the Cherubims, as to an Object of
their Worship, that he barred them from the very sight of them, and suffered
them not so much as to be an object of their eyes. Which was a plain inhibition
from bowing to them, as an Object of their Devotion, or any way of worshipping
them. It would be a very unjust imputation of any rash tongue, touching suppose
some chaste Amazon, that she was familiarly saluted by such a Knight at such a
time, when she did not so much as lift up the Beaver of her Helmet all the time
they conversed together, which therefore was a certain bar against any such
audacious attempt. And the Case is the same in this foul charge, that God
commanded the Jews to Worship the Cherubims over the Mercy sear, and bow to
them as an object; when as he carefully hid them with a vail from their eyes,
that they might not be worshipped. Besides how infinitely inconsistent is it
with the Truth and Sanctity of the Divine Majesty, to give so strict a Law
against worshipping of Images, and then at the same time to command the two
Cherubims to be worshipped, and yet to take away the lives of thirty Thousand
men for worshipping that golden Cherub, or golden Calf which Aaron had set up:
Which being in their view and they bowing before, became the object of their
Worship. But the Cherubims on the Ark of the Covenant were only a Ci^cumstance
of their Worship as so much, but were industriously hid from being any Object
thereof. And God alone who spoke from betwixt the Cherubims, was the only
object of their Worship: And the Cherubims and other Holy things there were
only Holy figures and Hierogly phicks of mysterious and profound Truths, which
here it is not at all necessary to explain.

And now lastly touching his last shift, concerning the nature of this Worship
of Images and Saints; which insinuates, that though there be a middle Worship
betwixt Divine and Civil, the Catholic Church (he means the Roman) does not
require that it should be called Religious; besides that it is contrary to the
common stream of Catholics as I noted before, and that he himself does imply
that middle Worship to be Religious; I add further, what are we the better for
not calling it Religious, when it is so in its own nature, and we thereby
Idolaters? Now is it in our Power to make this middle Worship of Saints
expressed by consecrated Images, and bowing to them to be a Civil Worship. For
the Almighty Lawgiver is before hand with us in this, who has forbidden us to
have any other Gods besides himself. And in the second Commandment as he has
forbidden that himself should be worshipped by any graven Image, Deuteronomy. 4. v.
12. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17* so by virtue of the first Commandment he has also
forbid us to erect, or consecrate, or any ways to make any Image to any one
else, and to bow to it in honor of the Person it is made to, it being the
known and usual way of making a false Deity; a false or in^eriour Deity being
nothing else but some Creature, (for there cannot be possibly any more than one
real God) that by erecting an Image ^o it, and by bowing to this Image, or any
otherwise worshipping it, or honoring it, in reference to that Creature, as by
burning Incense before it, and making Invocations looking up to it, is made a
God. Which therefore is forbid by this first and second Commandment as a
Religious, that is to say, as a wickedly Religious or Idolatrous Worship,
whether to God or to any thing else; but is not in any wise a Civil Worship,
it being thus branded by God for an Idolatrous one, and declared to be a Mode
of Religious Worship, though a bad one, as I have noted in this Conclusion.
Nor is there any legitimate Religious Worship, but what is truly Divine, and
is done to God himself. What ever comes after this, it is but several degrees
of Civil Worship, whether to Men or to Angels, namely when they are visible to
us. But to Worship an Angel no way sensible, nor visible to us is an act of
Idolatry, as is else where proved. In the mean time we sufficiently see how
weak all the attempts of my Adversary are against this seventh Conclusion.

Answer to the eighth Conclusion.
This Conclusion for its proof appeals to the Testimony of four false
witnesses; to wit, the third, fourth, fifth and sixth Conclusions, and as such
I justly except against them. This is his whole Answer to the eighth.

The Reply.
But now I desire the Reader to examine those four witnesses as he calls them,
and consider how clear and unexceptionable a witnses they give* And to perpend
my Reply to his Objections against them, that he may see what exceeding firm
and evident Truths they witness too, and such as no man of ordinary wit and
Conscience, if he impartially consider them, can possibly deny. And to note
also, that from my Adversaries own Concession, if those four Conclusions be
true, this Conclusion must be true also.

But that there may be no room left for further Cavilling, I will according to
my Promise in my Reply to his Objections against my fourth Conclusion, answer
to his exceptions there preposterously made against a special Clause annexed to
this eighth, viz. That the Pagans Demons, exquisitely answer to the Christians
Saints and Angels in this point; saving that this Spiritual Fornication is a
rape upon our Saints and Angels, but single Fornication in the Heathen with
their impure Demons. Touching this particular Clause says my Adversary, page
12, Of all the Doctors Conclusions, there is none more intrinsic and
Fundamental to the Subject now under debate, nor any that ought to speak more,
or does speak less to the point than this; For it is most fondly Erroneous, and
most disingenuously ob^ruded upon the easy credulity of the Vulgar; that the
Pagans Demons exquisitely answer to the Christians Saints and Angels, So he:
But this is only to make a noise ad populum. For what I affirm is most
apparently true, viz. That the Pagans Demons exquisitely answer to the
Christians Saints and Angels in this point here mentioned, in having the like
Idolatr^us Worship done to them. For my Conclusion says [in this Point] which
he craftily and according to his custom leaves out; but the Point is easily
proved. For had the Demons of the Pagans Temples Consecrated to them? So have
the Saints; Had they Altars built to them? So have the Saints; Had they Images
erected to them? So have the Saints; Did they burn Incense to the Demons? So
they do to the Saints; Were the Demons invoked before their Images? So are the
Saints; Did they make Vows to the Demons? So they do to the Saints. And is not
this similitude exact enough for my purpose, who intimate only, that those
things are done to Saints that were done to the Pagans Demons; and that
therefore those four Conclusions are rightly alleged to prove the eighth. But
whereas my Adversary makes a noise, as if this Clause were the most Intrinsic
and Fundamental to the whole business, it is so little essential to the matter,
that if I had not mentioned it, my Cause had been alike strong without it; and
my Reader by casting his eye on this Conclusion, and the Conclusions here
cited, might have observed as much as I have said, of himself, so obvious is
the Truth thereof. But taking this Clause absolutely as my Antagonist has
quoted it, there might abundance more similitudes betwixt the Pagans Demons,
and the Pontifician Saints be enumerated out of the 17. Chap. of the first book
of my Synopsis Prophetica, which for brevity sake I omit.

The greatest Objection my Adversary brings against this Assertion is, That the
Saints are not called Gods, as the Demons of the Pagans were; Can any sober
Divinity, says he, brook it, (page 15.) that the Pagans Demons should be said
exquisitely to answer to our Saints and Angels. Do we Worship Saints and Angels
for Gods? ^Do we call them Gods? Do we take them for Gods? Do we Sacrifice to
them as Gods? Far be it as from our heart to intend it so from an ingenuous
Adversary to Object it. But I say, though you do not Sacrifice Oxen to the
Saints, yet you burn Incense to them, which was a very high and Holy Sacrifice
under Moses. But the great stress lies in this, that you do not call them Gods.
But what is that to the purpose while you make them so; doing in a manner all
the Religious Ceremonies that the Pagans did to their Gods: And for the very
Name in your Latin Authors, how much does Divus Paulus, and Divus Thomas,
differ from Deus Paulus, and Deus Thomas; which yet is usual enough. Nec tam
praesentes alibi cognoscere Divos. But we will not insist on Grammatical
Niceties: Admit they are not called Gods, (not to note that (...) signifies at
least as high) does it follow you do not make them so. Let us frame this short
Parable fitted for the meanest Capacity.

A City suppose, for a certain time was so instituted, that Whores and
Whoredom, under that very Name and Appellation was admitted as Lawful; but
there being some ill consequences of it, and inconvenient for the Common Weal
of the City, this Licentiousness was abolished, and the City reduced to a more
sober pass. But after some time the same custom got up again, and was ratified
by Law, but under another Title; calling those that were termed Whores before,
Nymphs of Pleasure, and Whoredom, the doing duty and service to the Nymphs of
Pleasure. Thus having continued for a season, a certain plainhearted, and
plain-spoken Citizen, observing the same inconveniences return that were
before, stood up in the Senate, and spoke out his mind concerning this custom;
openly declaring, that the old Whoredom was returned again, which they had upon
good grounds abolished out of the City: Whereupon a Zealous Orator of the
other Party stands up and cries out: Can any sober Politics brook such a
reproach as this to so well governed a City, as to condemn it of approving
Whoredom, for allowing men to do duty and service to the Nymphs of Pleasure?
Where are the Whores that this licensed Whoredom is committed with? Do we
caress or accost these Nymphs of Pleasure as Whores? Do we call them Whores? Do
we take them for Whores? Do we lie with them as Whores? Far be it, as from our
hearts to intend it, so from any ingenuous and well-bred Citizen to Object it.
Was not this a very smooth and convincing speech to wipe the City clean off the
Imputation of Whoredom? But this honest blunt Citizen briefly replied: That in
lying with these Nymphs of Pleasure, they ips^facto made them Whores; which
was an Answer never to be refuted. And to say I to my right fluent and eloquent
Adversary, and to his vehement Rhetoric so like that of this Orator in the
Parable. That by erecting Temples, Altars and Images, by invoking and making
vows to Saints and Angels, they make them Gods whether they will or no, as much
as any thing can be made a God by men.

So that the Pagans Demons d^ exquisitely answer to the Christians Saints and
Angels in this point of Idolatry; saving that this Spiritual Fornication is a
Rape upon our Saints and Angels, but simple Fornication in the Heathen with
their impure Demons. Nor is it any immodesty in any one to use such
similitudes as the Spirit of God has used before us, who frequently sets out
Idolatry by Fornication. Whence it will follow by clean and dry Mathematical
Analogy, that Idolatry committed upon an unwilling Object is a ^ape, and that
the Saints and Angels are unwil^ing t^us to be abused, an^ one may adventure to
be their compurgator. Whence the Idolatry committed is more heinous, as a Rape
is a more heinous sin than simple fornication. This is t^ refore truly that
blaspheming of them that d^ell in Heaven, the Saints and Angels, Apoc. 13. 6.
namely by this Idolatrous Worship done to them, traducing them as if they were
pleased thus to be made false Gods by receiving Religious Worship, and were
open Rebels against the true. But we will dwell no longer on this Subject; It
is already sufficiently manifest that not only this eight Conclusion, but also
this superadded Clause annexed to it, is without exception.

Answer to the ninth Conclusion.
This Conclusion having thus coldly drawn up an enditement against us, pleads
its evidence out of the seventh and eighth Conclusions; And so leaning upon two
broken Reeds falls to the ground, where I am sure neither Reason nor Authority
will ever stoop to take them up.

The Reply.
This is all he returns to my ninth Conclusion, which is just nothing at all.
For I have abundantly evinced that my seventh and eighth Conclusions are no
broken Reeds, but invincible and immovable Pillars of Truth; which Reason will
never suffer to fall to the ground, nor any understanding Authority ever
gainsay.

Answer to the tenth Conclusion.
Here asking leave first of Ethics he tells my Conclusion, that it gives God
the lie, and makes him the Approver, Commander, and Rewarder of* Sin, eve^
Idol^try it self. For God promised a reward to Prayer made in the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 7. 15. where not withstanding there were graved Angels or Cherubims upon
the walls. And he commanded his people to adore the A^k over which were
Cherubims or Angels of Image-work; where the worshipper could not possibly make
his addresses, but he must needs bow at least Circumstantially if not
Objectively toward an Image, which he says I make Idolatry. This is the sum of
what he alleges against this tenth Conclusion.

The Reply.
To which I reply, That he would have done well tohave begged pardon of Grammar,
Rhetoric, and Logic too, as well as of Ethics; For he has offended against
all four. To give God the lie is no such Rhetorical flourish, though he uses it
more than once in his Answer to this Conclusion, as if he were in love with the
phrase. Nor has it that Grammatical sense he would put on it; For to give the
lie is to say one speaks false, not to speak false of another; That is to be
lie one. Besides to adore the Ark that is not good Grammar, Psalm. 99 5. It is
(...) Worship at his footstool. And the seventy has it, (...), where (...) in
(...) has the same force that ^ in (...). And it is lastly very bad Logic to
argue, That because I sav, in a Country where men professedly Worship an Image
as an Object, if another bow to the same Image, with an Intention only of
making it a circumstance of his Worship commits Idolatry; that therefore I say,
that al bowings before an Image, though only circumstantially, is Idolatry.
For this is to conclude a general from a particular, which is enormous bad
Logic: As ill as if he should conclude, that because one says, that putting
the Hat off in Turkey is a reproach; therefore he says, the putting the Hat off
any where is a reproach. Wherefore I do not make God an approver or rewarder of
Idolatry, since I do not affirm circumstantially to bow toward an Image to be
Idolatry, unless in a Country where the people do objectively bow to it; which
was not the case of the Jews, as I have sufficiently proved above.

There are some little nibblings and quibblings at my Transition which
concludes this first Chapter, which I permit my Adversary to please himself in,
it being past that time of the day with me. It is sufficient that I have
showed, that my ten Conclusions of this first Chapter have proved themselves as
firm as Adaman^ against all the assaults of my Adversary. And as for his
nibbling at my Transition to build a jest upon, it he had rather have Divine
definition or declaration, than definitions or declarations, let him please
himself. But the grounds of my Conclusions running much upon the first and
second Commandments, and we having no dual number in English, I thought no body
would have cavilled at my using the plural.

CHAP. II.
What is Idolatry according to the Determination of clear and free Reason.
1. WE will now try how obnoxious the Romanists are out of the plain
Definitions and Determinations of free and clear Reason. In which Method let us
set down for

The first Conclusion, That Idolatry is a kind of Injustice against God. That
this is true, may appear from that Definition of Religion in T^lly, who defines
it Iusti^am adversus Deum. Which is not the sense of Tully only, but the very
voice of Reason and Nature. And therefore Idolatry being one kind of Irreligion
or Impiety, it must needs in^lude in it a kind of Injustice against God.

2. The second Conclusion; That Idolatry is a very fore and grievous Disease of
the Soul, vilely debasing her and sinking her into Sensuality and Materiali^y,
keeping her at a distance from the true sense and right knowledge of God, and
leaving her more liable to bodily Lusts: That the natural tendency of Idolatry
is this, and yet the Souls of men, in this Lapsed state, are naturally prone to
so mischievous a Disease, as both History and daily Experience do abundantly
witness. See the Mischiefs of Idolatry in my Mystery of Iniquity, Part (...)
Lib. ^. Chapter 16.

Nor can it infringe the truth of this Conclusion, that a man, retaining still
the true Notion of God according to his Divine Attributes, may, according to a
sense of his own, bow down toward a corporeal Object of worship. For he must
retain it by force against such a Practice, as would and does naturally debauch
the users of it. And besides, if he had really the Life of God in him as well
as the Notion of him, he would feel such Actions grate against his heart, and
perceive how they would invade and attempt the abating and extinguishing the
more true and pure sense of God and of his Worship, and seduce the Soul to
external Vanity.

But suppose a man or two could keep their minds from sinking down from a right
Notion of the Deity; yet they are as guilty of Idolatry, if they give religious
Worship to corporeal Objects, as he is of Adultery and Fornication that yet
uses them so cautiously as neither to impair his bodily Health, nor besott his
natural Parts thereby. And therefore, though there may be some few such, yet
the Laws against Fornication and Adultery ought notwithstanding to be very
sacred to every one, even to those discreeter Transgressors of them, and ever
to be obeyed by them, because the Observation of them is of such infinite
importance to the Public.

And what we have said of the Worship of God is analogically true of honoring
of the Saints, who are best honored by the remembrance and imitation of their
Virtues, not by scraping Legs to or clinging about their Image, which are no
more like them than an Apple is to an Oister.

3. The third Conclusion; That those high expressions of the Jealousy of God
and his severe Displeasure against Idolatry are very becoming the nature of the
thing, and his Paternal care of the Souls of men. This appears from the
foregoing Conclusions. For both the Prerogatives and Rights of the Divine
Majesty himself are concerned, and also the Perfection, Nobilitation and
Salvation of the Souls of men. This we discover by Reason, and our Reason is
again more strongly ratified by Divine Suffrage.

The fourth; That Idolatry, though it be so heinous a Sin, yet where it is
committed most in good earnest does necessarily involve in it Ignorance or
Mistake, in the Act of Worship or in the Object; they either taking the Object
to be God when it is not, or to have some Attribute of God when it has not, or
to enjoy some Prerogative of God which yet it does not, or else the Worship not
to be Divine when it is; or, lastly, they mistake in the Application of the
Worship, thinking they do not appl^ Divine Worship to an Object when they do.

The fifth; That to be mistaken in the Object of Worship, or in the Kind of
Worship, or in the Application, cannot excuse anything from being downright
Idolatry; forasmuch as none are in good earnest Idolaters without some of these
Mistakes.

The sixth; That the peculiar Honor or Worship which is given to God is given
to him not so much as his Honor and Worship, as his Due and Right: insomuch
that he that does not give it to God, or communicates it to another, does an
injury to the Divine Majesty. This is plain, and consonant to what was said on
the first Conclusion, That Religion is a kind of Justice toward God. And
indeed if Divine Honor was not given to God as his Due and Right, it were no
Honor at all, but rather a Benevolence.

4. The seventh; The Right of that peculiar Honor or Worship we do to God is
grounded either in the nature of his incommunicable Excellencies, or in his
Excellencies so far as we know incommunicated to any Creature, or, lastly, in
Divine Declaration or Prescription of the ways or Modes of thus or thus
worshipping him, which himself has some-time set down.

The eighth; That any Actions, Gestures or Words directed to any Creature as to
an Object, which naturally imply or signify either the incommunicable or
incommunicated Eminencies of God, is the giving that Worship that is the Right
and Due of God alone to that Creature, and that Injury against the Divine
Majesty which is termed Idolatry. The evidence of this Conclusion may appear
from hence, because there is no other way of Application of external Worship
than by directing such significant Actions, Gestures, or Words, toward such a
Being as to an Object.

The ninth; That the using any of those Actions or Gestures, or doing any of
those things that the true and supreme God did choose and challenge in the
setting out the Mode of his own Worship, toward or in reference to any
Creature as to an Object, this also is that Injury against God which we term
Idolatry.

The Reason is this, Because such a mode of Worship does thus manifestly appear
to be the peculiar Right of God, which none can transfer to another but God
himself. Wherefore this Right having not been communicated by him to any other,
whenever such a kind of Worship is used, it must be used to him, and to none
else.

Nor can his dereliction of any such Mode of being worshipped warrant the use
of it to any Creature afterward, because no Creature can be God in those
circumstances as he thought fit to institute such a Worship for himself in: For
no Creature can be God at all, and therefore never capable of any of those
Modes of Divine Worship which God ever at any time instituted for himself.
Besides, if this dereliction and disuse of any Mode of Worship might make it
competible to a Creature, then might we sacrifice Beeves and Sheep (besides
other Services of the Temple) to any Saint or Demon.

5. The tenth; An omnipercipient Omnipresence, which does hear and see
whatever is said or transacted in the World, whether considered in the whole,
or as distributed into terrestrial, celestial, and supercelestial, not only
all these Omnipercipiencies but any one of them is a certain Excellency in God,
and, for ought we know, incommunicated to any Creature.

The eleventh; That this Omnipresence or Omnipercipience terrestrial is one
main ground of that Religious Worship due to God which we call Invocation. This
is plain, that upon this very ground that God hears and sees (though himself be
invisible) whatever is said or done upon earth, he has the honor of being
invoked any-where or everywhere, and of having Temples built to him; because
he that is Omnipresent cannot be absent from his Temple, but is always there to
be invoked.

The twelfth; That if Omnipresence or Omnipercipience, at least terrestrial,
(if not celestial,) be not communicated to Saints and Angels by God, the
Invocation of either is palpable Idolatry. This is manifest from the eighth
Conclusion. For Invocation implies an incommunicated Excellency in the Saints
or Angels, and ^o communicates that Right to them that appertains only to God,
and is that Injury against God that is called Idolatry.

So that it is a vain Evasion that pretends that we honor God the more in
making him so good to the Saints and Angels, as to bestow this Excellency on
them; whenas yet his Wisdom has not thought fit so to do. For we are so far
from honoring him hereby, that we injure him in giving his Right to another;
and we dishonor him in presuming he had done wiselier or better in doing what
he has not done. Whenas indeed, if he were so lavish in imparting his proper
Excellencies to Creatures as ^ome would make us believe he is, to palliate
their own Idolatries, it were the next way to make men forget all Applications
to God, and to cast him out of their memory, and take up with the more
particular Patronages of Saints and Angels.

6. The thirteenth; That our thinking such a Saint or Angel can hear us
wherever we invoke him, is no excuse for our Invocation of him, nor saves us
from Idolatry, since all Idolatry committed in good earnest implies some
Mistake, as has been noted in the fourth Conclusion.

The fourteenth; That all the Modes or ways of the Communication of this
Omnipercipiency to Saints or Angels are either very incredible, if not
impossible, or extremely ridiculous as to any excuse for their Invocation. For
the usual Residence of Saints and Angels being in sede Beatorum, as the Roman
Church holds, and that place on the Coelum Empyreum above all the Stars, That
the Angels and Saints should upon the account of the Exaltedness of their
natures see and hear from thence, what is done or said from one side of the
Earth to the other, is extremely incredible, if not impossible; yea,
sufficiently incredible, or rather impossible, though they had their abode on
this side of the Moon.

And that they should see all things and transactions, hear all Prayers and
Orations, in Speculo Divinitatis, is alike incredible; a thing which the
Humanity of Christ himself, though hypostatically united to the Divinity, did
not pretend to. But that God should either in this Speculum or any otherwise
advertise them that such a one prays to them that they would pray to him for
that party, is it not at first sight above all measure ridiculous?

And alike ridiculous it is to pray to Saint or Angel, as if they were present
and heard our Prayers, when indeed they are absent, and cannot tell that we did
pray, unless by some Intelligencers. This Devotion is an improper and unnatural
act, and shows that we do that to an invisible Creature which is only proper
to be done to the invisible God; and that therefore it is Idolatry, as giving
that right of Worship to others which is only congruous to him.

7. The fifteenth; That though there were communicated by God to Saints and
Angels at least a terrestrial Omnipercipiency, yet if he have not communicated
the knowledge thereof to us, as most certainly he has not, the Invocation of
them is notwithstanding a very presumptuous invasion of the ^indubitable Rights
of God, and the intrenching upon his Prerogatives, and therefore as to the
internal Act no less than the Sin of Idolatry.

The Reasons of this Conclusion are, First, That God concealing from us the
knowledge of the communication of this Excellency, does naturally thereby
intimate that he would not have them invoked, but reserves the Honor of our
Invocation of an invisible Power unto himself only.

Secondly, That whatsoever is not of faith is sin: and therefore the ground of
Invocation of Saints or Angels being at least dubitable, their Invocation is
sin; and it being about the Rights of God in his Worship, what can it be better
esteemed than Idolatry?

Thirdly, This Principle of feigning or groundlesly conceiting, without any
Revelation from God, that any Creatures are capable of such Honors as are
God's indubitable Right and Prerogative, is the Forge and Shop, the Palliation
and Pretense, for infinite sorts and odlyexcogitated varieties of Idolatrous
Objects: and therefore so presumptuous and so abominable a Principle, which is
the Mother and Nurse of such infinite ways of Idolatry and Injustice against
God, even according to humane Reason ought to be declared against as
Idolat^ous; and consequently, all the practices thereupon are also to be
declared Idolatry, because they spring from a Principle taken up which is such
a fundamental piece of Idolatry and Injustice against God, and exposes him to
all manner of Idolatrous Injuries.

Fourthly, To date to do an act we know not whether it may be Idolatry or no,
and this needlessly, our Conscience not all compelling us thereto, this is to
dare to commit Idolatry; and the daring to commit Idolatry, and so to do
defiance to the Majesty of God, what is it less than to be an Idolater? For
according to his inward man and the main Morality of the action he is so: As he
is morally a Murderer that, doubting or not knowing but that it is his own
Friend, by luck killed his intended Enemy: For the sense is, that rather than
not be revenged of his Enemy, he will not stick to kill his dearest Friend.

And finally, This Idolatry is the more discernable and aggravable in the
Invocation of Saints or Angels, their Omnipercipiency being so extremely
incredible, if not impossible or ridiculous, upon any ground, as appears by the
foregoing Conclusion.

8. The sixteenth; That the erecting of symbolical Presence with Incurvations
thitherward, the consecrating of Temples and Altars, the making of Oblations,
the burning of Incense, and the like, were declared by the supreme God, the God
of Israel, the manner of Worship due to him, and therefore, without his
Concession, this Mode of Worship is not to be given to any else; as appears by
Conclusion the ninth.

The seventeenth; That the Pagans worshipping their Demons, though not as the
supreme God, by symbolical Presences, Temples, Altars, Sacrifices, and the
like, become ipso facto Idolaters. This is manifest from the ninth, the
fifteenth, and the foregoing Conclusion.

The eighteenth; Though it were admitted that there is communicated to Saints
and Angels at least a terrestrial Omnipercipiency, and that we had the
knowledge of this Communication, and so might speak to them in a civil way,
though unseen; yet to invoke them in such Circumstances as at an Altar, and in
a Temple dedicated to them, or at their symbolical presence, this were palpable
Idolatry. The truth is manifest again from the ninth and sixteenth Conclusions.

9. The nineteenth; Incurvation in way of Religion toward any open or bare
symbolical Presence, be it whatever Figure or Image, as to an Object, is flat
Idolatry: in the Worship of Saints, Angels and Demons double Idolatry; in the
Worship of the true God, single. The reason hereof is resolved partly into the
ninth and sixteenth Conclusions, and partly into the nature of Application of
Worship. For external Worship is not any otherwise to be conceived to be
applied to asymbolical Presence, but by being directed toward it as toward an
Object. Wherefore if Religious Incurvation be directed toward any Figure or
Image as to an Object, this Figure or Image necessarily Receives this Religious
Incurvation, and partakes with God (if the Image be to him,) in it; which is
manifest Idolatry. For the direction of our Intention here is but a Jesuitical
Juggle. And therefore I will set down for Conclusion

The twentieh, That Religious Incurvation toward a bare symbolical Presence,
wittingly and conscienciously directed thither, though with a mental reserve,
that they intend to use it merely as a Circumstance of Worship, is
notwithstanding real Idolatry.

The Reason is, because an external Action toward such a thing as is looked
upon as receptive of such an Action, ^ and has frequently received it) if it be
thus or thus directed, will naturally conciliate the notions or respects of
^ction and Object betwixt these two, whether we intend, it or no. And it is as
ridiculous to pretend that their motions or actions toward or about such a
symbolical Presence are not directed to it or conversant about it as an Object,
as it were for an Archer to contend that the Butt he ^^oots at is not the Scope
or Object, but a Circumstance, of his Shooting; and he that embraces his
Friend, that his Friend is not an Object, but a Circumstance, of his Embracing.
Which are Conceits quite out of the rode of all Logic. See the last Conclusion
of the foregoing Chapter.

10. The twenty-first; That the Adoration of any Object which we, out of
mistake, conceive to be the true God made visible by Hypostatical union
therewith, is manifest Idolatry. The Reason is, because Mistake does not excuse
from Idolatry, by Conclusion the fourth and the fifth. And in this Supposition
we miss of one part of the Object, and the only part that single is capable of
Divine Honor. For God to be disunited from this adored Object is in this case
all one as to be absent: For God is not considered not intended in this act of
Adoration but as united with this visible Object. Which respect of Union if it
fail, that consideration or Intention also fails, and the Worship falls upon a
mere Creature.

In brief, If out of mistake I salute some lively Statue or dead body for such
or such a living man, though this Man or his Soul were present, and saw and
heard the Salutation, yet I play the fool, and make my self ridiculous, and an
conceived not to have saluted him I would: So if I do Adoration to any Object,
suppose the Sun or some Magical Statue, for the true Deity visible, when as
neither of them are so, I play the Idolater, and make my self impious, and have
missed of the due Object of my Adoration.

11. The twenty second; That the Adoration of the Host upon the presumption
that it is Transubstantiated into the living Body of Christ is rank Idolatry.
This appears from the precedent Conclusion. To which you may add, that the
Romanists, making Transubstantiation the true ground of their Adoration of the
Host, do themselves imply, that without it were so their Adoration thereof
would be Idolatry. But that it is not so, and that their Ground is false, any
body may be as well assured of as he can of any thing in the world: and no less
assured that they are Idolaters according to their own Supposition and
Implication, as Costerus indeed does most emphatically and expressly acknowledge
it, if they be mistaken in their Doctrine of Transubstantiation; as we shall
hear anon.

The twenty-third Conclusion; That Adoration given to the Host by Protestants
or any else that hold not Transubstantiation is manifest Idolatry. The Reason
is to be fetched from the nineteenth and twentieth Conclusions. For it is
Religious Veneration toward a bare corporeal Symbol of the Divine Presence,
and, to make the Action more aggravable, toward a Symbol that has Imagery upon
it, and that of the person that is pretended to be worshipped thereby. What can
be Idolatry if this be not?

The twenty-fourth; That the Invocation of Saints and Angels, though attended
with these considerations, that both that Excellency we suppose in them, and
which makes them capable of that Honor, is deemed finite, and also (be it as
great as it will) wholly derived to them from God, yet it cannot for all this
be excused from gross Idolatry. This is clear from the seventh, eighth, tenth,
and so on till the sixteenth Conclusion. For though this Excellency be supposed
finite, yet if it be so great as that it is nowhere to be found but in God, it
is his Right only to have such Honors as suppose it. And though it be deemed
or conceived to be derived from God, yet if it be not, we give an uncommunicate
Excellency to the Creature, and rob God of his Right and Honor. And, lastly,
though this Excellency were communicated, but yet the Communication of it
unreveal'd to us, it were a treasonable Presumption against the Majesty of God,
thus of our own head to divulge such things as may violate the peculiar Rights
of his Godhead, and (for ought we know) fill the world with infinite bold
examples of the grossest Idolatry: and therefore all our practices upon this
Principle must be Idolatrous, and Treasonable against the Divine Majesty.
Consider well the fifteenth Conclusion.

12. The last Conclusion; That this pretended Consideration, that where Christ
is corporeally present, Divine Worship is not done to his Humanity, but to his
Divinity, and that therefore, though the Bread should not prove
transubstantiated, the Divine Worship will still be done to the same Object as
before, viz. to the Divinity, which is everywhere, and therefore in the Bread;
this will not excuse the Adoration of the Host from palpable Idolatry.

For first, That part of the Pretense that supposes Divine Worship in no sense
due or to be done to Christ's Humanity is false. For it is no greater
presumption to say, that in some sense Divine Worship is communicable to the
Humanity of Christ, then, that the Divinity is communicated thereto. In such
sense then as the Divinity is communicated to the Humanity, which are one by
hypostatical Union, may Divine Worship also be communicated to it; namely, as
an acknowledgment that the Divinity with all its adorable Attributes is
hypostatically, vitally and transplendently residing in this Humanity of
Christ. Which is a kind of Divine Worship of Christ's Humanity, and peculiar to
him alone, and due to him, I mean, to his Humanity, though it be not God
essentially, but only hypostatically united with him that is; and does as
naturally partake of Religious or Divine Worship in our Addresses to the
Divinity, as the body of an eminently-vertuous, holy and wise man does of that
great Reverence and civil Honor done to him for those Excellencies that are
more immediately lodged in his Soul.

Which Honor indistinctly passes upon the whole man: And as the very bodily
Presence of this virtuous person receives the civil Honor, so in an easy
Analogy does the Humanity of Christ receive the Divine; b^^ both as partial
Objects of what they do receive, and with signification of the state of the
whole case, viz. that they are united, the one with the Divinity, the other
with so virtuous a Soul. Hence they both become due Objects of that entire
external Worship done toward them, to the one civil, to the other Divine.

And therefore, in the second place, it is plain, that there is not one and the
same due Object capable of Religious Worship in either Supposition, as well in
that which supposes the Bread transubstantiated, as in that which supposes it
not transubstantiated. For in the former it is the true and living corporeal
Presence of Christ, whose whole Suppositum is, as has been declared, capable of
Divine Honor; but in the latter there is only, at the most, but his
symbolical Presence, whose Adoration is Idolatry, by the nineteenth, twentieth
and twentyfirst Conclusions.

And lastly, The pretending that though the Bread be not transubstantiated, yet
the Divinity of Christ is there, and so we do not miss of the due Object of our
Worship; this is so laxe an Excuse, that it will plead for the warrantableness
of the Laplanders worshipping their Red cloth, or the Americans the Devil, let
them but pretend they worship God in them. For God is also in that Red cloth
and in the Devil in that Notion that he is said to be everywhere. Nay, there
is not any Object in which the ancient Pagans were mistaken, in taking the
Divine Attributes to be lodged there, whether Sun* Heaven, or any other
Creature, but by this Sophistry the worshipping thereof may be excused from
Idolatry. For the Divine Attributes, as God himself, are everywhere.

To direct our Adoration toward a supernatural and unimitable Transplendency of
the Divine Presence, or to any visible corporeal nature that is hypostatically
united with the Divinity, most assuredly is not that sunk and sottish, that
dull and dotardly sin of Idolatry. For, as touching this latter, to whatever
the Divinity is hypostatically united, or (to avoid all cavil about terms) so
specially and mysteriously communicated as it is to Christ, the Right of Divine
Worship is proportionably communicated therewith, as I have already intimated.
And as for the former, That through which the Divine Transplendency appears is
no more the Object of our Adoration, than the diaphanous Air is through which
the visible Humanity of Christ appears when he is worshipped.

But the Eucharistick Bread being neither hypostatically united with the
Divinity, nor being the Medium through which any such supernatural
Transplendency of the Divine Presence appears to us, Adoration directed toward
it cannot fail of being palpable Idolatry. For the Eucharistick Bread will
receive this Adoration as the Object thereof, by Conclusion the nineteenth and
twentieth. But the Adoration or any Divine Worship of an Object in which the
Divine Attributes do not personally reside, (in such a sense as is intimated in
those words of St. John, (Ioh. 1. 14.) And the word was made flesh,) but only
locally, as I may so speak, this, according to sound Reason and the sense of
the Christian Church, must be downright Idolatry.

CHAP. II.
His Answer to the first, second, and third Conclusions.
His first, second and third Conclusions, says he, quite digress from the
charge in hand, showing what a grievous sin Idolatry is; which is much more
largely and Learnedly declared by our own Authors, and readily granted by them,
with this further allowance; that if he can fix the crime upon us with any show
of reason, we shall acknowledge our guilt to be of a double dye.

The Reply.
THese three first Conclusions do not digress from the charge in hand; For as
much as they tend to the better understanding of the nature of the charge: As
for the first, it is plainly referred to in the sixth Conclusion: And the
second and third yield their due Illustration to the fourth, which is framed by
way of an Axioma discretum; That though Idolatry be a sin of that hainousness,
and provoke Gods wrath and Jealousy so, yet it does necessarily involve in it
ignorance or mistake, etc. Which does seasonably prevent all vain excuses and
subterfuges, all unskilful extenuations of so deadly a crime; Which I wish I
could free the Church of Rome from. When as of the contrary, out of my love to
the Truth and the Church of Christ, I am necessitated to prove her guilty
thereof, not by shows of Reason, but by solid and irrefragable Demonstration.
Which I pray God open their Eyes to see, that they may wash away their guilt of
a double dye, by the tears of a timely Repentance.

Answer to the fourth and fifth Conclusion.
The fourth and fifth, says he, tell us that Idolatry necessarily involves in
it ignorance or mistake in the act of Worship. The fifth advances a step
higher, and concludes very abruptly; that because all Idolatry involves in it
some ignorance or mistake, therefore no Ignorance can excuse from Idola^ry:
very learnedly!

The Reply.
Not so learnedly neither, or rather not altogether so solidly, as you have set
down my Inference in the fifth Conclusion from what preceeded in the fourth.
For my own words are these in my fifth Conclusion; That to be mistaken in the
Object of Worship, or in the kind of Worship, or in the Application, cannot
excuse any thing from being down right Idolatry; for as much as none are in
good earnest Idolaters without some of these mistakes. How very Learned this
is, is another matter, but how firm and solid an Inference it is, I leave any
one to Judge.

Answer to the one and twentieth, and two and twentieth Conclusion.
From the fourth and fifth, the Doctor, says he, makes a long stride to his
one and twentieth Conclusion; where he peremptorily concludes, that because
mistake does not excuse one from Idolatry, by Conclusion the fourth and fifth:
Therefore the Adoration of any Object, which we out of mistake conceive to be
the true God made visible by Hypostatical union therewith is mani^est Idolatry.
But let us put the case, says he, that some Christian contemporary to Christ
our Lord, whilst he sojourned upon Earth, had through mere mistake adored some
other person for Christ. Here the Query arises, whether this man's error would
have pleaded his excuse or no? The reformed Churches of France in their Apology
by Dally declare for the affirmative. And if this Error be not Idolatry, he
says, I shall never be able to prove what I aim at in my twenty-second
Conclusion, That any Idolatry is committed though it should so fall out, that
the Host untransubstantiated were exposed to the veneration of the people. For
as no Adoration is here due, so none is intended, but only to Jesus Christ
adorable where ever he is. This is the main strength of his Answer to my twenty
first and twenty second Conclusions.

The Reply.
The long stride that is made, is made by this Doctor of the Church of Rome,
not by my self. I had rather he would have taken my Conclusions as they lie in
order, which he does hugely neglect to do in this Chapter: But however I am his
servant to attend his motions whither he pleases within the compass of this
little Treatise. And to his Query upon the propounded case, I Answer, with the
reformed Churches of France, if they speak no further then to the case of this
man, (for I never saw that Apology by Daille) that this man's Error would have
pleaded his excuse: But not so as to argue him guiltless of Idolatry, but that
his sin of Idolatry is more pardonable in these Circumstances; pardonable I
say, which implies a fault or sin. And so my fifth Conclusion holds good; That
to be mistaken in the Object of Worship, or in the kind of Worship, or in the
Application cannot excuse any thing from being down right Idolatry, because
mistake is necessarily supposed in any Idolatry that is committed in good
earnest. But the invincibleness of the mistake, the sudden surprisedness, or
inevitable changeableness of the mistake may be a ground, though not of making
that to be no Idolatry which is, yet of excusing the person as to the severity
of punishment. Whence you may see, that it was not for nothing that my
Adversary molded my fifth Conclusion into words of his own, that he might the
easilyer have something to Cavil at.

But to let this pass, I say, the Mistake does not excuse, but the
invincibleness, or inevitableness of the mistake, which it does in all other
sins whatsoever. And in all Idolatries whatsoever, besides these committed in
the Christian world, where ever they are committed upon invincible mistake. But
as amongst the Heathen, those that worshipped the Sun suppose, taking it to be
the supreme God, endued with understanding and Power, of making and Governing
the Universe (and Millions worshipped him under the Notion, and as it seems to
me were in a manner inevitably, by reason of their education and want of
opportunity of knowing better, detained in this Error) as these by all men are
rightly judged to have been Idolaters, though more excu^able then they that
have opportunity of knowing better, so it is in the case of this man my
Adversary instances in, who surprised by an inevitable error has his excuse to
crave pardon; but it is manifest that he has committed the fault or rather
crime of Idolatry, in giving Divine Adoration to him that is not God. And if
this were repeated and habituated act in him, he were as errand an Idolater as
the Persians other Nations that worshipped the Sun.

For mistake even where it is not essential to a fault, does not destroy the
nature of the fault: as suppose one having his hat flung off his head to day by
some body he meet with in the streets, and next day meeting one like the party
that did him the injury, should presently fling his hat off, the mistake does
not take away the nature of this fault so as to make it no injury to this
Party, but only makes it more pardonable, it being not intended to an innocent
person: How then can mistake even in faults to which mistake is essential
change their nature from being what they are? So that though the Idolaters of
the Church of Rome were under invincible Ignorance, they would not for all that
cease to be Idolaters, or though they were made such only by sudden and
inevitable surprise.

But this is not their Case, and therefore with the good leave of my Adversary,
I must tell him, the Case he has put is not at all to the present purpose; nor
that of a Loyal Subject taking Hephestion for Alexander: All these Learned
fetches will not serve his turn. The worshipping of the consecrated Host with
them is neither upon inevitable surprise, nor invincible Ignorance, nor want of
opportunity of knowing better: For that which is accustomary, and continual, is
not surprise, nor is that Invincible Ignorance, which common sense, Scripture
and Reason will so easily dissipate in a very ordinary Capacity. For who,
unless he were under the Power of Diabolical delusion, but can easily undeceive
himself by common sense, Reason and Scripture, that a Wafer which Mice and Rats
will eat, cannot be that adorable (...), God-man, the Creator and Redeemer of
us all. And then for opportunities of knowing better from others, what
irrefragable evidences have the reformed Churches offered to the contrary, and
how many Thousands have sealed their Testimony with their very blood? Which is
a sufficient occasion, I think, in so easy a Case to undeceive them, that are
not given up, as the Apostle speaks, 2 These. 2* to believe a lie, for their
want of the love of the Truth. So that the Adoration given to the Host upon the
presumption of its being Transubstantiated, is most palpable and unexcusable
Idolatry, according as my twenty second Conclusion infers from my twenty first,
and that from the fourth and fifth. But to say, as no adoration is here due, so
none is intended, but only to Jesus Christ, adorable where ever he is; is such
a laxe Answer and unsound, that it will excuse the Persians worshipping the
Sun, and indeed all the Idolatries in the world as well as the Romanists
Artolatria, or Breadworship; which is a manifest Demonstration of the falsness
thereof. For no serious Idolaters give nor intend any Worship, but such and to
such Objects as they think it due to.

Answer to the sixth, seventh, eighth, tenth, eleventh, twel^th, thirteenth,
fourteenth, fi^teenth, eighteenth and twenty fourth Conclusions, but more
particularly to the eig^th, tenth and twel^th* and first in a more general way.
These eleven Conclusions, says he, talk big against the Invocation of Saints.
But the best speakers amongst them are the eighth, tenth and twelfth; He should
add the fifeenth also, that the foundation may be more square and stable: which
I desire my Reader to read over, and then consider my Antagonists Answer in
general to them. Behold then, says he, the Doctors Argument. Invocation implies
an incommunicated excellency in the Saints, viz. an omnipercipient
Omnipresence, atleast Terrestrial if none Celestial, and so communicates that
right to them that appertains only to God. Ergo, Invocation of Saints is
palpable Idolatry. Now if we can but acquit our selves handsomely in a fair
return to this Argument, all the rest that is to be found in the above said
eleven Conclusions, will amount to no more then mere empty and insignificant
Nothings.

The Reply.
Here I would understand of my Adversary, what he means by quitting of himself
handsomely, and making a fair return to this Argument. For ^ suspect in such
fair and smooth language, there lies some cunning slight, or trick of
Legerdemain to impose upon his Reader, and keep the simple still in Ignorance.
And therefore it is seasonable here to advertize them, That unless he bring
evident proof out of the Holy Oracles of God, out of some Universal Council,
that is really Universal, and held before the lapsed Ages of the Church, or
from clear and convictive Reason, that an omnipercipient Omnipresence, at least
Terrestrial, is an excellency communicated to the Saints; that all what he says
will be nothing to the purpose; the ground of my Argument in those Conclusions
touching the Invocation of Saints, being laid chiefly in this, That there is no
convincing proof of any such omnipercipiency in the Saints, but that men doing
no violence to their faculties naturally conclude the Contrary, and condemn the
other conceit as a mere extravagancy. And then secondly, I advertise this, that
though we should prove there is this omnipercipiency of the Saints, (which yet
he has not proved, and I am well assured cannot prove) all the rest of my
Conclusions will not Prove insignificant Nothings. For the fifteenth and
eighteenth will have their use still. But I am well assured his handsome and
fair return is so gentle and civil, that it has not ruffled the least hair of
any of these Conclusions, in that he has done no execution upon the eighth,
tenth, twelfth, and fifteenth on which the rest depend; which we shall
understand after we have set down the manner of his particular assault on these.

His Answer more particularly to the eighth, tenth, and twelfth Conclusions.
In order to this he casts the Centuries of the Church into two sorts, into
those that were more ancient, not yet resolved whether the Saints entered into
Heaven before the Day of Judgment, or were confined to some other place of
rest excluded from the beatifick vision, and those that are more Modern and
resolved of that point. The former was the state of the Church till the Council
of Florence, who cleared the Point, defining that the Souls of the ^ead, as
soon as cleansed from all sin, are received into Heaven and see God clearly as
he is in himself. Now his Argument proceeds in reference to these elder times
thus, As for those elder Centuries, says he, before the Council of Florence,
they held Invocation of Saints for an undoubted truth, though some of them
doubted whether they heard our prayers or ^o; because no Church-definition had
as then ascertained them of their full beatitude; let venerable Antiquity speak
for it self by the mouth of a Saint Austin, who in his book De Cura pro
mortuis, cap. 16. speaks thus. This question exceeds the reach of my judgment,
how the Martyrs relieve those who are certainly assisted by them? Whether they
are present by themselves at the same time in so many several places where the
benefit of their succor is received? Or being retired from the Conversations
of Men in some place proportioned to their Merits, and there interceding for
the relief of those that call upon them, as we pray for the dead who are not
really present with them, and know not how they are or what they do; God
Omnipotent and ever present, hearing the prayers of the Martyrs, grants to Men
by the Ministry of Angels these helps, where he will, when he will, and how he
will. Thus B. S. Austin, Here we have it, says he, from an undoubted work of
this great Saint and Doctor (owned by himself in his Retractations:)

First, That Invocation of Saints was the constant avowed practice of those
elder and purer days.

Secondly, (Contrary to the Doctors fifteenth Conclusion and all his
Pharisaical scruples) here is a sure and certain ground of this Invocation,
viz. Unquestionable, ancient, and immemorial possession, and the often
experienced benefit of it, by those who addressing themselves to the holy
Martyrs mediation, were (says St. Austin) certainly assisted by them.

Thirdly, That the Saints presence at the same time in so many several places,
(which is equivalent to the Doctors Terrestrial omnipercipient Omnipresence)
does not at all in St. Austins opinion, either imply an Impossibility, or
entrench upon any of the Divine excellencies: for then he would certainly have
rejected it; which yet he does not.

Fourthly, Waving this omnipercipient Omnipresence, St. Austin renders it
easily intelligible, how the Saints might, (even without that, and without the
hearing our prayers) relieve those that called upon them, viz. God omnipotent
and ever present hearing the Prayers of the Martyrs, and granting to Men by the
Ministry of Angels these helps when he will, where he will and how he will.

Out of all which I deduce, says he, this Inference which is home to the point,
That if St. Austin be to be credited before Dr. More, It is good and profitable
to invocate the Saints, though we know not whether they heard us or no. And
till the Doctor can prove the contrary, his main Hypothesis upon which he
builds ( viz. That an omnipercipient Omnipresence, is the only ground of the
invocation of Saints) is fundamentally subverted, and all his vapouring
pretenses of Idolatry end in smoke and fancy.

The Reply.
It would make even a serious man smile to observe what a fair and handsome
return he has made to the ground of my Argument, comprised in those four
Conclusions. I thought there was some circumvention and winding about to
ensnare in such smooth words. And lo! a marveilous fetch of wit, To prove from
those Ages (and this he must prove, or else he proves nothing to the purpose,
that is, to excuse them from Idolatry) wherein the Church knew not whether the
Saints had any knowledge of our affairs or no, (as vet not assured whether they
enjoyed the beatifick vision before the day of Judgment) that an
omnipercipient Omnipresence was an excellency then communicated to them; which
seems to be the prospect of his first way of Arguing in general, or else that
we may pray to them though they do not hear us at all: Which yet is as delirant
an Action, as if one of us here in England should speak to an absent friend in
the East Indies. And yet to invoke the Saints, incapable of hearing us, is not
only equally absurd, but grossly Idolatrous; by Conclusion eighth.

But let us see if he be more succesfull in his particular Applications, which
I confess to me are so wondrous subtle, and his Collections from that Quotation
of St. Austin so marvailous fine, that the dullness of my sight cannot discern
the coherence. For first that he should collect, that the Invocation of Saints
was the constant and avowed Practice of those elder days, from that Paragraph
of St. Austin, is without all ground, and implies that St. Austin understood
not his own meaning, and writ things contrary to his own Judgment. For himself
was an Opposer and disallower of that fond and Idolatrous Superstition that
began to creep up in his time, and a rejecter of it as a practice Uncatholick
and against Scripture. So far was it from being a constant and avowed Practice
in those days. A position that is both false in it self, nor any way deducible
from any thing here in this Paragraph of St. Austin, as it is in the Latin
Text. Which is, Et tamen generaliter orantibus pro indigentia supplicantium,
that is, Praying in general for the relief or necessities of Suppliants: Which
is not Suppliants to them, but to God, though at their Memorials. So that my
Adversary in rendering supplicantium, of those that call upon them, has foisted
in them, contrary to the meaning of St. Austin. For it is only supplicantium
in him, not supplicantium ipsis. Nor could St. Austin disallowing Invocation of
Saints as an Impious Worship, conceive God so ready to hear their Prayers if
they prayed to the Saints. For God hears not sinners, nor could be the Author
of so foul a sin, by fullfilling such petitions by the Ministry of his holy
Angels, as is here said. Wherefore those that Invocated God only and Jesus
Christ, at the Monuments of the Martyrs, might be helped by the Prayers of the
Martyrs, though they themselves were not prayed to. I say, men making their
addresses to God through Jesus Christ, that they might be delivered from this
or that evil, at the Memorials of the Martyrs might be healed and relieved, and
this imputed some way to these Martyrs, their Prayers in general for them, (God
having a mind to improve their sufferings for a further propagation of his
Church) contributing to the effect. But that Invocation of Saints was no
allowed nor avowed practice of the Church in St. Austins time is most certain,
as any one may see at large in the Bishop of Armagh and Chemnitius and others,
who have bestowed their pains on this point.

And therefore his second Inference is a mere Vaunt, That here is a sure and
certain ground of Invocation, to wit, unquestionable, ancient, and immemorial
possession, and the often benefit of it by those, who addressing themselves to
the holy Martyrs mediation were certainly assisted by them, and that in those
times when they knew not whether they heard their Prayers or no, whereby he
would subvert the Truth of my fifteenth Conclusion. But it is apparent, if you
Read those who are impartial searchers of Antiquity; that this ground my
Adversary alleges is a very rotten and Reprobate ground, which as it is not
asserted by St. Austin here, so is it disapproved by him else where, and
condemned as a wicked superstitious Innovation, begun amongst weak and ignorant
Souls, against the sense and tenor of Scripture, and practice of the Catholic
Church. And that therefore those helps that were afforded at the Monuments of
the Martyrs, were to them that made their addresses to God through Jesus
Christ. But if any happened to any that prayed to the Martyrs, it might well be
either an Accident in Nature, or some officious delusion of the Devil, to
plunge the Church into further Apostasy. So little force is there in this
second Inference from the pretense of either avowed practice or effect, in the
Age of St. Austin before the beatifick vision of the Saints was ratified, to
enervate my fifteenth Conclusion. But on the contrary, if the Church had
ratified the Invocation of Saints upon no assurance they had of their hearing
our Prayers, they had notoriously lapsed the Christian World into Idolatry. And
as many as took up that custom in those days, were assuredly Idolaters, as
Epiphanius defines of his Collyridians. So that the Sallies of my Adversary
hitherto are in vain.

And now for the third Inference, Does St. Austins doubting of the Martyrs,
after what manner they yield their help to those that are helped by them, Vtrum
ipsiper seipsos adsint, uno tempore (...) diversis locis and tanta inter se
longinquitate discretis, confirm the belief that they are a^ so far distant
places at once to help, which my Adversary says is equivalent to the
Terrestrial omnipercipient Omnipresence, which I deny to be in them? Certainly
no, But so venerable a Fathers doubting of it rather, makes the thing
doubtful. Nor do I think (...) was of so slow a wit, but that if he had
thought a little closer on the matter, he would have declared it out of all
doubt, and concluded it impossible, that any finite Being should be in one
moment of time at two distant places at once, a whole diameter of the ^arth
removed one from another, and a semicircle, or at least a quadrant, distant in
the surface of the Earth, if we reckon more places then two. For the motion
must be either unconceivably swift, or the Saint entirely divided into two
whole Saints in two distinct places at once. This I believe would have seemed
little less then impossible to St. Austin, and plainly to entrench upon the
Omnipresence of God; sure I am it seemed so to Athanasius or whoever was Author
of those Questions ad Antiochum, (Quest. 26.) (...). It is the privilege of
God alone to be found in more places then one at once. And Anastatius Nicenus,
(...). For neither can an Angel be seen in several places at once, but God
only can be so, who is uncircumscribable by any place, Quest. 89. But if St.
Austin does but only doubt, it is sufficient for me. For if we be not certain
of the omnipercipient Omnipresence of the Saints, we have no warrant nor right
to invoke them, as doing that honor to them, which is the undoubted Privilege
of God, and thereby incurring the crime of Idolatry, by Conclusion fifteenth.
For if there be no such omnipercipient Omnipresence communicated to the Saints;
it is plain from Conclusion, 12. That it is Idolatry. But if we know not
whether this omnipercipient Omnipresence be communicated or no to them, then
when we adventure to invocate them, we know not whether we commit Idolatry or
no, that is, we do a doubtful or uncertain action, and act not out of faith.
But he that acts not out of faith does sin, and sins specifically that sin,
which he doubts whether he so doing commits or no. As if he doubt whether such
a thing be Extortion, and yet do it, he commits the sin of Extortion. So he
that does an act which he knows not whether it is Idolatry or no, he commits
the sin of Idolatry in adventuring to do it, as to the inward man; but the
Saints having no such Omnipercipiency, (as any one that is free from
Superstition cannot but be easily assured of) it is Idolatry both as to the
inward and the outward.

And now for his fourth Inference; That waveing this omnipercipient
Omnipresence, St. Austin renders it easily intelligible, how the Saints might
relieve them that call upon them, viz. God omnipotent and ever present hearing
the Prayers of the Martyrs, and granting to men by the Ministry of Angels those
helps, etc. I have above plainly shown that St. Austin asserts no such thing as
the Invocation of Saints in this Paragraph, or that the Saints are called upon;
But God being called upon at the Memorials of the Saints by suppliants, and the
Saints praying in general for us, God is pleased to send relief to his
suppliants by the Ministry of Angels. This is all that is affirmed by St.
Austin; which makes nothing to the proving, That according to St. Austin,
though the Saints do not hear our Prayers, yet we may Pray unto them.

And therefore his general Conclusion of all which he so exults in, and says is
so home to the Point, ( viz. That if St. Austin be to be credited before Dr.
More; It is good and profitable to invocate the Saints though we know not
whether they hear us or no) is a Castle in the Air, and stands upon no
Foundation, since all the four Pillars that should sustain it are fallen into
dust. For neither does St. Austin say, That it was the constant and avowed
practice of those elder and purer days to invoke the Saints, not that any
received help from the Martyrs by invoking them, nor does he assert, but doubt
of the omnipresence Terrestrial of the Saints; nor is it credible, but upon
better consideration he as well as Athanasius and Anastatius, would have
concluded it impossible; nor lastly does he affirm, that God by the Ministry of
Angels did relieve them that prayed to the Saints, but only such as at the
Memorials of the Saints prayed to himself.

But I will not content my self with this, but I will further add; That if St.
Austin and Dr. More be to be believed before this Doctor of the Church of Rome,
it is very ill and pernicious to invocate the Saints whether they hear us or
no. And concerning my own Judgment, I think this Doctor of Rome will confess
there is no controversy. Now for the Judgment of St. Austin, I think he
sufficiently declares himself, in his De Civitate Dei, Book 22. chap. 10. We
build no Temples, says he, to our Martyrs as to Gods, but Memorials, as to dead
Men, whose Spirits are alive with God; nor do we there erect Altars on which we
Sacrifice to the Martyrs, but to that one and Common God of the Martyrs and us.
At which Sacrifice the Martyrs as Men of God, who by the confession of him have
overcome the World, are recited in their place and order, but not invoked by
the Priest that Sacrifices. And in his 42. Epistle, You see, says he, the
most eminent head of the most Renouned Empire, stooping with his Diadem, and
Praying at the Sepul^hre of Peter the Fisherman, namely, to God himself it is
that he prays, though at the Monument of Peter. And lib. 1. Confess. chap. 42.
whom may I find that should reconcile me to thee? was I to go to the Angels?
with what Supplication? with what Sacraments? many endeavoring to return unto
thee? and of themselves being not able, have, as I hear, attempted such things,
and have been thought worthy to be ill-used, etc. And is there not the same
Reason of the Mediation and nvocation of Saints. And against Parmenian, lib. 2.
cap. 8. he says, That if St. John should say, You have me a Mediator with the
Father, I pray for your sins (as Parmenian would have the (...) to be a
Mediator betwixt God and the people) who would look upon him as an Apostle of
Christ, but as Antichrist. And in the same place, For if Paul were a Mediator,
the rest of the Apostles would be so too; and if there were many Mediators,
how would that of Paul agree, who says their is one Mediator, etc. And we know
that Invocation in the most modest sense, is for the Mediation and Intercession
of the Saints, that they may intercede for us. In a word if you consult St.
Austin, he is so far from approving Invocation of Saints, that he is a diligent
Opposer of it, as you may see more at large in Chemnitius. And still, which
will make my Adversaries Argument weaker and weaker, if St. Austin had been an
approver of it, yet that would not have proved, that it had been a constant and
an avowed practice of those purer times, from the Apostles to St. Austins Age;
there being for 360 Years after Christ no Testimony for any such thing, none of
the Fathers appearing for it, but determining point blank against it. But the
Apostasy being to come in according to Prediction, about 400 Years after
Christ; if any Father, and St. Austin amongst the rest, should write any thing
in favor of (...) foul a crime, it would avail nothing with the prudent and
unprejudiced. So that here is a ratiocination (...) than nothing, and the smoke
and fancy appears on my Adversaries side, but on (...) clear and solid Reason.
Nor need I use any ^urther Arguments to prove, that it is not good nor
profitable to invocate the Saints, than what I have subnected to my fifteenth
Conclusion. which sufficiently proves it is a sin: And I think sin will be held
by no good Christian either good or profitable.

And thus you see my Antagonist full^ routed in his first method of attempting
my four chief Conclusions, viz. the eighth, tenth, twelfth, and fifteenth, he
pretending that invocation of Saints may be without Idolatry, though we know
not whether they hear us or no; which was a more oblique and incongruous
Method, and less likely to bring about what he would have.

His more direct Answer to the above said four Conclusions.
His secand Method is more natural, direct and pertinent, if he can make his
attempt good, viz. That ^e have a certain or sufficient knowledge, that the
Saints have at least a Terrestrial Omnipercipiency, and hear all those that
pray to them; which they, (...), most certainly do. 1. From their blissfull
vision of God* not gainsaid by Protestants, and determined by the Council of
Florence. 2ly. It is to be proved by the appearance of Devils upon the
Invocation of Witches and Sorcerers. 3ly. From the Aequality of the Saints with
the Angels, Mat. 22. 30. 4ly. And lastly, From the weakness of the Objections
taken from the ^ncredibility of the Modes of this Omnipercipiency of the
Saints. Because, potest constare de re quando non constat de Modo rei, which I
allow to be a sound Maxim. This is the sum of all the force he has to make out
a certain or sufficient assurance, that the Saints hear our prayers: Which by
the way is to be understood of every particular Saint that is called upon by
chance, or else its little to the purpose. And then again it is worth the
nothing, That if it were possible to bring certain or sufficient proof, that
every particular ^aint hears us, it will not follow that a Religious Invocation
is competible to them, which the Circumstances of the Romish Worship argue to
be given to them, but only a civil calling to, or asking them to do this or
that. For no honor bu^ civil is due to them, as St. Austin himself up and down
asserts. And it is further to be noted, that if they do not hear us, the
Invocation then is not civil, but non-sensical, and which is worse, Idolatrous,
by Conclusion twelfth. And therefore let us examine particularly the Arguments
he produces to make good the contrary, namely that they do ^ear, and we should
add, by the intrinsic virtue of that state they are in. But let us see at
large how he proves they hear us at all.

The Reply.
His first Argument is, That they enjoy the (...) ^^^^tifick Vision, not
gainsaid by Protestants, (...) ^^termined by the Council of Florence. (...)
some of the Protestants not gainsaying, (...) enjoy the beatifick Vision, prove
they (...) rather do not they deny it, in denying that the consummation of our
Happiness, which is the (...) Vision, is till the Resurrection, (...) appear,
and we then being transformed (...) glorious Similitude, shall thereby see him
(...) but till then few or no Protestants (...) a beatifick Vision. And it they
did, how (...) prove but that they are mistaken; especia (...) Scripture
seeming to defer that great and (...) Happiness till that day: though they do
not (...) them a pleasant rest, and enjoyment of the Divine favor before then?

But the Council of Florence, a general or Ecumenical Council, has determined
the point, and therefore we may be certain that the Saints do already enjoy the
beatifick Vision. The words of the Definitive sentence, as is supposed, of the
Council, are, (...). To see clearly the Triune God himself as he is. And the
Speculum Trinitatis, the clear Looking-glass of the Trinity is answerable to
this style of the Council. So that I must contess, if there be sufficient
Authority in this Council, my Adversary has so fast hold of me, that I must
acknowledge that they have determined, That purified Souls do enjoy the
beatifick Vision before the day of Judgment. But there are many things that
make me think that this Council has not authority enough to assure any prudent
man that this Position is true.

For first it determines also for Transubstantiation and the universal
Supremacy of the Pope, declaring him to have the Power and right of ruling and
governing the whole Church. The former of which is manifestly impossible, the
latter grossly injust against Christ the only universal head of the Church, and
against the particular supreme Heads of Christian Nations and Kingdoms, over
whom this Synod declares the Pope set over to govern as supreme. Which by how
much more it seems to favor the Popes immoderate ambition, by so much it seems
more certainly to deviate de via Spiritus (...), and show the Council not to be
infallible but rather actually Erroneous. And if they were so in these things
that are more obvious and discernible, viz. That a wafer or a piece of bread is
not Jesus Christ the Son of God, Nor the Pope the universal Sovereign of all
Christendom; may not any one justly wonder how they became Infallible in
determining what is the state of the Saints in Heaven, themselves having never
looked into that Looking-glass of the Trinity, nor experienced what it is to
see God as he is. Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God. And again, psalm. 17. 15. When I awaken into thy likeness, I shall be
satisfied therewith, viz. with the Eternal Righteousness of God, whereby we
become like him, and so see him as he is.

Secondly, If this opinion of the beatifick Vision had been true, and useful
for the excusing of the Church from Idolatry in the Invocation of Saints, as my
Adversary seems to insinuate, surely the Holy Ghost would have revealed it more
timely. For this Council of Florence was not held till about 1440 or 50 years
after Christ; wherefore it coming so extreme late, it is a sign, it is only a
device found out by men to stop the mouths of them that object against the
Invocation of Saints, from their Incapacity of hearing our Prayers.

Thirdly, Besides these flaws, the certain^y and infallibility of this Council
is blasted from the clear prediction of the Apostasy of the Church after about
400 or 500 years after Christ. And therefore we Protestants do well to have no
great regard to any more then the four first general Councils.

Fourthly and lastly, Though this Council had the face and appearance of a free
Ecumenical Council, it was not at all so in reality and Truth. The Greek
Bishops and others of that Clergy, being many ways necessitated against their
own Judgments and Consciences to subscribe that form, which the Emperor
Johannes Paleologus and Joseph the Patriarch had upon politic Ends, with some
few others, contrived. So that Sylvester Sguropalus a person of singular
integrity and Judgment, and a perpetual witness of the transactions of that
Council, as in particular he has noted, how the the Bishop of Ephesus was
denied his Florens, because he was so inflexible to the purposes of the Pope.
How the Latins produced a false and adulterate Creed of the seventh general
Council, affirming that it was so read (...) with the addittament of Filioque
in that Council. How the Emperor observing that his Clergy was for the greatest
part of them against the Latin Church in their votes, found a device to
deprive all of votes but the Bishops and Coenobiarchae. How falsely and
fraudulently they read the places of the Fathers, mutilating them, and mangling
them as they pleased, and was most for their purpose. How that after all this
ado, but ten of the Bishops and Coenobiarchae gave their votes for (...) for
the procession of the Spirit from the Son, seventeen against it. H^w ^ereupon
consultaion was held again of purging the Council, but that way declined both
the Patriarch and the Emperor dealt under hand with the most effectual
persuasions of fear and hope that they could. And at last how they brought it
to this, that thirteen Bishops gave their votes for (...), but the
Coenobiarchae's votes were made null by a trick, least they should have turned
the scales again. How the Lay Courtiers even to the Physicians and meaner sort
of Officers were enabled to vote, when so many of the Reverend Clergy were by
devices made vote-less. And lastly, when by these arts they had got a plurality
to declare for (...), and the Emperor made a long speech extolling the present
Synod, and delivering his own suffrage to close all: How his Greyhound that
constantly followed him to the Council, and lay on a silk cushion wrought with
Gold, at the Emperors feet every Session, and in so many Sessions had lain
still, both when the Emperor spoke, and also others, did now so soon as the
Emperor began to speak set up a shril howling note, modulated to the very
cadences of the Emperors Oration, nor could they by any sneaping of him, or
threatening him, keep him from so doing: Which, says he, many looked upon as an
inauspicious sign.

This is also observable, How nothing but (...), was so much as disputed in the
Synod: But the Emperor with some few of his own, the Cardinals ever and anon
visiting him, and propounding Questions to him, added four more Articles as
agreed upon, amongst which, by the by, there is no mention of the bea^ifick
vision, which I observe others also to omit. And how Nicenus made a long and
eloquent speech in public, which contained things as agreed on by the Greek
Church which yet they knew nothing of, (...), but it was altogether a pack't
device: but that however most of the Greek Clergy, what by promise, what b^
threatenings and urging necessit^s, (for the Bishop of Nicomedia poor man was
fain by friends to beg a new Cloak of the Pope, that he might not disgrace the
Solemnity by the squalour of his old apparel) much against their wills were
brought off to subscribe the form, and make their appearance at the celebration
of the union. I say, besides these particulars and many more that this
Sguropulus sets down, which plainly shows, that this was not a Synod held per
viam Spiritus sancti; he in general also tells us, That it was indeed an
Ecumenical Synod, no man can deny, (...), But no man that was there will ever
affirm that they came to any Synodical sentence or determination* For after the
public disceptations ceased, nothing was inacted; (...) (...), but all things
were transacted in hugger-mugger, by a few Prelates both on the Emperors part
and the Popes, the rest of the Greek or Latin Bishops knowing nothing: and
much more to this purpose may you read in this accurate describer of this
Florentine Council. But it is sufficiently evident already how little ground
there is in this Florentine Council, to found any man's belief of any Conclusion
they are said to have defined, and to venture on so heinous a sin as Idolatry,
as certainly Invocation of Saints is, be it called civil Worship or Religious;
if they hear us not, when the Authority of this Council is so uncertain or
rather null, which my Adversary would make use of to prove that they do hear
us, because purified Souls enjoy the beatifick Vision before the Day of
Judgment according to that Councils determination.

And if my Adversary would teach his Party here to evade, by saying what ever
this Council may prove, it is well known that the Council of Trent has
concluded the same opinion; I Answer, that the three first things alleged
against the Council of Florence, are also alledgeable against the Council of
Trent, and besides they have determined for the Communion in one kind, and for
the worshipping of Images, expressly against the word of God, whereby we cannot
but be well assured of their Fallibility. Besides that it is evident at it is
neither a free nor general Council, but a company of men contrived together for
the Interest of the Pope, thirteen new Cardinals, all Italians, being made by
him at a clap toward the end of the Synod, besides much garbling of the Council
before. And the Holy Ghost is also said at the time of their setting to have
Travailed from Rome to Trent in a Portmanteau, another evidence how much that
Synods proceedings were per vi^ Spiritus sancti. And therefore to adventure to
commit so heinous a crime as Idolatry, upon so weak a pretense as the Authority
of such a Council, what can be more horrid?

Butadmit the Saints do enjoy the beatifick Vision, how is it proved that the
beatifick Vision is such as implies the sight and hearing of all visible and
audible Objects here on Earth, or that to a mere Creature it would be any
happiness at all, but rather an unhappiness and a burdensome and unseasonable
distraction. Din quis vivendo multa quae non volt videt. Wherefore it is most
reasonable to conceive, that only such things are exhibited to them by God, as
they are particularly concerned in. And that all things and Persons of this
caliginous Globe, are not obtruded on them in the beatifick Vision, where there
is infinitely more then will fill them of better Objects. And therefore the
beatifick Vision as to this Point, will amount to no more then to one of those
^odes of the Saints knowing when we pray unto them; which I think I have not
without cause declared to be absonous and absurd as to the solving of this
difficulty, in my fourteenth Conclusion. And we may further here take notice,
that they make God an abettour of a very incongruous Act, the putting up
Prayers to a finite invisible Power, which of himself knows not whether he be
prayed to or no, unless God be so officious as to give him notice of it. The
thing therefore is so incredible in it self, and supported by so weak Authority
of the Florentine and Tridentine Councils, that no certain or sufficient
assurance can from hence be had thereof.

Now for the next Argument, fetched from the Devils appearing upon the
Invocation of Witches or Sorcerers^ I conceive it has little force to prove
that any particular Saint invocated by name, does presently of himself hear the
lnvocations of his Clients, though some be in America, others in the
East Indies, others in Italy at the same time. Which I deny that any particular
Devil can do: And therefore the Inference will be infirm, to conclude that
Saints hear the Prayers of their Suppliants, when they are particularly called
upon, and at whatsoever distant parts of the Earth at the same time; because
some particular Devils hear Sorcerers so, when there is no proof they do. Any
particular Devil may step in if Magically invoked, to delude a sinner, and when
Covenant is once made, that very Familiar by name may be ready to assist being
invoked; but this falls very short of proving, that a Devil let him be at what
distance he will from a Suppliant, that he hears, or that he can hear and
assist many Thousands of Suppliants in many Thousand far distanced places at
once. Which Incapacity not only of a Devil but a Saint makes their Invocation
Idolatry by Conclusion twelfth.

But at last my Adversary knocks at the door of the most important Topic of
all, for the proof of the Saints knowing the Prayers of their Suppliants; I
mean the holy Scripture, and if he produces any place there to prove they hear
when we speak to them: I will so far forth yield up the cudgels to him, as to
acknowledge a civil calling to them, or desiring them to do this or that for
us, that is really in their power to effect, may not be absurd. The place he
cites is Matthew, 22. 30. The Saints are as the Angles of God in Heaven, says he,
and of the Angels it is written, See ye despise not one of these little ones,
for I say unto you, their Angels in Heaven (...) see the face of my Father
which is in Heaven, Matthew. 18. 10. And again, There shall be joy in Heaven upon
one sinner that repents, Luke 15. 7.

To the latter I Answer first, if it were the privilege of Angels, through the
excellency of their own nature, to know at what distances soever they are at
when men prayed to them, why was the Invocation of Angels laid asleep all the
time of the Mosaical Law? and why spoken against by the very Gospel? or what
warrant has the Church of Rome to invoke Saints, more then the Jews to invoke
Angels? But moreover I Answer to that of Matthew. 18. 10. The sense, of the
Angels in Heaven always seeing the face of Christ's Father which is in Heaven,
is not, that by enjoying the sight of God they obtain thereby a terrestrial
Omnipercipiency, and see and hear all things transacted here on Earth; but the
phrase of seeing the face of Christ's Father in Heaven, signifies, that they are
those Angels that also Minister and wait before God and are Assistents at the
Divine Schechina or that inimitable glory whereby God reveals himself to the
Angels and blessed Spirits, and gives Oracles for the ministration of his
Kingdom. The Angels I say, that assist holy men on Earth, are of so great
excellency, that they are in Heaven part of the Satellitium that always wait on
God who is in Heaven; which also implies that they are one while on Earth,
another while in Heaven, a^cending and descending to negotiate the affairs of
the Church, receiving Oracles and commands from the Divine Schechina. But
instead of these Oracles of importance, if the Divine Schechina should tell St.
Peter, or St. Paul, or St. Apollonia, and the rest of the Saints ever when any
pray to them in such infinite distinct places, and some great numbers put
together, praying to some or other of the Saints, let any indifferent man judge
how incongruous it is. It is sufficient in the mean time, that no such
terrestrial Omnipercipiency is to be proved in the Angels from this Text. Nor
does Luke 15. 7. imply any such thing. For the Angels ascending and descending
as Jacob saw them in his Divine Vision, on the ladder that reached from Earth
to Heaven, those that ascend from Earth tell them in Heaven of the good news of
converted sinners, and so this Text implies no such terrestrial Omnipercipiency
as my Adversary would insinuate. But then in the last place, suppose this
terrestrial Omnipercipency were competible to the Angels, it does not follow
from Mat. 22. 30. that the Saints already enjoy it. For the entire Text runs
thus, For in the Resurrection they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but
are as the Angels of God in Heaven. But I hope my Adversary will not, with
Hymeneus and Philetus, affirm the Resurrection is past; and if not so, he must
acknowledge even from this Text himself produces, that this Angelical
privilege of the Saints, in seeing all things in the face of God, is yet to
come, if there were at all any such Angelical privilege.

The last thing he alleges for this Point, is the weakness of our Objections
from the Modes of this Omnipercipiency of the Saints; because, Potest constare
de re quando non constat de modo rei. But I answer, a posse ad esse non valet
consequentia. If we had indeed the like assurance of the thing it self, That
one particular Saint invocated by never so many, and at never so far distant
places at once, did hear the Prayers of all those Suppliants, as we have of the
Divinity of Christ and the Triunity of the Godhead, then though I could not
reach the particular Mode how it was, yet I would believe it. But when all
manner of Modes producible of a thing seem absurd and incredible, and in the
mean time there is no assurance of the Reality of the thing it self, it argues
great levity of mind to give belief to such a thing that it at all is. And it
is not mere levity in things of such great Importance, as the Rights of God,
and the danger of Idolatry, but an irreligious and giddy Temerity; Which I pray
God keep all men from.

In the mean time it is very apparent, that his attempts against my eighth,
tenth, twelfth, and fifteenth Conclusions are frustraneous, and that they stand
as firm as ever, he haying neither proved that we may invocate the Saints, we
being uncertain whether they hear us or no, nor yet proved it certain that they
do hear us; which were the two Methods whereby he could have undermined these
four Conclusions. And therefore they standing firm, still it is manifest from
his own supposal, that the other seven, viz. the sixth, seventh, eleventh,
thirteenth, fourteenth, eighteenth, and twenty fourth, stand firm and unshaken
also. We proceed now to his Answers to the remaining Conclusions in the order I
find them.

His Answer to the ninth Conclusion.
Against this Conclusion he argues thus; Incurvation of the body, according to
my sixteenth Conclusion, is one of the Actions or Gestures which God did choose
in the setting out the Mode of his own Worship. Ergo, Incurvation toward or in
reference to any Creature is Idolatry. But now, says he, if this be true,
Abraham who used this Incurvation to Men and Angls, Genesis 18. and 23. and the
beloved Disciple of Jesus, who reiterated the like Incurvation toward the
Angel, Apoc. 22. 8. were Idolaters. And therefore my Conclusion cannot be true,
that is laden with so great an absurdity. This is the main of his Argument.

The Reply.
In Answer to which I desire the Reader to peruse my sixteenth Conclusion. My
words are these, That the erecting of a Symbolical presence, with incurvations
thither ward, etc. I do not say that simple Incurvation is one of the Actions
or Gestures, which God did choose to set out the Mode of his own Worship by,
(for Incurvation of the body in general is neither Religious nor Civil, but may
be either, as all men know) but that it is Incurvation toward a s^mbolical
Presence, which God appropriated to himself, as a Religious Mode of Worship due
to himself only. Simple Incurvation is permitted, and has been used, without
any scandal to God or Man, both unto Men and Angels. Now neither Abraham's, nor
St. John's Incurvations being to the symbolical Presences of the Angels they
bowed to, my sixteenth Conclusion is unconcerned in it, nor does it therefore
at all enervate my ninth, as is plain at first sight. For it does not at all
imply that either Abraham, or St. John were Idolaters in their bowing to Angels
or Men.

His Answer to the sixteenth Conclusion.
The sixteenth, seventeenth, nineteenth and twentieth talk much, says he, of a
symbolical Presence, and Incurvation toward it; whereof the sixteenth refers
to the ninth and has its Answer there.

The Reply.
How infirm my Adversaries Answer is to the ninth and unsatisfactory you have
already seen, and therefore, I having already replied to it, it is evident that
his Answer to this sixteenth wants no further Reply.

His Answer to the seventeenth Conclusion.
To this, says he, I have already answered, shweing that the Pagans gave the
Worship and Title of Deities to their Demons, and therefore became ipso facto
Idolaters.

The Reply.
To that pretended Answer, I have made a full and perspicuous Reply above,
which if the Reader be pleased to turn back and peruse, the more he looks on
it, I do not question but the more he will be satisfied with it.

His Answer to the nineteenth Conclusion.
Here, says he, I would know of the Doctor, whether the Name of a person be
not a symbolical Presence in its kind as well as an Image. For as much as both
of them are signs or tokens representing the same thing, with this only
difference that the Image represents it to the eye, the Name to the ear. And
why then may we not bow to the Image of Jesus as well as to the name of Jesus,
or how can the one be condemned of Idolatry, but the other must incur the like
brand.

The Reply.
The Doctor Answers, that the Name may be a symbol, as Aristotle has defined.
(...) (...) Aword or Name may be a symbol of that conception I have in my mind,
says Aristotle, but he says nothing of its being a symbol of the external
Object. But let that go; Though it be a symbol, yet it is very unnatural to
conceive it a symbolical Presence, not is any where called so, nor accounted so
by any one. Besides, a symbolical Presence must be a standing permanent
representation of that which it is the symbolical Presence of, consecrated and
intended for that purpose. How unna^ural therefore is it to conceit a name,
that is no sooner sounded but vanishes from the senses, to be a symbolical
Presence, but only a mere note or symbol to help our memories, and to be part
of speech and discourse: So plain is it, there is not the same reason of the
Image of Jesus, and the Name of Jesus. No^ is the second Commandment against
bowing to sounds but Images: Nor do we, which is best of all, bow to the Name
of Jesus, but at the Name of Jesus, as I answered above. And if it could be
proved that the Name of Jesus were a symbolical Presence of one kind, as my
Adversary phrases it; so long as it is not of that kind my nineteenth
Conclusion speaks of, and founded on the second Commandment, what is it to the
purpose? Or if it were included, unless that of the second to the Philippians
commanded to bow to it in such a sense, which my Adversary will be never able
to prove, what will it avail? But I have even over-answered this Objection. And
it is already too too manifest, that though bowing at the Name of Jesus be no
Idolatry, bowing to the Image of Jesus may be palpable Idola^^y.

His Answer to the twentieth Conclusion.
To me, this Conclusion, says he, seems big with a spirit of contradiction, as
being manifestly against Scripture, against the practice of the Church of
England, and lastly against Dr. More himself. First, Against Scripture, As is
manifest, (besides what we have said, says he, in Answer to the last Conclusion
of the first Chapter) from the Incurvation the Scripture commands to the Name
of Jesus, which is as much a Religious Incurvation as any we give to t'ose
symbolical Presences called Images.

Secondly, Against the Church of England, who bow the knee at the Eucharist to
the bare Figurative or symbolical Presence of Christ's natural flesh and blood;
and therefore they useing this Religious Incurvation toward a symbolical
Presence, are Idolaters; Nor can excuse themselves by a mental reserve, they
intending it only as a circumstance of their Worship, because that is declared
Equivocation, in this very Conclusion and the foregoing one.

Thirdly and lastly, This Conclusion is against my self, Because my sixteenth
Conclusion openly avoucheth, That the erecting of a symbolical Presence with
Incurvation thitherward, was declared by the supreme God the God of Israel one
of the manners of worship due to him; but my twentieth runs counter and stiffly
presses, That Religious Incurvation toward a symbolical Presence (without
exception of any) wittingly and conscientiously directed thither, is real
Idolatry. These two Conclusions, says he, are as perfect a contradiction, as
to say, All Religious Incurvation toward a symbolical Presence is Idolatry, Not
all Religious Incurvation toward a symbolical Presence is Idolatry.

The Reply.
To all which three I Reply, and First to the first, That what he has said in
Answer to the last Conclusion of my first Chapter, I have replied to already
and plainly proved there is nothing therein that clashes with the Scripture.
And as I said before, so I again repeat, that we are not commanded to bow to
the name of Jesus, but, if it be understood of any external Ceremony, only at
the name of Jesus; and with all, though the Incurvation be Religious, that his
name is no symbolical Presence, as I declared before. Never any one phancied a
name any such thing, so that it is a mere shift to amuze the ignorant.

To the Second, that the Bread and Wine are no symbolical Presence or Figure of
the very Person of Christ, nor do I know that any Protetestants hold that any
Blood or Flesh of Christ not actuated by his humane Spirit, nor joined with the
Divinity is capable of Divine or Religious Worship, since nothing is capable
thereof but God. But a symbolical Presence is the representation of some Person
or thing, erected to represent the thing o^ Person conceived by them that erect
it, adorable' But we do not conceive the Body of Christ killed and Sacrificed,
and his Blood shed out of his Body adorable; unless it could be proved, what
yet is impossible, that it was even then Hypostatically united with God, when
it was disunited from the Soul. So that the broken Bread and the Wine are but
commemoration tokens of the Body of Christ killed and Crucified, and his Blood
shed for us, this commemoration being as it were a feast upon a Sacrifice, as
the Apostle intimates, (1 Cor. 5. 7.) after the Lamb is perfectly slain. Nor is
any man on his knees at the Communion in order to direct their kneeling to the
Bread or Wine in any sense, but they are on their knees before hand in their
Prayers and Devotions to God and Christ, and it is ex accidenti, as I may so
speak, that they are on their knees when they receive the holy symbols; So far
are they from wittingly and conscientiously directing any Religious Worship
toward them: but the symbols are brought to them in such a posture as the
Communicant is found in at his Devotions, whose face happily was not so much as
derected to the Communion Table while he was at his Devotion, and his heart, as
it is said, sursum corda, wholly carried to Heaven. This I confess is a pretty
gird of my Adversary, and a cunning justling me as it were against my own
Church as much as he can; But it is manifest that what I have here delivered in
this Conclusion is agreeable enough with the Rites of our own Church, as well
as with Truth it self.

To the third I Answer, That my twentieth Conclusion is not truly recited. For
my words run thus, That Religious Incurvation toward a bare symbolical
Presence, wittingly and conscientiously directed thither, etc. He has left out
the most emphatical word in the sentence, viz. [bare]. And hence you see how
unseasonable his Parenthesis is, [without exception of any] For when I restrain
my Assertion to bare symbolical Presences, it is evident that I except those
that are covered and concealed from the eyes of the people; As the Cherubins
were on the Ark of the Covenant. So that it was a great oversight, to say no
worse, in my Adversary to leave out that Monosyllabon which was of such
principal signification in the sentence. But it being in, as it was manifestly
in and before his eyes, in the Conclusion he pretends to consute, this
twentieth Conclusion is no contradiction at all to the sixteenth. All Religious
Incurvation toward a bare symbolical Presence is Idolatry, says this twentieth
Conclusion: But does the sixteenth say, Not all Religious Incurvation toward a
bare symbolical Presence is Idolatry? It says no such thing. But does only
imply that some symbolical Presence may be bowed toward without Idolatry, as
that over the Ark of the Covenant, it being not bare or open, but hid from the
eyes of the people; nor yet that bowed to as to an Object neither, but only as
a circumstance of Worship. Let the Reader judge how heedlesly at least, if not
disingenuously, my Adversary has dealt with me in this assault, and withal how
firmly and clearly I have maintained my own.

His Answer to the two and twen^ieth Conclusion.
My twenty first he gives here no brush against. Of the two following he speaks
thus. The twenty second, and twenty third Conclusions weakly cavil at the
adoration of the Host as Idolatrous, either in Catholics or Protestants. But
these petty Nibblers at the most blessed and ever adorable Sacrament, shall
have their Answer in the next Chapter, when the Doctor treats of this subject
ex protesso,

The Reply.
His Answer is mavelous lofty and full of despiciency toward his Antagonist,
and all of his mind. But I do not impute this so much to the pride of my
Adversary as to his cunning and prudence, that he may by this Scheme of
confidence keep his Parties devotions warm to the adoration of the most blessed
and ever adorable Sacrament, as he phrases it: And we indeed will also
acknowledge the consecrated bread, an holy and blessed symbol of the body of
Christ, but we adore only our Celestial Lord and King, who sits at the right
hand of his Father in glory; and take it as a great reproach done to him, that
those of the Romish Religion should pretend that a morsel of Bread or a Waser,
after a few words of the Priest should become this Lord of glory. And meaner
and more petty Nibblers than we, even those small and contemptible Animals,
ordinarily called Mice, offer such an Argument against so grand an Absurdity as
may well puzzle the subtilest of your School-Divines, viz. How this consecrated
Host, if it be Christ himself in his own Body and Person, should suffer himself
to be eaten up by a Mouse: You will say, that the Mouse only eats up the
species or external show of a Body not any real Body at all, and that though
Christ be contented to go along with the species when Men eat the Sacrament,
yet if a Mouse light on it, as soon as she nibbles at it he slips out of the
way. I must confess I know no other subter-fuge but this

But this seems to me a mere shift, Nor do I think that any will deny, but that
if the Mouses stomach were searched presently after she has eaten this
consecrated Bread, that the Bread, or call it the species, will be found there,
and certainly endewed with such Attributes as are the specific Attributes of
Body, that is with Divisibility and Impenetrability, which being the essential
and specific Difference whereby Body is Body, it is plain, that what they call
species is really a Body or substance; but the Body or substance of the Bread
is transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, therefore it is evident that the
Body of Christ is in the belly of the Mouse, if Transubstantion be true. Which
plain consideration methinks, might be sufficient to awaken any one that is not
in a very dead sleep or incurable Lethargy out of all conceit that a
consecrated Water does become Personally and Corporeally Christ himself. For if
it be He, though he humbled himself indeed so very extraordinarily in the
behalf of us Men, yet it is not at all credible, that he would make himself so
vile and cheap as to suffer himself to be devoured by a Mouse.

And if this Argument chance to be less pleasing, yet the recalling it to my
memory is to be imputed to the scornful expressions of my Adversary, who makes
us such petty Niblers in our argumentation; Whenas if he had not overlooked, in
this lofty mood of his, my twenty first Conclusion, this twenty second could
not but have appeared to him perfect demonstration, upon the suposal that
Transubstantiation is but a conceit, and no solid Truth; which is the main
Argument of the next Chapter.

His Answer to the twenty third Conclusion.
His present Answer to my twenty third is this, For Protestants indeed to adore
the Sacrament who believe no Corporeal presence of Christ there, would be a
like Crime, as for an unconverted Jew to adore Jesus Christ in whom he believes
not. But what is this to the Doctors purpose.

The Reply.
My Antagonist here acknowledges it a great sin, even a Crime in a Protestant
to adore the Sacrament, as well as for the Jew to adore Jesus Christ, when he
does not believe on him. Let me then here note by the by, how great a Crime it
is in them, who as much as in them lies, force men to commit so great a sin by
their unchristian Persecutions. But I would ask further what Crime it is that
the Jew and Protestant here commit. Certainly the Jew's can be no less then
Idolatry in the internal, being that he has assented to the practice of what he
thinks in his own Conscience is Idolatry, the giving of Divine Worship to a
mere Crea^ure. And so much at least is true of the Protestant that adores the
Sacrament, But the Sacrament being not Christ, he is also guilty of Idolatry in
the compleatest Circumstances, and becomes an Idolater as well in the external
as internal Act.

And if you ask what this is to the Doctors purpose; he will tell you, that his
purpose is to per^^^^^ all men as much as he can to deal uprightly and not to
dissemble. So that it is an intimation to as many as are not persuaded of
Transubstantiation, that they would not abuse themselves in communicating in
your service, they not being able to do it without apparent Idolatry.

His Answer to the twenty fifth Conclusion.
To the twenty fourth he Answered above, where you have also my Reply. To this
twenty fifth or last, he only says, touching my Objection there raised and
Answered, that he will leave the Doctor to the pleasure of his own thoughts,
raising his airy Castle with one hand, and beating it down with another.

The Reply.
To which my Reply is only this, let the Reader seriously peruse this my last
Conclusion, and consider whether the Objection I raise be not material, and
whether the solution thereof be not solid. And let him also impartially judge
if I have not, though briefly, yet very clearly and perspicuously showed the
Invalidity of all my Antagonists Objections against the Conclusions of these
two first Chapters of my Antidote. We proceed now to the third.

CHAP. III.
That the Romanists worship the Host with the highest kind of ^ orship, even
that of Latria, according to the Injunction of the Council of Trent; and that
it is most gros^ Idolatry so to do.
I. AND having thus clearly and distinctly evinced and declared what is or
ought to be held Idolatry amongst Christians; let us at length take morefull
notice of some Particulars wherein, according to these Determinations, the
Church of Rome will be manifestly found guilty of Idolatry, and that according
to the very Definitions of their own Council of Trent. As first, in the Point
of the Adoration of the Host, touching which the very words of the Council are,
Latriae cultum, qui vero Deo debetur, Council. Trident.
huic sanctissimo Sacramento in veneratione esse adhibendum: and again, Siquis
dixerit, Self. 3. cap. 5.
in sancto Euc^aristiae Sacramento Christum non esse cultu Latriae etiam
externo, adorandum, and solenniter circumgestandum populoque proponendum
public ut adoretur, Anathema sit.

2. This confident Injunction of gross Idolatry, as it is certainly such, is
built upon their confidence of the truth of their Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. For the Chapter of the Adoration of the Host succeeds that
of Transubstantiation, as a natural, or rather necessary, Inference, therefrom.
Null^^ itaque dubitand^ locus relinqui^ur, etc. That is to say, The Doctrine of
Transubstantiation being established, there is no Scruple left touching the
Adoration of the Host, or giving Divine Worship to the Sacrament (or Christ, as
it is there called,) when it is carried about, and exposed publicly in
Processions to the view of the people.

But the Doctrine of Transubstantiation being false, it must needs follow, that
the giving of Divine Worship to the Host is as gross a piece of Idolatry as
ever was committed by any of the Heathens. For then their Divine Worship, even
their Cultus Latriae, which is only due to the onely-true God, is exhibited to
a mere Creature, and that a very sorry one too; and therefore must be gross
Idolatry, by the twenty-first and twenty-second Conclusions of the second
Chapter.

3. But now, that their Doctrine of Transubstantiation is false, after we have
proposed it in the very words of the Council, we shall evince by undeniable
Demonstration. Per consecrationem Panis and Vini conversionem fieritotius
substantiae Panis in substantiam Corporis Christi, Council.
and totius substantiae Vini in substantiam Sanguinis ejus; Trident.
quae conversio convenienter and proprie a Sancta Catholica Ecclesia
Transubstantiatio est appellata. Sess. 3. cap. 4.
And a little before, cap 3. Si quis negaverit in venerabili Sacramento
Eucharistiae sub unaquaque specie, cap. 3.
and sub singulis cujusque speci^i partibus, can. ^.
separatione facta, totum Christum contineri, Anethema sit. In which passages
it is plainly affirmed, that not only the Bread is turned into the whole Body
of Christ, and the Wine into his Blood, but that each of them are turned into
the whole Body of Christ, and every part of each, as often as division or
sepa^ation is made, is also turned into his whole Body. Which is such a
contradictious Figment, that there is nothing so repugnant to the Faculties of
the humane Soul.

4. For thus the Body of Christ will be in God knows how many thousand places
at once, and how many thousand miles distant one from another. Whenas Amp^itruo
rightly expostulates with hi^ Servant Sosia, and rates him for a Madman or
Impostour, that he would go about to make him believe that he was at home,
though but a little way off, while yet he was with him at that distance from
home. Quo id (malum!) pacto p^test fi^ri nunc nti (...) hicsis, ^ domi? And a
little before, in the same Colloquie with his Servant, Nemo unquam ^omo vidit,
says he, nec potest fieri, tempore uno homo idem d^obus locis ut simul sit.
Wherein Amphitruo speaks but according to the common sense and apprehension of
all men, even of the meanest Idiots.

5. But now let us examine it according to the Principles of the learned, and
of all their Arts and Sciences, Physics, Metaphysics, Mathematics and
Logic. It is a Principle in Physics, That that internal space that a Body
occupies at one time is equal to the Body that occupies it. Now let us suppose
one and the same body occupy two such internal places or spaces at once; This
Body is therefore equal o those two spaces, which are double to one si gle
space; wherefore the body is double to that body in one single space, and
therefore one and the same body double to it self. Which is an enormous
Contradiction.

Again, in Metaphysics; The body of Christ is acknowledged one, and that as
much as any one body else in the world. Now the Metaphysical Notion of one is,
to be indivisum a^se, (both quoad parts and quoad totum,) as well as divisum a
quolibet alio. But the Body of Christ being both in Heaven, and without any
continuance of that body, here upon Earth al^o, the whole body is divided from
the whole body, and therefore is entirely both unum and multa: which is a
perfect Contradiction.

6, Thirdly, in Mat^ematicks; The Council saying that in the separation of the
parts of the Species, (that which bears the outward show of Bread or Wine,)
that from this Division there is a parting of the whole, divided into so many
entire Bodies of Christ, the Body of Christ being always at the same time
equal^ to it self, it follows, that a part of the Division is equal to the
whole, against that common Notion in Euclide, That the Whole is bigger then the
Part.

And, lastly, in Logic it is a Maxim, That the Parts agree indeed with the
Whole, but disagree one with another. But in the abovesaid Division of the Host
or Sacrament the Parts do so well agree, that they are entirely the very same
individual thing. And whereas any Division, whether Logical or Physical, is the
Division of some one into many; this is but the Division of one into one and it
self, like him that for brevity ^ake divided his Text into one Part.

To all which you may add, that, unless we will admit of two Sosia's and two
Amphitruo's in that sense that the mirth is made with it in Plautus his Comedy,
neither the Bread nor the Wine can be transubstantiated into the entire Body of
Christ. For this implies that the same thing is, and is not, at the same time.
For that individual thing that c^n be, and is to be made of any thing, is not.
Now the individual Body of Christ is to be made of the Wafer consecrated, for
it is turned into his individual Body. But his individual Body was before this
Consecration. therefore it was, and it was not, at the same time. Which is
against that fundamenta^ Principle in Logic and Metaphysics, That both parts
of a Contradiction cannot betrue; or, That the same thing cannot both be, and
not be, at once.

Thus fully and entirely contradictious and repugnant to all Sense and Reason,
to all indubitable Principles of all Art and Science, is this Figment of
Transubstantiation; and therefore most certainly false. Read the ten first
Conclusions of the brief Discourse of the true Grounds of Faith, added to the
Divine Dialogues.

7. And from Scripture it has not the least support. All is, Hoc est, corpus
meum, When Christ held the Bread in his hand, and after put part into his See
Paul. Fag, upon Deuteronomy. 8 10.
own mouth, (as well as distributed it to ^ his Disciples:) in doing whereof he
swallowed his whole Body down his throat at once, according to the Doctrine of
this Council, or at least might have done so, if he would. And so all the Body
of Christ, Flesh, Bones, Mouth, Teeth, Hair, Head, Heels, Thighs, Arms,
Shoulders, Belly, Back, and all, went through his Mouth into his Stomach; and
thus all were in his Stomach, though all his Body entirely, his Stomach
excepted, was still without it. Which let any one judge whether it be more
likely, then that this saying of Christ, This is my Rody, is to be understood
figuratively; the using the Verb substantive in this sense being not unusual in
Scripture; as in, John 15* 5. Genesis 41. 27.
I am the Vine; The seven lean Kine are the seven years of Famine; and the
like: and more particularly, since our Savior, speaking elsewhere of eating
his flesh and drinking his blood, says plainly, ( Ioh. 6. 63.) that the words
he sp ke, they were spirit, and they were truth, that is to say, a spiritual or
aenigmatical truth, not carnally and literally to be understood.

And for the trusting of the judgment of the Roman Church herein, that makes
it self so sacrosanct and infallible, the Pride, Worldliness, Policy and
multifarious Impostures of that Church, so often and so shamelesly repeated and
practiced, must needs make their Authority seem nothing in a Point that is so
much for their own Interest, especially set against the undeniable Principles
of common Sense and Reason, and of all the Arts and Sciences God has
illuminated the Mind of man withal. Consider the twelfth Conclusion of the
abovenamed Treatise, together with the otherten before cited. Wherefore any one
that is not a mere Bigott may be as assured that Transubstantiation is a mere
Figment or enormous Falsehood, as of any thing else in the whole world.

8. From whence it will unavoidabl^ follow and themselves cannot deny it, that
they are most gross and palpable Idolaters, and consequently most barbarous
Murt^^rers, in killing the innocent Servants of God for not sub^itting to the
same Idolatries with themselves. Costerus the Iesui^e speaks expressly to this
Point, (and conson^ntly, I think, to the Suppositions of the Council) viz. That
if their Church be mistaken in the Doctrine of T^ansubst^ntiation, they ipso
facto stand guilty of such a piece of Idolatry as never was before seen or
known of in the world.

For the errors of those, says he, were more to^rable who w^rship some golden
or si^ver Statue, Francise. Cosler. Enchirid* Controv* cap. 12.
or some Image of any other Materials, for their God, as the Heathen worshipped
their Gods; or ar^d Cloth hung upon the top of a Spear, as is reported of the
Laplanders; or some live Animal, as of old the Egyptians did; then of these
that ^orship a bit of Bre^d, as hitherto the Christians have done all over the
w^r^ for so many hundred years, if the Doctrine of: ransubstantiation be not
true.

What can be a more full and express ackno^ledgement of the gross Idolatry of
the Church of Rome then this, if Transubstantiation prove an Error? Then which
notwithstanding there is nothing in the world more certain to all the Faculties
of a man; as is manifest out of what has been here said. And therefore the
Romanists must be gross Idolaters, from the second, third, fourth, seventh and
ninth Conclusions of the first Chapter, and from the fourth, fifth, eighth,
ninth, twenty first, twentysecond and twenty fifth of the second Chapter. All
these Conclusions will give evidence against them, that they are very notorious
Idolaters.

9. And therefore this being so high and so palpable a strain of Idolatry in
them touching the Eucharist, or the eating the Body and drinking the Blood of
Christ, wherein Christ is offered by the Priest as an Oblation, and the People
feed upon him as in a Feast upon a Sacrifice, which is not done without Divine
Adoration done to the Host, according to the precept of their Church; This does
hugely confirm our sense of the eating of things offered unto Idols in the
Epistles to the Churches in Pergamus and in Thyatira, this worshipping of the
Host being so expressly acknowledged by the Pope and his Clergy, and in that
high sense of Cultus Latriae, which is due to God alone. And therefore it is
very choicely and judiciously perstringed by the Spirit of Prophecy above any
other Modes of their Idolatry, it being such a gross and confessed Specimen
thereof, and such as there is no Evasion for or Excuse.

Hoc teneas vultus muianiem Protea nodo. CHAP. III.
His Answer to the first Paragraph.
It had been ingenuous in the Doctor whilst he states Catholic ^octrine to
speak Catholic language. The Council of Trent (even as quoted by himself)
mentions not the ^ost but only the ^^oration of the Blessed Sacrament or
(which is the same) of Jesus christ in the Sacrament. Which is a quite
different thing from that uncatholick expression of worshipping the Host; For
Catholic Principles own nothing of the Host to remain after Consecration, but
the species or symbols. Nor does the Council enjoin the Worship of Latria to
the symbols but to jesus Christ veiled with these symbols.

The Reply.
THis Answer is most what but a (...) or strife about words. Whether it be
called Host or Sacrament, it is all one to me, and to the Cause I undertake.
For by the Host I mean the consecrated Bread, and it is familiar in common
sp^^ch to understand the Host in that sense. As when they say, At the elevation
of the Host, and, As the Host passes by, and the like, which is understood of
the Sacrament, as my Adversary here had rather have it called. Besides that,
the very Reason of the name implies so much, that it is the Consecrated Bread;
because Hostia, from whence the word Host is, signifies a Sacrifice; Which your
Church will not grant the Bread to be before Consecration, whereby you conceive
it to become Christ himself. And lastly Durandus, and I doubt not but many
others of your Church, do call the Sacrament it self Hostia very often. So that
there is more of pomp then solidity in this rebuke, and a cunning endeavor to
make me seem less skillful in these Points of Controversy in the eyes of your
Party.

But now to the Second part of your Answer which seems more material, That the
Council enjoins not the Worship of Latria to the symbols, but to Jesus Christ
veiled with the Symbols: I Reply, That for as much as they enjoin adoration or
bowing to this effigiated bare or visible s^mbolical Presence of Christ
invisibly there, it is Idolatry by Conclusion 20th. Chapter 2. And though they
pretend to omit the external species or show of the pread in their Worship; yet
while it is acknowledged that they Worship Christ as Hypostatically united with
the substance of the Bread not annihilated but changed and transubstantiated
into his body there veiled with these Species, and being this
Transubstantiation is not, this Latri^ of theirs is turned into Idolatry by the
twenty first, twenty second, and twenty fifth Conc^usions of the second
Chapter. As it is manifest to any one that lists to compare the Case with these
Conclusions, which stand very firm still, for any thing he has been able to
allege against them.

After this my Adversary gives a brief sum of this third Chapter of mine in
this Enthymeme, Transu^stantiation is a mere Figment; Ergo, The adoration of
the Eucharist is palpable ldolatry, and so runs out preposterously to the
eighth Paragraph, in Answer to the concealed Proposition of the Enthymeme. But
I will rather set his Answers in the same order that the numbers of the
Paragraphs require. And so his Answers to the Antecedent of the Proposition
will come in view first. We will consider his Answer to the consequence of it,
at the eight Paragraph which is its due place.

His Answer to the Argument in the fourth Paragraph.
To this he Answers, This is indeed a fair demonstration that Dr. More is
acquainted with Plautus his Comedies, and can when he pleases descend from the
Divinity-chair to a piece of unseasonable mirth an^ stage Drollery. But let
this pass as a pleasant skirmi^ before the main charge.

The Reply.
If it was not indecorous for St. Paul to quot^ Heathen Poets, as Aratus and
Epimenides, yea Comedians as Menander in his Thais, how can it be below such an
one as I to quote a Comic Poet* (...) in any point of Drollery, but for an
earnest (...) ration, That ^t never was seen nor is it possible that (...) body
can be (...) two places at once. But if this Testim^^ does not like you, you
may remember how I showd you above, That Athanasius and Anastatius ancient
Christians declare, that an Angel himself, nor a Soul separate can be in two
places at once. But the stress of my Argument yes not in the ^uthority of
P^autus, but in the sense of all mankind as I have in^ima^ed, who by common
suff^age, unless infinitely prejudiced, do ratify this (...) That one body
cannot be in two places at once. Which distinct force of this my first Argument
(...) A^versary endeavored to smother, by a Rhetorical flourish, and
nimble-paced Transition (...) those fetc^ed from Arts and Sciences, etc. To
which you shall now hear his Answers.

His Answer to the Argument from Physics in the fifth Paragraph.
To this he Answers, First, by asserting it possible, That a Body occupying a
space equal to it self in one place, may ^et be elsewhere without occupying any
place at all; and he would prove this more then possible, from the opinion of
the Learned, who maintain that actually the supreme Heaven occupies no place.
Secondly, by denying the Inferences I make (...) of one Body being in two
places at once, as first, That the Body will be equal to those (...) s^aces,
What needs that, Mr. Doctor, sa^s he, It is enough that in each of those two
space^ it be only equal or commensurate to that determina^e place it there
occupies, suppose of six cub^^s, and in neither of them equal or commensurate
to a space of twelve Cubits. And then for my Inference, That granting this Body
equal to the spaces it occupies at once, it will be double to it self, he
denies the consequence. Because a Body of one Cubit rare^ied into a double
dimension, and therefore occupying a double space, will not be double to it
self. And a rational Soul informing a Body of a span length, when the Body is
grown to another span still informed by the same Soul, it does not follow that
the Soul is double to it self. Is not this rare Divinity, says he. Let the
Doctor show a material disparity in these two Cases, or else acknowledge the
unconclusiveness of his own Objection. This is the sum and substance of that
wherewith he would en^rvate my Argument, drawn from Physics against
Transubstantiation. What follows belongs rather to his Answer to my Argument
drawn from Metaphysics which we shall consider there.

The Reply.
In the mean time to his first Answer, I Reply thus, That it is a fetch beyond
the Moon or rather beyond the World, to endeavor the enervation of my
Consequences from the supposal of a Body in two internal places at once, that
it so filling those two places, is equal to the two places equal to one
another, and that therefore it is double to it self; by saying, that a Body
occupying a place equal to it self in one place, may yet be elsewhere without
being in any place, be^cause the supreme or extimate Heaven is in no place;
which yet is to be understood of no ex^ernal place. But Eustachius and other
School^hilosop^ers, and all that hold an internal place ^ which Truth is
plainly demonstrable) do hold that it is in a place internal, upon which our
Argument goes, but is equally true of locus externus. Nor then will this high
flight beyond (...) supreme or extimate Heaven serve for any ev^^ (...). For as
much as we speak of Bodies placed ^n this side of (...) extimate Heaven, and no
Bo^y can b^ found amongst Bodies, but it will be (...) cumscr^bed b^ the
ambient superficies of the next Bodies about it, that superficies of the
ambient Bodies that do immediately compass (...) Body being its place. And
every Body ^ill h^ve such a place that is found on this (...) extimate Heaven.
This is a Truth that (...) be denied. And our Question is (...) only of suc^
Bodies as are on this side (...) extimate Heaven. From which the
unseasonablen^ss of my Adversaries subter^uge is plainl^ d^cerned, which in no
sense will serve his turn, unle^s for the amuzing the minds of the People.

To (...) Second Answer I return this; To the first (...) thereof, That it is
not only enough to him but it is also en^ugh to me that in each of the two
^paces the Body be equal to that de^erminate place it t^ere occupies,
understanding either an internal or external place. For suppose one and the
^ame Body at each place at ^nce (...) either an internal or external place of
such a quantity, of six Cubits suppose, which it cannot fill unless it be
commensurate to them, it is plain it fills as much space as comes to twelve
Cubits, if six and six make twelve, which is as sure as two and two make four.
And therefore that it is equal to twelve Cubits, because it plainly fills up
the space of twice six Cubits. Or how ever at the same time fills the ambient
superficieses that would exactly fit twice six Cubits in several. There is no
greater demonstration of equality then this, which the Geometricians call
(...), or Co^gruentia. So certain is it that a Body adequately filling two
places of six Cubits big at once, has it self the magnitude of twelve Cubits:
But the Body is supposed but one and the same Body in both places, and
therefore can be but six Cubits. Wherefore it is both six Cubits and twelve
Cubits at once, that is to ^ay, it is double to it self at the same time, which
is impossible.

Nor does the Second part of my Adversaries Answer evade this Impossibility:
That it will no more follow that a Body occupying at ^he same time two places,
and so being equal to those two places, which are double to one single place,
that the Body is double to it self, then that a Body of one Cubit ^a^ified into
a double dimension and therefore occupying a double space is double to it self:
Or the rational ^oul informing a Bod^ of a span length at first, but (...) the
same Body grown another span, is thereby double to it self. For not at all to
quarrel with the mistake of the nature of Rarefaction, which I must confess I
take to be the Cartesian way not the ^ristotelean, and heartily interpreting
his meaning, in those words, (a body of a span length and then grown up to
another span) which grown up to another span naturally implies the Body not
double but octuple to what it was before, passing by these and meddling only
with his own meaning, (as it may be hoped) and Hypotheses, the examples do not
at all reach the present purpose. For speaking in his sense, a body of one
Cubit rarefied into a double dimension is double to it self unrarified; that
is, It is as big again as it was when it was unrarified. But it is not as big
again or double to it self at the same time, but double it is to what it was
before. And the same is to be said of the soul, (in such a sense as extension
is applicable to her, and increase or decrease of it, namely by dilatation and
contraction Spiritual) that it is double when the Body is grown as big again as
it was when it was but a span long, to what it was when the Body was but a span
long. But here in the present Case a Body is demonstrated double to it self,
compared with it self and its present condition at the same time: Which is
impossible, viz. That the same Body should be double now to what it is now.
That it now should be as big again as it self is now. For neither can the Soul
her self be said to be now as wise again as she is now, but only as wise again
as she was some time ago. And so my Adversaries Answer does not at all reach
the point in hand. And therefore my Demonstration stands firm and unshaken, of
the Impossibility of Transubstantiation from this Argument taken from Physics,
as any unprejudiced eye may easily discern. Nor had we any need here to
consider the continuity or discontinuity of places. But all is clear from what
we have thus briefly represented.

His Answer to the Argument from Metaphysics in this fifth Paragraph.
To my Metaphysical Argument that infers, that the Body of Christ will be
Divisum a se, and both Unum and Multa. First he Answers to the first part; If
divisum a se secundum substantiam, I deny it, If divisum a se quoad locum,
transeat. To the Second, That it will not be Unum and Multa, but only Unum in
Multis, one and the same in many places.

His second Answer is, that I go upon a false supposition, That essential Unity
is derived from the Unity of local Presence, not from the Intrinsic Principles
of the subject. For unless this be granted, Plurality of local Presence at once
will not prove a thing divided from it self.

His last Answer is, That by this and my former Argument I put arms into the
hands of Infide^s against the Mystery of the Holy Trinity. For it will follow,
says he, That one and the same Divine Nature being in three distinct Persons
at once, the same Nature will be treble to it self, as much as the same Body
being in two places at once will be double to it self. And secondly, that one
Divine Nature being in three distinct Persons it will be as much Divisa a se
(besides that it will not be Divisa ab aliis, viz. from the three distinct
Persons with which it is really identified) as a Body will by being in two
distinct places at once. Th^s is the bare edge and full strength of his Answers
against my Metaphysical Argument. As for his Rhetorical Flourishes and Boasts,
they are no part of any proof, and I list not to meddle with such things.

The Reply.
To the First part of his first Answer I Reply, That it is plain that it is
divisum a se secundum substantiam, both quoad totum, and quoad parts, because
it is separate or distant so many yards or so many miles suppose from it self,
nothing of it self being between. As distant and separate as two several
Individual Bodies at the same distance, that is to say, A is as many yards or
miles distant from A quoad integram suam substantiam, as to its entire
substance, as B is from C. But B is really distant or separate from C suppose
twenty yards or miles, as to their entire substances. Ergo, A is distant or
separate from A twenty yards or miles as to its entire substance, nothing of
its substance being between. So that it is both present with it self and absent
from it self at the same time twenty miles, and may be many thousands according
to this impossible Hypothesis. In so much that it is plain this part of his
Answer is weak and insufficient. To the other part I say, That it manifestly
follows from my former Reply, (that shows plainly that A is distant and
separate from A which is a plain and palpable Division of A wholly and entirely
from it self) That A is not Ens unum, but Entia multa or plura, because the
very definition of Ens unum is, that it be indivisum a se. This is perfect
demonstration to any ones whose eyes are not obstructed with prejud^ce.

And now to his Second Answer, I deny that I go upon any such supposition, That
Essential Unity is derived from the unity of local Presence. But what I contend
for is this, That unity of local Presence is a necessary consequence of
Essential Unity: Nor can any finite Essential Unity be in any m^re than one
place at once, as Athanasius and Anastatius also have concluded. And there may
be as ne essary and indubitable reasonings from the property of a thing as from
its intrinsic Principles. As a man may as certainly conclude such a Triangle
to be a Rectangle Triangle from the equality of the Power of the Hypotenusa to
the Powers of the sides including the Angle subtended by the Hypotenusa, as
from the very definition of a Rectangle Triangle it self. And though the ubi of
a Being be not essential to it, yet we are sure what ever is is some where, and
quod nusquam est nibil est. From whence it is apparent how weak my Adversaries
Inference is, That unless essential Unity be derived from the Unity of local
Presence, it will not follow that the same Body being in diverse places at once
is divided from it self, any more than it is divided from its intrinsic
Principles, which it can never be by Plurality of local Presence, they being
wholly extrinsick to the subject. Which is the same as if he should contend
that a Man may be and yet be no where, because Vbi or Place is extrinsecal to
him. Or that his Soul may be neither wiser, nor less wise, nor equally wise
with others; or his Body neither taller, nor less tall, nor equally tall with
others, and yet be, these being only external respects and comparisons, and
not in the definition or ^ssential constitution of a Man. To all which I add,
That the very intrinsic Principles of any one ^eing supposed to be in two
Places are divided from themselves, that is, are distant or s^parate so many
Yards or Miles, as is plain from my former Arguing. As suppose Plato were at
the same time at Athens and Thebes, the intrinsic ^rinciples of Plato, to wit,
his Soul and Body would be both divided from themselves at this distance, and
constitute two Plato's. These things are so plain, that it is a wonder to me
that they can be hid from any Man's eyes, that does not wilfully wink against
them; or rather that any Man can wink against them, though in humor or for
ends best known to himself he may talk against them.

Now to his third and last I Answer; Who does the greater disservice to the
Catholic Church he or I? I dealing bona fide and plainly demonstrating that to
be an error that cannot be hid from the unprejudiced, it being in a subject so
easily comprehensible to all men's perceptions, I mean the nature of a Body* and
the impossibility of what they pronounce thereof. And it being an Opinion
unknown or disowned by the Fathers of the Church, I mean this Opinion of
Transubstantiation, not avowed by any Council till about four or five hundred
Years ago, when as the Doctrine of the Trinity was repeatedly ratified in the
Primitive times by general Councils above 1200 Years ago, with what reason is
it that my Adversary will allow no greater certainty of the Mystery of the
Trinity then of Transubstantiation, which has such palpable and easily
deprehensible and plainly demonstrable contradictions in it. Is not this to put
weapons into the hands of In^idels with a witness? But I hope I shall easily
wrest them out again by a sufficient Reply to this third Answer of my Adversary.

In the First part therefore, I say, his supposition is very gross and
incompetible to the Divine Nature. As if it were in the three Persons as one
hand phancyed in three distinct distanced gloves at once, or one finger in
three distinct finger^stalls filling them out in several with its presence,
whenas the Divine Nature and the Persons are promiscuously said to be in one
another, ( John 17. 21.) I in thee, and thou in me; And Trinity in Unity and
Unity in Trinity. Peter Lumbard not unskilfully resembles the Trinity and
Divine Nature, to the Mind and the three Powers in the Mind, Memory, and
Understanding, and Love, or Will. These three, says he, out of St. Austin, are
not three Lives but one Life, not three Minds but one Mind, one Essence. He
descants further on this Similitude, but it is enough to hint thus much, that
from hence also it is manifest, That the Divine Nature is not in the three
Persons, as one finger that fits three distinct distanced finger-stalls, but as
the Memory, Understanding, and Will, are adequately everywhere where the Mind
is by a Metaphysical Coincidency and ^ongruity, so also is the Presence of the
three Persons and Divine Nature every where coincident and adequate: Nor is the
Divine Nature any more repeated according to the number of Persons, then the
Essence of the Soul is according to the number of those three Powers, Memory,
Understanding, and Will. So that nothing more can be concluded then thus, That
the number of the Persons are triple to the Divine Nature which is but One, as
the Powers of the Soul or Mind are triple to the Soul or Mind that is but One.
And what inconvenience is there in this? Do not all Men say, that there are
three Persons though but One Divine Nature? But he would bring a thick Night
upon Truth, that gross Error also might find harb^ur under that Covert.

In the second part of his Answer there seems also to be a supposition as
Uncatholick and false as the former. As if the Divine Nature in the three
Divine Persons were as One common general Humane Nature in three Men, suppose
Pythagoras, Plato, and Socrates; when as according to St. Austin and others,
The Divine Nature is to the three Divine Persons rather as the Rational Soul or
Mind to the three Powers, Memory, Understanding, and will: ^his is as near as
in this impe^scrutable Mystery we can come, speaking in a Parable with that
ancient Father. And we must say so rather than acknowledge any similitude with
that of the common humane nature in Pythagoras, Plato, and Socrates, least we
run into that dreadful absurdity of making more Gods than One. But now
speaking according to the sense of St. Austin, it is plain that that One Divine
Nature being not in the three Persons as one general humane nature in three
Men, but the Union and mutual inexistence being as that of the Soul and her
Powers, it is plain I say, that tha^ One Divine Nature will be no more divided
from it self by being thus inexistent in the three Persons, than the Soul will
be divided from her self by reason of her three Powers, Memory, Understanding,
and will, or M^ns, Notitia and Amor, or Sapientia and Amor, which Peter Lumbard
contends to be the proper titles of the Son and Holy Ghost; which also is very
consonant to the doctrine of the ancient Philosophy of the Jews and Greeks
touching their Trinit^. And lastly as the Soul is sufficiently divisa ab aliis
in a Metaphysical sense, though she be really identi^ed with her three Powers,
so is the Divine Nature sufficiently divisa ab aliis though it be identified
reall^ with the three Persons. So that my Adversar^ does here nodum in scirpo
qu^rere out of an ill will to the clearness of my Arguments which he would thus
obliquely obscure, and teach the Infidel to cavil against the solid Mystery of
the Trinity, because neither himself nor any else can make good that false
Opinion of Transubstantiation. Which how pious and warrantable an act of him it
is, let any man judge. This is only to cast dust into the eyes of the Vulgar
to dishearten them from endeavoring to see the Truth.

His Answer to the Argument from Mathematics in the sixth Paragraph
This Argument is mere Cob-web stuff, half an eye may look through it; For
these words of the Doctor, (That a part of the Division is equal to the whole)
either refer to the species (and then it is false that a part of the Division
is equal to the whole) or they point at the Body of Christ (and then the words
are de subjecto non supponente) for there is no division of any part of Christ's
Body from the whole.

The Reply.
I will not say, That my Adversary looks through too thick a Cob-web to discern
the force and scope of my Argument. But this I will say, that he has plainly
missed it. For the very absurdity that I drive at is, that in dividing suppose
an entire consecrated Host into two parts, (in which one entire consecrated
Host there is but one continued Body of Christ, veiled as he says, but
co-extended with the species) that in the dividing this Host or species of the
Host if you will, that one continued Body of Christ there before, is
discontinued and separated into two as sure as it is in two places at once. And
what, I pray you, is this but to be divided into two? And being Division here
is into two entirely the same with the divided, what is it but to be divided
into parts of a Division which singly are equal to the whole, contrary to that
common Notion in Euclid? Or if you think this less absurd, to be divided into
two wholes? For they may be called either, in such an Hypothesis, as brings in
the con^usion of all things.

His Answer to the Argument from Logic in this sixth Paragraph.
This, says he, is the same in effect with the former and requires no new
Answer. Because these his trisling expressions if applied to the separated
species are false, if to Christ's Body then they proceed upon a false
supposition, as has been declared in my Answer to the third Objection.

The Reply.
That this Argument stands upon the same supposition that the former, I grant,
But that the supposition is false I may well deny, having proved it true in my
Reply to his former Answer. Nor is this Argument altogether the same in effect,
because it illustrates the grand absurdity of the opinion it oppugns from new
Maxims. So little tri^ling is the argumentation which I have here produced.
But it is the Policy of my Antagonist to slight and make himself merry with
such things as are too solid to be really Answered. For this is succedaneous to
a real Confu^ation in the eyes of the Vulgar, and it may be of more consequence
with them, that are taught not to examine but believe: In which Method he shows
himself an egregious Artist in his attaque upon my next Objection, where he
begins with some few scoptical and undervaluing Reflections as he calls them.
But a Man of his parts and wit cannot but know that they are insignificant to
any but the Vulgar, before whom he thinks it very conducing to seem to trample
on his Antagonist right loftily acting his part as it were on a Stage.

His Reflections on some Passages in my Argument from that fundamental
Principle in Logic and Metaphysics in this sixth Paragraph, together with my
Replies thereunto.
First, says he, a knowing Reader cannot choose but smile to see (Can be) or a
capacity of Being brought in for a piece of an Argument to prove that a thing
is not. That individual thing that can be, says the Doctor, and is to be made
of any thing, is not. So my Adversary in his first Reflection. To which I
Reply, That some knowing Reader it may be, may not only smile but laugh quite
out while he observes to what pretty shifts my Adversary is pu^, to make the
Doctor, as he calls him, seem an old doting fool to the heedless and ignorant.
For the knowing Reader will easily discern, that (That that can be) is not to
be disjoined from the rest of the sentence, but that (made) is to be referred
(...) to (be) in both places, and that the sense is, (though the sentence is
then less succinct and elegant) That that individual thing that can be made or
is to be made of any thing, is not.

But here he makes another oblique Reflection, and observes how fondly the
Doctor plays the confident Dogmatizer asserting as evident, That that
individual thing that can be and is to be made of any thing, is not; As if
forsooth it were evidently demonstrable, that that individual thing which is to
day in actual being could not possibly be destroyed and made anew again to
morrow by a second generation. Reply, This is a very oblique and distorted
Reflection indeed and cast off quite from the mark it should aim at; nor does
it at all respicere Titulum, the Argument in hand, which is our ever blessed
Saviors Body never to be destroyed. So that this Answer is only an argute
Cavil. For my Antanist is not so short sighted but he could easily discern,
that I understand the individual thing I speak of to be such a thing as being
once made is not to be destroyed. And therefore to quit my self of my
Antagonists crafty Evasions, I will mould my Proposition into a consistence
more full and close, that there may be no holes nor chinkes for a slippery wit
to creep through, and shall argue t^us That thing that once made is never to be
destroyed, when ever it may be truly said of it, That it can be made and is to
be made of any thing, it then is not. But the Body of Christ is a thing that
once made to exist, is never to be destroyed. Therefore when ever it is truly
to be said of it, That it can be made or is to be made of any thing, it then is
not. But Transubstantiation even now says, That the Body of Christ can be made
and is to be made of Bread or a Wa^er consecrated; Therefore according to the
doctrine of Transubstantiation, the Body of Christ is not But we know certainly
and both the Scripture and the Church Universal do restifie, that the Body of
Christ is: Therefore if Transubstantiation be true, The Body of Christ both is
and is not at the same time, against that Logical and Metaphysical Principle.
Idem non potest esse and non esse simul, Is not this as clear as the Meridian
Sun?

But he has not done yet, To say the Body of Christ is to be made of the
Consecrate Bread, is suc^ an unhappy absurdity with my Antagonist, that he
reflects on that in the third place even with the eye of pity. It is pity,
says he, to observe his words in the next Proposition. The individual Body of
Christ is to be made of the Wafer consecrated. Which implies as if the Wafer
were the material cause of Christ's Body. What Philosophy ever spoke so
Unphilosophically? Reply, Good lack! what Tragedies are here raised upon not an
halfpenny of harm done? If my Antagonist had but observed the many
significations of (...) in Aristotle's Metaphysics, he might easily have
observed more significations of (...) or of, than the Material cause. But he
proceeds,

Yet to make amends he immediately contradicts himself and adds, That the Wafer
is turned into his individual Body; which is a much different thing from being
made of the Wafer, Reply, Water is turned into Ice or Crystal or into Wine by a
Miracle, and Lead, by Chemical transmutation, into Gold; how much is that
different, from Ice or Crystal and Wine being made of Water, and Gold of Lead?

But the particle (for) says he, goes beyond wonder. The individual Body of
Christ is made of the Wafer Consecrated (mark the word) for it is turned into
his individual Body: Which is a piece of as Learned Nonsense, as if he said in
open terms, Because the Wafer is turned into Christ's Body by a total
Conversion, which excludes a Material cause, therefore his Body is made of the
Wafer by generation, which requires a Material cause. Thus unfortunate are the
Arts and Sciences when they engage against Gods Church. Reply, Would not one
think that in this high bluster and swaggering language he had plainly proved
his Antagonist a mere dotard in matters of Divinity? But let us reflect a
little on the Reflecter, And first upon his Hyperbolical wonderment on the
particle (for). Crystal is made of Water, for Water is turned into Crystal,
Vinegar made of Wine, for Wine is turned into Vinegar, Gold sometime made of
Lead, for Lead sometimes is turned into Gold. Is the use of (for) in such cases
as these so wonderful? Or were it not a wonder if (for) were not used upon
such occasions. And yet my Antagonist cannot abstain from calling it a piece of
learned Nonsense; though not half so Learned as the making of a Child of two
spans long, but double to the same Child when but one span long, which yet I
had the candor gently to connive at. Nor do I understand any sense in this
saying of m^ Antagonist, That a total conversion excludes the material Cause,
if he will allow the matter to be such. For certainly the whole Bread includes
the matter of the Bread as well as the form, and the form perishing, else it
were Bread still, what remains but the matter of the Bread to be turned into
the Body of Christ and to become formally and individu^lly his Body. And
whether this may be called generation or no is a (...)* It is no such
generation as is ordinarily seen in Nature, but being it is such a conversion,
changing or mutation, as whose terminus is substance, ((...), Physic. lib. 5.
says Aristotle (...) it is properly and simpl^ generation. So fortunate are
the Arts and Sciences when they engage for Gods Church against Error and
Falsehood.

But the best jest is yet behind, All the stir and bluster he makes and crowing
over me is, because I say, The Body of Christ is made of the Wafer, which is
the v^ry language of the Schoolmen and the Fathers. For besides that conficere
corpus Christi is an usual phrase with t^em. St. Ambrose plainly says, Vbi
accessit consecratio de pane sit Christi caro. And again, Scrmo Christi
creaturam mutat and ^ic ex pane fit Corpus Christi. The Body or flesh of Christ
is made of the Bread. Which ex pane, according to my Adversaries own sense,
designs the material Cause. And St. Austin, Corpus Christi and sanguis virtute
Spiritus sancti ex panis vinique substantia efficitur. The Body and Blood of
Christ is made of the substance of the Bread and Wine. No words can signify
the material Cause more fully then these expressions. So that now my Antagonist
may clap his wings and crow over St. Austin, and St. Ambrose for their learned
Nonsense, as well as over me. Thus unfortunate is humor, wit, and eloquence,
when it will engage against true Religion, sound Philosophy, and right Reason.
But he knows this was but a farce to the people, and does ingenuousl* at last
acknowledge he has said nothing as yet in Answer to my Argument, in that he
says he does but now come to it.

His Answer to the Argument from that Logical and Metaphysical Principle,
Nothing can be and not be at the same time, in this sixth Paragraph.
I come now to his Argument, says he; Transubstantiation implies that the same
thing is and is not at the same time. This, says he, I deny. First, because
Physics have rendered it probable that a thing which actually is may be
reproduced without losing its actual existence. And if we should say that
Christ's Body is thus reproduced in the Sacrament, it will not follow that the
Body of Christ is, and is not at once, viz. before the Consecration; But only
that it is by a first production, and is not by a second production till after
the Consecration.

Secondly, That when the Host is converted into the Body of Christ, there is no
necessity of the granting of the production of a new Body which was not before,
but only that the Body begins to be where it was not before. As in the
augmentation of our Bodies there is no need of a new Soul, but the same Soul
occupies those parts of matter that have accrewed to the Body in its
augmentation. The first is verbatim out of him. The second Answer contains the
full strength of his own words.

The Reply.
To the first Answer I Reply, That it has no basis, For Physics exhibit no
such probability, nor has he nor can he produce the least Instance thereof. But
in the mean time it is worth the taking notice of in this Answer, how well
assured in his own mind, for all his external cavilling before, my Adversary
is, That the meaning of that Proposition of mine, That that individual thing
that can be and is to be made of any thing, is not, was intended by me of such
things as which once made are not to be destroyed: or in such a sense as this,
That that individual thing that can be made or is to be made of any thing, in
that point of time that it is to be made, is not. Which is an Axiom
noematically true. And therefore to say that a Body is by a first production,
but yet still remaining produced is to be again produced entirely, even while
it remains produced, that is to say, that it remains produced already in that
very point of time that it is to be produced, is plainly to confess that the
very same individual thing is produced and not produced, or unproduced at the
same time. For the terminus productionis is one and the same individual body A.
Now according to Aristotle and the common sense of all men, all production
whether Accidental or Essential has its contrary terms and proceeds a
Privatione ad Actum, from Privation to Act. So that let A be Accident or
Essence, A must be supposed not to be that it may become A, or be made A;
supposing A such an Individual Body, when it is to be produced the Termini
Productionis are non-A and A. That which is to be made A, from not being A it
becomes A. Otherwise it being the same Individual Body and being before, it
could not of not being this Individual Body become this Individual Body A, but
only A would be in a new place. Which is no Essential production as is here
supposed, but only local mutation; and consequently the Individual Body A is
not produced, when it is thus supposed reproduced. And therefore if it be
really reproduced, as is pretended, it is a demonstration that it then was not.
Wherefore it being certain that our Saviors Body does not cease to be; if
Transubstantiation be true that pretends it reproduced, it necessarily implies
that it then is not. And therefore it plainly is and is not, according to that
doctrine, at the same time. Besides, if it were possible that A, suppose
Socrates, could be produced while Socrates is in being, it can be no otherwise
then thus, that is to say, That another man exquisitely Socrates, to whom
Socrateity is fully and essentially communicated in all points, is also
produced. But then this will also follow, that Socrates is now become a Genus,
and this and that Socrates are the species infimae of it, which we usually call
Individuals, and so they will not be idem numero but diversa numero and
consequently not the same Persons. And so the same Individual Socrates or the
same Individual A will be produced and not produced at the same breath. For
things that differ numerically cannot be the same Individuals. So impossible
every way is this first Fiction, and implies still the same Repugnancy. For i^
in the second production, the individual Body of Christ be produced, it
necessarily argues that Body before not to be his individual Body, so that his
Body then was not, according to the doctrine of, Transubstantia^ion, which yet
certainly was, and therefore if that doctrine be true, it is again true, That
the Body of Christ is and is not at the same time.

To the second Answer I Reply, First, That it is apparently repugnant to the
very Definition of Transubstantiation by the Council of Trent. Which says,
'That there is a conversion of the whole substance of the Bread into the
substance of the Body of Christ. Which, say they, is fitly and properly called
Transubstantiation. But if there were no production of the Body of Christ, but
only the causing of it to be where it was not before, this would not be
properly Transubstantiation, but mutatio Localis. But in the action of
Transubstantiation the terminus is substantia not Locus, it being the
transubstantiating one substance into another.

Secondly, If the Body of Christ be not produced, but there be only mutatio
Localis; the substance of the Bread either remains or is annihilated. That the
Bread remains is expressly against the doctrine of the Roman Church. That it is
annihilated, is to give the power of Annihilation to a creature which is only
proper to God, and to supose that every consecration of the Host annihilates so
much of the matter of the Universe; which mustneeds seem very harsh and absurd
to any unprejudiced Judgment. Besides that there is this palpable repugnancy
in it, That whereas Transubstantiation is said to be the conversion of all the
substance of the Bread into Christ's Body, this plainly implies that there is
the conversion of none at all into it, it being all annihilated and
exterminated out of the Universe. To say nothing of the Accidents of the Bread
remaining after this Annihilation, it being unconceivable where they should be
subjected, or that any modes of substance should be separated from their
substance, and exist without it. And then to what end it should be that the
species of the Bread should appear by the Divine Omnipotency, the substance of
Bread being annihilated. When it would conduce far more to our belief of the
corporeal Presence of Christ, in lieu of the annihilated Bread, if those
species did not appear, or were so changed that they seemed much above the
nature of ordinary Bread. Which things being not, it is a plain Judication to
the unprejudiced, that the Bread is still Bread after the Consecration. Else
God would be found exercising his Omnipotency, in exhibiting such perfest
species of Bread and Wine in such a way as is most effectual to drive all
Christians to the misbelief of the pretended Mystery of Transubstantiation:
Which were a grand absurdity and incompe^ible to the Divine Wisdom and
Goodness, if that Mystery were true.

And thirdly and lastly, for his quaint allusion to the Soul, which being the
same yet extends it self into new parts of matter accrewing to the Body in its
augmentation; it is a pretty offer of wit, but in my apprehension it extremely
falls short of the present Case. For the Soul being still one and the same
Spirit undistanced from it self and uninterrupted can contract and extend it
self within moderate bounds. But to imagine Christ's Body in Heaven by extending
it self from thence to the Earth upon every consecration of the Host,
continuedly, so to become present where it was not, is to make him even
perpetuall^ in a manner to have a monstrously big and misshapen Body, stretched
out into parts God knows how many Thousand miles long, which any judicious
mind and of a quick sense cannot but hugely abhor from thinking on. But this
being not, He must either come down from Heaven upon the Consecration and
Annihilation of the Bread, leaving Heaven quite for the time, and ever and anon
travail on Earth, and so swiftly as to be in many places at once, and some many
Thousand miles distant one from another, which how absurd it is has been often
intimated; which also seems to clash with, Acts 3. 21. Or else as it were
taking leave of himself in Heaven and parting from himself and yet leaving
himself behind he comes down to supply the room of the annihilated Bread.
Orlastly, he is present in the room of the said Bread, without at all passing
from Heaven to Earth. Both which seem altogether impossible and unconceivable,
For how can one and the same Body go from a place and yet leave it self
entirely behind in the said place, and so as it were divide it self entirely
from it self? Or how is it possible it should be found in two distant places,
without passing at least as great a space as that which lies directly betwixt?
These things are clearly and perfectly impossible. And if they were not, yet
are they quite beside the cushion, this Answer balking the doctrine of
Transubstantiation established by the Council of Trent.

So plain is it every way, That neither this nor his former Answer enervates
any thing the force of my Argument which proves that Transubstantiation implies
that the same thing is and is not at once. And therefore this Argument together
with all the former against Transubstantiation, notwithstanding all the
Assaults of my Adversary, remaining so manifestly strong and invincible, let
the impartial Reader judge whether I have cried Victory before my time or
behaved my self any way in down-bearing words Hector-like, as he says, and not
rather like a true Trojan, or to speak more properly in so weighty a Cause,
like a sincere Christian, speaking the Truth from my very heart, as I find it
in the innate and indeleble characters writ by Gods own finger in the
understandings of all Men that will open their eyes to Read them, even those
indubitable first principles of Physics, Metaphysics, Mathematics, and
Logic, and the common sense of all mankind, learned and unlearned. So far am I
from those Arts and sleights of Men, who managing a wrong Cause do swagger and
vapor to set off a fals^ood. Truth needs no such ill Artifices of wit; My
Adversary indeed swaggers much here in bearing us in hand that the difficulties
of the Trinity are equal or greater then these of Transubstantiation, and so
harpes again on the same string, but to this I have sufficiently Answered
above, and yet it may be I may touch upon it again in the close of my next
Reply.

His Answer to the eight Paragraph touching Costerus the Jesuit.
My Antagonist does altogether decline saying any thing to my seventh
Paragraph, which I desire my Reader considerately to peruse, and observe the
great judgment and discretion of my Opponent in so doing. But to that about
Costerus in this eighth Paragraph he Answers thus. Here is, says he, the
ground of Costerus his concession, That if the true Body of Christ be not in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, the Church of Rome in that point is in such
error and Idolatry as never was seen or heard of. Namely, because Christ then
had dealt unworthily with his Church, in leaving them to fall into such
Idolatry by occasion of his own words, and by consequence would not be the true
Christ; And therefore the adoration of the Eucharist would be not only a
mistake as to the Circumstance but also as to the Object, there being no such
adorable Object in the world as a true Christ according to this supposition,
and so the Cultus Latriae would be exhibited to a mere Creature. And adds, That
if Transubstantiation can be proved a mere Figment he will willingly grant as
much as Costerus to the full. This is the main of his Answer and the full
strength thereof.

The Reply.
This is an adventurous Answer indeed which hazards the Divinity of Christ, nay
the making him an Impostor and all the Churches of Christendom single Idolaters
at least, and themselves double Idolaters, who then Worship not only a mere
Man, but the symbolical presence of a mere Man, which is double Idolatry by
Conclusion 19th. Chap. 2. but this is a cunning though a very evil fetch of my
Adversary merely to elude the Testimony of Costerus, viz That the Divinity of
Christ standing, and he still acknowledged the true Christ, ^et the Adoration
of the Eucharist is Idolatry, un^^s Transubstantiation be true. Which most
certainly is the sense of Costerus in that place, Chap. 12. N. 10. nor did he
dream of any such consequence as my Adversary pins upon him; as if he meant
that then Christ would not be the true Christ if Transubstantiation were not
true, and that thence the Idolatry would proceed. But I will set the whole
argumentation of Costerus before my Readers eyes, and let him judge, whether
his Argument be such as my Adversary pretends. If in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist the true Body of Christ be not contained, Christ dealt unworthily
with his Church, whom throughout the world for 1500 years together, he has by
occasion of his own words left in such error and Idolatry as was never in the
whole world seen or heard of. And then follows that which I have cited in this
eighth Paragraph. For the errors of those, etc. which makes up the whole
Argument.

Where I Observe, First, that there is not the least men ion or intimation,
That Christ would not be Christ if his words, This is my Body, did not signify
properly but ^iguratively, but rather firmly supposing him to be Christ, he
would not do any thing so unworthy of his own Office and Dignity* as to use
words in such a way as should occasion the Church to plunge into so foul
Idolatry for so long a time; acknowledging that it would be Idolatry though he
were the true Christ, but that he being so would not use such words but in
their proper sense, that he might not occasion that Idolatry. I say in the
first place, there is no such thing in this place of Costerus as my Antagonist
puts upon him. And then secondly I affirm, That no man in his wits could be so
devoid of either Reason or Piety, as to say, in good earnest, That if these
words of Christ, This is my Body, be to be understood figuratively, and not
literally or properly, Christ is an Impostor, that is, is not the true Christ,
which is expressly the sense which my Antagonist would pin upon this passage of
Costerus. For first it is well known that it is usual in the Hebrew idiome, in
which Christ spoke, as it is not unfrequent also in other tongues, to use the
verb substantive [ est] when the subject and predicate in a proposition is
signum and significatum, or if you will when the subject and predicate are
those Arguments which Logicians call Similia. So our Savior ^ays elsewhere, I
am the Vine, I am the door. And St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 10. 4 The rock was
Christ; besides the examples I have produced in the foregoing Paragraph. Will
any Body therefore that has the least dram of Reason or Religion in him, when,(
This is my Body) may so naturally, and according to the idiome of the ^ongue
signify, This is the sign or symbol of my Body, or this is the Representation
of my Body, that is to be broken or crucified for you, affirm, that unless it
signify, This is my very Body indeed, flesh, blood, and bones, Christ must be
an Impostor? Nay when Christ himself so plainly affirms, ( Mat^h. 26. 26.) that
it is Bread For he affirms of that Bread which he had used no consecration to,
that even that was his Body.

Indeed if he had first done something to it for the transmutation of it, and
then taken it up and said, This is my Body, here had been more color of
pretense, that it was not ordinary Bread. But he says of this Bread as yet
unconsecrated, That it is his Body, and therefore he plainly affirms, that
Bread remaining still really Bread is his Body, which can be in no sense so but
in a figurative one, that is to say, That it is the sign or symbol of his Body;
Wherefore when our Savior does so plainly affirm, that the Bread is but the
symbol of his Body, is it any fault in him, that the Church of Rome or any
lapsed Church else will so perversely and absurdly understand it, as if it were
the very Body of Christ it self upon Consecration? as if our Savior Christ had
declared it so to be?

And besides this affirmation of our Savior we may add the Attestation of his
Evangelists, whom he lead into all Truth. Does not St. Luke expressly say, C^ap.
22. 19. He took Bread and gave thanks and brake and gave it to them saying,
This is my Body which was given for you, do this in remembrance of me. What can
possibl^ be more plain then this? He gave what he brake, he brake what he took,
and what he took was Bread, and of this Bread which he gave, brake and took, he
says, This is my Body; Wherefore it is evident that of the Bread he pronounced,
according to the Testimony of St. Luke, That it was his Body. But Bread cannot
be his Body otherwise then symbolically, or by way of token or remembrance, and
therefore he adds, Do this in remembrance of me. Now memory is not of things
present but of things absent. All which circumstances do so emphatically
import, that the Bread is but still a sign not the Body of Christ himself, that
the most cautious Lawyer could scarce express any ones mind in a conveyance
more certainly and expressly. And yet our Savior must be an Impostor if he did
not mean by This is my Body, This is my real Body, the same that hung upon the
Cross, and was born of the Virgin Mary. Can there be any thing more injurious
to Christ and Christian Religion then this?

Add unto all this, That besides that Christ himself and the Evangelists
declare that it is Bread and not the natural Body of Christ, it is
demonstratively impossible to be so, and openly repugnant to all our senses,
which alone would assoile our Savior from being an Impostor, the words being
easily to be understood in a figurative sense.

But I hope by this, my Adversary blushes that (...) has pinned so uncouth and
incredible a sense on this Argument of Costerus, and will acknowledge that
Costerus used this Argument only as a probability; namely, That Christ being
so certainly the true Christ, it is not probable that he would deal so
unworthily with his Church as by these words, This is my Body, occasion so
great Idolatry in this Artolatria, or Bread worship continued so long in it,
and that therefore it is not Bread, but the real Body of Christ; which yet is
as well argued or rather far worse, then if the Anthropomorphites of old should
have argued thus: That certainly God would not have dealt so unworthily with
his Church, as to occasion so hideous an error and blasphemy, that the eternal
God has limbs and shape like a Man, from those words, Let us make man after
our own Image, if so be he have not so. And that therefore he has the
lineaments and shape of a Man.

But besides this, where there is no pretense from Scripture to any such thing,
it is plain that the Church for as long a time have defiled themselves with the
Invocation of Saints and worshipping of Images, which are gross Idolatries as
well as this; nay indeed when the Scripture is expressly against it. Which yet,
if you will believe the Romanists themselves, have possessed the Church as many
hundred years as this worshipping of the Eucharist, though they be all really
Innovations upon the lapse of the Church, as the skillful in Antiquity do
abundantly prove. And for this gross error of Transubstantiation, it was not
confirmed by any Council till about 1200 after Christ.

Wherefore what an intolerable injury and calumny is it against the sacred
Person of Christ, to cast this Bread-worship upon him, as if by the occasion o^
his words it was introduced, when indeed both against his words and against all
sense and Reason the lapse and corruption of the Church has broug^t it in with
other Idolatrous opinions and mispractises. But when all this is so, to say
Christ is not Christ, that is, That Christ is an Impostor, if these words, This
is my Body, be not literally to be understood, as if it were his very true
natural Body, flesh, blood, and bones, I leave to any one to judge, if it be
not so groundless and so hideous a reproach, that it will be hard to find any
name ill enough for it.

And here I profess, I cannot but stand i^finitely astonished at the bold
Rhetoric of my Adversary, and such like Patrons of the Roman Cause: who for
the swaggering of the credulous people into a belief of Transubstantiation, do
not stick to own it as reasonable and certain as that Jesus is the Messiah, or
that the Mystery of the holy Trinity is true. When as the Mystery of the holy
Trinity has been no less then three or four times confirmed by general Councils
in the more pure Times of the Church, before her grand Apostasy, and Christ
always held the true Messiah, nor can it be doubted but he is so by any that is
a Christian; and may be demonstrated to be so to any that do doubt, if they
approve themselves but idoneous Auditors. Nor can there be any Reason or
demonstration brought against the Mystery of the holy Trinity, ^o far forth as
the Scripture and the ancient Councils have defined any thing therein; But the
Triunity of the eternal Deity has seemed to the best and wisest Philosophers so
reasonable and venerable a Tradition, that without any force or fear of any
external Power, they have embraced it of themselves and spoken many things
therein very cons^nant to the Christian verity. And therefore this Myster^,
though it be competently obscure, whereby it becomes more venerable, to say it
is as repugnant and as impossible to Reason as Transubstantiation, whenas it
was Confirmed by so many general Councils in the purer times of the Church, and
intimated by so many places of Scripture, as also is the Divinity of Christ
most expressly and indubitably, and his Messias-ship not questioned bv any
Christian; to set these Fundamentals of our Religion on the same tickle point,
nay on the same impossible point that Transubstantiation stands upon, not
countenanced by any Council, till about four or five hundreds years ago, and
repugnant to Scripture and Common sen^e, and to the very first Principles of
all solid knowledge and science, were it not charitably to be interpreted a
ranting piece of Rhetoric to befool the ^ulgar; as if they would say, As sure
as Christ is the Messiah and that the Mystery of his Divinity and of the
Triunity of the Godhead is true, Transubstantiation is so; it^ ere either a
careless disregard what became of Christianity, or a subdolous and operose
endeavor of betraying it, and oblique insinuation, that Transubstantiation and
the rest of those Mysteries of our Religion are alike false and impossible. But
I hope better things of my Adversary, and that he is rather an over officious
propugner of a beloved falsehood, and of so great interest to his Church, then a
sly Impugner or Betrayer of these sacred Truths.

And now, I hope, I have fully cleared all the Objections that my Antagonist
has brought against this third Chapter, or any Paragraph therein: So that it
remains invincible and unshaken, That the Opinion of Transubstantiation is not
only false but impossible, and consequently the Adoration of the Eucharist
palpable Idolatry. Which my Adversary himself cannot deny, no more than
Franciscus C^sterus who has so expressly affirmed it, as I have showed in this
eighth Paragraph.

As for that further o^fer toward a plausibilility for the Truth of
Transubstantiation, (for the Mystery of the holy Trinity wants no such small
apologies) that the seeming Impossibility thereof, is an Argument of its being
a doctrine Divinely inspired, and that that saying rightly here takes place,
The more incredible the more credible: These are fine Lullaby-songs to be sung
to babies half asleep; But we have most evidently demonstrated, even as clear
as Noonday, that Transubstantiation is not a seeming Impossibility but a
palpable and real one. And as for that saying, The more incredible the more
credible, it is a foundation so large, that all the Figments, even the most
extravagant of all the Religions of the World may equally be founded upon it,
and by how much more incredible and impossible any Figment, is by so much the
more stronger faith it ought to obtain, and may the more firmly be supported by
this Foundation. For the more impossible the more incredible, the more
incredible the more credible. As for example, the more incredible it is that
Mahomet put the Moon into his bosom, and that it came out at each sleeve
divided into two, and that he straitways sodered it together, and sent it back
whole to Heaven again, the more incredible this story is, the more credible it
is. That is, says my Antagonist, (for he explains this venerable Aphorism) By
how much the more incredible the Mystery is; if we only consult our senses and
the bare sentiments of the natural Man, by so much the more credible it is that
there lies a Divine Revelation at the bottom. Cannot the Mahumetan defend his
Religion as wisely as thus from this ground?

It is not a sign of our mere natural or unregenerate estate when we will not
nor can believe things that are apparently repugnant to the indeleble
Principles of natural Understanding. But it is a sign of their being the slaves
of the Man of sin in a doub ^esense, who can swallow such gudgeons. For for
this cause God sends them strong delusions, says the Apostle, (2 These. 2.)
that they may believe alye, because they love not the Truth but have pleasure
in unrighteousness. But ( John 8. 36.) if the Son makes us free by his spirit
of real Regeneration, then are we free indeed, even from all such Impostures as
these, while the world ( Apoc. 17. 8.) wonders after the Boast, and the strange
stories that he utters. But we know who those are that are excluded out of the
holy City, even every one that ( Apoc. 22. 15.) loves and makes a lie, and
those certainly are none of the Regenerate. And who should those be that love
and embrace l^es, but those that take up such Principles that they cannot
discern a lie or withhold their assent from it? For the more Impossible, which
should turn any Man's stomach from believing, makes it but the more Incredible,
and the more Incredible the more Credible.

But we have harped too long on a string which will sound over harsh to such
ears as are less accustomed to Truth. My main purpose I had dispatched before,
But I could not but say something to the fine popular fetches of my Adversary,
who cunningly insinuates into the minds of the unskilful and simple, that it
is a sign of a more then ordinary Religious and regenerate estate, far removed
above the mere natural Man, to believe things that are plainly and apertly
repugnant to the light of Nature and right Reason. For this is such a gap as
may let in the grossest falsities and Immoralities that can be invented, and
that upon the show of Religion and Supernaturality. For giving up their faith
to their Priest and his Church, the more incredible the Act to be good or
Doctrine true, the more credible. What therefore may not Men be brought to
believe and act upon so unsound a Principle? I pass now to his fourth Section,
which encounters all my three next Chapters at once.

CHAP. IV.
The gross Idolatry of the Romanists in the Invocation of the Saints even
according to the allowance of the Council of Trent, and the authorized practice
of that Church.
1. BUT we will fall also upon those Modes of Idolatry wherein the Church of
Rome may seem less bold; though indeed this one, that is so gross, is so often
and so universally repeated everywhere in the Roman Church, that by this
alone, though we should take notice of nothing farther, Idolatry may seem quite
to have overspread her like a noisome Leprosy. But, how-ever, we shall proceed;
and first to their Invocation of Saints. Touching which the Council of Trent
declares this Doctrine expressly: Con^il. Trident. Sess 9.
Sanctos utique una cum Christo regnantes Orationes suas pro hominibus offerre,
bon^mque atque utile esse suppliciter eos invocare; and ob beneficia impetranda
a Deo per Filium ejus Jesum Christum, ad eorum oratines, operam auxiliumque
confugere. Where Invocation of Saints is plainly allowed and recommended: and
besides their praying for us, or offering up our Prayers to God, it is plainly
implied that there are other Aids and Succors they can afford, if they be
supplicated, that is, invoked with most humble and prostrate Devotion. And the
pretending that this is all but the way of procuring those good things we want
from God, the first Fountain, and that through his Son christ; that makes the
Saints the more exactly like the Pagans Dii medioxumi, and the Demons that
negotiated the affairs of men with the highest Deity.

2. I say then that, though they went no farther then thus, even this is
downright Idolatry which the Council of Trent thus openly owns, (and
consequently the whole Church of Rome,) as appears from the third, fourth,
fifth, sixth and eighth Conclusions of the first Chapter; as also by the fifth,
seventh, eighth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth
and twenty-fourth of the second. But if we examine those Prayers that are put
up to the Saints, their Invocation is still the more unexcusable.

3. Wherefore looking to the public Practice of the Church of Rome, authorized
by the Popes themselves, the Invocation of a Saint does not consist in a mere
Ora pro nobis, as people are too forward to phansy that the state of the
Question, (though the mere invoking of them to pray for us would be Idolatry,
as is already proved:) but, which is insinuated in the Council it self, there
are other more particular Aids and Succors that they implore of them, and some
such as it is proper for none but God or christ to give: Such as Protection
from the Devil, Divine Graces, and the Joys of Paradise. But as the things they
ask of the Saints are too big for them to be the Disposers of; so the
Compellations, of the Virgin Mary especially, are above the nature of any
Creature. Whence this Invocation of Saints will appear a most gross and
palpable Mode of Idolatry in that Church. As I shall make manifest out of the
following Examples, taken out of such pieces of Devotion as are not muttered in
the corners of their Closets, but are publicly read or sung with Stentorian
Voices in their very Churches. I will only give the Reader a taste of this
kind of their Idolatry; for it were infinite to produce all we might.

4. And first, to begin with the smaller Saints, (as indeed they are all to be
reckoned in comparison of the blessed Virgin, to whom therefore they give that
Worship which they call Hyperdulia, as they give Dulia to the rest of the
Saints, and Latria to God alone, and to Christ as being God:) That Prayer to S.
Cosmas and S. Damian is plainly a Petition to them to keep us from all
Diseases, as well of Soul as of Body, that we may attain to the life of the
Spirit, and live in Grace here, and be made partakers of Heaven hereafter.

O Medici piissimi,
Qui Meritis clarissimi
In Coelis refulgetis,
A peste, clade corporum
Pr^servetis, and operum,
Moribus ne langueamus:
Nec moriamur spiritu,
Sed Animae ab obitu
Velociter surgamus;
Et vivamus in Gratia,
Sacra Coeli palatia
Donec regrediamur.
5. Such a piece of Devotion as this is that to S. Francis: Sancte Francisce,
propere veni; Pater, accelera ad populum, qui premitur and territur sub onere,
palea, luto, latere, and sepultos Aegyptio sub sabulo nos libera, carnis
extincto vitio. Which is plainly a Prayer to this Saint that he would deliver
us from the bondage and drudgery of Sin, which is only in the power of our
great Savior and Redeemer Christ for to do.

That Invocation of S. Andrew is also for that spiritual Grace of duly Bearing
the Cross here, that we may obtain Heaven afterward. Iam nos foveto languidos,
Curamque nostri suscipe,
Qu^ per Crucis victoriam
Coeli pet^mus gratiam.
But that to S. Nicolas is against the Assaults of the Devil: Ergo pie nos
exaudi
Assistentes tu^ laudi,
Ne subdamur Hostis fraudi,
Nobis fer auxilia.
Nos ab omni malo ducas,
Vita recta nos conducas,
Post ^anc vitam nos inducas
Ad aeterna gaudia.
The like Devotion is done to S. Martin, S. Andrew, S. James, S. Bartko^omew,
and others, though not in the same words.

6. When I have given an example or two of their Prayers put up to their
She-Saints, ^ shall a little more copiously insist on those to the blessed
Virgin. They beg of S. Agnes the greatest Grace that God is able to impart to
the Soul of man, that is to say, to serve God in perfect Love. And this Gift
this one poor single She-Saint is solicited to bestow on all men. Ave, Agnes
gloriosa
Me in fide serves recta,
Dulcis Virgo and dilecta,
Te exoro precibus:
Charitate da perfecta
Deum, per quem es electa,
Colere pie omnibus.
That Devotion put up to S. Br^gitt is, that she would play the skillful Pilot,
and lead us through all the tempests and hazzards of this World so safely, that
at last, by her good Conduct, we may attain to everlasting Life. The Rhyme runs
thus: O Bregitta, matter bona,
Dulcis Ductrix and Matrona,
Nobis fer suffragia;
Naufragantes in hoc Mari
Tuo ductu salutari
Duc ad vitae bravia.


7. But that to S. Cath^rine is a piece of Devotion something of an higher
strain, or rather more copious and express: But so great a Boon they beg of her
as is in the power of none to give but God alone.

Ave, Virgo Dei digna,
Christo prece me consigna,
Audi Preces, praesta Votum;
Cor in bono fac immotum.
Confer mi^i Cor contritum;
Rege Visum and Auditum:
R^ge Gustum and ^lfactum,
Virgo sancta, rege Tactum.
Vt in cunctis te regente,
Vivam Deo pur^ mente.
Christum pro me interpella,
Salva Mortis de procella.
Superare fac me Mundum,
Ne demergar in profundum,
Ne me sinas naufragari
Per Peccata in hoc Mari.
Visita tu me infirmum,
Et in bonis fac me firmum.
Agonista Dei fortis,
Praesto sis in hora mortis.
Decumbentem fove, leva,
Et de morte solve saeva;
Vt resurgam novus homo
Civis in coelesti domo.
8. Now it is observable in this devotional Rhyme to S. Catharine, that whereas
the Council of Trent advises men, ad sanctorum orationes, opem auxiliumque
confugere, that in these many Verses there are not passing two or three that
are an entreating of the Saint to pray for us, but to aid and succor us in
such a way as the Story of the Saint and the Allusion to her Name most
naturally leads the fancy of the Devotionist to think suitable for her: As if
she were the giver of Courage, of Patience, and of Purity of mind, and was to
comfort and support us in the very Agony of death by her presence. Which
Petition is very frequent to other Saints also. So plain a thing is it, that
this Invocation of the Saints is not a mere desiring of them to pray for us.

But here the Devotionist commits the whole Regimen of both his Soul and Body
unto this Saint, to rule all his Faculties and senses, and begs so high Virtues
and Graces, as that none but God can supply us with them; as I intimated at
first. Whence the Invocation upon that very account also must appear most
grossly Idolatrous, as Gro^ius, who yet is no such foe to the Papists, does
expressly acknowledge and declare.

CHAP. IV.
His Answer to the first and second Paragraphs in this Chapter.
This the Doctor (namely what the Council of Trent has defined in the first
Paragraph) terms the making the Saints more exactly like the Pagans Dii
Medioxumi, and the Demons that negotiated the affairs of men with the highest
Deity. Now to prove that this kind of invocation of Saints is down right
Idolatry, and by consequence that we are worshippers of false Gods, he conjures
up a Spirit, which ^or its many names and bad qualities may well be termed
Legion, viz. the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and eighth Conclusions of the
first Chapter. As also, the fifth, seventh, eighth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth,
thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and twenty fourth Conclusions of the second
Chapter. But I ^ope my Answer to these Conclusions, in the first and second
Section of this Discourse, will prove Exorcisme enough to lay this foul unclean
Spirit of ^alumny, and silence its Impertinencies.

The Reply.
THis Answer would recommend it self from a scheme of confidence and unexpected
piece o^ Drollery; he phancying, as it seems, every n^mber writ in words at
length, of the fifteen Conclusions I refer to in my second Paragraph, so many
figures cast to conjure up a Legion of Devils. But he must remember that there
are Legions of good Angels also, and that such were those that Michael was
General over when he fought against the red Dragon. And these Conclusions of
mine do fight against the red Dragon revived, that Idolatry too too Paganical
(though gilded over with the fair pretense of Christianity) that is so visible
in the Church of Rome. So that if these Conclusions be a Legion, they are a
Legion under Michael and therefore good Angels, and victorious as his were
notwithstanding the boast of my Adversary. For I have most clearly proved
above, that he has produced nothing to enervate them. And therefore these
Conclusions remaining firm, even according to my Adversaries own Concession
that which I declare in this second Paragraph is firm also, viz. That what the
Council of Trent does openly own in my first Paragraph is down right Idolatry.
For my Adversary has no way to avoid it but by recourse to his Confuations of
the above said Conclusions. Which I have apparently demonstrated already to be
no Confutations at all, in my Replies to them, which is needless here to
repeat. And therefore I go on to his further Answers to these three Chapters,
which are all of them in a manner in general: As first,

His first general Answer touching the fourth, fifth, and sixth Chapters of my
Antidote.
In the rest of his fourth and two ensuing Chapters, says he, the Doctor acts
a new Person. For laying aside his former Conclusions and Demonstrations, he
trades now wholly in Quotations, languishing or doting about Questions and
strife of words.

The Reply.
I perceive nothing by my self but that I am the same person still, but having
out of the Conclusions named in the second Paragraph demonstrated such an
Invocation of Saints, as the Council of Trent approves of and requires, to be
down right Idolatry, which common people pretend to be no more than an Ora pro
nobis, which yet is Idolatry too; I go on not languishing, but hail and hearty,
I thank God, nor doting at all I hope, but rationally deducing from the forms
of Invocation used in the Roman Church, that they naturally and plainly
signify more than an Ora pro nobis. And it is the force and distorsion that my
Adversary and his party ordinarily use to excuse these things, that raises
Questions and strife of words; when if they did not use this art and force to
distort the sense of them, there could be no strife at all.

His second general Answer.
Amongst these Quotations we are to meet with a great dearth of Reason: three
entire Chapters having much ado to furnish out matter for one argument, and
that a poor one, God knows.

The Reply.
Every form of Invocation is a Reason for the Conclusion I aim at, which is to
prove from either the manner of compellation, or from the nature of the Objects
of the Prayers made to the Saints, that the Invocation is Idolatry, and a crass
kind of one too. How then is the Argument but one? and how a poor one? This is
plainly intimated in the third Paragraph of this fourth Chapter.

His third general Answer.
My business is, says he, to lay down and amuse my Reader with a number of let
Forms of Invocation of Saints, scarce ever mentioning the Churches Public
Prayers and Liturgies, Litany, Canonical hours, Pontifical or Ritual, but the
Rosary of our Lady and the Mary Psalter.

The Reply.
I thought it sufficient in my third Paragraph to signify in general, that the
examples I give are taken out of such pieces of Devotion as are not muttered in
the corners of their Closets, but are publicly Read or Sung with Stentorian
voices in their very Churches. I suppose my Antagonist does not expect I should
set down in what Churches they are Sung, but to what Saints, which may be done
in several Churches.

His fourth general Answer.
As to the Fidelity of his Quotations, says he, I can neither accuse nor
acquit him. But I shall allow him all the fair play in the world by supposing
his Allegations to be true, and freely take them upon trust: Though his
carriage hitherto gives no great Cause to suspect him guilty of too much candor
in that kind.

The Reply.
To which I briefly Reply, That I have set down all things in this book bona
fide, without any design of imposing any way upon any one, writing nothing, but
what I am in my own Conscience persuaded to be true. Nor can imagine what my
Adversary should mean by saying, That his carriage hitherto gives no great
Cause to suspect him guilty of too much candor in that kind. I would not do any
thing of this kind knowingly and wittingly for any thing in the World. How
ingenuously he deals with me in this, let his own Conscience tell him; which he
seems to endeavor to satisfy by the Equivocalness of the Calumny.

His fifth general Answer.
That since the new charge of Idolatry from all these forms of Invocation of
the Virgin Mary and other Saints is this, That their Suppliants ask of them
such things as are only in the Power of our great Savior and Redeemer Jesus
Christ to grant, let us single out, says he, one of the most harsh sounding
forms of Invocation that is to be found in all the three Chapters, suppose
Domina salvum me fac, Blessed Lady save me, and if this may admit of an
Orthodox sense, and that by clear warrant from Scripture, then I hope the rest
that are not so seemingly unjustifiable as this, may in all reason be excused
from that odious Epithet of Idolatrous. Now, says he, it is very possible, that
he that makes this form of Invocation a piece of his Litany, Domina salvum me
fac, Blessed Lady save me, may be in no more danger of Idolatry thereby than
St. Paul was when writing to the Romans (Romans 11. 14.) he uttered these words,
If by any means I may provoke to emulation those which are of my flesh and
might save some of them. Or when he speaks to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 9. 22.) I
am made all things to all men that by any means I may save some. And therefore
if any well-meaning suppliant had prayed to the Apostle in this very form of
Prayer, Holy Apostle save me; What Idolatry had it been to petition St. Paul
for a favor which he professed himself both ready and able to grant. For here
the Apostle clearly supposes in himself not only the Will but the Power of
saving Souls. My Adversary uses larger circuits and ambages of wit and
Rhetoric, but this is the very substance of his Argument, and such as
wherewith he would elude the force of all my cited forms of their Invocation
of Saints. But how well he can effect it we shall see in the process of the
matter.

The Reply.
I Reply therefore, that though my Antagonist have used a great deal of
plausible wit and smoothmouthed Eloquence, yet what he has said is far from
solid Truth. For to omit for the present that this form of Praying, Domina
salvum me fac, is not the harshest passage in all my Quotations, yet it is so
harsh that those sayings of St. Paul to the Romans and Corinthians will not
justify it. For we must remember that St. Paul elsewhere says, 1 Cor. 3. 6.
that Paul may plant and Apollos may water but God gives the increase; whereby
he plainly declares it not to be in his power nor in any ones power else to
save a man from eternal death. But that it is in the Power of God alone. And
therefore it is evident that in those places he professes only that he used
all the means he could or the most seasonable he could to save them But no
Logic will ever evince, that therefore he thought it to be or that it was in
his power to save them he speaks of, but only to use his best endeavor in his
subordinate way of action and leave the success to God. And therefore it is
rashly and falsely imputed to the Apostle both against his own profession and
against the truth of the thing, namely, That he clearly supposes in himself not
only the will but the power of saving Souls; Which are the very words of my
Antagonist.

And I do not question, but if any one had in his time been so silly or wicked
as to have kneeled to St. Paul with eyes and hands lifted up to him and said,
Holy Apostle save me, he would have rent his garments and protested against it
as an enormous and Idolatrous petition, and have been carried with a great deal
of zeal and indignation against so sinful an Action; As Jacob was moved
against Rachel, when she said to him, Genesis 30. give me children or else I dye.
To whom the Patriarch replied with much anger, What am I in Gods sted?
intimating what an impious and idolatrous act it was, so bluntly and absolutely
to ask that of him which was only in the Power of God to give. Lo, children
and the fruit of the womb are an heritage and gift that comes of the Lord,
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 127. 4. How much more then is it, to be made a child
of God and an Inheriter of eternal Salvation. This is in no Mortals power to
give and therefore cannot be asked of any Creature without Impiety and Idolatry
by Conclusion the 8th. Chapter 2. And therefore, Holy Paul save me, could not
but have seemed to the Apostle a Petition blasphemous and Idolatrous, nor could
he have well born that compellation of Holy Apostle without some reproof like
that of our Savior to him that called him good Master, Mat. 19. 17. why
call thou me good, there is none good but only God. But we out of the rash
Idea's of our own corrupt minds fancy such things grateful or tolerable to
the Apostle, which would really have proved horrid and intolerable to him.

His sixth general Answer.
But yet as if the Apostle had in himself the power of saving Souls, (they are
his own words) and as if this Petition, Holy Apostle save me, were a lawful
and blameless Petition, he further would improve the supposition thus, That
forasmuch notwithstanding as the Apostle has not in himself the power of saving
Souls, in the quality of a God, but as instrumental to their Salvation by his
Prayers and Preaching, it is manifest that Holy Apostle save me, can signify no
more than Holy Apostle teach me the way of Salvation, or Holy Apostle pray for
my Salvation: And yet this form of, Holy Apostle save me, being legitimate, it
will follow that, (taking our measures from the Apostles o^n words and meaning)
Blessed Lady save me, will also be a lawful form of Prayer, it signifying no
more, than Blessed Lady pray for my Salvation. And so all the forms of Prayer,
says he, assigned by the Doctor taken in the sense of the Apostle will amount
to no more than a mere Ora pro nobis. And thus with her in the Proverbs, Prove.
30. 20. he has neatly wiped, as he makes show, his own mouth, and the mouth of
his party, and says, we have done no wickednss.

The Reply.
There are two things asserted in this Answer, First, that all the forms of
Invocation that I have recited in these three Chapters amount to no more than a
mere Ora pro nobis. And then, that this is deducible from such grounds. Now as
to the first, as I shall more particularly confute that Assertion, when I shall
afterward run through the Paragraphs of these Chapters, so I shall here in
general intimate that the Assertion is plainly repugnant to the very words of
the Council of Trent: Which says, That it is good and profitable ad Sanctorum
orationes, opem, auxiliumque confugere, where besides their Prayers and
Intercessions, there are other helps and assistences intimated. And therefore
these Forms of Invocation I have recited in these Chapters, mentioning other
help and assistence, besides their praying and interceding for their
Suppliants, how is it possible but according to the indication of the Council
they understand these Helps and Assistences, as things distinct from their mere
Interceding or Praying for us.

But now I further say, That the grounds here offered of this Assertion, will
not hold. For first I have already proved, that the Apostle does not affirm any
Power in himself of saving Souls, there being no such Power in him; nor his
words to the Romans and Corinthians implying any such thing, and himself
elsewhere professing against it. So that he has not the power of saving of
Souls in himself, neither in the quality of a God, nor in any sense. For to
have the power of saving of Souls in himself as an Instrument, is a repugnancy,
and plainly implies that he has not the power of saving of Souls in himself, no
more then a chissel has of carving in it self, or a pencil of limming, or an
Harp or Lute of playing a lesson. And therefore, Holy Apostle save me, would be
as good sense as, Lute or Harp play me a lesson. Indeed David says, Psalm. 57.
Awake Lute and Harp. But then by a seasonable Epanorthosis he straitway adds, I
my self will awake right early: For if he get not up before them and finger
them, they will certainly lie dumb and silent. And so is the very word whether
writ or spoken by the Apostle or others; so are all Prayers put up by any one,
if the Spirit does not assist and God say Amen to their Prayers, all is
ineffectual, all is as perfect dumbness and silence as in an Instrument hung up
against the wall. Besides that the mere Praying to another that a thing may be
granted is a plain Argument, that the thing is not in that parties power that
so devoutly asks it. So that though there be a great deal of fineness and
subtilty in these Arguments of my Adversary, yet we see they are plainly
entangled and contradict one another. And therefore it is not sense, bluntly
and absolutely to ask that of one that is not in his power to give, but only
to try and entreat it, if he can so procure it of another.

It is manifest therefore, that Holy Apostle save me, and Blessed Lady save me,
are groundless and incongruous forms of speech, and plainly ^ignifie that to be
asked of a Creature which is not in the power of any to give but God alone. (
John 6. 44. No man comes to me unless my Father draw him,) and consequently the
implying that to be in the Creature which only is in the Creator, are
Idolatrous forms of speech by the eighth Conclusion of the second Chapter. And
thus we see my Adversary is far from proving by this fetch, That all the forms
of Invocation which I have recited amount to no more than an Ora pro nobis.
Which though it were true, as it is most manifestly false, yet the Reader is to
remember, they are down right Idolatry by the second Paragraph of this Chapter.
And most Paganically so while these Petitions are put up before the Image, at
the Altar, and in the Temple dedicated to this or that Saint. And thus I have
fully Replied in the general to the general Answers of my Antagonist to these
three Chapters, which are all the Answers he has given. I shall take occasion
to make some more particular Replies to some of them as I run through the
Paragraphs of these Chapters, especially in reference to his last general
Answer and his second, proving plainly, that the sense of these Invocations are
more than an Ora pro nobis. And that greater things are asked and greater
Compellations used then are competible to mere Creatures to give, or be
invocated by. In the mean time it is plain, that the rest of his fourth Section
falls of it self by virtue of what has already been spoken.

Upon the fourth Paragraph.
In this Prayer to St. Cosmas and St. Damian it is observable how the Devotion
is framed with a sutableness to the condition of the Saints when they dwelt on
Earth. And therefore Cosmas and Damian having been of the faculty of Physic
here, they are made to retain it still, but in an higher degree and to have the
power of curing both Body and Soul, as if by their merits they had obtained
such a Privilege from God. And that Souls departed are exercised about such
things as they were taken up with in this life, was also the Opinion of the
ancient Heathen, as you may see in Virgil, Plutarch, Maximus Tyrius, and
others. People may find evasions for any thing, but considering the Council of
Trent mentions Ayds and Assistences distinct from their Intercessions, and the
second Council of Nice, to which the Council of Trent attributes so much to,
produces Instances hereof, any one that has but half an eye will easily discern
this meaning I have given to be true. And that the Invocation of these Saints
is not a mere Ora pro nobis, but the craving of them such peculiar ayds and
helps as are supposed proper for them to give; contrary to my Antagonists last
general Answer.

Upon the fifth Paragraph.
Which is also manifest out of the Invocation of St. Francis in this next
Paragraph, Sancte Francisce propere veni, etc. For St. Francis being desired to
have and come to his people plainly intimates it is not a mere Ora pro nobis;
(For that he might, one would think, most conveniently perform in Heaven before
the face of God) but by his Presence and Assistence to his Suppliant to deliver
him from the ^oul bondage and burden of sin; carnis extincto vitio, he himself
having been such an eminent example of Mortification here on Earth, and
therefore being now endewed with a peculiar Power of helping men to mortify
sin and to deliver them from that bondage, accordingly as was observed in the
former Petition. Which is a boon too great for any but Christ himself to give.
So that it is gross Idolatry on that account also. St. Andrew's being crucified
on the Cross is supposed likewise to have entitled him to the right and Power
of inabling men to bear the Cross. But whether St Nicolas was famous also for
incountring the Devil in his life time I know not. What has been said already
on this Paragraph is sufficient to prove that the Invocation of Saints are not
a mere Ora pro nobis.

Upon the sixth Paragraph.
That Prayer to St. Agnes is both for a boon alone to be given by God, and is
plainly directed to her in a form so far from an Ora pro nobis, that it is, Te
ex^ro pr^cibus. I pray you to keep me in the right faith, or, Grant you that
all may serve God in perfect Charity. And so the Prayer to St. Brigitt calls
her, dulcis ductrix, and says, tuo ductu salutari duc ad vitae bravia. By your
safe guidance bring us to the reward of everlasting life. Which can by no ways
be reduced to an Ora pro nobis, which may be a further Reply to his second and
last general Answer.

Upon the seventh Paragraph.
Upon this Paragraph or the Hymn to St. C^ tharine in it, I need say no more
than I have already said in my next Paragraph concerning it, which my Reader
may considera^ly read over, and then observe with himself not only touching
this present Invocation but also the former, how fully that of the Council of
Trent ad Sanctorum orationes, opem auxiliumque confugere, agrees with their
forms of Invocation to Saints, which is not only to pray for them, but to give
them further ayds and assistences according to the proper privileges that they
are supposed by their merits to have obtained, and some so great, that they
belong only to God, whence the grosness of the Idolatry is further argued, and
a further Reply made to his second and last general Answers.

But for the intitling of the Saints to a power of assisting correspondent to
some Action, or condition of life of theirs here, I have observed in several
other forms of Invocation in their Hortulus Animae printed at Dilinga, cum
facultate Superiorum: As to St. Thomas, O glorious toucher of the wounds of our
Lord Jesus, do thou vouchsafe to establish us thy Suppliants in the faith of
him whom by touching, thou deservedst, to acknowledge to he God. And to St.
Ambrose, O most blessed Bishop and greatest Doctor Ambrose, who teach the
safe way, guide thou the course of my life, etc. And to St. Austin, O glorious
light of the Church help us to profit in the precepts of God, and in thy
Doctrine, etc. Where it is again observable, they make their direct addresses
to these Saints, and upon account of what it is peculiar for them to help them
in, and that it is not a mere Ora pro nobis, but in the mean time abundantly
conformable to the words of the Council of Trent.

CHAP. V.
Forms of Invocation of the blessed Virgin used by the Church of Rome
egregiously Idolatrous.
1. ANd if they can contain themselves no better in their Devotions toward
these lesser Saints, to whom their Churchmen will allow only the Worship they
call Dulia, how wild and extravagant will they show themselves in their
Addresses to the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, to whom they allow the Worship
they call Hyperdulia? And that is the thing I will now take notice of, though
not according to the copiousness of the S^bject; for it would even fill a
Volume. But some Instances I will produce, and those such as are public and
authentic, as I intimated at first. In the Rosary of the blessed Virgin she is
saluted thus: Reparatrix and Salvatrix desperan^is Animae,
Irroratrix and largitrix spiruualis Gratiae,
Quod requiro, quod suspiro, mea sana Vulnera,
Et da menti te poscenti Gratiarum munera;
^t sim c^stus, and modestus, dulcis, fortis, sobrius,
^^us, rectu, circumspectus, simultatis nescius,
Eruditus, and munitus Divinis eloquiis,
Constans, gravis, and suavis, benignus, amabilis,
^orde prudens, ore studens veritatem dicere,
Malum nolens, Deum volens pio semper opere.
A very excellent Prayer, if it had been directed to a due Object. But such
things are asked as are in the power of none but of Jesus Christ himself, as he
is God, to give.

2. For the Virgin Mary is here made no less then a Savior and giver of all
spiritual Graces; as she is also a giver of eternal Life in what follows in
Prose. Peccatorum consolatrix, infirmorum curatrix, errantium rev^catrix,
justorum confirmatrix, desolatorum spes and auxiliatrix, atque mea promptissima
adjutrix, tibi, Domina gloriosa, commendo ^odie and quotidie Animam meam* ut me
in custodiam tuam commendatum ab omnibus malis and fraudibus Diaboli custodias,
atque in ^ora mortis constanter mihi assistas, ac Animam ad aeterna gaudia
perducas. Here is the commending of the Soul of the Devotionist into the
Protection of the Virgin, that he may be kept from all Evil, and from the
Frauds of the Devil, and that she would assist at the hour of death to convey
his Soul to the eternal Joys of Heaven.

3. Like that at the end of the Rosary; Cor meum illumina, fulgens Stella
Maris, Et ab hostis machina semper tuearis. O gloriosa Virgo Maria, matter Regis
aeterni, Libera nos ab omni malo, and a poenis I^ferni. Which is a Petition for
Illumination of heart, for Security from the Devil and from eternal Death:
which is only the Privilege of the Son of God, the eternal Wisdom of the
Father, to grant, who is said also ( Apoc. 1. 18.) to have the Keys of Hell and
of Death.

4. But the thing which is very observable, and which I mainly drive at, is
this, That the Roman Church toward the latter end, before the Reformation broke
out, had run so mad after the Patronage of the Virgin, that they had almost
forgot the Son of God, and spent all their Devotions on her, whom they do at
least equalize to Christ, and so really make her, as well as some love to call
her, the Daughter of God, in as high a sense as Christ is his Son: as will
farther appear in the process of our Quotations. As in that Prayer to the
blessed Virgin that follows in Chemnitius: Te, matter illuminationis cordis mei,
te, nutrix salut^^meae m^ntis, te obsecrant quantum possunt cuncta praecordia
mea. Exaudi* Domina, adesto propitia, adjuv^ potentissima, ut mundentur sordes
mentis meae, ut illuminent^r te^ebrae meae. O gloriosa Domina, Porta vitae,
Ianu^ salutis, Via reconciliationis, Aditus recuperationis, obsecro te per
salvatricem tuam foecunditatem, fac ut peccatorum meorum venia and vivendi
gratia concedatur, and usque in finem hic servus tuus sub tua protectione
custodiatur. Which Petition and Compellations, saving what belongs to the Sex,
are most proper and natural to be used toward Christ. But the Virgin is here
made our Savior and Mediator in the feminine gender.

5. As she is again most expressly in that Prayer to her in her Feast of
Visitation:

Veni, praecelsa Domina Maria; tu nos visita: Aegras mentes illumina Per sacrae
vitae munera.

Veni, Salvatrix s^culi; Sordes aufer piaculi; In visitando populum Poenae
tollas periculum.

Veni, Regina gentium; Dele flammas reatuum; Dele quodcunque devium; Da vitam
innocentium.

In which Invocation the Virgin Mary is plainly called the Savior of the
World, and prayed unto for spiritual Illumination of the Soul, and for the
purgation thereof from the filth both of Sin and Guilt: whereby she is plainly
equallized to the Son of God, and made as it were a SheChrist, or Daughter of
God.

To this sense also are those Prayers put up to her in her Feast of the
Conception and of the Annunciation: But it were infinite to produce all. Read
that Prayer in (...) sung to her by the Council of Constance: It is a perfect
^mitation of the ancient Prayer of the Church to the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. V.
Upon the first Paragraph.
IN that Prayer to the blessed Virgin in this Paragraph are such Compellations
as if they were in the masculine gender were only proper for God and Christ,
and such things are asked as are in their power only to give; which is a
further Reply to his second general Answer.

Upon the second Paragraph.
And the very same may be said of the Invocation in this second Paragraph out
of the same Rosary of the Virgin, which though my Adversary seems desirous to
signify his slighting of, yet he dare not deny but that it passes current with
them. And why may I not produce what forms of Invocation I please which are
allowed amongst them, and are made use of in the devotions of them that are of
the Church of Rome? For this does plainly prove the Idolatry that Chuch is
lapsed into. But if some few flowers out of the Hortulus Animae may be more
grateful to him, he shall find what will amount to as much as is in the above
said Rosary. For in a Recommendation to the blessed Virgin we read thus; I
commend unto thee blessed Virgin, my whole Body and Soul and my whole life, the
five senses of my Body, all my actions and my death, who art with thy Son
Christ blessed for ever and ever. What can be said more to Christ or God
himself? This is surely more than an Ora pro nobis, Pray for us. For in a
Recommendation immediately going before, the form is: Precor te, I pray thee,
that thou would keep me from sins, from scandals, from all the Confusion of
humane life, from unclean thoughts, from all perils of Soul and Body. And some
few leaves before in the Canticum ad Virginem, it is said, Dignare dulcis Maria
nunc and semper nos sine delicto custodire. O sweet Mary vouchsafe to keep us
now and for ever without sin. As if they had a mind to turn the Te Deum, into a
Te Deam; and indeed in this Canticle they have endeavored it as near as they
can. But this in it verbatim Answers to, Vouchsafe to keep us this day without
sin, in the Te Deum. I will close all with that Rhyme in their Oration ad beatam
Mariam. Esto custos cordis mei,
Signa me timore Dei,
Confer vitae Sanctitatem
Et da morum honestatem;
Da peccata me vitare
Et quod justum est amare,
O Dulcedo Virgin^lis
Nunquam fuit nec est talis.
Can any one be the keeper of ones heart b^t God that knows the hear^? This
therefore is such a sweet strain of Devotion as never was heard till the lapse
of the Church into gross Idolatry. And yet all this and a great deal more is in
that Hortulus Animae, which questionless is a most delicious Paradise with
those of that Church, and has a sufficient stamp of Authority upon it. Which I
speak in reference to his third general Answer. Nor have I gathered any
examples of Invocation but such as the Author I have them out of does expressly
profess to have been confirmed by public Authority, and to have been in
public use. See Chemnitius his third part of the Examination of the Council of
Trent, page 135. I do not profess to have all their Rituals, and Pontificals
and Rosaries by me, but what I have by me and under my eye are so like what
Chemnitius has produced, that I think it the greatest folly and stupidity in
the World to misbelieve his Quotations.

Upon the third Paragraph.
As for Example in the Invocation in this Paragraph, Cor meum illumina fulgens
stella Maris; why should I at least doubt of that form, when I have before mine
eyes in Hortulus Animae; Esto custos cordis mei, Signa me timore Dei. Out of
both which in the mean time there may be a further Reply to his second general
Answer, or an In^stance of one of those Generals in my general Reply to that
Answer.

Upon the fourth Paragraph.
That I take notice, that these Invocations imply that the Virgin Mary is the
daughter of God, is in reference to my Exposition of the Epistle to the Church
of Thyatira, which the Reader, if his Genius lead him to such things, may
please to peruse. But in the mean time they implying so plainly that the Virgin
is the daughter of God in such a kind of sense as Christ is his Son, it plainly
appears from hence, that the Invocation is not a mere Ora pro nobis, or the
Pra^ing for such things as are not greater then is in the power of any Creature
to give; which therefore again is a further Reply to the second and last
general Answers.

Upon the fifth Paragraph.
Besides that she is again in this Invocation made the daughter of God in that
high sense, and that the same Arguments that prove ^er Titles bigger imply the
boons she can bestow to be greater then what is competible to a mere Creature,
and so it respects the second general Answer of my Adversary* It is plain also
from veni and visita, that it is impossible to be understood of a mere Ora pro
nobis, contrary to my Adversaries last Answer. And lastly it is to be observed
in reference to his third general Answer, that this song in her Feast of
Visitation must be in the number of those forms, quae public in Eccl^sus
legunt^r and magnis ^oatibus proclamantur Chemnitius. speaks. And the like is
to be said of her Feast of Conception, and Annunciation, in Reply to the said
third general Answer. As also of that Prayer sung to her at the Council of
Constance, in imitation of Veni Creator Spiritus, as that in Hortulus Animae is
of Te Deum Laudamus. And why should I doubt of that when I see this before mine
eyes? But instead of V^ni Creator Spiritus, which is the usual Prayer to the
Holy Ghost; it is here, Veni matter Gratiae,
Fons misericordiae,
Miseris Remedium;
Veni lux Ecclesiae,
Tri^tibus laetitiae
Nunc infunde radium, etc.
And now let any one judge whether these are the words of suppliants only
saying, Ora pro nobis. For whereas it is said, Veni lux Ecclesiae, Nunc infunde
radium; O come thou light of the Church, Now infuse thy rays; This is both a
calling her to them not a bidding her pray for them in Heaven, and also the
styling her the light of the Church and upon that account Praying her to
illuminate them, it is plain they suppose her from self to shine forth upon
them. And the like might have been observed in that Form, Paragraph 3. Cor meum
illuminae fulgens stella Maris. So manifest over and over again is it, That
those forms of the Invocation of the Saints must be more than an Ora pro
nobis, against his last general Answer.

CHAP. VI.
More Forms of Invocation of the blessed Virgin out of the Mary-Psalter, so
called, exremely Idolatrous and Blaspemo^s.
1. WE will now only note some passages in the Mary-Psalter, as it is called,
wherein how much at that time the Church of Rome had thrust themselves under
the Protection and Patronage of the Virgin, and made her the Daughter of God,
instead of approving themselves faithful touching the Rights and Prerogatives
of the Son and his Worship, will be most notoriously evident. I will begin with
the thirtieth Psalm: In te, Domina, speravi; non confundar in aeternum.
Ingratiam tuam suscipe me; inclina ad me aurem tuam, and in moerore meo
laetifica me. Tu es fortitudo mea and refugium meum, consolatio mea and
protectio mea: ad te clamavi cum tribularetur cor meum, and exaudisti de
vertice collium aeternorum. In manus tuas, Domina, commendo spiritum meum, meam
totam vit^m, diem ultimum. This is that whole Psalm to the Virgin: just in such
a form and with such a repose of spirit as David prays in to God himself.

2. But we will content our selves with transcribing only some select pieces.
As Psalm 71. Resperge, Domina, cor meum dulcedine tua. Fac me ob^ivisci mi
erias hujus vitae: Concupiscentias aeternas excita in anima mea, and de gaudio
Paradisi inebria mentem meam. And again, Psalm 104. Salus sempiterna in manu
tua est, Domina, qui te digne honoraverint suscipient illam. Clementia tua non
deficiet a seculis aeternis, and misericordia tua a generatione in
generationem. And Psalm 117. Dispositione tua mundus perseverat, quem tu,
Domina, cum Deo fundast^ ab initio. Tuus totus ego sum, Domina; salvum me fac,
quoniam desiderabiles sunt lauds tuae in tempore peregrinationis meae. No man
can say more to, or expect more from, the eternal God himself.

Whence they make the eternal Godhead as hypostatically united with the Virgin
as with Christ himself, and carry themselves to her as if she were as properly
the Daughter of God as he the Son. For else how could she be said to have
everlasting salvation inher power, and to have laid the Foundations of the
world from the beginning with the eternal Deity?

3. There are also other passages in this Psalter whereby they make the Virgin
Mary a She-Christ, the Daughter of God, as he is the Son of God; and that is by
the applying of the very Phrases spoken of him in the Scripture, unto her. As
in Psalm 2. Venite ad ^am omnes qui laboratis and tribulati estis, and
refrigerium and solatium dabit animabus vestris. And Psalm 81. Terge foeditatem
meam, Domina, quaesemper rutilas puritate. Fons vitae, influe in os meum, ex
quo viventes aquae profluunt and emanant. Omnes sitientes venite adillam, and
de font suo gratanter vos potabit. This is the gift of the Spirit, belonging
only to Christ to give to them that believe on him. And he is also said ( John
7. 37, 38.) to be the ease and rest of all them that are weary and heavy laden,
Matthew. 11. 28.

And again, Psalm 46. Omnes gentes, plaudite manibus, psallite in jubilo
Virgini gloriosae. Quoniam ipsa est portae vitae, janua salutis, and vianostrae
reconciliationis, spes poenitentium, solamen lug^ntium, pax beata cordium atque
salus. This is attributed to the Virgin, when as it is Christ alone that is the
way of Salvation and Reconciliation with God.

4. This is a foul and tedious Subject, and therefore to make an end at length,
let us consider the Blasphemy of the 41. Psalm. Quem^dmodum desiderat cervus ad
fontes aquarum, ita ad amor^m tuum anhelat anima mea, Virgo sancta. Quia tu es
genitrix vitae meae, and altrix reparationis carnis meae: Quia tu lactatrix
Salvationis animae meae, initium and finis totius salutis meae. Here is that
attributed to the Virgin which is said of Christ, that he is the Author and
Finisher of our Faith and Salvation. Nay, the Creation or Generation of our
life and flesh, as well as our Salvation, is here ascribed to the Virgin. Which
can have no sense or truth, unless she were (...), God-woman, in that sense
that Christ is (...) or (...), God-man, and as I said, were as properly the
Daughter of God as he is the Son of God.

5. As she is expressly called in her Litany, Filia Dei, the Daughter of God.
Which, considering what high Titles they give her both in that Litany and
elsewhere, as Illuminatrix cordium, Fons misericordiae, Flumen sapientiae,
Matter D^i, Regina coeli, Domina mundi, Domina coeli and terrae, would be but a
dwindling Title, (it belonging to all women that are believers,) if there was
not some such raised and sublime sense of it as I have intimated.

And therefore their Addresses to her being as if she were, as I said, a
She-Christ, and the Daughter of God in as high a sense at least as Christ is
the Son of God, and she being called the Daughter of God in the Litaniae
Mariae, in her Litany or public Supplication to her, it is plain, that in that
Interval of the Church wherein this most conspicuously and notoriously
happened, the Church of Rome, by reason also of the abundance of their
Devotions then to the Virgin, might be said to be rather the Worshippers of the
Daughter of God then of the Son of God. And that therefore the Spirit of
Prophecy ^oreseeing these times, whenas for such a space he called Rome
Pergamus, this succeeding Scene coming on, he might very well change the Title
of Pergamus into that of Thyatira, with a derisorious Allusion to the occasion
of the name of that City, from the news of a Daughter being born to Nicanor. As
if God Almighty had the like occasion of changing the name of Pergamus into
Thyatira, from the Romanisls turning the Virgin Mary into the Daughter of God.

6. For a stop to which Insolency Christ seems on purpose in the Epistle to the
Church in Thyatira to resume to himself the Title of the Son of God, Apoc. 2.
18. notwithstanding that he is called the Son of man in the Vision in the
foregoing Chapter, Apoc. 1. 13. out of which he ever draws a description of
himself for an Entrance before each Epistle to the Churches. Which, in my
judgment, is a thing specially well worth the marking; and that this making
the Virgin Mary the Daughter of God in this Interval, might alone be a
sufficient occasion of changing the name of the Church of Rome from Pergamus to
Thyatira. But other things that are apposite are also comprehended by a
Prophetical Henopoeia.

7. But this is an Overplus to our Present purpose, which was mainly to
discover the gross Idolatry of the Church of Rome in the Invocation of their
Saints, and especially of the Virgin Mary; and how both the Definition of the
Council of Trent is Idolatrous in this Point, and much more the Practice of the
Church countenanced by public Authority.

8. For this Mary-Psalter it self, that has the most enormous and blasphemous
Forms of Idolatrous Invocation of any, is not the private Contrivance of some
single, obscure, superstitious Monk, but bears the Title of that Seraphick
Doctor ^t. Bonaventure, once Cardinal of Rome: Which is no small public
countenance thereto. And that nothing might be wanting to the grace and
furtherance of so devotional a piece of Idolatry, there was instituted a
peculiar Society, entitled the Fraternity of the Mary-Psalter, confirmed
afterward by Sixtus the fourth, many Indulgences being added Anno 1470. And
Innocent the eighth added to these Indulgences plenary Remission a poena and
culpa once in their life, and once in articul^ mortis, to as many as entered
into that Fraternity.

9. And in such case stands the Church of Rome at this very day, that is to
say, she is still Thyatira, notorious for her Idolatrous Worship of the Virgin
Mary. But the Interval of the true Church in Thyatira ceased upon the
Reformation, when we cast off the Pope, or suffered I^zebel to delude the
Servants of God no longer, nor to debauch them with Idolatrous Modes of
Worship. But this is only by the bye.

In the mean time it is abundantly manifest, that the Invocation of Saints in
the Roman Church is not only the praying to them that they would pray to God
for us, but the asking Aids of them, and such frequently as are in the power of
none but of God, and of Christ as he is God, for to give; and therefore is
still the grosser Idolatry.

CHAP. VI.
Upon the first Paragraph.
IT is observable that as the Canticum to the Virgin in Hortulus Animae is an
Imitation of Te Deune Laudamus, and the Prayer sung to her by the Council of
Constance an Imitation of the Hymn to the Holy Ghost, Veni Creator Spiritus: So
is this Psalm of the Mary-Psalter an Imitation of the thirtieth Psalm, which is
a Prayer to God Almighty, to Jehovah himself; beginning, In te Domine speravi
non confundar in aeternum. Which is Verbatim here applied to the Virgin Mary,
and there is no change of the word Dominus, but putting Domina for it, which
changes only the gender not the signification. As if it had been Deus and they
should have turned it Dea. And Dominus (which is so translated from the Greek
(...), which in this sense some Cri^icks, if I remember right, deduce from
(...), which is (...) or (...) ( to be) that (...) may Answer to Jehovah,
Essentiator) signifies here not a Lord in a civil sense, but is the same that
Jehovah and (...), God the Creator and Essentiator of all things, or that which
is the Fountain of all Essence and is Essence it self necessary and eternal.
This is Dominus in this Psalm, and therefore to call the Virgin Mary here
Domina with the rest of the words of the beginning of this Psalm, is as much as
if they should say, In te Dea (in the highest sense imaginable) speravi, non
confundar in perpetuum, which is Idolatry of the deepest dye. To give such an
Attribute to the Creature, as implies the highest perfections that are in the
Creator himself. Thus unadvisedly have they done, by making such humoursom
Imitations in words of such Devotions as are proper alone to God. For to excuse
it by saying, they can put another sense upon, it will not serve: For I dare
say one may put such a meaning on the whole Lords Prayer as that the words may
be used to the Pope, with a continued coherence of sense, partly proper, partly
figurative, if such shifts would serve the turn. And yet I hope none of the
Church of Rome will stick to say, that, if one should kneel to the Pope, and
say the Lords Prayer to him, making him the Object thereof, but it would be
apert blasphemy and Idolatry. But we proceed; And as for Exaudivisti de vertice
collium ^ternorum, it is another Privilege too big for a Creature, as if the
Virgin were omniscient. But the whole form of the Devotion is such, which I
have already noted, as if it were David's own Praying to God himself, and not an
Orapro nobis, against his last general Answer; as what went before was against
his second.

Upon the second Paragraph.
And in Reply again to the same second Answer, Here is also attributed to the
blessed Virgin what is too big for any Creature, Everlasting salvation is said
to be in her, Psalm 104. And again, Psalm 117. Domina salvum me fac, if
understood of eternal salvation as my Adversary understands it. But besides
this is these two Psalms of the Mary-Psalter, in further Reply to that part of
his fifth general Answer that singles out Domina salvum me fac for the most
harsh passage of all; In my mind Clementia tua non deficiet a saeculis aeternis
seems more harsh, and to imply that her mercy is ab aeterno in aeternum, which
no mercy can be but that of God alone. But, Dispositione tua Mundus perseverat
quam tu Domina cum Deo fundasti ab initio, does plainly make Domina our Lady,
to be Dominus Jehovah, or the Aeternal wisdom, the Son of God by whom the world
was really made and is governed. And this surely is far more harsh than Domina
salvum me fac, against his fifth Answer.

Upon the third Paragraph.
That out of the second Psalm of the Mary-Psalter, Cleanse my filthiness O
blessed Lady who always shinest with purity, Flow into my mouth O fountain of
life out of which proceed living waters. How can this be a mere Ora pro nobis,
it being so plainly an address to the blessed Virgin to purify her suppliant
by her own purity, and to flow in upon him as being her sels the fountain of
life, which is against his last Answer general.

Upon the fourth Paragraph.
The Compellations of the blessed Virgin in this Paragraph out of Psalm 41. are
too great for a mere Creature, and therefore may be instanced in by way of
Reply to his second general Answer.

Upon the fifth and sixth Paragraphs.
These two Paragraphs refer to my Exposition of the Epistles to the seven
Churches; which if the Reader have any inclination to such speculations and
will peruse them, he will read these and some few more Paragraphs of this my
Antidote with more pleasure.

Upon the seventh Paragraph.
That the Definition of the Council of Trent in this point is Idolatrous, is
abundantly demonstrated in the second Paragraph of the fourth Chapter, from
such Conclusions as I have above plainly proved no assaults of my Adversary
have at all weakened. But the Accessions to make this Idolatry still more
gross, is that it is so evident from these usual forms of Invocation, that the
Compellations of some of the Saints at least are incompetible to any Creature,
and they are asked such things as no Creature is able to give, and so, as if
they were to be given by themselves and not by begging them of God for us.

Upon the eighth Paragraph.
What is said here may serve for a more full Reply to my Antagonists third
general Answer, in that particular that concerns the Mary-Psalter, it bearing
this Authority and Authentickness with it. For it goes under St. Bonaventures
name, though I will not avow him to be the Author of i^. But the Countenance
and Authority of two Popes is even more than enough to ratify it for a genuine
piece of devotion of the Church of Rome.

Upon the ninth Paragraph.
To the former part of this ninth Paragraph, I have no more to say than what I
have said already on the fifth and sixth. The second part it is not impertinent
to take notice what it intimates against the second and last Answers of my
Adversary, viz. That I have not only proved in these three Chapters that
Invocation of Saints is Idolatry though it were only for an Ora pro nobis, but
also that according as the Council of Trent it self does insinuate, there are
special aids and helps, besides praying for us, asked of the Saints and so
great ones, as also so great Compellations, as are incompetible to a mere
Creature to give or receive; Which makes the Invocation twice or thrice more
gross than a mere Ora pro nobis. To all which you may lastly add these
aggravating Circumstances which are very frequent, That these Invocations are
made at their Festivals in Temples, at Altars and Images consecrated to them,
that nothing may be wanting to the most formal Idolatry imaginable. See
Conclusion the eighteenth of the second Chapter.

We see therefore the gross Idolatry of the Romanists in the Invocation of
Saints, even according to the allowance of the Council of Trent and the
authorized practice of their Church, beyond all exception evidenced and
demonstrated.

CHAP. VII.
That the Doctrine of the Council of Trent touching the Worshipping of Images
is Idolatrous, and the Reason of the Doctrine weak and unsound.
1. AND thus much for their Idolatry in the Invocation of Saints. Let us now
consider what the sense of the Council of Trent is touching the worshipping of
Images. Council. Trident. Sess. 9.
Imagines porro Christi, Deiparae Virginis, and aliorum Sanctorum, in templis
praesertim, habendas and retinendas esse, e^sque debitum honorem and
reverentiam impertiendam. Quoniam honos qui eis exhibetur refertur ad
Prototyp^, quae illae repraesentant; ita ut per Imagines quas oscul^mur, and
coram quibus caput ap^rimus and procumbimus, Christum adoremus, and Sanctos,
quorum illae similitudinem gerunt, veneremur. Id quod Conciliorum, praesert^m
vere secundae Nicaenae Synodi, Decretis contra Imaginum oppugnatores est
sancitum.

The meaning of which in brief is this, That the Images of Christ, of the
blessed Virgin and other Saints, are to be had and retained in Churches, and
that due honor and reverence is to be done to them. For which are produced two
Reasons. The first, In that the Honor that is done to the Images is referred
to the Prototypes. The second, In that this Injunction is but what the second
N^cene Council had of old decreed.

2. To which ^ answer, That thus much as the Council of Trent has declared
touching Images is plain and open Idolatry by the seventh Conclusion of the
first Chapter, and expressly against the Commandment of God, who forbids us to
make any graven Image to bow down to or Worship. But the Council of T^en^ says,
Yes, ye may make graven Images of the Saints, and set them up in their Temples,
and give them their due Honor and Worship; nay, ye ought to do so; and
instances in the very act of Bowing or Kneeling and prostrating our selves
before them. This Definition of the Council is so palpably against the
Commandment of God, that they are fa^n to leave the second Commandment out of
the Decalogue, that the people may not discern how grossly they go against the
express Precepts of God in their so frequent practices of Idolatry. See the
first, ninth and tenth Conclusions of the first Chapter; as also the third,
fourth, fifth, eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth of the second.

3. Nor can all their Tricks and Tergiversations and subtle Elusions serve
their turn. For undoubtedly the Decalogue was writ to the easy capacity of the
people, and therefore their hearts and consciences are the best Interpreters.
Not the foolish Evasions and Subterfuges of perfidious Sophisters, who, to the
betraying of weak Souls to Idolatry and Damnation, and for the opening their
Purses, would make them believe that the Council of Trent's enjoining of Images
in Churches, and the honoring them or worshipping them and bowing down before
them, can consist with God's forbidding to make any graven Image, and to bow
down to it and worship it. So that I say, the Council it self does appoint flat
Idolatry to the Christian world to be practiced. And it being so monstrous a
thing, I pray you now let us consider the Reasons why they do so.

4. The first is, Because the Honor done to the Image is referred to the
Prototype. But I answer, that this Reference is either in virtue of that
Similitude the Images have with those persons they represent, which the words
of the Council seem to imply, at least touching the Saints, quorum illae
similitudinem gerunt: as when we praise a Picture of such or such a person,
that it is a very comely and lovely Picture, this praise naturally has a
reference to the Person whose Picture it is, in virtue of the similitude
betwixt the Picture and the Party.

Or else this Reference, without any regard to personal Similitude, is from the
Direction of the Intention of the Devotionist, that he intends upon the seeing
and bowing, suppose, to the Image of Christ, the blessed Virgin, or any Saint,
to take this occasion to worship Christ, the blessed Virgin or the Saint
thereby, the Image being but at large a symbolical Presence of them, it being
not regarded whether the Symbol or Image have any personal Similitude with the
party it represents or no.

5. But now as for the former it is evident, that it is infinitely uncertain
whether any Image of Christ, the blessed Virgin, or of this or that Saint, be
like the carnal figure of these persons while they were alive upon earth, or
no. Nay, it is in a manner certain to the contrary, none of these holy Souls
being given to such follies as to have their Pictures drawn while they were
alive. See my Mystery of Iniquity, Part 1. Book 1. chap. 14*

But being it is extremely improbable but an Image should be like some or
other, that are either now alive, or have lived on the earth since the
beginning of the world, according to this first supposition, this Honor or
religious Worship intended to Christ, the blessed Virgin, or any other Saint,
will not only miss them, but certainly fall on some other who, in stead of
being Saints, happily are or have been very vile and wicked persons.

6. But besides, no ^aints are worshipped before they be in Heaven, nor indeed
are properly Saints till then; and the Glories in their Pictures that are about
their Heads show plainly that they intend to represent the Saints in their
present condition of Glory in Heaven. Whence it is plain that the Images are
nothing like them they are made for. For how can these Images of brass or stone
or wood, or any other materials, bear the Image of a seearate Soul, which all
the Saints are for the present? And what likeness can there be betwixt the
glorious body of christ Heavenly and spiritual, and an Image of any terrestrial
matter? No more than betwixt a piece of Dirt or Soot and the Sun or bright
Morning Star.

And, which is most of all to be considered, what terrestrial Image can
possibly represent him that is truly (...), God-man, and is not the Object of
our Adoration but as he is this Divine Complexum as well of the Divinity as the
Humanity? But what Statuary can carve out the Effigies of the Deity? So that
the pretense of this Reference of the Honor to the Prototype in this first
sense thereof is very weak and vain. Nor, though there were this natural
Reference, would it follow that we are to honor them this way, it being so
plainly forbid, and there being better ways then this, viz. the commemorating
and imitating their Virtues.

7. And for that second sense, it is indeed disinvolved of those former
Difficulties; but greater here occurr. For as touching our Savior Christ,
forasmuch as his pretended Image is but his symbolical Presence, the doing of
Divine Worship toward it is again plain Idolatry, as appears by that Example
of the Israelites, who worshipped the golden Calf in reference to Jehovah, as
appears plainly in the Story, Exodus 32. 4* 5. And for the blessed Virgin and
the rest of the Saints, that Incurvation toward their symbolical Presences is
flat Idolatry, is manifest from the eighth, ninth and tenth Conclusions of the
first Chapter, and the fifth, nineteenth and twentieth of the second of this
Treatise.

And indeed thus to make the Images of the Saints so called only their
symbolical Presences, and so to Worship them before these Images, is an
attributing Divine Honor to them. For this naturally does declare that they
have at least a terrestrial Omnipresency, which no invisible Power which we
know has but only God. But to make a low Obeisance to an absent person God
knows how many millions of miles off, is still a more forced and ridiculous
thing. And therefore the saluting of the Saints thus at their symbolical
Presences or Images, and in the mean time acknowledging them to be in s^de
Beatorum, (which they do, and must do, unless they exclude them Heaven,) is to
acknowledge one Soul to fill Heaven and Earth with its presence, which is that
vast Privilege of God Almighty only; and therefore this Worship to them is
gross Idolatry, as supposing such a Perfection in them as is nowhere but in
God.

Besides what was intimated before, that let this Reference be what it will,
there being an Incurvation or Prostration before Images, whether they be mere
Symbols or exact Representations, it must be ipso facto^dolatry by the seventh
Conclusion of the first Chapter. From whence it follows, that the Saints are
not honored by this worshipping of their Images, but hideously reproached, it
supposing them to be pleased and gratified with that which is an abomination to
the Lord, and a gross transgression of his express Commands. It implies, I say,
that they are ambitious, vain glorious and rebellious against God. And
therefore they that the most vehemently oppose this way of honoring of them by
Images and Invocations are the most true and faithful Honourers of them, they
so zealously vindicating them from the great Reproaches these others cast upon
them. So far are they from being guilty herein of any Rudeness or Clownishness
against the Saints of God.

CHAP. VII.
His Answer to the first part of the second Paragraph.
There was no Answer to be given to the first Paragraph, it being merely the
setting down what the Council of Trent defines about the worshipping of Images.
But to the first part of the second Paragraph his Answer is this; Here the
Doctor, says he, gives us a learned Antithesis betwixt the Commandment of God
and Decree of this Council. But how weak, frivilous and Pharisaical this
Antithesis is, I have sufficiently declared in my Answer to the second and
seventh Conclusions of the first Chapter. This is his whole Answer to this part
of the Paragraph.

The Reply.
AS to that he says it is a learned Antithesis, I Reply, That it is a plain,
conspicuous and obvious Antithesis, so obvious, that it has caused your Church
to hide the second Commandment from the sight of the Vulgar. To the ill
language you give me I Reply nothing, but that of the Apostle. 1 Pet. 3. 9. Not
railing for railing. And for your pretended Answer to the second and seventh
Conclusions of my first Chapter, I refer my Reader to my Reply to it, and
appeal to his judgment if it be not satisfactory.

His Answer to the second part of this second Paragraph.
He uses long ambages and circuits in his Answer to this second part, but the
main matter occurs in the the end of his Answer, which is this, That I ought to
have proved that which I call the second to be a Commandment really distinct
from the first; And that the understanding is not the same whether we divide
the Precepts of the first Table into three or into four Commandments. This he
absolutely omitting to do, says he, his charge proves a mere Calumny, and
bearing false witness against his neighbor. And so while he pleads for his
second, he very uncharitably breaks his ninth Commandment.

The Reply.
The whole frame of his Answer, if I had taken it from the beginning to the
end, is so weak and slight, that I half suspect he was invited to it merely for
that last conceits sake; to break ajest betwixt the second and ninth precept
upon his Adversary. For first, though I should admit the understanding would be
the same though the first Table were divided but into three Commandments, so no
words of the first Table were left out; nay though the first Table were called
one Commandment or Decree touching our duty toward God, yet my charge against
the Church of Rome for leaving out so great and so material a part of this
Decree, or of the first Commandment if you will, would not be a jot mitigated
thereby, the understanding being the same, as my Antagonist himself confesses,
whether it be held one Commandment, or two. For if it be held one Commandment
yet it is plainly divisible into these two parts which we call the first and
second Commandments. And this that we call the second Commandment, and you the
second part of the first Commandment, being really one and the same, and you
acknowledging you leave out that part of the Commandment, where then is the
Calumny? any more then if one should accuse another that he took away two
shillings six pence, and he should Reply, it is an unworthy slander, it was
only half a crown that he took away: would not this to any indifferent judge
seem a very pleasant Apology to clear one of the Theft?

But now in the second place, Though St. Austin and St. Hierome (^eter Lombard
says it is Origin and Austin) may differ in their Opinion about the first and
second Commandment, whether they be one or two Commandments, yet I presume the
more ancient, and the more general sense of the Church is that they are two.
And it is well known that Origin flourished long before Austin: But it is
acknowledged of all hands out of the word of God, that there are just ten
Commandments, neither more nor less. Now the Church of Rome that would have the
first Table consist but of three Commandments, is constrained to divide the
last Commandment into two; which is against the Antiquity of the distinction of
the Greek and Hebrew Text into verses. For it is observable that both in the
Greek and Hebrew Text, though the length of some of the Commandments has
occasioned them to be divided into more verses than one, yet they no where have
crowded two Commandments into one verse; in so much that they make, Thou shall
not kill, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, three distinct
verses: Whence it is plain that that which we call the tenth Commandment is
really but one Commandment, as being contained in one verse; and that, Thou
shall not covet thy neighbors wife, is not a whole Commandment distinct from
the rest contained in that verse.

Besides, which is hugely remarkable; if, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, be one entire Commandment, viz. the ninth; part of the tenth Commandment,
viz. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, is set before it, which is not
a thing credible. But there is no absurdity nor inconvenience, supposing it but
one Commandment, that, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, is set first
in Exodus, and, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, is placed first in
Deuteronomy. This methinks should be enough to the impartial to demonstrate,
that that which we usually call the tenth Commandment, is not to be divided
into two but is all one entire Commandment; and that therefore the first and
second Commandments ordinarily so called cannot be one Commandment but two,
that there may be ten.

To all which you may add, that but even a moderate smattering in Logic may
easily discover the tenth Commandment usually so called to be but one, and the
first and second Commandments so called to be really two; namely, from the
consideration of their Objects. Now the Object in the tenth Commandment is but
one in General, viz. the keeping our desires from other men's goods of what
nature soever, Thou shall not covet any thing that is his; That is the general
of the whole Commandment plainly: And House, Wife, Servant, Ox, Ass, are but
particulars belonging to this general, and by the same reason that you make an
entire Commandment of any one of these Particulars, you may of every one of
them, and so divide the last Commandment at least into five, which is very
absurd. But as the Object of the tenth Commandment shows it can be but one, so
the Objects of the first and second plainly show they must be two Commandments,
because their Objects are distinctly two. The first having for its Object the
only one true God whom alone to retain we are plainly taught or commanded by
that Precept; the second having for its Object Graven Images or whatsoever
similitudes of things, which we are strictly forbid any way to wor^hip. So
plain every way is it, That that which we call the second Commandment is the
second Commandment, and that there is not the least show of calumny, in saying,
They have left out the second Commandment in their Catechisms.

But yet it is further observable, that if the first and second Commandments
were to be held but one Commandment, there can be no so rational ground as
this, That the second has a close subserviency to the first, and that it is
added that we may keep the first more entirely and have no more Gods in any
sense, than one: Which implies therefore that worshipping of Images Gods does
interpret as the making more Gods to our selves then one, or that it is a
necessary Concomitant of making to our selves more Gods then one, as is too too
apparent in the Religion of the Gentiles, nor can be enough lamented in
degenerated Christendom. Which eagerness after Idol-Gods the true God most
severely prohibits, and show's himself so much the more solicitous and zealous
here against worshipping of Images, by reason of the great Proclivity of
mankind to that more than to Polytheisme, or the not believing that there is
only one supreme God the Creator and Governor of all things. But the great
danger is, that acknowledging this, yet they may either defile his Worship with
Images, and make those Images Gods by worshipping them, or Worship Doemon^ and
Saints in Images and Pictures, and so accordding to the custom of the Heathens
make more Gods than one, though but one supreme and others inferior to him.
There is such a pruriency and precipitant inclination in humane nature to these
superstitions, that to put a stop to it. God adds such a rousing Commina^ion
at the latter end of this second Commandment or the second part of the first,
as my Adversary would have it. For I am a jealous God that visits the
iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children to the third and fourth Generation
of them that hate me* As if he declared them more particularly (...) haters of
God as well as hateful to him who will presume so hainously to affront him as
to make Images to Worship them or any Object by them.

Which second Commandment therefore with this direful Commination added to it,
being so effectual a bar and so point blank against the Idolatry practiced in
the Roman Church, my Adversary must give me leave to suspect, that it is not,
as he says, left out to ease the memory of the Vulgar of so long a lesson, but
to obliterate it out of their mind and memory, or rather to never let them have
the sight of that which would certainly make their Consciences tremble when
they saw the practices of the Church which they are obliged to, so plainly
contrary to the word of God. But that they have also left out the tenth and
eleventh verses about the Sabbath, that may be for a better blind for this, and
also that people may not be imbrued with an over religious regard to the Lords
day, least they should find offense at the licentiousness of that day too, and
note that many Saints days are more solemnly kept, then that wherein the
Creation of the world and Redemption by God our great Savior and Redeemer is
celebrated at once. But I have insisted on this Argument longer than I
intended. I hope long before this the discerning Reader perceives, That the
crime lies where it did, and that my charge in this point is no Calumny.

His Answer to the fourth Paragraph.
My third Paragraph he passes over sicc^ pede, nor excerps any thing out of it,
lest it should prove too wholesome food for his misled Party. But to my fourth
Paragraph he answers* thus, ( p. 74. 75.) Then he supposing, says he, that
neither of these are maintainable, he infers that by no means can the honor
done to the Image be referred to the Prototype or Thing represented. But to the
Argument I Answer, That this Reference is in virtue of that similitude which
the Image has with the Prototype as including the direction of the Intention of
the Devo^ionist ipso facto, that is supposed to be a rational Agent. And
therefore the Doctors disjunctive Dilemma is very vain and defective. This is
his Answer in general to my disjunctive Dilemma, as he calls it. But before
this Answer he unmethodically propounds my Arguments against the first member
of the Dilemma. But I shall reduce all to the order of my Paragraphs; and Reply
to this general Answer first.

The Reply.
I say therefore, That there is a great defect and mistake of my Adversary in
his not apprehending the full scope of my Argument. For it is not merely to
prove that the Honor done to the Image cannot be any of these two ways
referred to the Prototype, but that it cannot be referred so as to quit the Act
of Idolatry, as I have intimated at the end of the sixth Paragraph, and at the
beginning of the last part of the seventh. Now there being but two ways of
referring this honor to the Prototype, and the Council seeming to insinuate a
fitness from the similitude of the Images to their Prototypes, I mainly impugn
that in my fifth and sixth Paragraph, his Answer to which we shall here omit.
But for the sense of his present Answer in general to the Dilemma, if I
understand him it is this, That there being a similitude of signification as
well as of figure (as he tells us anon) which is implied in the direction of
the Intention of the Devotionist, and that therefore represents the Prototype
to his mind, whether there be similitude of figure or no, that this makes my
Dilemma vain and defective, as disjoyning or dividing those things one from
another, that are found together in every reference of the Devotionist. This is
the best sense I can make of his perplexed and obscure Answer; To which I Reply,
That although there be that similitude of signification (though in the mean
time it be very improperly so called) included in the intention or mind of the
Devotionist in the referring of the Image to the Prototype, and so is a kind of
note of remembrance to him, yet being sometimes, this thing may be like the
thing which it is a note of, and have the similitude of Figure as well as of
Signification, and sometimes merely the similitude of Signification, it is
plain there is ground enough to raise this bipartition of Reference of the
Image to the Prototype, it being sometimes of Images that have merely
similitudinem Significationis, sometimes of those that have similitudinem
Figurae also, which the Council insinuating some greater fitness in, I impugn
in the abovesaid Paragraphs. In the mean time to them that understand Logic,
it is plain that my Dilemma is neither vain nor defective.

His Answer to the fifth Paragraph.
I argue in this Paragraph against the referring the honor done to the Image
unto the Prototype by virtue of similitude* 1. Because it is uncertain whether
the Figure of Christ the blessed Virgin and the rest have any likeness to them.
2. And that it is hugely probable they may be like some body else and those
none of the best. To the former he Answers, That the honor done to the Image
may be referred to the Prototype, though there be no personal similitude of
Figure betwixt the Image and the Person it represents, but only the similitude
of Signification, the Image signifying the Dignity, Gravity, or other
perfections of the Prototype. And this similitude of Signification he would
prove to be where there is no personal similitude of Figure, because man is
said to be made after the likeness of God though there be no personal
similitude of Figure betwixt them. And he who honors man, says he, as he is
the image of God, honors God in his Image. And if therefore where no
similitude of Figure, much more where a specifical similitude of Figure, the
honor done to the Image may be referred to the Prototype, as it happens in the
Case of the Images of Christ and his Saints.

To the second he Answers, that the Case the Doctor puts is more than possible.
Because the Images of the Angels or Cherubims over the Ark had no personal
similitude with the Angels but with some terrestrial Creatures, yet the honor
done to them was referred to the Prototypes.

The Reply.
To the former I Reply, That the honor done to the Image may be referred to
the Prototype (or rather that to which the Image is erected) though there be no
similitude of Figure. But I deny that any such honor or Worship can be done to
the Image with reference to the Prototype without Idolatry, as I have declared
and proved in my seventh Paragraph. And now this hitherto being the safest
Answer my Adversary can make, I understand not why he should not stick to it
and balk the first part of my Dilemma, but that he has a mind to infuse
Idolatry by what follows in his Answer to this Paragraph, into his heedless and
credulous party. Whereunto tends also the proof of his Assertion, That there
may be a similitude of signification where there is no similitude of personal
Figure, from, Let us make man after our own Image. As if that the personal
similitude betwixt God and Man mentioned in the Scripture respected that of
external Figure, and therefore could be only of Signification; whenas it is
understood of internal righteousness and true holiness, this is the Image of
God in which man was created; In which there is not only a similitude of
Signification, but of real and personal likeness. But this was only to bring
in that sly saying, He who honors man as he is the image of God, honors God
in his Image. Whenas there is no man honors man in reference to God as you
pretend to honor the Image of Christ terminating your Worship in him. But we
do civil honor only to men, and in bowing to them only signify our
inclination and readiness to do them all good offices of love service and in
the mean time acknowledge there is that in them that is worthy of civil honor
and esteem. And lastly, I say, as to the pretense of specific similitude of
Figure, it signifies no more as to the intended honor of an Individual, then
if there were no similitude at all. (...). For not to signi^ie one determinate
thing is to signify nothing, as Aristotle says. But by virtue of the direction
of our intention, we may make any thing signify any thing.

To the second I Reply, That if the Case the Doctor puts be more than
po^^^ible, then it is probable or possible, so that he yields what I would
have. But I will not yield him that he has brought a fit instance, or that he
has spoke right in that Instance. For neither were these Cherubims ^ntended for
the symbolical presence of Angels but of God, nor was any honor done to the
Cherubims or their Prototypes, although here again he slily would infuse this
poison of Idolatry into his ignorant Party, though with a reproach to God and
Moses.

His Answer to the sixth Paragraph.
To the first part of this Paragraph he Answers; That the Images of the Saints
represent them such as they were upon Earth, only with an additional mark of a
Crown or Laurel to signify their triumphant state in Glory; And then, That an
Image may be like to a separate Soul as well as to an Angel or Cherubim, he
would infer from that Opinion of the Platonists, who make separate Souls
invested with aereall or ethereal Vehicles as well as the Angels.

To the second he Answers, that if a terrestrial Image cannot represent that
Person who is (...) God-man, then neither can a terrestrial eye represent him,
and so the Apostles whilst living did never see that Person who was (...)
God-man, which is no less then blasphemy; as implying that that Person called
Jesus Christ whom the Apostles daily beheld with their eyes, was not (...)
God-man.

The Reply.
To the first I Reply, That unless my Adversary here suppose what he can never
make good, that they have the true effigies of the Saints such as they were
upon Earth, he is never the near (as to this first curiosity) whether he fancy
them represented such as they were on Earth, or such as they are now in Heaven.
But being Religious Worship is not due to them till they be canonized, to
represent them such as they were on Earth, is to represent them in Order to
Religious Worship, such as they were before they were capable of Religious
Worship. And the Laurel and Crown he talks of, those are not on their Images or
Statues, but only a Glory over their Heads in their Pictures, so far as I
remember, of which the genuine signification is, That that picture stands for
them such as they are now in glory, and there is the same sense of their
Statues and of their Pictures. Moreover, his supposal is false and contrary to
his own Assertion before, when he asserts that the Images of Cherubims or
Angels are like in Figure to the Angels themselves, as if there were Ox-headed
and Lyon-headed Angels. And lastly, suppose we should be so courteous as to
grant him the doctrine of the Platonists that Souls separate have aereal or
ethereal Vehicles, what would this advantage him they allowing no settled
Figure to them? And if there were an humane Figure allowed, when we have no
knowledge what was their individual terrestrial Figure, how shall we know what
is their aereal or ethereal? And though the Figure was known, what terrestrial
matter can express that lively enravishing spiritual beauty that is in those
lucid Vehicles? So that though the Figure were (...) the form which is the life
of the Figure would be quite lost, and be nothing near so like the separate
Soul as the dead carcass of the greatest beauty on Earth, after four days lying
in the grave, would be to the said party when alive. So that my Adversary in
his Answer to this first part seems to indulge to humors and fetches of wit,
rather than to reason soberly, and so as to prove a personal likeness betwixt
the Saints and their Images.

And this in like sort may be said of his Answer to the second part, which is
indeed an odd unexpected fetch of wi^, but hugely rude and harsh, that would
pretend to fix on my Argument the horrid crime of blasphemy, when it is in
truth the asserting the transcendent excellency of the (...) of Christ, not the
denying of it, which were an heinous piece of blasphemy against the Son of God
indeed. I say therefore that when I ask, what terrestrial Image can possibly
represent him that is truly (...) God-man? that no man's mind that is not very
extravagant could ever fancy that I meant any other Image, then what is
external to our sight, which that in our eye is not. Again, it is manifest that
I mean it of some Image that represents the absent, and invisible Humanity of
Christ by reason of its absence; and not such an Image as a Parelion or a
Paraselene are, that do not represent the Sun or Moon but by virtue of the
presence of those Luminaries. Nor did the Image of Christ in the eyes of the
Apostles or other men represent Christ any otherwise then by (...) of his
Presence. But it is plain to any that will not cavil, that I understand my own
words of such Images as represent the absent, as the Statue of Caesar, of
Virgil, and the like. And then lastly I flatly deny that the Image of an
external Object in the eye, is terrestrial. For the Image is not in the nervous
bottom of the eye but butts only upon it, as the Images let in upon white
paper through a Hole in a dark room. That Image is not fixed nor subjected in
the paper, but in the ethereal matter that touches the paper And so the Image
is in the ethereal matter that touches the bottom of the eye, not in the bottom
of the eye it self. But ethereal matter is not terrestrial, and therefore this
no terrestrial Image.

Unto all which I add, That it does not follow but that, though the Image in
the eye, call it terrestrial or ethereal, had not the adequate or principal
power of representing Christ God-man to the Apostles when he was on Earth, yet,
the presence of our Savior and the Divine graces of his Person shooting
through that Image into the Souls and hearts of the beholders (faith being
wrought in them by the spirit of God according to his eternal purpose; as it is
written, No man comes to me, unless my Father draw him) they might behold him
and give that Testimony that St. John does of him, John 1. The word was made
flesh and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld the glory of him as the glory of the
only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth. But for others that saw the
humane Presence of him who is truly (...), though they could not discern him to
be such or to be the Messiah, so far as they saw it chiefly to be imputed to
his humanity being present, and not to the Image in the eye, which but for his
Presence could not represent him to the Soul. But I hope the wicked and
unbeliever no^ discovering his (...) does not at all argue him not to be (...)
God-man. And now if the Image impressed by the very presence of Christ had not
not the natural Power of representing that Divine Complexum God-man, according
to both the natures, how far short shall Images of wood or stone, or what ever
materials be from representing him being absent?

In the mean time it is apparent how rash and inhumane my Antagonist is, to
charge me with blasphemy upon such slight and toyish pretenses as he is pleased
to take up, and every way so weak and insignificant. I have insisted on this
longer than was needful: But I was invited so to do, because my Adversary here
seems to have intended to make a show of induing his confutations of this
seventh Chapter with so great Triumph; when indeed he has one nothing at all,
he having not taken notice of the close of this ^ixth Paragraph, that declares
and proves, that though there were this natural reference of Images to their
Prototypes by reason of personal similitude of Figure, yet it would be Idolatry
to Worship them.

Upon the seventh Paragraph.
Which I do more-f^lly inculcate in the beginning of the last part of this
seventh Paragraph. And in the first and second part thereof copiously
demonstrate, that though these Images have the similitude of Signification
only, as he loves to call it, and not of Figure, yet it is Idolatry over and
over again to Worship them. Which Hypothesis he chiefly or rather only adheres
to, and has sported and played away his time in superfluously and weakly
trifling against the first part of my Dilemma, is if he would make good the
similitude of Figure betwixt the Images and Prototypes when he seems to believe
neither any truth nor necessity of it: but only to make a show of confuting
this seventh Chapter, when he has left the latter end of the sixth Paragraph,
and this whole seventh untouched, which is the main drift of all; namely to
show, that whether the Images have any similitude with their Prototypes or no,
yet it is Idolatry to Worship them, and that therefore the Council of Trent has
no subterfuge in this regard to excuse themselves from the charge of Idolatry,
in appointing the honor they appoint to them.

CHAP. VIII.
The Doctrine of the second Council of Nice touching the Worship of Images, (to
which the Council of Trent refers,) that it is grossly Idolatrous also.
1. BUT now as for the other Reason of these Tridentine Fathers, whereby they
would support their Determination in this point, Viz. the Authority of the
second Council of Nice held about the year 780, (to omit, that long before this
time the Church had become asymmetral, which yet is a very substantial
Consideration) I shall only return this brief answer. The God of Israel, which
is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, has given this express command to his
Church for ever, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, thou shall
not bow down to it, nor worship it. But the second Council of Nice says, Thou
may and shall bow down to to the Image of Christ, of the blessed Virgin, and
of the rest of the Saints. Now whether it be fit to believe and obey God, or
men, judge ye: I might add farther, men so silly and frivolous in the defense of
their Opinions, so false and fabulous in the Allegations of their Authorities
and the recital of miraculous Stories, as Chemnitius has proved at large in
his Examen of the Council of Trent.

2. I will give an Instance or two. Mat. 5. 15. No man lights a candle and
puts it under a bushel; therefore the Images of the Saints are to be placed
on the Altars, and Wax-candles lighted up before them, in due honor to them.
Again, Psalm 16. But to the Saints that are on the Earth: But the Saints are in
Heaven, say they, therefore their Images ought to be on the Earth, etc. As for
the Miracles done by Images, as their Speaking, the Healing of the sick, the
Revenging of the wrong done to them, the distilling of ro^id drops of balsame
to heal the wounded, sick or lame, their Recovering water into a dry Well, and
the like, it were too tedious to recite these Figments.

But that of the Image of the Virgin, to whom her Devotionist spoke when he
took leave of her, and was to take a long Journey, entreating her to look to
her Candle, which he had lighted up for her, till his return, I cannot conceal.
For the Story says, the same Candle was burning six months after, at the return
of her Devoto. An example of the most miraculous Prolonger that ever I met
withal before in all my days. Such an Image of the Virgin would save poor
Students a great deal in the expense of Candles, if the thing were but lawful
and feasible.

3. From these small hints a man may easily discover of what Authority this
second Council of Nice ought to be, though they had not concluded so
point blank against the Word of God. But because that Clause in this Paragraph
of the Council I have recited, Id quod Conciliorum, praesertim vero secundae
Nicaenae Synodi, etc. may as well aim at the determination of what these
Fathers mean by that debitus honor and reverentia which they declare to be due
to the Images of Christ and the Saints, as confirm their own Conclusion by the
Authority of that Nicene Council, we will take notice also what a kind of
Honor and Reverence to Images the Nicene Council did declare for, and in short
it is this;

That they are to be worshipped and adored and to be honored with Wax-candles,
and by the smoking of Incense or Perfumes, and the like. Which smells rankly
enough in all conscience of Idolatry, as Grotius himself upon the Decalogue
cannot but acknowledge. But this is not all. The Invocation of Saints, their
Mediation and propitiating God for us for adoring their Images, ^ealing of
Diseases, and other Aids and Helps, besides Ora pr^ nobis, are manifestly
involved in the Worship of these Images, according to that Nicene Council.

4. And truly, according to the Collections of Photius in Iustellus, one would
think that they meant the Cultus Latriae to the Image of Christ, they using the
word (...), as if that Worship which was done to the Image passed through to
Christ himself, which would not be suitable to him, if itwere not Divine
Worship. And where that word is not used, yet the sense makes hugely for it. As
in this Paragraph touching the second Council of Nice according to Photius;
(...).

This seventh Synod, says he, (that is to say, the second of Nice) with joint
suffrages has established and ratifj'd the worshipping of the Image of Christ,
for the honor and reverence of him that is expressed by it; this Worship and
Honor being done in such manner as when we approach the holy Symbols or Types
of our most holy and Divine Worship: ( for the word is (...).) For we do not
stop at them, nor restrain our Worship and Devotion to them, nor are we divided
toward heterogeneous and different Scopes or Objects; but by that Service and
worship of them that appears divided are we carried up devoutly and undividedly
unto the one and indivisible Deity. Whereby it is plainly declared, that that
very Worship which passes to the Deity is done toward the Image of Christ
first or jointly, as being one and the same undivided Worship in truth and
reality; as also that this Worship is that Worship which is called Latria, and
is due to the highest God only.

5. But that Religious Worship is done to the Images of all the Saints seems
implied in what comes afterward, where it is said, that this second Council of
Nice, (which Photius calls (...). That this Council has not only established
and appointed that the Image of Christ should be honored and worshipped, but
the holy Images of the Virgin Mary and of all the Saints, according to the
excellency and venerability of their Prototypes. For even by these are we
carried up into a certain unitive and conjunctive vision, and thereby are
vouchsafed that divine and supernatural con^^nction or contact with the highest
of all desirables, that is, God himself.

6. Can any thing more inflame the Souls of men with that mystical lust after
Idols then the Doctrines of this Nicene Synod? For as for the Image of Christ,
the same Devotion and Worship is done to that which is done to God himself. And
for the Images of the Virgin Mary and the rest of the Saints, though that
Worship is allotted them only that is proportionable to their Prototypes, yet
they are worshipped such a way as that thereby* while we adhere to their Images
or Statues, we are declared to be made fit for and to be vouchsafed a tactual
Union with God himself. What Philtrum more effectual to raise up that
Idolomania, that being mad and lovesick after Images and Idols, then this? What
can inrage their Affections more toward Idolatry, then to fancy that while
they worship Idols, and cling about dead Statues, that very individual act (and
therefore it cannot be too intense) is that wherewith they are united to, and
lie in the very Embraces of, the everliving and true God?

7. The sense of the Synod is, according to the representation of Photius, that
we worship and unite our selves with God as well in the worshipping the Images
of the Virgin and of other Saints, as in the worshipping of the Image of
Christ. So that all is Religious Worship, and consequently gross Idolatry, it
being done to Stocks and Stones and such like senseless Objects. For the drift
of all Idolatry is, when it is questioned, and craftily defended, that through
the Worship of Demons and Images they reach at the Worship of, and the joining
their Devotion to, the first and highest Godhead. Wherefore the Council of
Trent declaring with the second Council of Nice, that is to say, the blind
leading the blind, they have both fallen into this dreadful Pit of Idolatry.

CHAP. VIII.
Upon the first Paragraph.
TO this first Paragraph he has given his Answer already in what he has said to
the first Paragraph of the former Chapter, viz. Here the Doctor gives us a
learned Antithesis between the Commandment of God and Decree of this Council.
The like Rhetorical flourish he uses against the second Council of Nice, etc.
See my Reply to his Answer on that Paragraph. There is no need of any thing new
to be said.

His Answer to the second Paragraph.
To that about the weak reasonings of the Council, which he says I would gladly
father upon them, he pretends to think it a child of my own brain till I take
the pains to prove it is none of mine. Touching the Miracles there mentioned;
But whereas, says he, the Council recites some Miracles in favor of the due
honor given to the Images of Christ and his Saints, these he most profoundly
confutes by an unanswerable laughter. This is the main if not all to this
second Paragraph.

The Reply.
To the first I Reply, It is Chemnitius, not I, that fathers those subtle
reasonings upon the Fathers of the Nicene Council. And though I have not had
the time nor curiosity to examine the History of the Council my self so
thoroughly and exactly as to affirm of my own notice that this is the very
reasoning of the Nicene Fathers, yet this I will say for Chemnitius, that I
find him, so far as I can see, careful in the main of his account of things,
not omitting that of the seventh Action which my Adversary alleges so
triumphantly against Photius; Which we shall consider anon. As for that of
^salm 16. I am sure they bring it in impertinently enough. But can any thing be
more impertinent than that of Pope Adrian, who influenced the Council, in his
letter to Irene and her son Constantine, where pleading zealously for
Image Worship he urges these places of Scripture, Vultum tuum Domine requiram,
Psalm 26. Ad vultum tuum depre^abuntur omnes divites plebis, Psalm 44. And
again, Psalm 4. Signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui, etc. Thy face Lord
will I seek, Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us. Therefore
Images are to be erected and lights set up before them, as if the light of Gods
Countenance were to be reflected from these painted Statues, or his face to be
sought in looking up to graven Images which his Soul abhors. But such seems to
be the arguing of Pope Adrian to these two Princes. And as for the middle
Quotation, it is very modestly or very cunningly done of the Pope, that he did
not take a greater share of that verse, and say, In muneribus vultum tuum
deprecabuntur omnes divites plebis. But then the plot had been more easily
smelt out, that the Zeal for Images was in reference to the Oblations and gifts
brought to them. This taste may suffice to let the Reader understand what shre^d
Reasoners they were in that Council, when the Pope himself, who inspired all by
his influence, reasons at such a rate as he does.

Now to the second part I have nothing to Reply, but that I think it not so
commendable carriage for a man's self to laugh when he tells a story that is
ridiculous; and therefore it is a breach of Charity, at least of Civility, to
affirm that I laughed, where it was not good manners so to do; he not possibly
hearing me laugh at such a distance as he was removed from me when I writ this
Paragraph; which makes me believe that he himself could not but laugh at the
recital of such incredible stuff, and so measured my Corn by his own Bushel.

His Answer to the third Paragraph.
From laughing, says he, he immediately falls alowring, and the Reason is,
because this Council declares that it is lawful to burn Candels, Incense, and
Perfumes in honor of the Saints before their Images; which he in an angry mood
concludes to smell rankly of Idolatry, even by the Authority of Grotius himself
upon the Decalogue. This is all in Answer to this third Paragraph, saving his
falling foul upon Grotius.

The Reply.
It is not unworthy Observation of what a Scenical or Histrionical Genius this
Roman Doctor my Adversary is, that can raise Comedies and Tragedies thus upon
such slight occasions; I must confess I am sorry for the Idolatries of their
Church, but that I did either laugh before or lowre now is only the Poetical
fancy of my Antagonist so to imagine. But that the Council of Nice does
appoint the burning of Incense and the lighting of Candles before the Images, I
shall prove in its proper place. In the mean time I would have my Reader take
notice that [even by the Authority of Grotius himself upon the Decalogue] are
the words of my Adversary not mine, which are these, As Grotius himself upon
the Decalogue cannot but acknowledge. I give little to the Authority of Grotius
in himself, but to the clearness of the Case, that such an one that did so
glaver and fawn upon the Church of Rome and endeavor to gratify her every
where to the utmost he could, yet was ashamed to venture to gratify her in a
point so clearly against her as this, and therefore could not but acknowledge,
though against his will, that the burning of Incense before Images is Idolatry.

His Answer to the fourth Paragraph.
Instead of Answering to that Quotation of Photius which plainly implies that
the Council of Nice has allotted the Worship of Latria to the Image of Christ,
he according to his usual Art would make the World believe, that I clash again
here with our Church of England, out of my own positions or Conclusions. But
the thing he here repeats is Crambe bis cocta, heartless and sapless stuff, as
indeed I proved it to be at first. The sum of his Answer is this, That when the
Sons of the Church of England bow their knees at the Eucharist, which to them
is a Symbolical presence, whether they terminate this act of Worship on the
Eucharist or Symbolical presence, or profess it does (...), pass on to Christ,
in the first they will be absolute Idolaters by the twentieth Conclusion of my
second Chapter, in the second they will be obnoxious to what I urge here
against the Nicene Council* One would think they meant the Cultus Latriae, etc.
This, I say, is all be seems to be concerned in upon this Paragraph. For his
exception against Photius his Authority follows in the next.

The Reply.
But to this, such as it is, I Answer, or rather say that I have Answered it
already upon his first proposing of it; where I deny that we of the Church of
England take the Bread or Wine to be any symbolical Presence to be bowed to,
but mere symbolical Instruments of commemorating the Passion and Crucifixion of
our Savior, mere holy Elements consecrated to that use. And that we do not
kneel to them, or at their approach, but are at our Devotions before in a
posture of Prayer to God and Christ, which these Symbols when they are given to
us find us aforehand in. So that this is a mere Cavil against the Sons of the
Church of England and against my self, devised and repeated by my Adversary to
fill up the defect of better Answerings.

His Answer jointly to the fourth, fifth, and sixth Paragraphs:
His next pretense is to prove positively by the Testimony of Photius that this
Council gives the worship of Latria to the Image of Christ. But the Doctor,
says he, had played his Master-prize, if he had given all this rabble (he means
both the Quotations) in the Councils own words, but instead of that he feeds
upon Reversions, at the second hand takes his Quotations from Photius (a Person
of as much credit as himself) and makes Photius the Paraphrast and Interpreter
of the Councils meaning. But what if the Council say no such thing? Nay what if
the Council deliver the quite contrary doctrine? How blank then will the
Doctors charge look, upon the discovery of such Disingenuity? And truly had the
Doctor but taken so much as a cursory survey of Catholic Authors on this
Subject, he might have found them frequently and truly quoting this very
Council, Act. 7. to prove that the Image of Christ is not to be honored with
the Worship of Latria: but that such honor and reverence is due to Images in
general, as to the Books of the Gospel and the holy utensils of the Altar. This
is all, touching this Chapter, the rest is raillery and humor, which I leave
this Roman Doctor to enjoy himself in. But by the by in the next ^e pretends
that I have omitted the Translation of (...) in my second Quotation of Photius
in this; which therefore I shall touch upon.

The Reply.
That these Quotations out of Photius prove that which I produce them for, my
Adversary cannot deny, supposing the Authority of Photius were Authentic;
Which he vilifies upon no grounds, nor has any that I know so to do. He was the
Patriarch of Constantinople, the Chief or Head of the Greek Church where this
Council was held, And was Patriarch not long after this Council. And his place
and dignity in the Church, and very Genius you may be sure would make him very
careful to understand a Council of so great importance as this: And for his
Parts and Learning, he was extraordinarily famous. Concerning which I cannot
here abstain from interserting that high Elogium which that Learned Prelate of
our Church Dr. Creighton gives him in his Preface to the History of the
Florentine Council. Illustri Photio Doctiorem in omni genere literarum,
prudentiorem in rebus gerendis, omnis Iuris Divini humanique peritiorem nunquam
quovis solio vel Romae Papam vel Constantinopoli Patriarcham sedisse puto. And
again in the same Preface, Aequalem Photio nulla aetas dedit, nulla dabit. And
this Photius it is that describes the seven general Councils in his Epistle to
Michael Prince of Bulgary, in none of which, for his own Credit, can a man
think he would willingly be taken Tripping, or that he would say any thing
contrary to the sense of this Council of Nice, which the Bishop of Rome had
assuredly a Copy of as well as himself, and would have been ready to discover
him if he falsified in any thing; especially these two Sees being in
Competition for that Principality of Bulgaria to whether Church it should be
adjoined, they being but lately Converted to Christianity. And therefore in all
likelihood Photius would take special heed how he spoke any thing contrary to
the sense of this Council. Nay, what will you say, if I prove that Photius has
spoke exquisitely according to the sense of the Pope of Rome himself, (I mean
of Pope Adrian who influenced this Council of Nice) as also of the Council it
self; who will be blank then? or who ought to blush for his Temerity and
Disingenuity?

Let us therefore take notice what Pope Adrian says in his letter to Irene the
Empress and her son Constantine. That the Worship or honor done to Images does
(...) or pass to the Prototype, such passages as these in Pope Adrians letter
do plainly signify. In the whole Christian World, says he, the holy Images are
honored or worshipped by Believers, ut per visibilem vultum ad invisibilem
Divinitatis Majestatem men's nostra spirituali affect^ rapiatur, which he speaks
more especially in respect of the Image of Christ. And a page or two after,
Creatura non terrenam speciem honorat sed coelestem ipsam figuram reveretur.
And in the page following, Non enim lignum adoratur sed id quod in ligno
conspicitur and memoratur, honorificatur. And a little above he quotes Ambrose
to Gratian the Emperor, (...). What, says he, out of Ambrose, when we adore the
Divinity and the flesh of Christ do we divide him? God forbid. And then
presently out of Ep^phanius Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, (...), i. e. If a
King have his Statue or Image, is he presently two Kings? no by no means: The
King is still one together with his Image. And now we have heard Pope Adrian
Patriarch of Rome, let us hear what Tarrhasius Patriarch or Pope of
Consta^inople speaks, who presided in this Nicene Council, and does fully and
plainly agree to this letter of Adrian writ to Irene and the Emperor her son,
he and the whole Synod professing, that they ought to receive Images, (...),
etc. and the said Images made to Christ who is God, to our immaculate Lady the
holy Mother of God, to the holy Angels and Saints to adore and Worship them
with respective affection, in the mean time plainly directing or devoting their
faith and Latria to the only one true God, (...).

All which Quotations considered together plainly intimate what Photius has
declared in that which I have produced of him. That there is a (...) of that
Worship which is done to Images, and that it passes to the Prototype; which
therefore must be such as is worthy the Prototype, and therefore Latria in the
Image of Christ. This Diabasis or passing of the Worship to the Prototype is so
manifestly and so principally aimed at, that in some of these sentences I have
recited, they deny any honor at all done to the Image, declaring that the
Terres^rial form is not honored but the Celestial, nor the wooden Image, but
that which is signified by i^; and yet that the Image and Person is one, to
make sure of but one Mode of Worship which is due to the Person or Prototype,
and that there is no dividing of the Worship more than of the Person: which is
exactly according to Photius his description of this Council, Pa^^graph 4. Nor
are we divided toward heterogeneous and different scopes and Objects, but by
that service and Worship of them that appear divided are we carried up devoutly
and undividedly unto the one and indivisible Deity, to the only one true God,
as the Council and Tarrhasius concludes in this 2. Act. Compare with this also
the latter Clause of the Quotation out of Photius in the fifth Paragraph. So
that hitherto Photius has exquisitely represented the mind of the Council.

Let us now hear what is said Act. 7. to which my Antagonist appeals. The last
definitive sentence therefore of the Council as much as respects our business
is this. (...). that is, We define with all care and earnestness that holy and
adorable Images be set up, and that they be honored with salutations and
adorations, but not in such sort as according to the tenor of our Faith is the
true Latria which belongs only to the Divine Nature; but in such sort as we
salute and Worship the Figure of the precious and vivificative Cross, the
sacred Books of the Gospel and other holy Things. And that there be added also
Lights and Incense for the honoring of them, as was the Pious custom of the
ancients. For the honor of the Image passes to the Prototype, and he that
worships the Image worships the person which the Image does express.

This is in full as much as respects the point in hand out of Act. 7. of this
Nicene Council according to the Greek Text as Severinus Binius has set it out:
And the word (...) is plainly used here. According to which and to those
passages in Pope Adrians letter, and the Consent thereto of Tarrhasius and the
whole Council, Act 2. it is manifest that Photius has given an account of this
Council, terminating no Worship in the Images no^ any thing used in our
Religion, but only in God himself, or in the Saints, or rather not in the
Saints neither, but (...), as both the Council and Photius faithfully following
the footsteps of the Council do declare. But now in this last definition of the
Council, to say they give to no Image that Worship which is Latria, and then
afterward to say, The Worship done to the Image does (...) pass to the
Prototype, is plainly to say they give Worship not Divine to Christ, and so
declare he is not God; which makes me hugely suspect, that (...) till we come
to (...) has been foisted in since Photius his time. But Photius living not
long after the Council, perused uncorrupted copies thereof; And truly that
this is foisted in it is an argument to me, in that the sense seems so lame and
bungling, as if the party knew not how to express his mind in the language. For
it should be naturally, either (...), etc. Not giving them, contrary to the
tenor of our faith, the true Latria which belongs only to God, or else,
(...), etc. Not giving them the true Latria, which, according to the tenor of
our faith belongs only to God. For the definition of what is the true Latria
is not so properly any Article of our Faith and Religion, but that the true
Latria belongs to God alone.

And therefore the first reading was in all likelihood thus; That holy and
adorable Images be set up, and that they be honored with salutations and
adorations in such sort as we salute and Worship the figure of the blessed and
vivificative Cross, the sacred Books of the Gospel, and other holy Things. And
that there be added also Lights and Incense, etc. For the honor of the Image
passes to the Prototype; Where we might take notice of the unskilful blunder
and gross confusion in the Latin Translation which is caused by not taking
notice, that [ we define] is to be repeated (...), before [And that there be
added also Lights and Incense, etc.] But one thing more especially is to be
observed here, That the Council does look at the burning of Incense and setting
up Lights as an Act of Latria if before the Image of Christ, and as a Religious
Worship be they before what Image they will, for immediately after [ And that
there be added also Lights and Incense, etc.] there follows, For the Honor
done to the Image passes to the Prototype.

But I will add unto all this, that suppose the foisted words which we have
excluded should be retained and allowed of, yet if we improve that Epither of
Latria to what it seems to aim at, it will not at all justle with Photius his
sense nor other parts of the Council. For (...) true Latria, here naturally
signifies that Latria which is Terminative on the Object, which can belong to
no other but God. And therefore is counterdistinct to that Latria which does
(...) and is Transitive, which cannot belong to God, because there is none
greater nor higher than He to whom it should pass: whence it is plain that the
Transitive Latria is not the true Latria as being incompetible to God the
highest Object. So that Cultus Latriae transitivus or respectivus, that is,
which hits so on one Object, that it tends to an higher and better, is allowed
by the Council to the Image of Christ, though not Cultus Latriae terminativus.
Which Bin^us also plainly acknowledges in his Notes on this seventh Act of the
Council. Which is the very sense of Photius; And which this foisted sentence at
least does not obscure. but does rather imply, That this to the Image of Christ
is Latria too, but not vera Latria, viz. Terminative but Transitive only;
which is the Thing, as I said, which Photius asserts.

And now for that passage in the second Quotation (...), the genuine sense of
it will be hence easily understood. For Latria belonging to the Image of Christ
according to the sense of the Council and of Photius, and to Christ himself
according to the sense of all Orthodox Christians, the Analogy will be thus.
Let Christ himself be 24. and the Worship due to him, viz. Latria, 18. Let the
Virgin Mary be 8. every Saint else 4. Now (...) we necessarily conclude, as 24
to 8, so 18 to 6. As 24 to 4, so 18 to 3, that is to say, As Christ is to Mary,
so is Latria to Hyperdulia, and as Christ is to any other Saint, so is Latria
to Dulia. But according to the Council and Photius who give Latria also to the
Image of Christ; Then as Christ is to Mary, so is the Worship of the Image of
Christ which is Latria, to the Worship of the Image of Mary, which must
therefore be Hyperdulia. And as Christ or Mary to another Saint, so the Worship
of the Image of Christ or Mary to the Worship of the Image of another Saint.
The former therefore being Latria and Hyperdulia, this last must be Dulia: The
Worship of the Image of the Saint must be Dulia, as well as of its Prototype:
Which is the very same that Alexander Halts, Thomas Aquinas and Bonaventure
those ancient Schoolmen, who writ above 400 years ago, do affirm, That the
same honor is done to the Image that is done to the Prototype. That the Images
have according to the excellency and venerability of their Prototypes, some
Latria, some Hyperdulia, and some Dulia. And thus I think I have proved my
Translation of that passage, (...), etc. to be very right and full, which he
says is the only material word in that Citation, page 86. l. 13. and have made
it manifest, that the very Analogy Photius aims at concludes the sameness of
honor to Image and Prototype. And which is my main drift of all, I have
sufficiently evinced that Photius has given the most natural and genuine sense
of this Nicene Council. According to which my Adversary even in his own conceit
and opinion cannot but conclude the Church of Rome, which refers her self to
this Council, to be gross Idolaters. And who, I pray you, ought to be blank now?

Upon the seventh Paragraph.
That my Antagonist Answers nothing to this seventh and last Paragraphs, must
be either because he thinks he has Answered it already by denying that sense of
the Council which Photius represents, or because he thinks it unanswerable. If
the former, I have made good that Photius his sense of the Council is the most
genuine and natural. If the latter, we have the day in this Point without any
more to do.

Nor can I imagine what may occur that may seem at all to lessen the certainty
of that sense of Photius, unless that passage of Constan^ine Bishop of
Constantia, Act 4. where giving his vote for the worshipping of Images (as if
forsooth there was any fear that he should give that Worship to the Image of a
Saint that is due to the holy Trinity) he is made to reserve (...) (by which is
understood (...), to the super-essential and zoarchical Trinity. The former
part of which is so without analogy, and the latter so turgid and
preterscriptural, and this caution so solitary, not one of the Bishops making
any such caution but himself; and lastly, so superfluous in respect of what
goes before in the form of profession approved by them, (Where they declare
they do not Worship (...), the painted wood or stone, but that through these by
the eyes of their mind they are carried to the Prototypes, according to that of
Basil the great, (...); which is a sign they pretend not one Worship for the
Image and another for the Prototype, but that it is one Worship though the
Image to the Prototype,) that I must confess to me it makes Bishop Constan^ines
Caution look very odly and unlikely to be his own, but of some heedless and
unskilful foister in of stuff to serve a sense against the general current of
the Council, or to obscure the genuine tenor of it. Which yet, if (...) be
understood of the (...), as I have noted and explained it above, though this
caution were in, it would not be repugnant to any part of the Council. And
besides, what is the Authority of one single Bishop in so great a number of
Bishops, to weaken the general Current of the sense of the Council? So sure and
certain every way is the meaning that Photius has represented of the Council.

CHAP. IX.
The meaning of the Doctrine of the Council of Trent touching the Worship of
Images more determinately illustrated from the general Practice of the Roman
Church and Suffrage of their Popes, whereby it is deprehended to be still more
coursly and Paganically Idolatrous.
1. BUT it may be it may give more satisfaction to some, to know what is the
Church of Rome's own sense of this Honor debitus she declares ought to be done
to the Images of Christ and the Saints. Putting off a man's Hat, and lying
prostrate before them, the Council does not stick to instance in by the bye.
But because the Council calls this neither Dulia, nor Hyperdulia, not Latria,
some will, it may be, be ready to shuffle it off with the interpretation of but
a civil Complement to these Images or their Prototypes.

But since the Council of Trent has declared nothing farther, what can be a
more certain Interpreter of their meaning then the continued Custom of their
Church, and the sense of such Doctors as have been even sainted for their
Eminency, as ^homas Aquinas and Bonaventure, who both of them have declared
that the Image of Christ is to be worshipped with the Worship of Latria, the
same that Christ is worshipped with?

2. And Azorius the Jesuit affirms that it is the constant Opinion of the
Theologers, (their own, he means, you may be sure,) that the ^mage is to be
honored and worshipped with the same Honor and Worship that he is whose Image
it is. Which is not unlike that in the Council of Nice,, (...), in the
foregoing Citation. But that they are all capable of religious Worship, the
Council of Trent it self (as well as Bellarmine and others, if* not all the
Theologers of that Church,) does plainly acknowledge, in that it determines for
their Invocation, which is competible to no invisible Power but the Godhead it
self. Wherefore it is manifest that their Images are worshipped with religious
Worship also.

3. But we shall make still the clearer judgment thereof, if we consider the
Consecration of these Images which the Council of Trent declares are to be
worshipped. For the Con^ecration and Worshipping of them makes them perfectly
as the Idol-Gods of the Heathen, as Octavius jearingly speaks of the Heathen
Gods, that is, their Idols, in. Minucius Felix: Ecce funditur, fabricatur,
scalpitur; nondum Deus est. Ecce plumbatur, constr^itur, erigitur; nec adhuc
Deus est. Ecce ornatur, consecratur, oratur; tunc postremo Deus est. Behold it
is clothed or adorned, it is consecrated and prayed unto; then at length it
becomes a God. And if this will do it, the Church of Rome's Images will prove
as good Idol-Gods as any of them all.

4. Chemnitius recites some forms of Consecration: I will cull out only those
of the Images of the blessed Virgin and of S. John. That of the Virgin is this:
anctify, O God, this Image of the blessed Virgin, that it may aid and keep safe
thy faithful people; that Thundrings and Lightnings, if they grow too terrible
and dangerous, may be quickly expelled thereby: and that the Inundations of
Rain, the Commotions of civil War, and Devastations by Pagans, may be
suppressed by the presence thereof. Which is most effectual to make all men
come and hurcle under the protection of the Virgin's Image in such dangers, as
under the Wings of the great Jehovah. This is hugely like the consecrated
Telesms of the Pagans.

But let us hear the form of the Consecration of the Image of S. John also:
Grant, O God, that all those that behold this Image with Reverence, and pray
before it, may be he ard in whatsoever Streights they are. Let this Image be
the holy Expulsion of Devils, the conciliating the presence and assistence of
Angels, the protection of the faithful; and that the Intercession of this
Saint may be very powerful and effectual in this place. What a mighty Charm
is this to make the Souls of the feeble to hang about these Images as if their
Presence were the Divine Protection it self?

5. These Chemnitius recites out of the Pontifical he perused. But the Rituale
Romanum, published first by the command of Paulus Quintus, and again authorized
by Pope urban the eighth, will do our business sufficiently, they being both
since the Council of ^rent; and therefore by the Exposition of these Popes we
may know what that debitus Honor is which the Tridentine Fathers mention as
that which ought to be done to the Images of Christ, the blessed Virgin or any
other Saint. For the Consecration of their Images runs thus:

Grant, O God, that whosoever before this Image shall diligently and humbly
upon his knees worship and honor thy only begotten Son, or the blessed Virgin,
( according as the Image is that is a-consecrating) or this glorious Apostle,
or Martyr, or Confessor, or Virgin, that he may obtain by his or her Merits and
Intercession Grace in this present life and eternal Glory hereafter.

So that the Virgin and other Saints are fellow-distributers of Grace and Glory
with Christ himse^f to their Supplicants before their Images, and that upon
their own Merits, and for this Service done to them in kneeling and pouring out
their Prayers before their Statues or symbolicall Presences. What greater
Blasphemy and Idolatry can be imagined? Ornatur, consecratur, oratur, tunc
postremo fit D^us: that is to say, The Image is prayed before, but the Demon
prayed unto. There is no more in Paganism it self. And yet by the Pope's own
Exposition this is the debitus Honor that is owing to the Images of the Saints.
Consider the latter end of the last Conclusion of the first Chapter, and the
forms of Invocation in the fourth and fifth, as also the eighteenth Conclusion
of the second Chapter.

6. This is all plain and express according to the ^uthority of their Church.
And that, besides their Adoration and Praying before these Images, (which,
considering the postures of the Supplicant and the Image, is as much praying to
them as the Heathens will acknowledge done to theirs,) there are also
Wax-candles burning before them, and the Oblation of Incense or perfuming them,
Feasts likewise, Temples and Altars to the same Saints, and the carrying them
in Procession, (which was the guize of ancient Paganism,) is so well known,
that I need not quote any Authors. And that this is the practice of the Roman
Church jointly and coherently with their Worship of Images, is manifest to all
the world; and that therefore it is as arrant Idolatry as Paganism it self, and
consequently real Idolatry by the third Conclusion of the first Chapter. And
lastly, it is to be noted that the Council of Trent, naming the debitus Honor
of Images, and not excepting these in known practice then among them, must of
all reason be conceived to mean these very Circumstances, as Paganicall as they
are, of the Worshipping of them.

7. And the rather, because they do pretend to rectify some Miscarriages in the
business of Images, as any unlawful or dishonest Gain by them, all lascivious
Dresses of the Images, all Drunkenness and disorderly Riot at their Feasts, and
the like. Which methinks is done with as grave caution against Idolatry, as if
they had decreed that all the Whores in Rome should forbear to go in so garish
apparel, that they should be sure to wear clean linen, to be favorable to
poor younger Brothers in the price of a night's Lodging, that they keep
themselves wholesome and clean from the Pox, and the like; which were not the
putting down, but the establishing, of whores and Whoredom in the Papacy. And
so are these Cautions touching Images. Exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis.
Wherefore these Circumstances of Idolatry being not named by the Tridentine
Fathers in their Exception, they are thereby ratified. Which yet are so like
the old Pagan Idolatry, that Ludovicus Vives, one of their own Church, could
not abstain from professing, non ^osse aliquid discrimen ostendi, nisi quod
nomina tanium and titulos mutaverint; That only the Names and Objects were
changed, not the Modes, of the ancient Idolatry of the Heathen.

8. If the Council of Trent would have really and in good earnest rectified
their Church in the point of Images, they should have followed the Example of
that skillful and famous Physician Dr. Butler, they should have imi^ated his
Prescript touching the safe eating of a Pear, viz. That we should first pare it
very carefully, and then be sure to cut out or scoup out all the Coar of it,
and after that fill the hollow with Salt, and when this is done, cast it
forthwith into the Kennell. This is the safest way of dealing with those things
that have any intrinsic Poison or Danger in them. See those most wholesome and
judicious Homilies of our Church of England against the Peril of Idolatry.

9. And thus much shall serve for the setting out the Idolatry of the Church of
Rome so far as it seems to be allowed by the Church it self. But for those more
gross Extravagancies, which, though they have connived at, yet they would be
loath to own upon public Authority, I will neither weary my self nor my Reader
by meddling with them. Such as the making the Images to sweat, their Eyes to
move, the making them to smile, or lowre and look sad, to feel heavy or light,
or the like. Which does necessarily tend to the engaging of the people to
believe and have assiance in the very Images themselves, as those Consecrations
also imply which I cited out of Ch^mnit^us, and which that Rhyme seems to
acknowledge which they say to that Face of Christ which they call the Veronica.
Which Rhyme runs thus: Nos perduc ad patriam, felix o Figura,
Ad videndam Faciem quae est Christi pura.
Nos ab omni macula purga Vitiorum,
Et tandem consortio junge Beatorum.
And with such like blind Devotion do they likewise speak to the Cross: O
Crux, spes unica,
Hoc Passionis tempore
A^ge piis Iustitiam,
Re^sque dona Veniam.
This must sound very wildly and extravagantly to any sensible ear. And yet the
invoking any Saint before his Image for Aid and Succor, (the Image bearing the
name and representation of the Saint,) with Eyes and Hands lift up to it, is as
arrant talking with a senseless Stock or a Stone as this, See Chapter (...) Conclus.
10.
and as gross a piece of Idolatry, though approved of by the Authority of the
Roman Church. But I intended to break off before.

CHAP. IX.
His Answer to the first Paragraph.
That the image of Christ, says he, may be worshipped ^ith ^^e ^orship of
^atria (though expres^y contrary to the Doctrine of the second Council of Nice)
is the commonly supposed Opinion of St. Thomas and St. ^onaventure. But there
is a great difference betwixt, is to be wors^ipped, and may be worshipped. And
besides it is hard to say, what the meaning of these two Doctors is, they wind
about so, and enter into such nice distinctions, etc.

The Reply.
AS to the being contrary to the Council of Nice, I Reply, That I have already
shown that it is most consonant thereto, both from Photius and the Council it
self. And therefore Thomas and Bonaventure being such very ancient Schoolmen,
about 400 years ago, and therefore much nearer to the Nicene Council, it is
most likely they followed the air of that Council and of Pope Adrians letter to
Irene and Constantine approved by that Council. And it is incredible that Pope
Adrians letter and the sense of the Council concerning so great a point, and ^f
so high importance, should be unknown to the Church of Rome, especially the
more learned of them, for above four hundred years together. Touching [ May be
worshipped] and [ Is to be worshipped] I demand whether any undue Worship may
be given to the Image of Christ. If therefore that Worship which may be given
is due and fit, it is plain it is to be given or ought to be given; which
questionless was the Opinion of both Thomas and Bonaventure. And lastly, As to
the winding into nice distinctions, what distinctions are here but only of
Terminative, and Relative, or Transitive? which are intelligible enough, viz
That Latria cannot be given to the Image of Christ Terminative but only
Relative, or Transitive, It must (...), pass to the Prototype as the Council of
Nice speaks. That is to say, We must do Divine honor to the Image of Christ
that Christ ultimately may be honored thereby, which is plainly to commit
gross Idolatry to the glory and honor of Christ. And therefore my Adversary
durst name none of these nice distinctions, not because they are above the
capacity of the Vulgar, but because even a Vulgar capacity can easily observe
the folly and futility of them.

His Answer to the second Paragraph.
First, he says, That my alleging of Azorius is a proofless Accusation or
Calumny against them. I suppose, because ^ cite not the very place and words.
Secondly, Touching the Doctrine z^rius witnesses of, he says it is so far from
being the constant Opinion of their Theologers, that it is now generally
rejected by them, unless limited by that qualifying distinction of (...); which
he says I have forgot or purposely omitted in my long Translation out of
Photius, though the only material word in the whole citation. For he contends
that the Worship due to the Image and the Prototype, is Analogically though not
Univocally the same; which he would have intimated in that passage of Photius,
(...), and that therefore I have purpose^y omitted the Translation of it. He
streams out a great deal further in this second part of his Answer to this
Paragraph, but what ever is material I shall have an eye to in my Reply.

The Reply.
To that of Azorius, I have no more to say than thus, to prove it no Calumny;
That his words Instit. Moral. part 1. lib. 9. cap. 6 are these, Constans est
Theologorum sententia imaginem eodem honor and cultu honorari and coli quo
colitur id cujus est Imago. What can be more express? Touching the doctrine it
self, I note from the very intimatition of my Adversary, that he cannot well
deny, but that it has been the general doctrine of their Church though now it
is not, they being Apostates, as it seems, from the Opinion of Pope Adrian, the
steers-man of that Council of Nice, whom yet they now make a Fallible Mortal,
renouncing his Opinion and the Councils, as I think I have plainly proved
above. And then to what he says, Unless limited by that qualifying distinction
of (...), which I purposely omitted in Translating of Photius. First, I say, I
did not omit the Translating of it; For I render (...), thus, According to the
excellency of the Prototypes, [according] here being the same that pro ratione,
and that the same that (...). But, not only notwithstanding this passage, but
from this very passage have I demonstrated, according to the mind of Photius
and the Council, that one and the same Worship, even univocally the same, is to
be given to the Image and the Prototype. Of such confessed Idolatry has their.
Church been found guilty of till of late, even according to my Adversaries
Concession.

But now, Secondly, with my Adversary to say, They are only Analogically the
same, is a phrase of uncertain signification, whether it is to be understood
Logically or Geometrically. If Logically, it is as much as to say, That the
Worship to the Image and the Prototype agree in one immediate Genus Analogum.
As in those words that I suspected foisted into the Council, there is mention
of (...), by which suppose were meant the highest and most principal Latria,
which is excepted there as undue, suppose to the Image of Christ; but that
there may be some other Latria that is. Wherefore the Genus Analogum that is
immediate to these two Latria's, is a Latria common to them both, and the two
Latriae under it, the one to Christ, the other to his Image, are the species of
this Genus. And so in like manner of Hyperdulia to the blessed Virgin and of
Dulia to the rest of the Saints, these words used in respect of their Images
and of themselves must be the species of those common genera, Hyperdulia and
Dulia. But according to the Rudiments of Logic the species of a Genus Analogum
do really, though one dependently of the other and less principally, partake of
the common nature of the Genus; which being either Latria, Hyperdulia, or
Dulia, and all these Religious Worship, it is manifest Religious Worship is
given to all the Images.

But now if we understand that the Worship done to the Image and the Prototype
is. Analogically the same in a Geometrical sense, we are first to take notice,
that Analogy in Geometry requires four terms; as, in A, B:: B, C. or A, B:: C,
D. And therefore the four Terms in this Case, will be, Christ, the Worship of
Christ, Christ's Image, the Worship of Christ's ^mage: As Christ to the Worship
of Christ, so Christ's Image to the Worship of Christ's Image. Now if you will
say, The Worship of Christ and the Worship of Christ's Image is one and the same
Term in this Analogy, you ipso facto declare, that, seeing the Worship of
Christ is Latria prope^ly so called, the Worship of Christ's Image is so also.
You see therefore how gross a thing it is to say the Terms are Analogically
the same in this Geometrical way, it implying also a Parity betwixt the Image
of Christ and Christ himself. And the same inconvenience will recu^ though you
take them alternately: As Christ to Christ's Image, so the Worship of Christ to
the Worship of Christ's Image. Here again if the Worship of Christ's Image and
the Worship of Christ be the same, it will follow that there is a Parity
betwixt Christ and his Image, which is Impossible. But you will say, the
Worship of Christ, and the Worship of Christ's Image is Analogically the same,
That Is the thing you mean. But you seem not to know what you mean your selves:
If you mean in that Logical sense above, you have your Answer already; If you
mean in a Geometrical or Arithmetical sense, if I should use your freedom of
speech elsewhere, I might say more than that it is not sense. For the Terms
including a proportion are not called Analogically the same, but the
proportions included betwixt each two Terms, which make up the four Terms
proportional, are rightly said to be the same; As in 6 to 3, and 4 to 2, the
proportion betwixt 6 and 3 is the same proportion that betwixt 4 and 2; but
neither 6 and 3 nor 4 and 2 are Analogically the same. Therefore nothing with
any sense can be said this Geometrical way unless this, That there is the same
proportion betwixt the Worship of Christ and the Worship of his Image, that
there is betwixt Christ and Christ's Image. But this is far from saying the
Worship of Christ and the Worship of his Image is Analogically the same;
there being no sameness of Terms including proportions in these Cases, unless
the Terms be equal, as in 10, 10:: 5, 5* or 10, 5:: 10, 5. But thus will the
Image of Christ have Latria due to it as well as Christ himself. But such muddy
and confounded Doctrines must needs be the mothers of confounded Notions and
distinctions. But supposing, As Christ to his Image (which must be the ground
of proportion betwixt the two Worships of Christ and Christ's Image) so the
Worship of Christ is to the Worship of Christ's Image; the Image of Christ
beingin a most absolute sense infinitely inferior to Christ himself, what kind
or share of Worship that is to terminate on his Image, can be imagined so mean,
but it will be really too much? and therefore the fittest proportion will be
none at all. And how will lighting up Candles and burning Incense before
Christ's Image, which is plainly Religious Worship, yea Sacrifice and therefore
Latria, as I have proved above, and yet enjoined by this Council of Nice, bear
so little proportion to the Worship of Christ himself, as his Image does to
him, which is infinitely inferior?

Things therefore succeed so ill this Arithmetical way that I half fancy my
Antagonist to affect the Logical, though I must confess I know not which he
would be at, he is so off and on; which made me show the unsuccesfulness of
both. But let the Reader judge of his words, page 87. As the Man and the
painted Man are Analogically the same, so the honor done to the painted Man
and the Man himself, are not univo^ally but Analogically the same; which he
applies to Images and Prototypes. By saying not Univocally but Analogically the
same, (though a few lines before he expresses himself in a Geometrical way) he
seems to make a Man and a painted Man two species under one Genus Analogum,
whenas a Man and a painted Man are terms equivocal; As if Thomas and
Bonaventure when they declared the Worship given to the Image and the Prototype
to be the same, meant equivocally the same! What is all this but Tergiversation
and Equivocation? No question therefor but Thomas and Bonaventure meant as
Photius, and Photius as the Nicene Council, and the Nicene Council as Pope
Adrian. And that Religious Worship is meant to Images in their worshipping
them, is plain from that Clause; (...). That besides Salutation and Adoration,
they were to add the setting up Lights and burning of Incense in honor to
them. For the honor done to the Image passes to the Prototype. Now as I above
noted, burning of Incense is a Sacrifice, and setting up Lights was a piece of
Religious service in the Pagan Religion to their Demons and a kind of
Oblation, and it is here plainly expressed to be done in honor to the Images,
out of all which it is apparent that it is Religious Worship. And then, in that
it is said (...), to pass to the Prototype, that is a further Confirmation
thereof, and intimation that it is that very Worship that is competible to the
Prototype; whether Christ, the blessed Virgin, or any other Saint, to all whom
Invocation is expressly competible according to the Council of Trent it self;
which yet is comperible to no invisible Power, but the very God^ead. But Pope
Adrian in his Letter to Irene and Constantine says expressly, that Images and
their Prototypes are looked upon but as one, and therefore their Worship bu^ as
one; not one to the Image the other to the Prototype, (accordingly as Photius
has faithfully declared the sense of the Council) but one Religious Worship
passing through the Image to the Prototype: As those that should Worship the
Moon through a glass window with the picture of the Moon in it. I do not at all
doubt but this was the genuine and true sense and air of that second Council of
Nice.

And therefore my Antagonist must give me leave to give credit to Azorius,
(who, by the by, does also declare, that it is the sense also of the Council of
Nice and of Trent) when he tells us this is the constant Opinion of their
Theologers, especially the more ancient Schoolmen, as Alexander Hales, Thomas
Aquinas, Bonaventure, etc. as keeping to the right sense of Pope Adrian and
this seventh general Council called on purpose to decide this matter of Images.
And if you have changed of late from this Rule, it is but a concession how
grossly you were lapsed into Idolatry before. Nor are you yet a jot mended, by
saying it is Analogically the same Worship, it still remaining Religious
Worship terminated in the Images t^emselves; which is a gross blot, and makes
the matter worse than before. But to make the Worship equivocally the same, is
such an equivocating quibble to put on these two Saints of Rome, St. Thomas,
and St. Bonaventure, that all the honor done to their Images will not
recompense this injury done to their Memory.

And thus I have used my Christian liberty, which my Adversary so courteously
allows me, in impugning Gabriel Biel, and whosoever else do corrupt the
genuine sense of Thomas Aquinas, and Bonaventure, with such pitiful glosses.
And whereas he says the Council of Trent never mentions any such Worship of
Latria due to the Image of Christ; I Answer, it mentions the Council of Nice,
and refers to the sentence of that Council, which assuredly was the same that
Azorius says is the constant Tenet of Theologers. And thus consequentially at
least does the Council of Trent declare for Latria to the Image of Christ.
Besides, as I have noted; Azorius is of Opinion that the Council of Trent of it
self is of this judgment. But of this enough, Not has he any thing else on
this second Paragraph which may not easily be Answered from what is said
already.

His Answer to the third Paragraph.
Here is a Calumny, says he, of the first Magnitude, most uncharitably
implying that the Roman Church prays to Images as the Heathen did to their
Idol-Gods. The charge is so gross that no person but one remove from a fool can
either believe the Doctor, or think he believes himself.

The Reply.
Truly I think there were very few among the Pagans that were so silly and
unwise, as to take the very wood and stone they prayed to for a God, but for
the Image of that God they prayed to, toward which they doing their devotions
hoped to be heard. There might be some so sottish amongst them, as I have heard
a story long since of an old woman amongst you, who having done her devotions
to the Image of the Virgin, and being asked by one that stood by, what Lady she
prayed to, to her in the Church, or to her in Heaven; what talk you to me, says
she, of our Lady in Heaven? I pray to this Lady before my eyes. I will not deny
but there may have been such sottish old wives amongst the Pagans too; But
assuredly for the most pa^^ neither you nor they profess to pray to the very
Image of wood or stone, but to the Prototype it is consecrated to. And now say,
whether this Calumnv of the first magnitude has not melted into a liquid Truth:
There is no praying to the Image terminatively but to the Prototype before the
Image, in either the Pagan, or Pagano-Christian Religion, unless by such doting
old wives as that story goes on. The very meanest and most ignorant of the
Indians will profess, they do not take their Pa-Gods, or Idols, to be Gods* or
Worship them as such, but Worship God in them, as I am certainly informed by a
careful inquirer into those things.

His Answer to the fourth Paragraph.
Chemnitius his word, says he, is no proof with us, who is a known Sinon, a
person of that tried integr^ty, as that he that never trusts him shall be sure
never to be deceived by him. This he makes another Calumny.

The Reply.
But this, I say, is a kind of an equivocating form of railing against a very
eminent person, for his great learning and faithful industry in supporting the
Truth. But why a Sinon I pray you? Si miserum fortuna Sinonem
Finxit, vanum etiam mendacemque improba finget.
If he undertook a miserable Cause, destitute of all Truth and solidity, as
your Party does in such Points as we are upon, then indeed there were some
temptation for him to do as some at least of you do, to use slights, and
shifts, and tricks, to foist in, and to expunge by expurgatory Indexes, to
feign any thing plausible for your own advantages: but our Cause being firm of
it self, we are put to no such devices; but if we were destitute of Truth on
our part, would willingly embrace it where we find it. Or if you could fancy
Chemnitius a Sinon, could you fancy him such a fool to quote Consecrations out
of a known Pontifical, where every body might see there is no such thing. I am
glad I have the Ritual by me, which I make use of in the next Paragraph, that
proves that there is such a thing as Consecration of Images in your Church to
be prayed before, and the Saint whose Image it is to be invoked before it. But
in that Consecration, you will say, there is no mention of Thundering and
Lightning, and Storms to be chased away by these Images consecrated. But I
beseech you what more of absurdity or incredibility, that the Church of Rome in
honor to their Saints should consecrate their Images to these purposes, than
that she should consecrate bells to the said uses? as you may see abundantly in
Durandus his Rationale, lib. 1. cap. 4. Pulsatur and benedicitur Campana ut
fruges, mentes and corpora credentium serventur, procul pellantur hostiles
exercitus and omnes insidiae ^nimici, fragor grandinum, procelia turbinum,
impetus tempestatum and fulgurum tempe^entur, infestaque ton^trua and ventorum
flamina suspendantur, spiritus procellarum and Aereae Potestates perterreantur,
etc. When they consecrate bells to such mighty Powers and effects as these, can
any man that is but one remove from a fool, doubt whether they would consecrate
the Image of St. John and the blessed Virgin to such like purposes? Their Agnus
Dei is also consecrated to the like uses, as you may see in the same Durandus,
lib. 6. cap. 79. And in the above said Ritual you may observe I know not how
many things to the like purpose, The Cross, Oil, Salt, Water, and the like: So
that he must be very weak that can misbelieve this Quotation of Chemnitius out
of the Pontifical he mentions, or that it is any Calumny to produce his
Testimony, or improper for me to use it, though he be a Protestant, my scope
being not only to grapple with the adverse Party, but also to confirm our own.

His Answer to the fifth Paragraph.
There is no such expression, says he, in the whole Prayer, as Grant O Virgin,
or Grant O Saint, but Grant O God. How then do we here make the Virgin and
other Saints, fellow-distributers of Grace and Glory with Christ himself? Much
less do we make them fellow distributers of Grace and Glory with Christ upon
their own Merits, who have no Merits of their own, but such as flow from and
have their absolute dependence of the Merits of Christ. And least of all are
they here made fellow-distributers of Grace for the service done to them in
kneeling and praying before their Statues; there being no such causal as that
(For) specified at all in the Prayer.

The Reply.
To all which I Answer, It is true, it is not said* Grant O Virgin, nor Grant O
Saint, but Grant O God* because this is a form of consecration of the Images of
Christ, the Virgin or any other Saint; to wit, Prayer to God (not to the Virgin
or any other Saint, not made before any of their Images already consecrated, as
he would make his simple folk believe whom he endeavors to keep in ignorance)
but is, I say, a Prayer to God, that whosoever shall invoke Christ, the Virgin,
or such a Saint, whose Image is a consecrating, may be heard, and obtain by the
Merits and Intercession of the party they pray to, grace here, and glory
hereafter. This is the plain sense of the Consecration. And it is plain it is
through their own Merits, though they may be supposed enabled so to merit be
virtue of Christ. And if an Invocation of the Virgin, or any other Saint,
before their Images, by their Merits and Intercession (which is the usual form
of Invocation as you may see above) procure Grace here and Glory hereafter, are
not they fellow-distributers of Grace and Glory with Christ? And does not the
very form of Consecration imply that they are Distributers, that is to say,
that the Saints by their Merits and Intercession do procure Grace here and
Glory hereafter for their Suppliants, upon the very account of their earnest
and humble supplication to them before their Images, as being a means to this
end and therefore Causal thereto? But I do not exclude herein the virtue of the
Intercession and Merit of our highest Mediator Jesus Christ no more than the
form of Consecration. Yet these notwithstanding are like the Dii Medioxumi or
Demons of the Heathens, who were the lowest Negotiators of humane affairs with
the Divine Powers. So that the strenghth of this Paragraph rests firm for any
thing my Antagonist has alleged against it, as any one may perceive who lists
to consider on it.

His Answer to the sixth Paragraph.
To that about Wax-candles burning before their Images and the Oblation of
Incense smoking before them, he says, I pretend, but do not prove to be
Idolatrous, and that therefore it is a Calumny. To that of Temples and Altars
he says again, they erect them to God alone, reserving only a secundary honor
for the Saints. This is the sum against this Paragraph.

The Reply.
To the first, I Reply, That it is very plain that burning of Incense was a
Sacrifice to God in the Mosaical Law, which Incense was burnt before His
symbolical Presence in the Sanctum Sanctorum, And I add also that the lighting
the Lamps before him in the same place was another part of this Mosaical
service to him, which is some-how imitated by the Pagans in lighting Candles
before the Images of their Demons. In both which respects it is plain, that to
do thus to the Images of the Saints is Idolatrous. And by thus doing the Saints
are intended to be honored according to the very Nicene Council, that
presently upon the mention thereof, says, The honor done to the Image passes
to the Prototype: wherefore that these actions are Idolatrous is plain already,
and is more clearly confirmed from the third Conclusion of the first Chapter*
and the ninth of the second.

To the Second, I Reply, That the very Rubric of the Ritual I have so often
named (in the form of consecrating and laying the first stone of the Church)
says thus, Nominando Sanctum vel Sanctam in cujus honorem ac nomen fundatur
Ecclesia. Is not this plainly a consecration to the honor and name of the
Saint? And again in the Form of consecrating the Church and the Altar, Te
rogamus ut hanc Ecclesiam and Altar ad honorem tuum and women Sancti tui N.
pargare and benedicere digneris, where questionless [ ad nomen Sancti] includes
honorem in it, which was expressly signified before in the consecrating the
Foundation-stone, and is also included in the signification of nomen. We do not
pretend that you equalize the Saints, in these doings, with God himself, but
that you make them partake of true Religious Worship, though in a less share or
in a more secundary way, with God in these dedications of Temples and Altars to
them as well as to God, though not principally, or equall^. Suppose a Pantheon
dedicated to Jupiter and the rest of the Gods, no man would say it was
dedicated with equal honor to the rest as to him, and yet the dedicating of it
to the rest would be Idolatry, as being Religious Worship as well as his,
though not at the same pitch; wherefore these excuses are very weak and
insignificant.

His Answer to the seventh Paragraph.
I shall not foul my paper with taking notice of such uns^emly brothel-language
as fills up his next page. It is enough to say, it is more than becomes a
modest Doctor. This is all to this Paragraph.

The Reply.
Certainly if this Paragraph were not before the Readers eyes to peruse, he
would think the Doctor a man of very soul and obscene language. If it be the
language of the holy men of God in the Scripture, If it be not more than
becomes a modest Prophet, a modest St. John, Apoc. 17. 2, 4. a modest Jeremy or
Ezeki^l to compare Idolatry to whoredom in broader terms than I have done,
certainly what I have said here is not more than becomes a modest Doctor. But
it is the Policy of my Adversary to fling away with a seeming disdain from what
he knows not how to Answer. For this plain Similitude pinches hard and carries
along with it a demonstration, that the Council of Trent have not taken away
Idolatry from their way of honoring of Images, but confirmed it. He slips by
my eighth Paragraph also, as conscious it is too true what I utter in that
similtude likewise. And I hope he now sees more clear than ever, that the
pr^^ence of honoring Images is quite to be cast out of the Church, there being
no good sense to be made of it any way.

His Answer to the ninth Paragraph.
To that of the smiling, and lowering Images, he says, That I charge their
Church with connivence at such Unchristian Impostures as have ever been the
Object of her s^arpest Censures, not backing my Accusation with any single
Instance. To the Veronica and to O Crux spes Unica, he Answers; To the first,
that it is no part of any Ecclesiastic Office. To the second, that I might as
well compare the Invoking God Almighty before the Ark of the Covenant to this
devotion of speaking to the Cross, as the praying before Images, and make them
both alike talking with a stock or stone. This is the main of his Answer in
brief: If there be any further pretense of Reason, I shall mention it and meet
with it in my Reply.

The Reply.
To the first I Reply, That it is a witty fetch to require of me an Instance of
connivence at a fault which, as soon as it is known, is no interest of them
that are to punish it to connive any longer at it. For those smiling, lowering
and eye-rowling Images, so soon as they are deprehended to be such by Art and
not by Miracle, they loose the effect they are intended for, which is to bring
more plenteous Oblations to the Church. But for as much as these tricks of the
Images cannot but be known to the wise of the Clergy, the Bishop and others
under him, to be tricks and not Miracles, and they suffering them till open
discovery or complaint, why may they not be said to connive at them? or why was
I bound to bring an Instance of their connivence in so short a Treatise, more
than my Adv^rsary of any sharp Censure of their Church against these
Impostures? which he being deficient in^, I will help him with one Instance
here in our own Nation in the time of Popery.

In the Abbey Church at Boxley there were two famous Images, one of St.
Rumwald, a stone statue of the bigness of a little boy, the other was called
the Ro^d of Grace. There was no admission here but upon a treble Oblation, one
to the Confessor, the other to St. Rumwald the touchstone of clean life, and
the last to the Rood of Grace. Now to those that offered frankly to St. Rumwald
it was most easy to lif^ him; but on the contrary (by reason of a pin which
the keepers could put in and take out at their pleasure) to those that offered
faintly, it was immovable. So that it was a pleasant spectacle to the
bystanders, to see a great lubber not able to lift that which a boy or a girl
had taken up before. But he was made heavy to those whose Offerings were light,
and light to those whose Offerings were more weighty. But they having passed
this trial of clean life, they then were admitted to the Rood of Grace. In
which Image stood a man enclosed, and with many wyres made the Image goggle
with the eyes, and nod the head, move and shake the jaws, according to the
value of the gi^t that was offered. If it was a small piece of silver he would
hang the lip. If it were a piece of gold then would his jaws go right merrily.
Thus were the people abused and beguiled for a certain time.

I but you will say, certainly some of the Prelates, so soon as it was
discovered, severely punished the Imposture. Nay I will tell you more, One of
the Prelates discovered it, namely Archbishop Cranmer, and the Image with all
its engines was openly showed at Paul's Cross, and torn in pieces by the people.
Did not I tell you so? will my Adversary reply; But in the mean time let me
tell him again, that it is well known how inclinable then Archbishop Cranmer
was to Protestantism, if not a Protestant in his judgment. But we speak of the
Connivence of the Popish Clergy in this point, and desire one Instance of any
such discovery of Imposture by them, that could any longer have been concealed.
And if not, where is the Calumny of Connivence?

And for the Prayer to the Veronica, be it no part of any Ecclesiastic Office,
yet it is in your approved Devotion-books, such as Hortulus Animae; and this
Veronica is showd solemnly once a year to the people to spend their devotion
on; and lastly Pope John the 22d. is said to have granted a thousand years
indulgence to them that repeat the whole Prayer, of which I have set down but a
third part.

And in the last place, For that he says, The praying before the Ark to God
Almighty (which Ark and the things in it and about it are wood) may as well be
said to be talking with stocks and stones as the praying before the Image of a
Saint and the Cross in such forms as are used to them, is a most senseless and
absurd speech, to say no worse. For the disparity is manifest. For did the Jews
ever say, O Ark hear me, or, O Cherubims hear me. But here is plainly speaking
to the Cross, which is but a piece of wood, (in this form) Hail O Cross our
only Hope, increase righteousness to the righteous, and pardon our sins.
Besides, neither Ark nor Cherubim was in their sight to speak to, But the Image
of St. Peter, or the Blessed Virgin is before their eyes, and they bear the
names of these Saints, (as the Image of Christ does his; of which one Johannes
in the Nicene Council declares, if any one call it or inscribe upon it, This is
Christ, he does nothing amiss therein) and are as it were these very Saints
represented to us in Figure and Person; and therefore when we speak to these
wooden Personages, saying, O blessed Virgin, O holy St. Peter, etc. is not this
infinitely more like talking to stocks and stones, then when the Jews having
their faces toward the Ark, which yet was veiled from them, mentioned God
alone? nor was there any wood-work, nor stone-work there, that was called God
or Jehovah. But what will not they say, that are in a bad Cause, to make a show
to desend themselves?

But for O Crux ave spes Vnica, he would excuse the gross absurdity of it, (For
none can excuse the Idolatry, when they yield Latria to the true Cross and
contend what kind of Religious Worship is due to the Type of it) by saying that
by Crux here is not meant the Cross but Christ crucified on the Cross. So that
it is but a figurative speech, The Cross for Christ upon the Cross, Metonymis
subject^; as it is used, 1 Cor. 1. 18. For the preaching of the Cross is to
them that perish foolishness, that is, says he, Christ crucified on the Cross.
But it is immediately in the former verse, (...), left the Cross of Christ be
made of none effect, Then immediately follows, (...), which is plainly an
Ellipsis, and (...) is to be understood (...), And so the whole is, For the
preaching of the Cross of Christ, etc. As it is taken, Gal. 6. 24. God forbid
that I should glory in any thing saving in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world. This is that which
is foolishness to them that perish, but the Power of God to them that are
saved. So that there is no ground for a Metony^nia Subjecti, when an Ellipsis
is so naturally understood, which will not at all serve his purpose. And the
Metonymy indeed very poorly.

For it does not follow, because by a figurative speech the Subject may be put
for the Adjunct; or the Symbol for the Person it is compared to in speech, that
therefore we may (and yet seem to be in our wits) make Prayers or speeches to
these Subjects or Symbols. The Cherubims are the seat of the Divine Presence;
should the Jews therefore have said by a Metonymy, O golden Cherubims come and
help us? And because men talk of the infallible chair at Rome, meaning the
Popes, would any but a mad man propound questions to the chair, and not to the
Pope himself, to be resolved? And our Savior Christ says, Apoc. 22. I am the
bright morning Star, which is a figurative speech; Can therefore any one with
eyes and hands lift up to the morning Star, say unto it, O bright morning Star
illuminate my understanding, increase righteousness to the righteous, and
pardon our sins, but he will be looked upon as an Idolater and Star-worshipper?
and to say he means Christ the morning Star will not excuse him from mere
madness and delirancy, if it could from Idolatry. And how much better, I pray,
is it to speak to a piece of wood? nay, to the figure of another piece of wood?
For Christ was not crucified on the wood they speak to. But by speaking to this
piece of wood, they would be understood to speak to another piece of wood on
which Christ was crucified at Jerusalem; nor yet to that piece of wood neither,
but to Christ hanging on the wood, and that now at such a time as he is off of
the wood, and is in Heaven to be spoke to himself as a gracious Intercessor,
that we may not call on this stock or that stone, but make our immediate
addresses to him in word and heart, that he would be graciously pleased to
intercede with his Father for us.

To all which you may add, That comparing this passage of the Prayer with that
which goes before, Arbor decora and fulgida, Electa digno stipite Tam sancta
membra tangere; Beata cujus brachiis secli pependit pretium, and how within a
line or two after follows, O Crux ave spes Vnica, etc. it is demonstratively
plain, that it is the Cross it it self, not Christ meant in this passage;
unless you will make Christ his own Cross to hang upon, and make him distinct
from his own Body and members. Whence the Absurdity and Idolatry of this
devotion is most clearly manifest, and that it is no Calumny to charge them
with it. The rest of this Section is (...) or (...) if you will, and I will
leave my Antagonist to enjoy himself in the reek and perfume thereof.

CHAP. X.
Several important Consectaries from this clear Diseovery of the gross
Idolatry of the Church of Rome; with an hearty and vehement Exhortation to all
men, that have any serious regard to their Salvation, to beware how they be
drawn into the Communion of that Church.
1. THus have we abundantly demonstrated that the Church of Rome stands guilty
of gross Idolatry according to the conc^ssions and Definitions of their own
Council of Trent; that is to say, though we charge them with no more then with
what the Council it self does own, touching the Adoration of the Host, the
Invocation of Saints, and the Worshipping of Images. But we must not forget, in
the mean time, that the Crime grows still more course and palpable looking upon
the particular forms of their Invocation of the Saints, and the Circumstances
of their worshipping their Images, and yet ratified by the Popes, and
corroborated by the uncontrolled practice of their whole Church: Which
therefore must in all reason be the Interpreter of the mind of the Council. So
that there is no evasion left for them, but that they are guilty of as gross
and palpable Idolatry as ever was committed by the sons of men, no less gross
then Roman Paganism it self.

2. From whence, in the next place, it necessarily follows, that they are the
most barbarous Murderers of the Servants of God that ever appeared on the face
of the Earth. For indeed if they had had Truth on their side so far, as that
the things they required at the hands of the Dissenters had been lawful,
(though not at all necessary;) yet considering the express voice of Scripture,
which must be so exceeding effectual to raise conscientious Scruples, and
indeed to fix a man in the contrary Opinions, besides the irrefragable Votes of
common Sense and Reason, and the Principles of all Arts and Sciences that can
pretend any usefulness to Religion in any of its Theoreticall Disquisitions; I
say, when it is so easy from hence, if not necessary, for some men to be born
into a contrary conscientious Persuasion, it had undoubtedly even in this case
been notorious Murder in the Pontifician Party, to have killed men for
dissenting from the Doctrine and Practice of their Church.

But now the Murderers themselves being in so palpable an Error, and requiring
of the Dissenters to profess Blasphemies and commit gross Idolatries with them,
which is openly to rebel against God under pretense of obeying Holy Church, as
they love to be called, they murdering so many hundred thousands of them for
this Fidelity to their Maker, and their indispensable Obedience to the Lord
Jesus Christ, this is Murder of a double dye, and not to be paralleled by all
the barbarous Persecutions under the red Dragon, the Pagan Emperors themselves.

3. From which two main Considerations it follows in the third place, that,
considering the fit and easy congruity of the names of the Seven Churches and
of the Events of the seven Intervalls (denoted by them) to the Prefigurations
in the Visions, there can be no doubt but that by Balaam mentioned in the
Epistle to the Church in Pergamus, wherein Antipas, that is, the Opposers of
the Pope, are murdered, the Papal Hierarchy is understood; as it is also by
the Prophetess Iezebel in the Epistle to the Church in Thyatira, who was also a
Murtheress of the Prophets of God, and both of them expr^^ly Patrons of
Idolatry, as is manifest in the very Text.

Nor is it at all wonderful that Balaam and Iezebel, the one a man, the other
a woman, should signify the same thing. For the false Prophet and the Whore of
Babylon in the following Visions of the Apocalypse signify both one and the
same thing, viz. The Hierarchy of Rome, from the Pope to the rest of their
Ecclesiastic Body.

4. And what I have said of the Vision of those Seven Churches, the same I say
of all those Expositions of the thirteenth and seventeenth Chapters of the
Apocalypse* and that of the little Horn in Daniel; namely, The words of the
Prophecies being so naturally applicable to the Affairs of that Church, besides
the demonstration of Synchronism, that the weight of those two foregoing
Conclusions being added thereto, there cannot be the least doubt or scruple
left, but that those Interpretations are true; and that the Church of Rom^ is
that Body of Antichrist, that Mother of Fornications and Abominations of the
Earth, that is, of multifarious Modes of gross Idol^tries, or that scarlet
Whore on the seven Hills, that is also drunk with the blood of the Saints, and
with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus.

5. And that therefore, in the fourth place, in the Church of Rome the Poison
exceeding the Antidote* there can be no reason that Salvation should be hoped
for there. It is a sad and lamentable Truth, but being a Truth, and of such
huge moment, it is by no means to be concealed. What God may do in his more
hidden ways of Providence, he alone knows. And therefore we cannot say that
every Idolatrous Heathen must perish eternally: But to speak no farther then we
have commission, and according to the easy tenor of the Holy Scriptures, we
must pronounce, though with great sadness of heart, that we have no warrant
therefrom to think or declare any of the Popish Religion, so long as they
continue so, to be in the state of Salvation; and especially, since that voice
of the Angel which sounded in the Intervall of Thyatira, saying expressly, Come
out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and receive not of
her plagues; and the Apostle in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 6.
9. Be not deceived, neither Fornicatours, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, etc.
shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And those of the Church of Rome are bound to
continue Idolaters as long as they live, or else to renounce their Church; and
therefore they are bound to be damned by adhering to the Roman Church, unless
they could live in it for ever. For he that dies in such a capital si^ as
Idolatry without Repentnce, nay, in a blind, obstinate perseverance in it, how
can he escape eternal Damnation?

6. But though we had kept our selves to the Apocalypse, the thing is clear in
that Book alone, chapter 22. ver. 14, 15. where all Idolaters are expressly excluded
from the Tree of Life: Blessed are they that do his Commandments, (and one of
them, though expunged by Rome, is, Thou shall not worship any graven Image,)
that they may have right to the tree of life, etc. For without are dogs, and
Sorcerers and Whoremongers, and Mortherers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and
makes a Lie. All these are excluded the Heavenly Jerusalem, and from eating
the Tree of Life. Of which who eats not is most assuredly detained in
eternal death. As it is written in the foregoing Chapter, Apoc. 21. 8. that
Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liers,
shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone; which
is the second Death. What sentence can be more express then this?

7. But besides this Divine sentence against them, they are also (...), they
are self condemned, or at least give sentence against themselves, while they so
freely pronounce that no Idolaters are to be saved; which they frequently do,
to save their own Church from the reproach of Idolatry. For, because some
Protestants have declared for the Possibility of Salvation in the Romish
Church, they farther improve the favor to the quitting themselves of the
guilt, from others hopeful presages that by an hearty implicit Repentance of
all their sins (even of those that are the proper Crimes of that Church,) they
may, through God's mercy in Christ, be delivered from the punishment.

This piece of Charity in some of our Party they turn to the fencing off all
imputation of Idolatry from themselves, arguing thus; That no Idolaters can be
saved: But those in the Romish Church may be saved, according to those
Protestants opinion: Therefore those in the Romish Church are no Idolaters.

But most assuredly while they thus abuse the Charity of some, even by their
own Proposition they must bring the sentence of condemnation from all the rest
upon their own heads, as they have herein given it against themselves, in
saying that all Idolaters are damned, or that no idolater can be saved. For it
is demonstrated as clear as the Noon-light, in this present Discourse, that the
Church of Rome are Idolaters.

8. And in that of those of our Church that say they may be saved upon a
sincere and hearty implicit Repentance of all their sins, (wherein they include
the Idolatries and all other Miscarriages which they know not themselves guilty
of, by reason of the blind Mis-instructions of their Church,) no more is given
them by this then thus, viz. That they are saved by disowning of and
dismembring themselves from the Roman Church, as much as it is in their power
so to do, and by bitterly repenting them that they were ever of that Church as
such, and by being so minded, that if they did know what a corrupt Church it
is, they would forthwith separate from it. So that in effect those of the Roman
Church that some of ours conceit may be saved, are no otherwise saved, if at
all, then by an implicit renouncing Communion with it, which in Foro Divino
must go for an actual and formal Separation from it.

In which Position if there were any Truth, it will reach the honest-minded
Pagans as well; but it can shelter neither, unless in such Circumstances, that
they had not the opportunity to learn the Truth, which since the Reformation,
and especially this last Age, by the mercy of God, is abundantly revealed to
the world. So that all men, especially those that live in Protestant Nations or
Kingdoms, are without all excuse; and therefore become obnoxious to God's
eternal wrath and Damnation, if they relinquish not that false Prophetess
Iezebel, as she is called in the Epistle to the Church in Thyatira, who by her
corrupt Doct^ines deceives the people, and inveigles them into gross Idolatrous
Practices.

9. Thus little is conceded by those of our Reformed Churches that speak most
favorably of those in the Church of Rome. And yet this little must be
retracted, unless we can make it out, that any of that Church are capable of
sincere and unfeigned Repentance while they are of it. For to repent as a
Thief, because he is afraid to be hanged, is not that saving Repentance. But to
repent as a true Christian none can do, unless he has the Spirit of God, and be
in the state of Regeneration.

For true Repentance arises out of the detestation of the ugliness of Sin it
self, and out of the love to the pulchritude and amiableness of the Divine Life
and of true Virtue, which none can be touched with but those that are
Regenerate or born of God. Now those holy and Divine Sentiments of the new
Birth are so contrary to the Frauds and Impostures, to the gross Idolatries and
bloody Murders of the Church of Rome, which they from time to time have
perpetrated upon the dear Servants of Christ, that it is impossible for any one
that has this holy sense, but that he should incontinently fly from that Church
with as much horror and affrightment as any Countryman would from some evil
Spectre, or at the approach of the Devil.

10. He that is born of God sins not, says S. John: 1 John 5. 18. How then
can they be so born whose very Religion is a Trade of sin, and that of the
highest nature, they ever and anon exercising gross acts of Idolatry? besides
that they are consenting (by giving up their belief and suffrage to the
murtherous Conclusions of that Church) to all the barbarous and bloody
Persecutions of the Saints that either have happened or may happen in their own
times, or ever shall happen, by that Church; they become, I say, guilty thereof
by adjoining themselves to this bloodthirsty Body of men, with whom the
Murder of those that will not commit Idolatry with them, and so rebel against
God, is become an holy Papal Law and Statute.

And therefore, I say, how can any man conceive that those men are born of God
who are thus deeply defiled with Murtherous and Idolatrous Impurities, but
rather that they are in a mere blind carnal condition, and incapable, while
they are thus, of any true and sincere Repentance, and consequently of
repenting of their daily Idolatries which they commit, and ordinarily (to make
all sure) in ipso articul^ mortis, and therefore are out of all capacity of
Salvation while they are members of that Church? As plainly appears both by
this present Reason fetched from the nature of Regeneration, as also from the
judgment of the Romanists themselves touching the state of Idolaters after
this life, and chiefly from the express sentence of the Spirit of God in
Scripture, as I intimated before.

11. And therefore, in the fifth and last place, it is exceeding manifest how
stupid and regardless those Souls are of their own Salvation, that continue in
the Communion of the Church of Rome; and how desperately wild and extravagant
they are who, never having been of it, but having had the advantage of better
Principles, yet can find in their hearts to be reconciled to it. This must be a
sign of some great defect in Judgment, or else in their Sincerity, that they
ever can be allured to a Religion that is so far removed from God and Heaven.

12. But this Church, as the woman in the Proverbs, is, I must confess, both
very fair of speech and subtle of heart, and knows how to tamper with the
simple ones right skilfully. She knows how to overcome all their carnal senses
by her luxurious Enticements. She has decked her bed with coverings of I
apestry, with carved work, with fine linens of Egypt. She has perfumed her bed
with M^rrh, Aloes and Cinnamon, Prove. 7. 16, 17. She entertains her Paramours
with the most delicious strains of Music, and chants out the most sweet and
pleasing Rhymes, to Iull them secure in her lap: Such as those Idolatrous forms
of the ^nvocation of the Virgin Mary, and of other Saints, which I have
produced, of which she has a numerous store. Unto which I conceive the Prophet
Isay to allude in that passage touching the City of Tire, representing there
mystically the relapsing Church of Rome: Take an harp, go about the City, thou
harlot that have been forgotten, make sweet Melody, sing many Songs, that thou
may be remembered, Isa. 23. 16. See Synop^is Prophetica, Book 2. chapter 16.

13. She gilds her self over also with the goodly and specious ^itles of unity,
Antiquity, ^niversality, the power of working Miracles, of Sanctity likewise,
and of Infallibility; and boasts highly of her self, that she has the power of
the Keys, and can give safe conduct to Heaven by Sacerdotal Absolution; and, if
need be, out of the Treasury of the Merits of holy men of their Church, which
she has the keeping and disposing of, can add Oil to the Lamps of the
unprovided Virgins, and so piece out their Deficiency in the works of
Righteousness. Such fair speeches and fine glo^ing words she has to befool the
judgments of the simple.

14. But as to the first, it is plain that that Unity that is by Force is no
fruit of the Spirit, and therefore no Sign of the true Church: nor that which
is from free Agreement, if it be not to good Ends. For Solomon describes an
Agreement of Thieves or Robbers, heartening one another to spoil and bloodshed,
and to enter so strict a society as to have but one purse, Prove. 1. 14. And
therefore for a company of men, under the pretense of Spirituality, to agree in
the inventing or upholding such Doctrines or Fictions as are most servlceable
for a wor^dly design, and for the more easily riding and abusing the credulous
and carnal-minded, thereby to be masters of their Persons and Wealth, this is
no holy Unity, but an horrid and unrighteous conspiracy against the deluded
Sons of Adam.

15. And for Antiquity and Universality, they are both plainly on the
Protestants side, who make no Fundamentals of Faith but such as are manifestly
contained in the Scripture: which is much more ancient, and more universally
received, then any of those things upon* whose account we separate from the
Church of Rome, which are but the fruits of that Apostas^e which, after four
Hundred years or thereabout, Synop^. Prophet. lib. ^. c. 5.
the Church was to fall into according to Divine Prediction. So that we are as
ancient and universal as the Apostolic Church it self, nor do we desire to
appear to be the members of any Church that is not Apostolical.

And for their boasts of Miracles, which are produced to ratify their crafty
Figments, they are but Fictions themselves framed by their Priests, or
Delusions of the Devil, according as is foretold concerning the coming of
Antichrist, that Man of sin, (which the Pope and his Clergy most assuredly is,)
namely, that his coming i^ after the working of Satan, with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. So that they glory in their own shame,
and boast themselves in the known Character of Antichrist, and would prove
themselves to be Holy Church by pretending to the Privileges of that Man of
sin, and by appealing to the palpable signs of the Assistence of the Devil. For
from thence are all Miracles that are produced in favor of Practices that are
plainly repugnant to the Doctrines of the Holy Scriptures.

16. But now, as for their Sanctity, what an holy Church they are, any one may
judge upon the reading of the Lives of their Popes and History of their
Cardinals, and other Religious Or^ers of that Church of Rome; how rankly all
things smell of Fraud and Imposture, of Pride and Covetousness, of Ostentation
and Hypocrisy; what monstrous examples of Sensuality their Holinesses
themselves have ordinarily been, of Fornication and Adultery, of Incest and
Sodomie; to say nothing of Simonie, and that infernal sin of Necromancy. But
for Murder and Idolatry, those horrid Crimes are not only made familiar to
them, but have passed into a Law with them, and are interwoven into the very
Essence of their Religion. Judge t^en how holy that Church must be, whose
Religion is the establishment of Idolatry and Murder. Of the latter of which
Crimes the holy Inquisition is an Instance with a witn^ss. And yet that Den of
Murderers, whose Office it is to kill men for not committing Idolatry, with
the Church of Rome must needs bear the title of Holy.

17. And for their pretense of Infallibility, it is expressly predicted in the
Apocalypse of S. John, as well as their laying claim to Miracles. For as the
two-horned Beast is said Apoc. 13. 13 to do great Wonders, and to bring fire
from Heaven, which two-horned Beast is the Pope and his Clergy; so Iezebel,
which is the same Hierarchy, is called the Woman that gives to her self the
title of a Prophetess, Apoc. 2 20. whose Oracles you know must be infallible.
For she does not mean that she is a false Prophetess, though indeed and in
truth she is so. And the Pope with his Clergy is judged to be so by the Spirit
of God, in that he is called the false Prophet, Apoc. 16. 13. as well as the
two-horned Beast, in those Visions of S. John.

And while he pretends himself to be a Prophet, even without Divine Revelation,
one may plainly demonstrate that he is a false one from this one notorious
Instance of Transubstantiation; which is a Doctrine repugnant to common Sense
and Reason, and all the Faculties of the Mind of man, and bears a contradiction
to the most pla^n and indubitable Principles of all Arts and Sciences, as I
have proved above. So that we may be more sure that this is false, then that we
feel our own bodies, or can tell our toes and fingers on our hands and feet.
Judge then therefore whether is more likely, that the Church of Rome should be
infallible, or Transubstantiation a mere Figment, especially it being so
serviceable for their worldly Advantages, and they being taken tardy in so many
Impostures and Deceits. So that Infallibility is a mere Boast.

18. And now for their Sacerdotal Absolution, that they can so safely dismiss
men to Heaven or secure them from Hell thereby, this power of their Pri^st is
such another vain Boast as that of Transubstantiation. Except a man be born
again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. John 3. 3. And the form of
words upon one's Deathbed can no more regenerate any one, then their
Quinqueverbiall Charm can transubstantiate the Bread and ^ ine into the Body
and Blood of Christ. Where the form of Absolution has any effect, it must be on
such persons as are already really regenerate and unfeignedly and sincerely
penitent: which I have shown to be incompetible to any one so long and so far
forth as he adheres to the Roman Church. So that in this case one Ethiopian
does but wash another, which is labor spent in vain.

There must be a change of Nature, or no external Ceremony nor words can do
any thing. For the form of Absolution is not a Charm, as I said, to change the
nature of things, but only a Ticket to pass Guards and Scouts, and to procure
safe conduct to the Heavenly Regions. But if by Regeneration and due Repentance
one has not contracted an alliance and affinity with the Saints and Angels, but
is really still involved in the impure and Hellish nature, the grim Officers of
that dark Kingdom will most certainly challenge their own, and they will be
sure to carry that Soul captive into a suitable place, let the flattering Priest
have dismissed her hence with the fairest and most hopeful circumstances he
could. This is the most hideous, the most dangerous and the most perfidious
Cheat of that Church of Rome that ever she could light on for the damning of
poor credulous Souls, that thus superstitiously depend on the vain breath of
their Priest for the security of their Salvation.

19. And yet they are not content with this Device alone to Iull men secure in
wickedness, but besides their pretense of singing them out of Purgatory by
mercenary Masses, and pecuniary Redemptions, by Pardons and Indulgences, and I
know not what Trumperies, they allure men to come into their Church as having
that great Store and Treasury of the Merits of Holy-men and women, their works
of Supererogation, which they pretend to have the keeping and disposing of. So
that a poor Soul that is bankrupt of herself, and has no stock of Good works of
her own, may sufficiently be furnished for love or money by the Merchants of
this Storehonse. Which, besides that it is a blasphemous Derogation to the
Merits of Christ, is the grossest Falsehood that ever was uttered.

For these Holy men, as they are called, and Virgins, were, God wot, themselves
most miserable Sinners, and died in most horrid Idolatries, as dying in the
Practices of that Church; and he that comes to that Church does necessarily
become a gross Idolater himself; besides that he sets to his seal and makes
himself accessory to all that innocent blood, the blood of those many hundred
thousands of Martyrs for the Protestant Truth, which that Woman of blood that
sits on the Seven Hills has with the most execrable Circumstances imaginable so
frequently murdered. So that a Soul otherwise passable of her self would be
necessarily drowned in this one foul Deluge of Guilt: so far is she from having
any relief or advantage by reconciling her self to the Church of Rome.

20. Wherefore who-ever thou art that have any sense or solicitude for thy
future state and Salvation, believe not this Woman of subtle lips and a
deceitful heart, and give no credit to her Fictions and high Pretensions; but
the more she goes about to magnify her self, do thou humble her the more, by
showing her her ugly hue in the glass of the Holy Scriptures.

If she boast that she is that holy Jerusalem, Psalm. 122. 3. a City at Unity
within it self, whenas the rest of the World are so full of Sects and Factions;
tell her that she is that carnal Jerusalem, wherein Christ in his true Members
has been so barbarously persecuted and murdered, and that the Stones of her
buildings are no living stones, but held together by a mere iron violence, and
the Cement of her walls tempered with the large effusion of innocent blood;
forasmuch as she is that two-horned Beast that gave life to the Image of the
Beast, Apoc. 13. and caused him to decree that as many as would not obey his
Idolatrous Edicts should be slain. This is the power of your Unity, which is
not from the Spirit of God, but from the spirit of the Devil, who was a
Murderer from the beginning. But the Division of us Protestants is both a sign
of our sincere search after the Truth, and a more strong Testimony against you
of Rome, in that we being so divided amongst our selves, yet we so unanimously
give sentence against you: your Miscarriages and Crimes being so exceeding
gross, that no free eye but must needs discern them.

21. If she vaunts of her Antiquity; give her enough of it, and tell her she
derives her pedigree from that great Dragon, the old Serpent, Apoc. 12. 9. that
is called the Devil and Satan, that Murderer of mankind. Ye are of your father
the Devil, says our Savior, and the works of your father will ye do. John 8.
44. We grant that the Visage and Lineage of your Church reaches even beyond the
times of the Apostles, the two-horned Beast reviving the Image of the Pagan
Beast, the great red Dragon, by bringing up again his old bloody Persecutions
and Idolatries. It suffices us, that our Church began with the Apostles;

If she glories in her Universality, and in her large Territories; tell her she
is that GREAT City which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord
was crucified: Apoc. 11. And that she is Babylon the GREAT, the mother of
Fornications and the Abominations of the Earth.

If she boast of the power of the Keys, and of Sacerdotal Absolution; tell her
that he that is holy, he that is true, he that has the Key of David, he that
opens and no man shu^teth, and shuts and no man opens, Apoc. 3. that is
to say, our Lord Jesus Christ, will never part with these Keys to his
inveterate Enemy, that notorious Man of Sin, or Antichrist.

If she spread before thee her goodly wares of mercenary Masses, of Pardons and
Indulgences, of the mutuatitious Good works of their pretended Holy men and
women, or the Wealth and external Glories of their Church, and varieties of
rich Preferments and Dignities; say unto her, that she is that City of Trade of
whom it is written, that no man buyeth her merchandise any more; and again,
Alas, alas! that great City that was clothed in fine linen and purple and
scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls: For in one hour
so great riches are come to naught. For her Merchants were the great men of the
Earth, and by her Sorceries were all Nations deceived. And in her was found the
blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth,
Apoc. 18.

22. If she would amaze thee with the stories of the wonderful Miracles done
by her; tell her that she is that two-horned Beast Apoc. 13. 13, 14. that does
great wonders, and that deceives them that dwell on the Earth by means of
those Miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the ten-horn'd Beast;
or that false Prophet working Miracles, Apoc. 19. 20. and deceiving them that
receive the mark of the Beast, and worship his Image, who together with the
Beast is to be taken, and cast alive into a lake of fire burning with
brimstone; or lastly, that Man of Sin and Son of perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders.

If she would inveagle thee with her pretenses of Infallibility, tell her that
she is that Woman Iezebel, Apoc. 2. 20. that calls her self a Prophetess; or
the Prophet Balaam, Apoc. 2. 14. that ensnared the Israelites in Idolatry; and
that very false Prophet that together with the Beast is to be cast alive into
the lake of burning brimstone, Apoc. 19. 20.

23. And lastly, if she would gull thee with that specious and much-affected
Title of Holy Church; tell her that the Spirit of Truth in the Divine Oracles,
let her commend her self as much as she pleases, gives no such Character of
her, but quite contrary, declaring the Sea of Rome to be the Seat of Satan
Apoc. 2. 13. and their Church his Synagogue Apoc. 3. 9. the Pope and his Clergy
to be Balaam the son of Bozor Apoc. 2. 13, 14. who loved the wages of
unrighteousness, and who was the Murderer of Christ's faithful Martyr
Antipas; to be that Woman Iezebel who calls her self a Prophetess, but was
indeed a Sorceress, and a murderer of the true Prophets of the Lord Apoc. 2.
20. to be also that false Prophet, that is to be taken alive, and cast into the
lake of fire and brimstone Apoc. 19. 20 to be that great City that spiritually
is called Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord was crucified Apoc. 11. 8. to be the
Beast that has the horns of a Lamb, but the voice of the Dragon, Apoc. 13. 11.
decreeing Idolatries and cruel Persecutions against God's people; to be that
Babylon the great, Apoc. 17. Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth;
the Woman on the seven Hills that is drunk with the blood of the Saints and
with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; and lastly, to be that Man of Sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2. that notorious Antichrist, that opposes and exalts himself above
all that is called God or is worshipped, whose coming is with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they receive not
the love of the truth that they may be saved. For which cause God sends them
strong delusion, that they believe a lie. That they all might be damned that
believe not the truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness. As well (...), as
(...), as well all they that love the Romish Lies and Impostures, as all they
that invent them, are here plainly declared in the state of Damnation.

With this Nosegay of Rue and Wormwood antidote thy self against the Idolatrous
infection of that strange Woman's breath, Prove. 5. 3. whose lips yet drop as an
hony^ comb, and ^er mouth is more smooth then oil. And be assured that that
cannot be the true Holy Church wherein Salvation is to be expected, which the
Spirit of God has marked with such unholy and hellish Chara ^ers, let her boast
of her own Holiness as much as she will.

24. And if she return this Answer to thee, That this is not to argue, but to
rail in phrases of Scripture; do thou make this short Reply, That whiles she
accuses thee of railing against sinful and obnoxious men, she must take heed
that she be not found guilty of blasp^eming the holy Spirit of God. I confess
these Prophetical Passages applied to such persons as to whom they do not
belong were an high and rude strain of Railing indeed, and quite out of the
road of Christianity and common Humanity: But to call them Railings when they
are applied to that very Party to whom they are really meant by that Spirit
that dictated them, is indeed to pretend to a sense of Civility toward men,
but in the mean time to become a downright Blasphemer against the Holy Ghost
that dictated these Oracles.

And that they are not mis-apply'd, any impartial man of but an ordinary
patience and comprehension of wit may have all assurance desirable from that
demonstration of the truth comprised in the eight last Chapters of the first
Book of Synopsis Prophetica; to say nothing of the present Exposition of the
Seven Epistles to the Seven Churches in Asia.

25. Wherefore, O serious Soul, whoever thou art, be not complemented out of
the Truth and an earnest pursuance of thine own Salvation from a vain sense of
the Applauses or Reproaches of men, or from any consideration what they may
think of thee for attesting or standing to such Verities as are so unwelcome to
many ears, but of such huge importance to all to hear. For no less a Game is at
stake in our choice of what Church we adhere to, that of Rome or the Reformed,
then the Possession of Heaven and eternal Life.

Wherefore stand stoutl^ upon thy guard, and whenever thou art accosted by
the fair words and sugared speeches of that cunning Woman, (who will make
semblance of great solicitude for thy future Happiness, most passionately
inviting thee to return into the bosom of Holy Church,) be sure to remember
what an Holy Church she is according to Divine description; and that if thou
assentest to her smooth Persuasions and crafty Importunities, thou do ^pso
facto (pardon the vehemence of expression adventure thy self into the jaws of
Hell, and cast thy self into the arms of the Devil, Matthew. 23. 15.

God of his mercy give us all Grace to consider what has been spoken, that we
may evermore escape these Snares of Death. Amen.

THE END.
CHAP. X.
The Answers of my Antagonist to this 10th. Chapter, and my Replies put
together without any distinction of Paragraphs.
HItherto I have reduced my Antagonists Answers to the Paragraphs of each
Chapter. But now he does so overflow with humor, wit, and confusedness, and
walks so alo^t in Generals, that I cannot reduce this last Section of his on my
last Chapter to any such particular distinctness, but must make what I can of
things in that order they lie.

First then, my hearty Exhortation to men to take heed how they be drawn into
the Communion of the Church of Rome he phancies may fitly be called Dr. Tailor
revived, or a second Dis^asive from Popery: Whereupon he takes Occasion to give
the different Characters of Dr. Tailor and my self. For Dr. Tailor is a Person,
says he, of a more refined and plausible Insinuation, a smooth tongue and only
Expression, cloaking his many and great Disingenuities with fair glozing words
in an affected strain of Scripture phrase, pretending to the power of
Godliness. But Dr. More is a Polemical man, of a quite different Temper, His
fiery zeal wears no mask, His disputing is open railing, and his Arguments
blustering words not always too much concerned whether true for alse.

To which I Reply* Whether he call my hearty Dehortation Dr. Tailor revived, or
a second Diss^asive from Popery, he may please his own p^ancy in that, he shall
find me a man of great humanity and facility in matters of that kind: And let
Dr. Tailor be of one temper and my self of another, so there be no Immorality
in these different tempers, that is all one to me also. But when he talks of
the great Disingenuities of Dr. Tailor, I suspect they are nothing else but
great and hard Arguments against the errors of the Roman Church, which they
cannot Answer; The same crime that I have been guilty of all along this book
hitherto, and it is ^ell I be not charged with great disingenuities my self at
last; which now I think on it, I have been already under an harsher term, he
calling that calumny in me, who seem to be a more rude Writer, which in Dr.
Tailor that more smooth and oyl^ Arguer he terms a disingenuity. But it is
needless for me to say any thing more of Dr. Tailor, his learned and eloquent
writings will Answer for him and themselves too.

But now for my own Charge, That I am ^olemical; I am sure I am neither
Soldier, n^r disputacious Schoolman. But if I be Polemical or warlike, it is
in that war^are whose weapons are spiritual, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 10.
4. for the pulling down strong holds and inveterate Imaginations, raised
against the truth of God and the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. And for my
fiery zeal that wears no mask, the Apostle says, Gal. 4. 18. It is good to be
zealous in a good matter, and as good to be zealous against a bad one. And is
not the spirit of God resembled to fire? Which where it appears in truth it
will burn off all masks of Hypocrisy and make men walk in all simplicity of
Conversation before God and before men. But why is my disputing open railing?
If I speak any thing false, witness of the fal^hood: But if the corruptions of
your Church be such, that they cannot be named by their proper Names, such as
all solid Theolog^, Philosophy and ordinary humane Laws would call them; in
calling them so, am I a Rayler, or you very great and enormous sinners? I speak
of those two grand crimes Idolatry and Murder, which are interwoven into your
Religion. And whet^er my Arguments be blustering words or solid Reason, let any
indifferent Reader judge by what has passed ^itherto in your pretended
Confuration of this Antidote against Idolatry, and in my ^o clearly proving my
Reasonings therein to remain sound and unshaken for all the Battery you could
lay against them. And whereas you add, not always too much concerned whether
true or false, it is such an equivocating Imputation, that look one way on it,
it says less than is true. For I confess I am never too much concerned whether
I speak true or false, especially considering of what moment the things are I
write of. But if you mean I am not always enough concerned, whether what I
affirm be true or false: The tree is known by its fruits; ^^ow me where I have
trip't; or if I have any where trip't, prove that it was out of carelesne's
whether it was true or false which I uttered. And this I think he pretends he
will show in this Dehortation of mine: For immediately he adds,

Witness the Contents of this Chapter, whereof I shall give my Reader a brief
Extract drawn up in the Form of an Homily, yet in the Doctors own words and
charitable Dialect. Thus then begins the Dissuasive. Repl. This is a Dissuasive
of my Adversaries own making, whom though I acknowledge a man of Wit and
Eloquence yet I will not trust him in making speeches for me; and se^ing his
Dissuasive is pretended but an Epitome of mine, and mine being already under
the eye of the Reader, I hold it altogether impertinent to set down his,
especially he putting his for mine, and calling it so, adding at the end of it,
This is Mellifluous Dr. Mores sweet harangue, etc. The truth is he has made as
dry and lank an Homily as he could, and heaped up those Titles their Church is
adorned with in the Apocalypse, barely and nakedly without the Occasions and
circumstances I bring them in upon, to make himself and his party merry, and to
make my serious Exhortation to deceivable People that they take heed of the
frauds and danger of that Church, to look ridiculously. But this is one
Artifice of theirs amongst the rest, when the weight of Reason and Religion
presses on them to any purpose to slip from under it by some ludicrous jest, or
profane raillery. Wherefore letting this drollery pass, let us observe what in
good earnest he would weaken my Exhorration by, or where is that place in it
where he will make good that Imputation against me, that I am not enough
concerned whether what I say be true or false.

Now I would gladly know, says he, what there is in all this discourse, which
an ingenuous Son of the Church of England will not be heartily ashamed of, and
even blush for the Doctors sake? Repl. Why did you then make such a silly
Oration in my name, that all the ingenuous Churchmen in England should be
ashamed of it? as well they might, if I had made such a jejune lank piece of
stuff as your officiousness has made for me. But for mine I dare say, there is
no ingenuous Son of the Church of England (unless ^ou measure the I^genuity and
Disingenuity of men by their affection and disa^fection to the errors of your
Chuoch, as you seem to do in Dr. Tailor) much less any genuine Sons of our
Church, but will approve of the firmness, reasonableness and seasonableness of
such an Exhortation.

Here is I conf^ss, quoth he, stout railing, Disingenuity more than is
necessary for a Doctor, etc. Repl. Here the Reader may be pleased to take
notice of the special sense of Disingenuity with my Antagonist, namely, that it
is the plainly speaking such Truths as argue the gross errors and perilous
Enormities ^f the Church of Rome. Whenas it is ten thousand times more
disingenuous, according to the law of God and Nature, to smother Truth to the
great and real injury of both the Church of Rome and our own. And then for my
stout Railing, which else where he calls that ^nmanly Rheto^ick of Railing, let
us put them together, The stout unmanly Rhetoric of Railing. I demand, If it
be either ferine or womanish with a plain open Constancy to declare those
Truths that are of such vast Concern and of so perspicuous a clearness to those
that do not wilfully wink against them? Or if the propriety of language, and to
declare according to the nature and true Notion of things, and that without all
ill will, be any form of Railing; Unless Adam in the state of Innocence railed
when he gave names according to the natures of the Creatures? And this great
Clamor against me of Railing, is because I call Idolatry Idolatry, and the
killing of men because they will not commit Idolatry with the Church of Rome,
barbarous murder. But if he mean because I call the Church of Rome by those
Titles the Spirit of God calls her in the Apocalypse, my Apology is already
made in the twenty fourth Paragraph of this 10th. Chapter. Which I desire my
Antagonist, and every one it may concern, in the fear of God to^ peruse, and to
consider the latter part of it touching those eight last Chapters of the first
book of my Synopsis Prophetica, and my Exposition of the seven Epistles to the
seven Churches of Asia. In both which Expositions, I challenge any diligent
searcher to show any considerable flaw that will lessen the certitude of them
for the main, or if they think there is the least faultering in this proposal,
let them show any flaw at all if they can. For as for my self, though I have
been an anxious searcher after Truth, I was never yet satisfied concerning any,
more palpably than of these I speak of. Which, God knows, I do not speak in the
way of Boasting, but merely to excite the ingenuous to try the strength and
evidence I find them, that they may thereby, after a manner whether they will
or no, feel it also themselves and find it. Nor do I use those Names of Infamy
wherewith the Spirit of God has branded the Pontifician Clergy, nakedly and
without occasion, as my Antagonist has framed his frigid, flaccid and insipid
Dissuasive which he would father upon me; but upon the Church of Romes false
boasts of her self, whereby to tempt ours to her Idolatries, I put in their
mouths what the Spirit of God says touching her in the Apocalypse, and other
places of Scripture: Whereby is understood plainly how the Mystery of Iniquity
is with them, and how when they make a specious show and boast of being one
thing, the Spirit of God judges them the quite Contrary.

But further he adds; That this Exhortation of mine is an ill-grounded and
Schismatical Discourse, Dr. Thorndike himself being Vmpire in the Case. Repl.
As for Dr. Thorndike I shall consider him at the close; In the mean time it is
apparent that my Exhortation is very well grounded, it being grounded upon
sound and clear Reason and the Holy Scriptures of God, than which there is no
^u^e^ ground in the world. And certainly no genuine Sons, what ever the
ingenuous Sons of the Church of England may do, will ever say that it is
Schismatical whenas the main end of it is to keep the members of our Church
from making any Schism or separation from us, and from betaking themselves to
the Church of Rome, who has separated herself from the purity of the Gospel.

But after this, most inhumanely and injuriously he parallels this faithful
and unexceptionable Exhortation of mine made to the people to keep them from
the deceits and inticements of the Church of Rome, that they may not separate
from the Church of England and Apostatize to her, to the bitter and rebellious
Trumpeters of war in the late distempered times, who loudly out of the Pulper
thundered into the peoples ears, Curse ye Meroz, yea curse ye bitterly, etc. And
there are not wanting in this Nation, says he, those who can find Rome in
England to make Meroz of it when they please. Repl. Then they are those chiefly
that are of your Emissaries gendring and fomenting. But it is well known to all
the world, that it has been precisely and particularly my care and labor to
distinguish what is truly Antichristan from what is not, that the Church of
England might be cleared from such Imputations, and the saddle set on the right
Horse; As you may see, Preface to my Idea of Antichristianism, Sect. 8. and in
the two last Chapters of Synopsis Pro^hetica For my own part I dare say, there
is none that know me either personally or by my writings that will not readily
acknowledge, that nothing can be more removed from bitterness, persecution,
tumult and rebellion, then that Spirit that I am of. No could I in those very
times of rebellion and tumult forbear to testify in public my disgust
thereof, in these mean Rymes but of sound and good sense. Immortality of the
Soul, Book 2. Cant. 3. stanz. ^. Can wars and jars and fierce Contention
Swollen Hatred and consuming Envy spring
From Piety? No, It Is Opinion
That makes the riven Heavens with trumpets ring
And thundering Engines mundrous balls out-sling,
And send men's groaning Ghosts to lower shade
Of horrid Hell. This the wide world does bring
To divastation, makes mankind to sade,
Such direful things does false Religion pers wade.
But true Religion sprung from God above
Is like her fountain full of charity,
Embraceing all things with a tender love,
Full of good will and meek expectancy,
Full of true justice and sure verity
In heart and voice, etc.
It is not our telling you plainly and apertly, according to Truth and
Scripture, what is hainously amiss in you, that can be any prejudice to our own
Church, but it is the excusing you and dissembling your great crimes by
extenuating terms, and your aggravating every little Ceremony of ours, such as
kneeling at the Communion and the like, to make us odious to the ignorant
people, that makes us suspected of Romanism. But this is one of your Arts
amongst many others to make those that are the most hearty well-willers to the
Church of England the most suspected by them. But Truth and Innocence bids
defiance to all your devices.

But in the mean time where is the charge made good of being so little
concerned whether I speak true or false in this Exhortation of mine? Why, at
last it is this, That I so peremptorily aver, that no Protestants allow them a
possibility of Salvation, but only in case of such a Repentance as implies an
absolute renunctation of their Religion and its Idolatrous doctrines and
practices by diso^ning of and dismembring themselves from the Roman Church.
Which, says he, will scarce appear pardonable in the eyes of his fellow
Doctors. Repl. This is a charge founded upon the eighth Paragraph of this tenth
Chapter, I desire the Reader to peruse the Paragraph and compare it with his
charge: where, after [disowning and dismembring themselves from the Roman
Church] he omits a special ^lause which immediately follows, viz. [As much as
it is in their power so to do.] Which is quite another t^ing from actually
renouncing of their Church, while they have not the opportunity of discovering
her gross Errors; but that their general Repentance is so hearty and unfeigned,
that it would descend to this particular upon the detection to them of the foul
errors of that Church. And this I hope will not only be pardonable but
acceptable to those eminent men of our Church, Archbishop Laud, Bishop Abbot,
and the rest he names out of Bishop Laud, Relation Sect. 35. who examined to
the bottom will appear of the same mind with my self. And for that of Mr.
Hooker in his Discourse of Justification, Sect. 17. where he sa^s, For my part
I dare not deny possibility of their Salvation, who have been the chiefest
Instruments of ours. Which Quotation, which my Adversary so much glories in* it
is evident, is n^thing at all to the purpose. For as much as he speaks not here
of those of the Church of Rome since the Reformation but before, when the state
of the Church was the Woman in the Wilderness, as is manifest both from the
sentence it self quoted and the Context. But if Mr. Hookers Authority be of any
weight with you, do but look into the foregoing Section, and he will tell you
the Church of Rome has played the Harlot worse then ever did Israel. And now I
demand, for a Christian who is part of the Body of Christ to adjo^n himself to
the Church of Rome, what is it but to make a member of Christ the member of an
Harlot? as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 6. 15. And is that, I pray, the next way
to the Capacity of Salvation? But this by the by.

After this he brings in Dr. Potter and Dr. Hammond, glorying much of the
charitable principles of the Church of England and Objecting want of charity to
them, for maintaining that Protestancy unrepented destroys Salvation: Now if
the Objectors should retaliate and say, that Popery unrepented destroys
Salvation, I would willingly be instructed, says he, by Dr. More, wherein lies
the charity and moderation they boast of. Why, I Will tell you; In this, ^ hat
whereas Protestancy, that is, Christian Religion quatenus reformed from the
errors of Rome wants no repentance, and the Errors and mispractises of the
Church of Rome are so heinous and enormous, that most Protestants, comparing
the Crimes of that Church with the menaces of Scripture, do conclude the
Adherers thereto in the state of Damnation without any more to do, so soon as
they adhere unto it, Dr. Hammond and Dr. Potter are so charitable, that though
men dye in that Church, yet by a general sincere repentance, such as implies
that if their Errors and mispractises were discovered to them to be such they
would forthwith leave the Communion of that Church, declare they may be saved,
which is the same I profess too. But we declare in the mean time, that it is
perfect madness in any one to go over to such a Church in which there is no
Salvation but upon supposition that if we knew the gross Errors and
mispractises of it, we would presently renounce Communion with it, which if we
did not we should certainly be damned.

But behold a third fetch also; Nothing is more current, says he, amongst
them, when they are pressed with the Crime of Schism, then to return the Charge
upon us from other grounds, saying, that as the Donati^ts and Luciferians were,
so we are Schismatics in cutting off from the Body of Christ and hope of
Salvation other Churches from which we are divided in Communion. From which he
would infer, that we should make our selves Donatists and Luciferians if we
should cut them off from hope of Salvation. To which I Reply, That this must be
current only amongst them that fancy themselves pressed with the Crime of
Schism. But, (...)! How soft and yielding must they be, how weak and feeble,
that can fancy themselves pressed with such an Objection? Certainly those must
be but very few, And therefore this Answer must be current but with a very few.
Our constant Answer is, that they are Shismaticks that depart from the
Communion of the truly ancient and Apostolic Church. Of whose lineage we do
avow ou^ selves to be, and do plainly and irrefragably prove it. And therefore
you are Apostates from us and Schismatics that you do not cast off your
enormous errors and heinous practices, and Communicate with us. But with the
Lucif^rians and Donatists you make your selves more holy, and call us Heretics
when your selves are really the Heretics and Schismatics. In this are you
like the Donatists and Luciferians, and unjustly take upon you to cut us short
of Salvation. But does it thence follow, we justly declaring you debarred of
Salvation by reason of your open Idolatries and Murders of the innocent people
of God, that we become thereby also Donatists and Luciferians? let any
indifferent man judge.

But the last and strongest prop of so bad a Cause, is the great and venerable
Authority of Dr. Thorndike an ingenuous Son of the Church of England. Of whom
he says, In regard I have mentioned so eminent a person and member of the
Church of England as Dr. Thorndike, I shall make bold to turn him into the
lists against Dr. More. The Antithesis of their doctrines is very remarkable;
for they run diametrically opposite one to another. 1. Dr. More affirms the
Worship of the Host in the Papacy to be Idolatry. Dr. Thorndike ( chapter 19.)
denies the Worship of the Host in the Papacy to be Idolatry. 2. Dr. More holds
that the placing and reverencing Images in Churches is Idolatry. Dr. Thorndike
( chapter 19.) holds that the placing and reverencing Images in Churches is not
Idolatry. 3. Dr. More will have Invocation of Saints to be inexcusable
Idolatry. Dr. Thorndike ( chapter 16.) excuses Invocation of Saints from Idolatry.
4. Lastly, Dr. More exhorts all men to separate from the Church of Rome, as
Idolaters. But ^r. Thorndike ( chapter 1.) avows to all the world, that those who
separate from the Church of Rome as Idolaters, are thereby Schismatics before
God. When the two Doctors are fully agreed upon these Points, Dr. More shall
hear more from me, if he desires it. In the mean time I shall entreat him to
respite my pen for some other Employment.

Repl. Dr. Thorndike, I confess, is a Person, whom his years and repute of
Learning have made venerable. But what is this to the point in hand? to the
proveing the Charge of my being less regardfull then I should be in this
Exhortation whether I speak true or false? This is a mere popular Topic, and
this your whole last Section, wherein you would fain offer something against
this last Chapter of my Antidote, but a loose and weak stroke of Rhetoric to
drive the simple into your Church as I have seen men drive Geese or Turkies on
the high way to London, with a stick and long string with a red cloth tied at
the end of it; as you annex the splendid name of Dr. Thorndike at the end of
this Section, to either scare or encourage poor Souls to your Communion. But
does Dr. Thorndikes being of another mind from me prove that I am in the wrong?
If this be to con^u^e a man, I can easily con^ute Dr. Thorndike himself, by
showing that Persons not only of very eminent Learning, but of clear and terse
judgments, differ from Dr. Thorndike in all these four Antitheses. Mr. Joseph
Mede of our College, who was so modest a Soul, that though he had worth to
furnish out I know not how many Doctorships never commenced Doctor, let us for
the time, to make the Comparison more plausible, call him Doctor as well as my
Adversary does Doctor Thorndike, and then say, Dr. Thorndike denies the
worshipping the Host to be Idolatry, Dr Mede affirms it to be Idolatry; Dr.
Thorndike holds the honoring of Images in Churches to be no Idolatry, Dr. Mede
affirms it to be Idolatry, etc. Where is Dr. Thorndike now? Nay suppose I
should put that eminently Learned Prelate of the Church of England and of
singular clearness of Reason and Judgment, Bishop Downham once of Christ's
College, in the balance with Dr. Thorndike, who in these things is exquisitely
of the same mind with Dr. Mede, in what elevation would Dr. Thorndike appear
then? The same I may say of the Archbishop of Armagh, Bishop Jewel, Archbishop
Abbot, and several other Bishops and Doctors of our Church, who at least
jointly, if not in several, will surely counterpoize the weight of Dr.
Thorndikes name. Indeed I might say the whole Body of our Church, as
subscribers to the Homilies of our Church, affirm in all these points against
Dr. Thorndike. Nay I dare with all confidence assert that no man can make any
good sense of the 13th. and 17th. Chapters of the Apocalypse, but he will
plainly discern that the very Spirit of God himself has declared against him.
What poor and simple Souls then must they be that can be scared out of the
Truth or kept in Error by such Topics as these? Dr. Thorndike is not of the
same mind with Dr. More, therefore Dr. More uses blustering arguments not much
concerned whether true or false. For my part I desire no man take my Arguments
or Assertions upon trust, but do appeal to Scripture and his own Reason whether
what I say be not true, and would have him examine them accordingly. And
therefore Dr. Thorndike must not be offended though I yield not to his name,
though I have a due respect for him, till I have tried the strength of his
Arguments, in each Antithesis to my Assertions.

As to the first Antithesis therefore where he denies the Worship of the Host
in the Papac^ to be Idolatry, Cap. 19. the short and long of his Argument is
this, That no Papist worships the Elements of the Eucharist nor the Accidents
of it for God. Therefore no Papist in this Worship is an Idolater. He V^
orships not the Elements of the Eucharist because he does not believe them to
be there, Nor the Accidents, as they call them, because he believes them to be
no part of the Body of Christ into which the consecrated Bread is
Transubstantiated. But to this I briefl^ Answer, That the Bread
Transubstantiated into the Body of Christ and Hypostatically united with the
Deity there where the Accidents show us (so that they become that very Person
God-man) is the intended Object of their Worship and Adoration, being visible
to them merely in virtue of those Accidents or species that are like Bread. Now
therefore it is plain if there be no such thing as Transubstantiation, that
their Adoration passes upon a mere untransubstantiated piece of Bread instead
of the Body or corporeal presence of Christ, supposed to be veiled with those
Accidents of Bread; which therefore is plain Idolatry. For in that they are
mistaken in their Object and intended no Worship to a piece of Bread but to
Christ, does not excuse the Idolatry by the 4th. and 5th. Conclusions of the
second Chapter. See also Conclusion 21. and 22. as also the last Conclusion of
the same Chapter. I have represented Dr. Thorndikes Argument with the utmost
strength I could possibly, and yet it is no other than you see.

To the second Antithesis, Dr. More, says he, ho^ds that the placing and
reverencing of Images in Churches is Idolatry. Repl. I do not hold that the
mere placing of Images in Churches is Idolatry (though I must confess I had
rather have their room than their Company) but only the worshipping of them.
And now let us hear what Dr. Thorndike (Chap. 19.) alleges to the contrary; ^n
doing honor, says he, to the Images of Saints there can be no Idolatry, so
long as men take them for Saints, that is, Gods Creatures, much less to the
Images of our Lord. ^or it is the Honor of our Lord and not of the Image. And
a little after to the like sense, For indeed and in truth it is not the ^mage
but the Principal (the Nicene Council calls it Prototype) that is honored by
the honor that is said to be done to the Image because it is done before the
Image. This is the sum of his Argument to prove that Image Worship is no
Idolatry. Now in order to the better understanding my Answer, you are First to
take notice that both my Adversary and Dr. Thorndike understand such Images as
have honor done to them in the Church of Rome, viz. Images dedicated or
consecrated, as you have an example of the form above, and therefore such as
are the symbolical Presences of their Principals or Prototypes. Secondly, That
this honor here mentioned in general by Dr. Thorndike is the Honor done and
allowed by the Church of Rome unto Images, viz. Invocation before them,
Incurvation, setting up Wax-candles and burning Incense before them. No^ that
the doing of this honor to these Images is not Idolatry, Dr. Thorndike would
prove upon the Principel of Pope Adrian and the second Council of Nice; Because
the Honor does (...), passes from or through the Image to the Principal, in so
much that the Principal alone seems to be worshipped not the Image; And this
Principal being either the Saints or Christ, so long as we remember the Saints
to be Gods Creatures it can be no Idolatry, much less in the Image of Christ,
since the Principal or Prototype there is God.

Repl. To the first of which I Answer, That the Primitive Christians knew the
Emperor to be Gods Creature, and even eo nomine because they remembered him to
be Gods Creature would not cast a few grains of Incense into the fire in honor
of him though it cost them their lives for not doing of it. And the departed
Souls of the great Heroes or Benefactors among the Heathen, whom they after
death made Damons and worshipped them, were known well enough to be Gods
Creatures, that is to say, the offspring of the highest Numen, (...) -- as the
Heathen Poet could sa^) and yet no Christians doubt but they were Idolaters in
worshipping them. And therefore by the third and fourth Conclusions of the
first Chapter the worshipping of the Images of the Saints though terminating on
the Saints themselves is Idolatry. Besides Incurvation to an Image, such as is
here practiced, is Idolatry by the seventh and eighth Conclusions of the same
Chapter. See also the nineteenth Conclusion of the second Chapter.

And then for the Image of Christ, though Christ be God, yet to Worship God by
an Image is Idolatr^; By the nineteenth Conclusion of the second Chapter, and
by the second Commandment, and the ^earfull vengeance on the Israelites for
worshipping the golden Calf, which not withstanding was the symbolical Presence
of Jehovah.

And for the pretense that the Worship is done only before the ^mage not the
Image; since the Image is a symbolical Presence dedicated to Christ or this or
that Saint, and that these are the Instances of Honor debitus, viz. Incurvation
toward it, burning Incense and the like, used by the Church of Rome and
specified by the Council of Nice to which the Council of Trent does refer, it
is manifest that these honors are done to these Images as well as to their
Protoypes; as appears further from the tenth Conclusion of the first Chapter,
and the twentieth of the second; which Conclusions are improvable also to the
case of burning of Incense, and lighting up wax-candles, and bringing of
Oblations to these symbolical Presences, which please the simple people when
they visibly behold their Masters to whom they pay their Religious Tribute or
Offerings, whether Money or money-worth. What Idolatry can be more Pagan-like
than this? So little satisfactory is it what Dr. Thorndike produces for the
freeing of the Church of Romes Image Worship from Idolatry.

To the third Antithesis, Dr. Thorndike, says he, excuses Invocation of Saints
from Idolatry. Repl. Truly upon my perusal of that Chapter in Dr. Thorndike, I
think my Adversary has little reason to brag of the Excuse there made for it.
For First, Dr. Thorndike does sreely confess the Saints know nothing of our
particular necessities unless God reveal them to them. Secondly, he accuses
Invocation of Saints of Novelty, as not being owned and used by the Church till
a good while after Constantine. Thirdly, he says the abuse has increased so far
that the same things are desired of them, (of the Virgin Mary especially) and
in the same terms in which they are desired of God even in the holy Scriptures.
Fourthly, That the appearance of Devotion to the mother is visibly an^
outwardly no less than to the Son (which is equal to that to God himself)
whence any mean Logician may infer, that the appearance of Devotion to the
Mother is no less than that to God himself. Does not this hugely excuse the
Romish Invocation of Saints from Idolatry? But you will say, Certainly I am
mistaken in the place. No, no, Iam not. Now comes the Excuse; So that were
there not a profession of that Church extant, contradicting the proper sense of
such Prayers to the Saints, and forceing them that address them, unless they
will contradict themselves, to abate their own meaning, and to expound them to
signify no more than the Saints obtaining that of God which they are desired to
grant of themselves, they could not be excused of Idolatry. Of which the brief
sense is, That unless the profession of the Church contradicted their Practice,
which is Idolatrous, viz. their profession of one God the giver of every good
and perfect gift, (for I know no other public Profession then that he can
mean) they cannot be excused of Idolatry. As if professing things repugnant to
Idolatry, and in the mean time committing it against their Profession, could
save them from being Idolaters, more than from being Murtherets and Adulterers,
because they profess the Decalogue. Or as if there being a Society of men that
did in Special manner profess Civility, and yet would call any one all the ill
names imaginable, might put it off by saying, these names and railings are
indeed utterl^ repugnant to our public Profession if they be taken in their
proper sense; and therefore you must interpret them in such a sense as is not
repugnant to our known Profession; For we declare to all the world that we are
civil Gentlemen and very much every man's humble servant. Would this seem a
solid excuse and not rather matter of laughter to all that heard it? Such an
Excuse might excuse the Heathen who held one supreme God fountain of all
things, in all the Idolatrous Rites of worshipping their Demons. For they
might say, no other sense is to be given of those Idolatrous Rites then will
consist with the belief of one supreme Deity the Fountain of all Good. Nay,
they of the Roman Church might Sacrifice whole Hecatombs of Oxen to their
Saints, and excuse it, because it is not to be taken in the proper sense of
such Sacrifices, but in such a sense as is consistent with the knowledge and
profession of the only one true God. So that that which is an excuse for any
Idolatry, is indeed an Excuse for none.

And besides this, Dr. Thorndikes excuse, though it were solid as to this
particular point of Idolatry, yet it is too scant to reach others. For the mere
Invocation of this or that particular Saint for an Ora pro nobis, it implying
such an excellency as is in God alone, (according to Dr. Thorndikes own
acknowledgment) will be Idolatry, by the eighth Conclusion of the second
Chapter of my Antidote. And then considering their Canonization, the erection
of dedicated Images or symbolical Presences to them, the belief that some are
proper to intercede for one thing others for another, and that offerings are
brought to them upon the good either expected or obtained by their negotiations
for us, what is this Invocation thus circumstantia^ed different from the
Invocation of the Dii Medioxumi of the Heathen which all will say is Idolatry?
And therefore this must be Idolatry, by the third and fourth Conclusions of the
first Chapter. See also the eighteenth of the second. So that in an ill hour
has my Adversary brought Dr. Thorndike to be a compurgator of his Church from
the stain of Idolatry in the business of Invocation of Saints. But it may be he
will make amends in the last Antithesis.

Dr. Thorndi^e, says he, (Chap. 1.) avers to all the world, that those that
separate from the Church of Rome as Idolaters are thereby Shismaticks before
God. Repl. I confess he does say so. And I never read it but am surprised with
amazement at it, that any one that professes himself a Protestant, should
adventure to pronounce such a speech. For my own part I can profess truly and
unfeignedly (and I think there is not any one but will believe me that knows me
or has read my writings, especially my Mystery of Godliness and my Dialogue,
where drawing the best and the most benign representation I can of Providence
and the affairs of the world in all Ages as to Religion, I strain my little Wit
to the utmost to make the Idolatry of the Pagans look as tolerably and
excusably as I can) I say I profess unfeignedly that I am not conscious to my
self of any superstitious hurry or fright and over scrupulous fear of
committing Idolatry where none is to be committed, that carries me into this
judgment touching the Idolatries of the Church of Rome; nor can any thing
possibly tempt me to it, it being so contrary to my nature to find any more
faults in the world then needs must; and I think any one will easily discern it
is not any way for my Interest to declare this fault I find, if it were not
true. But it is pure and impartial Reason, and something better and higher in
my esteem than Reason, that does assure me of the truth of what I do in this
Case thus pronounce against my own natural Inclination and Interest. Whence I
am well assured, that in all integrity of Conscience other men having the fear
of God before their eyes may be also fully persuaded to these Idolatries I
charge the Church of Rome with, and consequently be necessarily engaged to quit
her Communion, and separate from her. Now what Protestant, nay what Christian
would ever think, or whisper within himself, much less aver to all the world,
thar such a separation is Schism before God, or in Foro Divino? especially
considering that the Opinions and Practices for which the party separates are
not Catholic but After-Inventions and Customs of the Church degenerating, as
Dr Thorndike himself cannot deny. This instance I give, at least in Foro
Divino, certainly would be no Schism, though the Church of Rome were guilty of
no Idolatry. And therefore I am sorry so venerable a Person should be so rash
and precipitant in his censure against his fellow-Protestants.

But in the mean time will my Adversary say, It is apparent not withstanding
that Dr. Thorndike has quitted the Church of Rome of the charge of Idolatry in
this last Antithesis. Repl. I grant he supposes you no Idolarers, but how does
he prove you none? I have demonstrated over and over again in my Antidote that
you are Idolaters, and you have not been able to inervate one proof. Now let us
consider the demonstrations of Dr. Thorndike upon which he builds his assertion
so prodigiously Paradoxical to all Protestants, a thing never uttered by any
member of the reformed Churches before. I have poized his weights, and fathomed
the measures of his Reasonings to the utmost length and extent of them, but
find all too light and scant to make good so strange a Conclusion. The utmost
he says to prove you no Idolaters is this;

First, says he, The Church of Rome is a true Church, but a true Church
presupposes the profession of so much of Christianity as is necessary to the
Salvation of all Christians, and therefore men may be saved in the Church of
Rome. But no Idolaters can be saved. Therefore the Church of Rome are no
Idolaters.

Secondly, The Church of Rome being a true Church must needs profess the true
God, and therefore if they believe that which they profess they cannot honor
any Creature as they honor God, knowing every Creature to be an infinite
distance below him, and therefore they cannot be Idolaters.

Thirdly and lastly, A true Church, which therefore professes the only true
God, does necessarily profess to detest all Idolatry; Which detestation of
Idolatry the Church of Rome does expressly profess, which profession therefore
unless they expressly renounce they cannot expressly be Idolaters.

This is the utmost (and represented to the utmost) of Mr. Thorndikes Reasons
whereby he would prove the Church of Rome to be no Idolaters; All which he
makes to depend upon that grand Assertion, That the Church of Rome is a true
Church.

To which before we can say, I or No, we must understand what is meant by a
true Church. For, true, sometimes signifies as much as pure and sincere without
mixture of any other with this Nature or formal Essence which is really here.
As that is said to be true Wine that has no other liquour mingled with it, and
that true Gold that is not adulterated with any base alloy. And in this sense I
flatly deny the Church of Rome to be a true Church. But there is another sense
of true which excludes not impurity or some hurtful superaddition to the
nature and form of the thing, the true formal nature of the thing still
existing there: As some subtle poison conveyed into Wine, the Wine is true Wine
still; And an house infected with the Plague, or whose walls are overrun with
the Leprosy is a true house still; Or, if it be not too homely a comparison, a
pair of Sheep-clippers shears fallen into the pitch-pan, and so all over
besmeared with pitch, is a true pair of shears still; all these having the true
and essential form whereby they are constituted such. And they have an aptitude
in themselves for those ends they were made, though their actual usefulness is
for the present taken away or turned into the contrary by what incumbers them
or is added to them; but the definition of Wine, an House, and pair of shears
dot^ still belong to them and is truly predicated of them.

Now therefore though I will neither aver nor deny the Church of Rome to be a
true Church, you making so ill use of all our fair and ingenuous Concessions,
yet I will suppose with Dr. Thorndike the Church of Rome to be a true Church;
and that to be a true Church, is to profess all those Articles of the Christian
Faith, to have that form of Government, suppose Episcopal, which was in the
Primitive Church, to administer the Sacraments in that form of words the
Primitive Church did, and in a word to profess so much of Christianity and
preach it, as of it self, if there were no other Impediments added, would be
sufficient to Salvation. And so supposing the Church of Rome to profess all
those things which the true and unapostatized Church professed, (which were
then and are still of themselves effectual for Salvation if men be not wanting
to themselves) in this regard I confess she may be said to be a true Church.
For so much as such a definition of a true Church would be competible to her.
But all this supposed and admitted, I utterly deny that there is any validity
at all in Dr. Thorndikes Arguments to prove she is not an Idolatrous Church.
For a true wife according to definition of Law, yet may be a soul adulteress
and noisomly infected with the disease of her Uncleanness, and a true House may
be infected with the Plague, or stand in Pestilential air, or be infested with
the Devil or evil Spirits.

And now therefore to Answer to his first Argument, I say it does not follow
because the Church of Rome is a true Church men may be saved in it, because a
thing may truly be, what it is said to be, by reason of its intrinsic form and
nature, and yet notwithstanding be in such Circumstances, that unless it be
extricated out of them, it is made quite useless for the end it was ordained,
and for which it has still an aptitude were it extricated and cleared from the
present Encumbrances, and admixtures; as in the example of the pair of Shears,
of the House, and of the Wine with poison in it, and the like; Which for the
present, though it be a true House, a true pair of Shears, true Wine, etc. yet
they are not good. They retain the form but fall short of the end, nay are
quite opposite to it. And so they in the Church of Rome, though a true Church,
fall short of their Salvation, nay fall into eternal damnation by reason of the
deadly poison in their Church which they wilfully keep infused in it.

To his second Argument I Answer, That they that profess the true God may
notwithstanding commit Idolatry, as I have demonstrated at large in my Idea of
Antichristianism, Chap. 6. and Chap 8. of the first Book. And no man doubts but
the Israelites committed Idolatry even then when they professed the Worship of
the true God. And the Indians at this day who Worship their Pa-gods and are
universally accounted Idolaters, I am certainly informed have a clear notion of
the true God the Creator of all things. Besides, this Argument of Dr.
Thorndikes supposes that which is notoriously false, as if there could be no
Idolatry unless the Creature were so honored as if it were done to God
himself: Which is abundantly confuted out of the third, fourth, fifth and sixth
Conclusions of the first Chapter of my Antidote. And lastly, they do de facto
give that honor to the Creature that is due to God alone. And there is no
arguing against experience.

His last Argument I conceive is the infirmest of all, and the Conclusion the
faintest o^ all, and is a kind of tacit insinuation that they are indeed
Idolaters but not express ones, as if their Hypocrisy could avail any thing
with God, or free them from that condemnation that attends all that are
Idolaters. Is the business then come only to this, that the Romanists are not
professed Idolaters? I wonder who ever professed themselves Idolaters that were
serious in their Idolatry! For serious Idolatry always implies Ignorance and
mistake in the Idolater, though the Crime of Idolatry be so exceeding heinous,
by Conclusion 4th. Chapter^d.

But it being probable that Dr. Thorndike had a greater kindness for the Church
of Rome then thus, and that by this last Argument also he would prove them to
be really no Idolaters, let us suppose it, and see how well his Argument will
conclude it. They expressly profess their detestation of Idolatry, nor make any
express renunciation of that profession, therefore they are no Idolaters. To
which (...) Answer, An unjust man or Extortioner, one that blinded with
Covetousness does unjust actions, does expressly profess his detestation of
injustice, nor renounces that profession; does it follow therefore that he is
not an unjust man? Or to make an Hypothesis something more operose, though
sufficiently pertinent to the Occasion, we will suppose a considerable number
of Jews in some Kingdom having misbehaved themselves, out of fear of punishment
to posses themselves of some strong Castle of the Prince of the Country, and
there continuing a considerable time to exercise their Religion, and for better
show to write at the upper end of the Hall where they meet, Moses Decalogue in
golden Capital letters, making great profession of the righteousness of the
Laws of that Decalogue, but in the mean time for the indulging to themselves
the pleasures of the flesh as well as for the supplying their necessities and
securing themselves, should make particular Laws and Decrees amongst themselves
for the plundring and spoiling the Country people as they went to Market, and
killing such as resisted, and should declare it Lawful to Ravish the Women
they met with, interpreting the Law against Adultery touching Jewish Women
only that are of their own Religion, and Theft, and Murder, of Plundring or
killing those of the common wealth of Israel, not Aliens and Strangers, which
their Law makes no provision for as they will pretend, that take upon them to
be the Interpreters thereof. Now if any one should accuse them of Adultery,
The^t and Murder committed against their Princes Subjects, and they should
plead or any for them, that they cannot possibly be Robbers, Murderers or
Adulterers, because they expressly profess their open detestation thereof, nor
have any where renounced that Profession, the Decalogue of Moses also
witnessing for them, writ in great Capital letters in their very Hall where
they daily meet, in which it is expressly said, Thou shall not commit Adultery,
Thou shall do no Murder, Thou shall not Steal, they notwithstanding making
those particular Decrees amongst themselves and acting accordingly, would not
the Apology seem vain or impious? How then can the express Profession of the
Church of Rome against Idolatry excuse her from Idolatry when they make
particular Decrees of worshipping the Host with Latria, of Invocating the
Saints and bowing to their Images, and practice it in such Circumstances as I
have again and again declared. Nay when these Decrees are made by general
Councils as they pretend, how can they be but express Idolaters and renounce
their prosession against Idolatry as much they can do? For no serious Idolater
takes himself to be so. Wherefore we see how hugely unconcluding every Argument
of Dr. Thorndikes is whereby he would prove the Church of Rome no Idolaters But
I have over and over again demonstrated them to be Idolaters in this my
Antidote, nor has my Adversary produced any thing that in the least manner
enervates any of my Arguments; nor can he prop himself by the Authority of Dr.
Thorndike, it being so without all ground and Reason.

From all which, that Imputation I hope by this time is washed off, That my
Arguments are mere blustering words, and I unconcerned how true or false they
are: whenas if my Adversary be a man of sense, as truly I presume him to be, he
cannot but feel by this that my words are not a storm and thunderclap without a
bolt, but that they carry along with them what is solid and strong. And verily
for Dr. Thorndike, himself being so venerable and Learned a Person and of that
judgment and sincerity, after a Cause is so thoroughly canvassed on all sides
as it has been betwixt you and me and him and my self about the Idolatry of the
Church of Rome, if he were now alive, (as it has pleased God to take him out of
this life and translate him, as I hope, to a better, since the finishing of
this my Reply and before the transcribing of it) I believe he would not stick
to conclude her guilty of Idolatry and that he and I should be fully agreed in
these Points.

Which I am the more easily induced to believe from what he wrote in a letter
about a year before he died; which Clause does plainly seem to null this fourth
and greatest Antithesis betwixt him and me, viz. That the separating from the
Church (...) Rome upon the account of Idolatry is Schism before God. His words,
as I had them faithfully conveyed to me by a worthy friend, are these; To pray
to the Saints for those things which only God can give, as all Papists do, is
in the proper sense of the words down right Idolatry. I but here my Adversary
will be forward to Reply, But so long as the words may be figuratively
understood we are excused of Idolatry. But let him hear how Dr. Thorndike
himself obviates this subterfuge: If they say their meaning is by a figure
only to desire them to procure their requests of God, how dare any Christian
trust his Soul with that Church which teaches that which must needs be
Idolatry in all that understand not that figure: Which is spoken with
incomparable judgment and modesty and tender Civility to that Church, but, I
promise you, in effect charges them as home, as to this point, as if he had
said in a word, They are all down right Idolaters. From whence it will
necessarily follow, That he changed his opinion before he dyed, and held that
to separate from the Church of Rome upon the account of Idolatry is not Schism
before God.

Now that he says they are all down right Idolaters is manifest: Because he
says all that understand not that figure, which may excuse them of Idolatry,
are so. Now I am well assured, and he could not choose but be so too, that the
most Learned of them understand not that figure, there being no such figure in
all Rhetoric yet, unless they have made of late a new Figure calling it,
Quidlibet pro quolibet, that is, the putting any thing for any thing, which
will be a color for all the Nonsense in the world that ever was, is, or can be
writ or spoken. But men can no more make what figures they please in Rhetoric
then they can make what Moods they please in the three figures in Logic. But
all must be measured by the end of each Art, Been disserere in the one, and
Been dicere in the other; what is not consentaneous to the former can be no
Precept in Logic, and what not to the latter none in Rhetoric. And if there
be the pretense of the use of any figure acknowledged in Rhetoric, which is
not consentaneous to that end, the figure thus pretended to be used cannot be
used, but the words will at the peril of the speaker remain in their proper
sense. As if some wretched extravagant fellow should venture to begin his
Prayer thus, O infinitely weak, unwise, and unholy Lord God, and pretend it is
an Irony, and that he speaks by contraries, would this excuse him from horrid
blasphemy? Surely no. For the use of the Figure in this place is not
consentaneous to the general End of Rhetoric which is Ars been dicendi, which
no loathsome, disharmonious and absurd speech can agree with. Wherefore if a
figure cannot be admitted here where there is one to which it is so obvious to
refer the speech, how can the pretense of a figure excuse that speech which it
will puzzle any man to find a figure to refer it to. As for Example, if one
should pray thus to St. Francis, O holy St. Francis give me the spirit of Grace
in this life, and eternal Glory in the life to come. Upon which one crying out,
Down right Idolatry, if he that addressed this absurd and Idolatrous Prayer,
should say he meant figuratively, intending no more then thus, O holy St.
Francis pray to God to give me the spirit of Grace, etc. this speech also being
so loathsome, harsh and scandalous can be no figurative speech but is
necessarily shut up in the proper sense of the words, and as the other was
horrid blasphemy, so this is down right Idolatry, as Dr. Thorndike speaks.

This is clear demonstration to any one that considers the case impartially;
whence it is plain that this sourth Antithesis betwixt Dr. Thorndike and my
self is quite broke a pieces, and that we are agreed in this, That to separate
from the Church of Rome upon the account of Idolatry is not Schism before God.
For as much as to pray to the Saints for those things which God alone can give,
as all Papists do, is in the proper sense of the words do^n right Idolatry. And
I have plainly demonstrated there is no changing the sense of the words by a
figure, for as much as there is no figure to refer the speech to, or if there
were, there is no legitimate use of any such figure, because it would be no
ornament or perfection of speech but a loathsome blemish thereof, and therefore
no more a figure than a piece of dung hung at the Ear in a string is an
Ear-Jewel.

Wherefore, as I said, Dr. Thorndike coming so readily off, of himself, in this
fourth and last Antithesis, which indeed is founded in a breach also upon the
third Antithesis, he so plainly declaring such an Invocation of Saints to be
down right Idolatry which yet all Papists use; for all they cannot but remember
the Saints to be Gods Creatures, and therefore commit Idolatry with them though
they remember them to be Gods Creatures; Which enervates also the second
Antithesis, he endeavoring to prove that the honoring the Images of the
Saints would be no Idolatry so long as we remember them to be Gods Creatures; I
cannot but hope if he had lived and perused this careful and distinct
Disceptation, he would have come off in all. For how could he stick in the
first An^ithesis, at the acknowledging their Idolatry in the worshipping the
Host? Whenas, though they think the Bread is not there, yet they conceiving the
individual matter of the Bread transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, and
so Hypostatically united with the Divinity, and upon that account pursue it
with their devotion and Divine Adoration, hit upon the said Individual matter
untransubstantiated and remaining Bread still, and so do plainly give Divine
Adoration to Bread, as much as the Persians to the Sun who take it for the
Supreme Intellectual Deity.

But take him agreed no further then he actually was before he dyed, which is
so far as to declare all the Church of Rome down right Idolaters, he does
thereby freely acknowledge the Church of England and other Protestant Churches
to be no Schismatics either before God or before men. Nay, says he, (Weights
and Measures Chap. 1.) if the Papists be Idolaters, we are t^ own the
separation for our own Act and to glory in it. For it is done by Gods express
Command, Come out of her my people, etc. Apoc. 18. 4. But for the Papists being
Idolaters, whatever the declarations of Dr. Thorndike are, my demonstrations in
my Antidote and what occurs in my Reply do evidently and irrefragably evince it
in all Points they are charged with. And thereupon you see what an agreeable
Conclusion comes from us both. It is Gods express Command to come out of her.

And if this be not Agreement enough, conconsidering Dr. Thorndike has now laid
down that load of ^arth that depresses the mind, and is, as we in Charity hope,
among the blessed, I question not but he clearly discerns his mistakes in all
four Antitheses betwixt us. So that it is very credible that the two Doctors
are agreed fully in these Points, though I pronounce it with some peril of
bringing my Antagonist upon me again, who craves respite for his pen only so
long as till the two Doctors be fully agreed, but then Dr. More, says he, shall
hear more from me if he desire it.

But we being thus fully agreed, yet I confess I shall desire to hear no more
from you, unless you will imitate your fellow-Combatant, and wear no Mask, but
do as I do, speak verily as you think and bring no Arguments but such as you in
your own Conscience think true and concluding; and then I dare say the Game
will soon be at an end. But there may be made a show of Confutation in
infinitum to amuse or quiet those of your own Party that have not the leisure
or capacity of reading and understanding what is Written. But if you think to
make any Rejoinder, if I find you bring any thing material more than what you
have suggested already, I will, God willing, take the pains to Answer; but if
not, I shall neither give you nor my self any further trouble, but leave the
world to judge. And so, Fellow-Combatant, I bid you heartily farewell. And that
you may be the better assured I part with you in Charity, and that I may appear
to you clear of that Imputation of Uncharitableness which you labor so in this
last Section to cast upon me, peruse the fifth Paragraph of this tenth Chapter,
as also the Parable in the Preface to my Antidote; which you seem to have been
loath to take notice of, that you might with better show accuse me so much of
uncharitableness as you here have done. But it being so lively a Representation
of the real and sincere Charity of those Ministers of the Gospel, that plainly
and faithfully tell those of your Church the great peril of continuing in it, I
will close all with that Apology.

There was a certain Knight bravely mounted, as it might seem, and in goodly
equipage, in bright Armor, a rich Scarf about his Shoulders, and a large plume
of Feathers in his Helmet, who was bound for the Castle of Health, seated on an
high Hill not unlike to the Domicilium Salutis in Cebes his Table, which
therefore he easily kept in his eye. But the way he was in, being something
stony and rough, and leading not so directly as he thought, to the desired
Castle, he diverted out of the way, and descended into a green Plain; but not
knowing whether it was all passable to the Castle, called to some Loyterers
there in the field to inquire of them; who came right willingly to the Knight,
scraping many legs to him, and desiring him to tell his demands.

There was an old Shepherd likewise not far off, who, by that time this idle
people had got to the Knight, had come down to him also. Friends, said he, to
those men he called, Is the way passable and safe through this green Plain to
vouder Castle? pointing to the Castle of Health with his warder; very safe, may
it please your Worship, said they, and shrugging their Shoulders, and scraping
many Legs, asked a Largess of the Knight, pretending they had been at common
work not far off, whereupon the Knight put his hand into his pocket and gave
them liberally. But are there no Bogs, said he, nor Lakes betwixt this and the
Castle? Some small inconsiderable Sloughes it may be, said they, but you will
meet with the Holy society of the Wipers every where, who will be ready to wipe
you as clean as a Clock before you come at the Castle. And being so excellently
well mounted as we see you are, namely upon that famous steed the
infallible-footed Aplanedo, so good an Horse as that he never stumbles, your
Worship need fear no disaster at all: Besides, the Beast, God bless him, has a
Nose like any Hound, and by a miraculous Sagacity, without any Reason or Humane
Literature, with an unerring certainty he can smell out the right way, and so
secure you from all danger. To say nothing how excellent he is at the swimming
any Water, and how he can tread the very Air he is so high m^tald and light
Footed. Only be sure to keep fast in the Saddle.

And then, Sr. Knight, said the Shepherd, if the wind blow fair, the plumes in
your Helmet may help to support you both; but if not, some Angel from Heaven
may take you by the Crest of your Helmet, as he did the Prophet H^bbakuk by the
hair of his head, when he carried him through the air from Iudaea to Babylon.

The Knight looking back (for he was not aware of the Shepherd at this time)
What conceited old man is this, said he, that talks thus phancifully? May it
please your Worship, he is a Shepherd, said they, and has a flock on yonder
little Hill hard by; but he is one of the most selfconceated old Fools that
ever your Worship met with in all your days: He thinks that all skill and
knowledge lies within the compass of his bald pate and wrinkled forehead,
though few or none are of the same Opinions with himself. Sr. Knight, said the
Shepherd, I pretend to no skill nor knowledge but what is certainly within my
own Ken; but what I know I love to speak freely. And I tell you, Sr. Knight,
unless you be stark staring mad you will never follow these men's Counsels, nor
venture over this Moor to that Castle: for you will be swallowed up Horse and
Man into a fathomless Lake of ill-sented mire, for all the nice Nostrils of
Aplanedo. You was in a more hopeful way before, though something rough; but it
is so straight before you come at the Castle, that you could never have got
through unless you had left Aplanedo behind you. He Is an old Choleric Dotard,
said those other fellows; be but sure to keep the Saddle and we dare warrant
your Worship (our lives for yours) that Aplanedo will carry you safe through
all dangers.

Wherefore upon the renewal of the high conc^it the Knight had before of his
Steed, and those confident Animations of his Mercenary Counselors, he set on
in a direct line toward the Castle over this Moor, the Shepherd looking after
him to see the event. But the Knight had not rid two or three Bow-shots from
the place, but the Shepherd saw them suddenly sink Horse and Man into the
ground, so that they were both buried alive in the mire.

Whereupon fetching a deep sigh after so Tragical a Spectacle, he returned with
a sad heart and slow pace toward his Sheep on the top of the Hill, drailing
his Sheephook behind him, as they do their Spears, at the Funeral of a
Soldier: whom his Dog followed with a like soft pace, hanging down his head,
and letting his tail flag, as if he had a mind to conform to both the sorrows
and postures of his Master. But those other false Companions had somewhat
before this got to a lone Alehouse not far off, to spend the Knights Largess
merrily with a bonny young Hostess, and in plenty of good Ale and Cakes to
celebrate his Funeral.

Now I dare appeal to the Judgment of any indifferent Reader which of these
Parties, the old free-spoken Shepherd, or those Mercenary Flatterers, had the
greater share of Charity: and would have him consider with himself in what a
sad condition those of the Church of Rome are, who having the opportunity of
being better instructed, as the Knight had, are yet led away Captive by such
cunning Deceivers, which is the main state of the Controversy. John 15. 22. If
I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin; but now they have no
excuse for their sin, says our blessed Savior in the Gospel.

THE END.

