Annotations UPON THE Two foregoing TREATISES, LUX ORIENTALIS, OR, An Enquiry
into the OPINION OF THE EASTERN SAGES Concerning the Prae-existence of Souls;
AND THE Discourse of TRUTH.

Written for the more fully clearing and further confirming the main DOCTRINES
in each TREATISE.

By one not unexercized in these kinds of SPECULATION.

LONDON: Printed for J. Collins, and S. Lounds, over against Exeter-Change in
the Strand. 1682.

Annotations UPON LUX ORIENTALIS.
THese two Books, Lux Orientalis and the Discourse of Truth, are luckily put
together by the Publisher, there being that suitableness between them, and
mutual support of one another. And the Arguments they treat of being of the
greatest importance that the Mind of man can entertain herself with, the
consideration thereof has excited so sluggish a Genius as mine to bestow some
few Annotations thereon, not very anxious or operose, but such as the places
easily suggest; and may serve either to ^ctifie what may seem any how oblique,
or illustrate what may seem less clear, or make a supply or add strength where
there may seem any further need. In which I would not be so understood as that
I had such an anxiety and fondness for the Opinions they maintain, as if all
were gone if they should fail; but that the Dogmata being more fully, clearly,
and precisely propounded, men may more safely and considerately give their
Judgments thereon; but with that modesty as to admit nothing that is contrary
to the Judgment of the truly Catholic and Apostolic Church.

Chap. 2. p. 4. That he made us pure and innocent, etc. This is plainly
signified in the general Mosaic History of the Creation, that all that God
made he saw it was good; and it is particularly declared of Adam and Eve, that
they were created or made in a state of Innocence.

Page 4. Matter can do nothing but by motion, and what relation has that to a
moral Contagion? We must either grant that the figures of the particles of
Matter and their motion, have a power to affect the Soul united with the Body,
(and I remember Josephus somewhere speaking of Wine, says, it does (...),
regenerate, as it were, the Soul into another life and sense of things) or else
we must acknowledge that the parts of Matter are alterable into qualifications,
that cannot be resolved into mere mechanical motion and figure; whether they be
thus altered by the vital power of the Spirit of Nature, or however it comes to
pass. But that Matter has a considerable influence upon a Soul united thereto,
the Author himself does copiously acknowledge in his fourth Chapter of this
Book; where he tells us, that according to the disposition of the Body, our
Wits are either more quick, free, and sparkling, or more obtuse, weak, and
sluggish; and our Mind more cheerful and contented, or else more morose,
melancholic, or dogged, etc. Wherefore that he may appear the more consistent
with himself, it is likely he understands by this Moral Contagion the very
venom and malignity of vicious Inclinations, how that can be derived from
Matter, especially its power consisting in mere motion and figuration of parts.
The Psalmist's description is very apposite to this purpose, Psalm. 58. The
ungodly are froward even from their mothers womb; as soon as they are born they
go astray and speak lies. They are as venomous as the poison of a serpent, even
like the deaf adder that stops her ear. That there should be such a
difference in the Nativity of some from that of others, and happily begot also of
the same Parents, is no slight intimation that their difference is not from
their Bo^ but their Souls; in which there is (...) Eruptions of vicious
Inclinations w^ (...) had contracted in their former stat^ (...) pressed nor
extinct in this, by reason o^ (...) lapse, and his losing the Paradisiacal
(...) which he was created, and which should, (...) had not been for his Fall,
been transmitted to his Posterity; but that being lost, the several measures of
the pristine Vitiosity of humane Souls discover themselves in this life,
according to the just Laws of the Divine Nemesis essentially interwoven into
the nature of things.

Page 5. How is it that those that are under continual temptations to Vice, are
yet kept within the bounds of Virtue, etc. That those that are continually
under temptations to Vice from their Childhood, should keep within the bounds
of Virtue, and those that have perpetual outward advantages from their
Childhood to be virtuous, should prove vicious notwithstanding, is not
rationally resolved into their free will; for in this they are both of them
equal: and if they had been equal also in their external advantages or
disadvantages, the different event might well be imputed to the freedom of
their Will. But now that one, notwithstanding all the disadvantages to Virtue
should prove virtuous, and the other, notwithstanding all the advantages to
Virtue should prove vicious; the reason of this certainly to the considerate
will seem to lie deeper than the mere liberty of Will in man. But it can be
attributed to nothing, with a more due and tender regard to the Divine
Attributes, than to the pre-existent state of humane Souls, according to the
Scope of the Author.

Page 9. For still it seems to be a diminutive and disparaging apprehension of
the infinite and immense goodness of God, that he should detrude such excellent
Creatures, etc. To enervate this reason, there is framed by an ingenious hand
this Hypothesis, to vie with that of Pre-existence: That Mankind is an Order of
Beings placed in a middle state between Angels and Brutes, made up of contrary
Principles, viz. Matter and Spirit, endued with contrary faculties, viz. Animal
and Rational, and encompassed with contrary Objects proportioned to their
respective faculties, that so they may be in a capacity to exercise the Virtues
proper and peculiar to their compounded and heterogeneal nature. And therefore
though humane Souls be capable of subsisting by themselves, yet God has placed
them in Bodies full of brutish and unreasonable Propensions, that they may be
capable of exercising many choice and excellent Virtues, which otherwise could
never have been at all; such as Temperance, Sobriety, Chastity, Patience,
Meekness, Equanimity, and all other Virtues that consist in the Empire of
Reason over Passion and Appetite. And therefore he conceives that the creating
of humane Souls, though pure and immaculate, and uniting them with such brutish
Bodies, is but the constituting and continuing such a Species of Being, which
is an Order betwixt Brutes and Angels; into which latter Order, if men use
their faculties of the Spiritual Principle in them well, they may ascend:
Forasmuch as God has given them in their Spiritual Principle (containing Free
Will, and Reason to discern what is best) a power and faculty of overcoming all
their inordinate Appetites.

This is his Hypothesis, mostwhat in his own words, and all to his own sense,
as near as I could with brevity express it: And it seems so reasonable to
himself, that he professes himself apt to be positive and dogmatical therein.
And it might very well seem so to him, if there were a susficient faculty in
the Souls of men in this World, to command and keep in order the Passions and
Appetites of their Body, and to be and do what their Reason and Conscience
tells them they should be and do, and blames them for not being and doing. So
that they know more by far than they find an ability in themselves to perform.
Extremely few there are, if any, but this is their condition: Whence all
Philosophers (that had any sense of Virtue and Holiness) as well as Jews and
Christians, have looked upon Man as in a lapsed state, not blaming God, but
deploring the sad condition they found themselves in by some foregoing lapse or
fault in Mankind. And it is strange that our own Consciences should fhe in our
faces for what we could never have helped.

It is witty indeed which is alleged in the behalf of this Hypothesis, viz.
That the Rational part of man is able to command the lower Appetites; because
if the superior part be not strong enough to govern the inferior, it destroys
the very being of moral Good and Evil: Forasmuch as those acts that proceed out
of necessity cannot be moral, nor can the superior Faculties be obliged to
govern the inferior, if they are not able, because nothing is obliged to
imposs^bilities. But I answer, if inabilities come upon us by our own fault,
the defects of action then are upon the former account moral, or rather
immoral. And our Consciences rightly charge us with the Vitiosities of our
Inclinations and Actions, even before we can mend them here, because they are
the consequences of our former Guilt.

Wherefore it is no wonder that there is found a flaw in a subtilty that would
conclude against the universal Experience of men, who all of them, more or
less, that have any sense of Morality left in them, complain that the inferior
powers of the Soul, at least for a time, were too hard for the superior. And
the whole mass of Mankind is so generally corrupt and abominable, that it would
argue the wise and just God a very unequal Matcher of innocent Souls with
brutish Bodies, they being universally so hugely foiled or overcome in the
conflict, if he indeed were the immediate Matcher of them. For how can that be
the effect of an equilibrious or sufficient Free Will and Power, that is in a
manner perpetual and constant? But there would be near as many Examples one way
as the other, if the Souls of men in this state were not by some precedent
lapse become unable to govern, as they ought, all in them or about them that is
to be subjected to their Reason. No fine Fetches of Wit can demolish the steady
and weighty structure of sound and general Experience.

Page 9. Wherein he sees it, ten thousand to one but that they will corrupt,
etc. The Expression [ten thousand to one] is figurative, and signifies how
hugely more like it is that the Souls would be corrupted by their Incorporation
in these Animal or Brutish Bodies, than escape Corruption. And the effect makes
good the Assertion: for David of old (to say nothing of the days of Noah) and
Paul after him, declare of Mankind in general, that they are altogether become
abominable; there is none that does good, no not one. Wherefore we see what
efficacy these Bodies have, if innocent Souls be put into them by the immediate
hand of God, as also the force of Custom and corrupt Education to debauch them;
and therefore how unlikely it is that God should create innocent Souls to
thrust them into such ill circumstances.

Page 10. To suppose him assistent to unlawful and unclean Coitions, by
creating a Soul to animate the impure Foetus, etc. This seemed ever to those
that had any sense of the Divine Purity and Sanctity, or were themselves endued
with any due sensibleness and discernment of things, to be an Argument of no
small weight. But how one of the more rude and unhewen Opposers of
Pre-existence swaggers it out of countenance, I think it not amiss to set down
for a pleasant Entertainment of the Reader.

Admit, says he, that Gods watchful Providence waits upon dissolute
Voluptuaries in their unmeet Conjunctions, and sends down fresh created Spirits
to actuate their obscene Emissions, what is here done which is not very high
and becoming God, and most congruous and proportionable to his immense Grandeur
and Majesty, viz. To bear a part amongst Pimps and Bawds, and pocky Whores and
Woremasters, to rise out of his Seat for them, and by a free Act of Creation of
a Soul, to set his Seal of Connivance to their Villainies; who yet is said to be
of more pure Eyes than to endure to behold Wickedness. So that if he does (as
his Phrase is) pop in a Soul in these unclean Coitions, certainly he does it
winking. But he goes on: For in the first place, says he, his condescension is
hereby made signal and eximious; he is gloriously humble beyond a parallel, and
by his own Example lessons us to perform the meanest works, if fit and
profitable, and to be content even to drudge for the common benefit of the
World. Good God! what a Rapture has this impure Scene of Venerie put this young
Theologer into, that it should thus drive him out of his little Wits and
Senses, and make him speak inconsistences with such an affected Grace and lofty
Eloquence! If the act of Gods freely creating Souls, and so of assisting
wretched Sinners in their foul acts of Adultery and Whoredom, be a glorious
action, how is it an Abasement of him, how is it his Humiliation? and if it be
an humbling and debasing of him, how is it glorious? The joining of two such
(...), are indeed without parallel. The creating of an humane Soul immortal and
immaculate, and such as bears the Image of God in it, as all immaculate Souls
do, is one of the most glorious actions that God can perform; such a Creature
is it, as the Schools have judged more of value than the frame of the whole
visible World. But to join such a Creature as this to such impure corporeal
matter, is furthermore a most transcendent Specimen of both his Skill and
Sovereignty; so that this is an act of further Super-exaltation of himself, not
of Humiliation. What remains then to be his Humiliation, but the condescending
to assist and countenance the unclean endeavors of Adulterers and
Adulteresses? Which therefore can be no Lesson to us for Humility, but a
Cordial for the faint-hearted in Debauchery, and degeneracy of Life; wherein
they may plead, so instructed by this rural Theolog, that they are content to
drudge for the common profit of the World. But he proceeds.

And secondly, says he, hereby he elicits Good out of Evil, causing famous and
heroic persons to take their Origin from base occasions; and so converts the
Lusts of sensual Varlets to nobler ends than they designed them. As if an
heroic Offspring were the genuine effect of Adultery or Fornication, and the
most likely way to People the World with worthy Personages. How this raw
Philosopher will make this comply with his Profession of Divinity, I know not;
whenas, it teaches us, that Marriage is honorable, but Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge; and that he punishes the Iniquities of the Parents
on their Children. But this bold Sophist makes God adjudge the noblest
Offspring to the defiled Bed, and not to punish, but reward the Adultery or
Whoredom of debauched persons, by giving them the best and bravest Children:
Which the more true it could be found in experience, it would be the stronger
Argument for Pre-existence; it being incredible that God, if he created Souls
on purpose, should crown Adultery and Whoredom with the choicest Offspring.

And then thirdly and lastly, says he, hereby he often detects the lewdness of
Sinners, which otherwise would be smothered, etc. As if the All-wise God could
find no better nor juster means than this to discover this Villainy. If he be
thus immediately and in an extraordinary way assistant in these Coitions, were
it not as easy for him, and infinitely more decorous, to charge the Womb with
some Mola or Ephemerous Monster, than to plunge an immaculate humane Soul into
it? This would as effectually discover the Villainy committed, and besides
prevent the charge Parishes are put to in maintaining Bastards. And now that we
have thus seen what a mere nothing it is that this Strutter has pronounced with
such sonorous Rhetoric, yet he is not ashamed to conclude with this Appeal to
I know not what blind Judges: Now, says he, are not all these Actions and
Concerns very graceful and agreeable to God? Which words in these circumstances
no man could utter, were he not of a crass, insensible, and injudicious
Constitution, or else made no Conscience of speaking against his Judgment. But
if he speak according to his Conscience, it is manifest he puts Sophisms upon
himself, in arguing so weakly.

As he does a little before in the same place, where that he may make the
coming of a Soul into a base begotten Body in such a series of time and order
of things as the Pre-existentiaries suppose, and Gods putting it immediately
upon his creating it into such a Body, to be equally passable, he uses this
slight Illustration: Imagine, says he, God should create one Soul, and so soon
as he had done, instantly pop it into a base begotten Body; and then create
another the matter of an hours space before its precipitation into such a
Receptacle: which of these Actions would be the most diminutive of the Creators
honor? would not the difference be insensible, and the scandal, if any, the
same in both? Yet thus lies the case just betwixt the Pre-existentiaries and
us. Let the Reader consider how senseless this Author is in saying the case
betwixt the Pre-existentiaries and him is just thus, when they are just nothing
akin: for his two Souls are both unlapsed, but one of the Pre-existentiaries
lapsed, and so subjected to the Laws of Nature. In his case God acts freely,
raising himself, as it were, out of his Seat to create an immaculate Soul, and
put into a foul Body; but in the other case God only is a looker on, there is
only his Permission, not his Action. And the vast difference of time, he
salves it with such a Quibble as this, as if it were nothing, because thousands
of Ages ago, in respect of God and his Eternity, is not an hour before. He
might as well say the difference betwixt the most glorious Angel and a Flea is
nothing, because in comparison of God both are so indeed. Wherefore this
Anti-Pre-existentiary is such a Trifler, that I am half ashamed that I have
brought him upon the Stage.

But yet I will commend his Craft, though not his Faithfulness, that he had the
wit to omit the proposing of Buggery as well as of Adultery, and the
endeavoring to show how graceful and agreeable to God, how congruous and
proportionate it were to his immense Grandeur and Majesty, to create a Soul on
purpose (immaculate and undefiled) to actuate the obscene Emissions of a Brute
having to do with a Woman, or of a Man having to do with a Brute: For both
Women and Brutes have been thus impregnated, and brought forth humane Births,
as you may see abundantly testified in Fortunius Licetus; it would be too long
to produce Instances.

This Opinion of Gods creating Souls, and putting them into Bodies upon
incestuous and adulterous Coitions, how exceeding absurd and unbecoming the
Sanctity of the Divine Majesty it seemed to the Churches of Aethiopia, you may
see in the History of Jobus Ludolphus. How intolerable therefore and execrable
would this Doctrine have appeared unto them, if they had thought of the
prodigious fruits of successful Buggery? The words of Ludolfus are these:
Perabsurdum esse si quis Deum astrictum dicat pro adulterinis and incestuosis
partubus animas quotidie novas creare. ^st. Aethiop. lib. 3. cap. 5. What would
they then say of creating a new Soul, for the Womb of a Beast bugger'd by a
Man, or of a Woman bugger'd by a Beast!

Page 12. Methinks that may be done at a cheaper rate, etc. How it may be done
with more agreeableness to the Goodness, Wisdom, and Justice of God, has been
even now hinted by me, nor need I repeat it.

Page 13. It seems very incongruous and unhandsome, to suppose that God should
create two Souls for the supply of one monstrous Body. And there is the same
reason for several other Monstrosities, which you may take notice of in
Fortunius Licetus, lib. 2. cap. 58. One with seven humane heads and arms, and
Ox-feet; others with Men's bodies, but with a head the one of a Goose, the other
of an Elephant, etc. In which it is a strong presumption humane Souls lodged,
but in several others certain. How does this consist with Gods fresh creating
humane Souls pure and innocent, and putting them into Bodies? This is by the
aforesaid Anti-Pre-existentiary at first answered only by a wide gape or yawn
of Admiration. And indeed it would make any one stare and wonder how this can
consist with Gods immediately and freely intermeddling with the Generation of
Men, as he did at first in the Creation. For out of his holy hands all things
come clean and neat. Many little efforts he makes afterward to salve this
difficulty of Monsters, but yet in his own judgment the surest is the last;
That God did purposely tie fresh created Souls to these monstrous shapes, that
they whose Souls sped better, might humbly thank him. Which is as wisely
argued, as if one should first with himself take it for granted that God
determines some men to monstrous Debaucheries and Impieties, and then fancy
this the use of it, that the Spectators of them may with better pretense than
the Pharisee, cry out, Lord, we thank thee that we are not as these men are.
There is nothing permitted by God, but it has its use some way or other; and
therefore it cannot be concluded, because that an Event has this or that use,
therefore God by his immediate and free Omnipotence effected it. A
Pre-existentiary easily discerns that these Monstrosities plainly imply that
God does not create Souls still for every humane Coition, but that having
pre-existed, they are left to the great Laws of the Universe and Spirit of
Nature; but yet dares not conclude that God by his free Omnipotence determines
those monstrous Births, as serviceable as they seem for the evincing so noble a
Theory.

Page 15. That God on the seventh day rested from all his works. This one would
think were an Argument clear enough that he creates nothing since the
celebration of the first seventh days rest. For if all his works are rested
from, then the creation of Souls (which is a work, nay a Masterpiece amongst
his works scarce inferior to any) is rested from also. But the abovementioned
Opposer of Pre-existence is not at a loss for an Answer; (for his Answers being
slight, are cheap and easy to come by:) He says therefore, That this supposes
only that after that time he ceased from creating new Species. A witty
Invention! As if God had got such an easy habit by once creating the things he
created in the six days, that if he but contained himself within those kinds of
things, though he did hold on still creating them, that it was not Work, but
mere Play or Rest to him, in comparison of his former labor. What will not
these men fancy, rather than abate of their prejudice against an opinion they
have once taken a toy against! When the Author to the Hebrews says, He that has
entered into his rest, has ceased from his own works, as God ceased from his;
verily this is small comfort or instruction, if it were as this
Anti-Pre-existentiary would have it: for if God ceased only from creating new
Species, we may, notwithstanding our promised Rest, be tied to run through new
instances of labors or sins, provided they be but of those kinds we
experienced before. To any unprejudiced understanding, this sense must needs
seem forced and unnatural, thus to restrain Gods Rest to the Species of things,
and to engage him to the daily task of creating Individuals. The whole
Ethiopian Church is of another mind: Qui animam humanam quotidie non creari
hoc argumento asserunt, quod Deus sexto die perfecerit totum opus Creationis.
See Ludolfus in the place above cited.

Chap. 3. page 17. Since the Images of Objects are very small and
inconsiderable in our brains, etc. I suppose he mainly relates to the Objects
of Sight, whose chief, if not only Images, are in the fund of the Eye; and
thence in virtue of the Spirituality of our Soul extended thither also, and of
the due qualification of the Animal Spirits are transmitted to the Perceptive
of the Soul within the brain. But how the bignesses and distances of Objects
are conveyed to our cognoscence, it would be too tedious to signify here. See
Dr. H. Moore's Enchiridion Metaphysicum, cap. 19.

Page 17. Were it not that our Souls use a kind of Geometry, etc. This alludes
to that pretty conceit of Des Carts in his Dioptricks, the solidity of which I
must confess I never understood. For I understand not but that if my Soul
should use any such Geometry, I should be conscious thereof, which I do not
find my self. And therefore I think those things are better understood out of
that Chapter of the Book even now mentioned.

Page 17. And were the Soul quite void of all such implicit Notions, it would
remain as senseless, etc. There is no sensitive Perception indeed, without
Reflection; but the Reflection is an immediate attention of the Soul to that
which affects her, without any circumstance of Notions intervening for enabling
her for sensitive Operations. But these are witty and ingenious Conjectures,
which the Author by reading Des Carts, or otherhow, might be encouraged to
entertain. To all sensitive Objects the Soul is an Abrasa Tabula, but for Moral
and Intellectual Principles, their Idea's or Notions are essential to the Soul.

Page 18: For Sense teaches no general Propositions, etc. Nor need it do any
thing else but exhibit some particular Object, which our Understanding being an
Ectypon of the Divine Intellect necessarily, when it has thoroughly sisted it,
concludes it to answer such a determinate Idea eternally and unalterably one
and the same, as it stands in the Divine Intellect, which cannot change; and
therefore that Idea must have the same properties and respects for ever. But of
this, enough here. It will be better understood by reading the Discourse of
Truth, and the Annotations thereon.

Page 18. But from something more sublime and excellent. From the Divine or
Archetypal Intellect, of which our Understanding is the Ectypon, as was said
before.

Page 21. And so can only transmit their natural qualities. They are so far
from transmitting their Moral Pravities, that they transmit from themselves no
qualities at all. For to create a Soul, is to concreate the qualities or
properties of it, not out of the Creator, but out of nothing. So that the
substance and all the properties of it are out of nothing.

Page 22. Against the nature of an immaterial Being, a chief property of which
is to be indiscerpible. The evasion to the force of this Argument by some
Anti-Pre-existentiaries is, that it is to philosophize at too high a rate of
confidence, to presume to know what the nature of a Soul or Spirit is. But for
brevities sake, I will refer such Answerers as these to Dr. H. Moore's brief
Discourse of the true Notion of a Spirit, printed lately with Saducismus
Triumphatus; and I think he may be thence as sure that Indiscerpibility is an
essential property of a Spirit, as that there are any Spirits in the Universe:
and this methinks should suffice any ingenuous and modest Opposer. But to think
there is no knowledge but what comes in at our Senses, is a poor, beggarly, and
precarious Principle, and more becoming the dotage of Hobbianism, than men of
clearer Parts and more serene Judgments.

Page 22. By separable Emissions that pass from the flame, etc. And so set the
Wick and Tallow on motion. But these separable Emissions that pass from the
flame of the lighted Candle, pass quite away, and so are no part of the flame
enkindled. So weak an Illustration is this of what these Traducters would have.

Chap. 4. page 32. Which the Divine Piety and Compassion has set up again,
that so, so many of his excellent Creatures might not be lost and undone
irrecoverably, but might act anew, etc. To this a more elegant Pen and refined
Wit objects thus: Now is it not highly derogatory to the infinite and unbounded
Wisdom of God, that he should detrude those Souls which he so seriously
designs to make happy, into a state so hazardous, wherein he sees it to be
ten thousand to one but that they will corrupt and defile themselves, and so
make them more miserable here and to eternity hereafter? A strange method of
recovering this, to put them into such a fatal necessity of perishing: it is but
an odd contrivance for their restoration to Happiness, to use such means to
compass it which it is ten thousand to one but will make them infinitely more
miserable. This he objects in reference to what the Author of Lux Orientalis
writes, chap. 2. where he says, It is a thousand to one but Souls detruded into
these bodies will corrupt and desile themselves, and so make themselves
miserable here and to eternity hereafter.

And much he quotes to the same purpose out of the Account of Origin. Where the
Souls great disadvantages to Virtue and Holiness, what from the strong
inclinations of the Body, and what from National Customs and Education in this
Terrestrial State, are lively set out with a most moving and tragical
Eloquence, to show how unlikely it is that God should put innocent and
immaculate Souls of his own creation immediately, into such Bodies, and so hard
and even almost fatal condition of miscarrying. Upon which this subtle
Anti-Pre-existentiary: Thus you see, says he, what strong Objections and
Arguments the Pre-existentiaries urge with most noise and clamor, are against
themselves. If therefore these Phenomenon be inexplicable, without the
Origenian Hypothesis, they are so too with it; and if so, then the result of
all is, that they are not so much Arguments of Pre-existence as Aspersions of
Providence. This is smartly and surprizingly spoken. But let us consider more
punctually the state of the matter.

Here then we are first to observe, how cunningly this shrewd Antagonist
conceals a main stroke of the Supposition, viz. That the Divine Pity and
Compassion to lapsed Souls, that had otherwise fallen into an eternal state of
Silence and Death, had set up Adam for their relief, and endued him with such a
Paradisiacal body of so excellent a constitution to be transmitted to all his
Posterity, and invesled him, in virtue of this, with so full power non
peccandi, that if he and his Posterity were not in an happy flourishing
condition as to their eternal interest of Holiness and Virtue, it would be long
of himself. And what could God do more correspondently to his Wisdom and
Goodness, dealing with free Agents, such as humane Souls are, than this? And
the thing being thus stated, no Objections can be brought against the
Hypothesis, but such as will invade the inviolable Truths of Faith and Orthodox
Divinity.

Secondly, We are to observe, how this cunning Objector has got these two
Pre-existentiaries upon the hip for their youthful flowers of Rhetoric, when
one says, it is hundreds to one; the other, ten thousand to one, that Souls
will miscarry put into these disadvantages of the Terrestrial state, by which
no candid Reader will understand any more, than that it is exceeding difficult
for them to escape the pollutions of this lower World once incorporated into
Terrestrial Bodies. But it being granted possible for them to emerge, this is a
great grace and favor of the Divine Goodness to such peccant wretches, that
they are brought out of the state of eternal Silence and Death, to try their
Fortunes once more, though encumbered with so great difficulties which the
Divine Nemesis suffers to return upon them. That therefore they are at all in a
condition of recovery, is from the Goodness and Mercy of God; that their
condition is so hard, from his Justice, they having been so foully peccant. And
his wisdom being only to contrive what is most agreeable to his Mercy and
Justice, it is not at all derogatory to the infinite and unbounded Wisdom of
God thus to deal with lapsed Souls. For though he does seriously intend to make
them happy, yet it must be in a way correspondent to his Justice as well as
Mercy.

Thirdly and Lastly, Besides that the Spirit of the Lord pervades the whole
Earth ready to assist the sincere; there is moreover a mighty weight of mercy
added in the Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ to the world, so that the
retriving of the Souls of men out of their Death and Silence into this
Terrestrial state, in which there is these helps to the sincere, it is
manifestly worthy the Divine Wisdom and Goodness. For those it takes no effect
with, (they beginning the world again on this stage) they shall be judged only
according to what they have done here, there being an eternal obliteration as
well as oblivion of the acts of their Pre-existent state; but those that this
merciful Dispensation of God has taken any effect upon here, their sincere
desires may grow in^o higher accomplishments in the future state. Which may
something mitigate the honor of that seeming universal squalid estate of the
Sons of men upon earth. Which in that it is so ill, is rightly imputed by both
Jews and Christians and the divinest Philosophers to a Lapse, and to the Mercy
and Grace of God that it is no worse. From whence it may appear, that that
argument for Pre-existence, that God does not put newly created innocent Souls
into such disadvantageous circumstances of a terrestrial Incorporation, though
partly out of Mercy, partly out of Justice, he has thought fit lapsed Souls
should be so disposed of, that this I say is no aspersion of Divine Providence.

Page 36. And now I cannot think of any place in the sacred Volume more, that
could make a tolerable plea against this Hypothesis, etc. It is much that the
ingenious Author thought not of Romans 9. 11. [For the Children being not yet
born, neither having done either good or evil, that the purpose of God
according to Election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls.] This
is urged by Anti-preexistentiaries, as a notable place against Pre-existence.
For, say they, how could Esau and Jacob be said neither to have done good nor
evil, if they pre-existed before they came into this world? For if they
pre-existed, they acted; and if they acted, they being rational Souls, they
must have done either good or evil. This makes an handsome show at first sight;
but if we consult Genesis 25. we shall plainly see that this is spoke of Jacob and
Esau yet struggling in the Womb; as it is said in this Text, For the Children
being not yet born; but struggling in the Womb, as you may see in the other.
Which plainly therefore respects their actions in this life, upon which
certainly the mind of St. Paul was fixed. As if he should have expressly said:
For the Children being not yet born, but struggling in the Womb, neither having
done either good or evil in this life as being still in the Womb, it was said
of them to Rebeckah, The elder shall serve the younger. Which sufficiently
illustrates the matter in hand with St. Paul; that as Jacob was preferred
before Esau in the Womb, before either of them was born to act here on the
Earth, and that therefore done without any respect to their actions; so the
purpose of God touching his people should be of free Election, not of Works.

That of Zachary also, Chap. 12. 1. I have heard alleged by some as a place on
which no small stress may be laid. The Lord is there said to be the Former of
the Spirit of Man within him. Wherefore they argue, If the Spirit of Man be
formed within him, it did never pre-exist without him. But we answer, That
(...) is but the same that (...). And then the sense is easy and natural, that
the Spirit that is in man, God is the Former or Creator of it. But this Text
defines nothing of the time of forming it. There are several other Texts
alleged, but it is so easy to answer them, and would take up so much time and
room, that I think fit to omit them, remembering my scope to be short
Annotations, not a tedious Commentary.

Page 41. Mr. Ben Israel in his Problems De Creatione assures us, that
Pre-existence was the common belief, etc. That this was the common opinion of
the wiser men amongst the Jews, R. Menasse Ben Israel himself told me at London
with great freedom and assurance, and that there was a constant tradition
thereof; which he said in some sense was also true concerning the Trinity, but
that more obscure. But this of Pre-existence is manifest up and down in the
Writings of that very ancient and learned Jew Philo Judaeus; as also something
toward a Trinity, if I remember aright.

Chap. 5. Page 46. We should doubtless have retained some remembrance of that
condition. And the rather, as one ingeniously argues, because our state in this
life is a state of punishment. Upon which he concludes, That if the calamities
of this life were inflicted upon us only as a punishment of sins committed in
another, Providence would have provided some effectual means to preserve them
in our memories. And therefore, because we find no remainders of any such
Records in our minds, it is, says he, sufficient evidence to all sober and
impartial inquirers, that our living and sinning in a former state is as false
as inevident.

But to this it may be answered, That the state we are put in, is not a state
only of punishment, but of a merciful trial; and it is sufficient that we find
our selves in a lapsed and sinful condition, our own Consciences telling us
when we do amiss, and calling upon us to amend. So that it is needless
particularly to remember our faults in the other world, but the time is better
spent in faithfully endeavoring to amend our selves in this, and to keep our
selves from all faults of what nature soever. Which is a needless thing our
memory should discover to us to have been of old committed by us, when our
Consciences urge to us that they are never to be committed; and the Laws of
holy Lawgivers and divine Instructers, or wise Sages over all the world,
assist also our Conscience in her office. So that the end of Gods Justice by
these inward and outward Monitors, and by the cross and afflicting Rancounters
in this present state, is to be attained to, viz. the amendment of Delinquents
if they be not refractory.

And we were placed on this stage as it were to begin the world again, so as if
we had not existed before. Whence it seems meet, that there should be an utter
obliteration of all that is past, so as not to be able by memory to connect the
former life and this together. The memory whereof, if we were capable of it,
would be inconsistent with the orderly proceedings of this, and overdoze us and
make us half moped to the present Scene of things. Whenas the Divine Purpose
seems to be, that we should also experience the natural pleasures and
satisfactions of this life, but in an orderly and obedient way, keeping to the
prescribed rules of Virtue and Holiness. And thus our faithfulness being
exercised (...) in those things which are more estranged from our nobler and
diviner nature, God may at last restore us to what is more properly our own.

But in the mean time, that saying which the Poet puts in the mouth of Jupiter,
touching the inferior Deities, may not misbeseem the mercy and wisdom of the
true God concerning lapsed Souls incorporate into terrestrial Bodies. Has
quoniam coeli nondum dignamur honor,
Quas dedimus certe terras habitare sinamus.
Let them not be distracted betwixt a sensible remembrance of the Joys and
Glories of our exterior Heaven above, and the present fruition of things
below, but let them live an holy and heavenly life upon Earth, exercising their
Graces and Virtues in the use and enjoyment of these lower earthly Objects,
till I call them up again to Heaven, where, after this long swoond they are
fallen into, they will more seasonably remember their former Paradisiacal state
upon its recovery, and reagnize their ancient home. Wherefore if the remembering
or forgetting of the former state depend absolutely upon the free contrivance
of the Divine Wisdom, Goodness, and Justice, as this ingenious Opposer seems to
suppose, I should even upon that very point of fitness conceive that an utter
oblivion of the former state is interwoven into the fate and nature of lapsed
Souls by a Divine Nemesis, though we do not conceive explicitly the manner
how. And yet the natural reasons the Author of Lux Orientalis produces in the
sequel of his Discourse, seem highly probable.

For first, As we had forgot some lively Dream we dreamt but last night, unless
we had met with something in the day of a peculiar virtue to remind us of it,
so we meeting with nothing in this lower stage of things that lively resembles
those things in our former state, and has a peculiar fitness to rub up our
Memory, we continue in an utter oblivion of them. As suppose a man was lively
entertained in his sleep with the pleasure of dreaming of a fair Crystal River,
whose Banks were adorned with Trees and Flags in the flower, and those large
Flies with blue and golden-colour'd Bodies, and broad thin Wings curiously
wrought and transparent, hovering over them, with Birds also singing on the
Trees, Sun and Clouds above, and sweet breezes of Air, and Swans in the River
with their wings sometimes lifted up like sails against the wind. Thus he
passed the night, thinks of no such thing in the morning, but rising goes about
his occasions. But toward evening a Servant of a Friend of his presents him
with a couple of Swans from his Master. The sight of which Swans striking his
Perceptive as sensibly as those in his Dream, and being one of the most
extraordinary and eximious Objects of his Night-vision, presently reminds him
of the whole scene of things represented in his sleep. But neither Sun, nor
Clouds, nor Trees, nor any such ordinary thing could in any likelihood have
reminded him of his Dream. And besides, it was the lively resemblance betwixt
the Swans he saw in his sleep, and those he saw waking, that did so effectually
rub up his memory. The want therefore of such occurrences in this life to
remind us of the passages of the former, is a very reasonable account why we
remember nothing of the former state.

But here the Opposers of Pre-existence pretend that the joyous and glorious
Objects in the other state do so pierce and transport the Soul, and that she
was inured to them so long, that though there were nothing that resembled them
here, the impression they make must be indelible, and that it is impossible she
should forget them. And moreover, that there is a similitude betwixt the things
of the upper World and the lower, which therefore must be an help to memory.

But here, as touching the first, they do not consider what a Weapon they have
given into my hand against themselves. For the long inuredness to those
Celestial Objects abates the piercingness of their transport; and before they
leave those Regions, according to the Platonic or Origenian Hypothesis, they
grow cooler to such enjoyments: so that all the advantages of that piercing
transport for memory, are lost. And besides, in virtue of that piercing
Transport, no Soul can call into memory what she enjoyed formerly, but by
recalling herself into such a Transport, which her Terrestrial Vehicle makes
her incapable of.

For the memory of external Transactions is sealed upon us by some passionate
corporeal impress in conjunction with them (which makes them whip Boys
sometimes at the boundaries of their Parish, that they may better remember it
when they are old men;) which Impress if it be lost, the memory of the thing it
self is lost. And we may be sure it is lost in Souls incorporate in Terrestrial
Vehicles, they having lost their Aereal and Celestial, and being fatally
incapacitated so much as to conceit how they were affected by the External
Objects of the other World, and so to remember how they felt them. And
therefore all the descriptions that men of a more Ethereal and Entheous temper
adventure on in this life, are but the Roamings of their Minds in virtue of
their Constitution toward the nature of the heavenly things in general, not a
recovery of the memory of past Experience; this State not affording so lively a
representment of the Pathos that accompanied the actual sense of those things,
as to make us think that we once really enjoyed them before. That is only to
be collected by Reason; the noble exercise of which faculty, in the discovering
of this Arcanum of our Pre-existence, had been lost, if it could have been
detected by a compendious Memory. But if ever we recover the memory of our
former State, it will be when we are re-entred into it; we then being in a
capacity of being really struck with the same Pathos we were before, in virtue
whereof the Soul may remember this was her pristine condition.

And therefore to answer to the second, Though there may be some faintness of
resemblance betwixt the things of the other State and this, yet other
peculiarities also being required, and the former sensible Pathos to be
recovered, which is impossible in this State, it is likewise impossible for us
to remember the other in this.

The second Argument of the Author for the proving the unlikeliness of our
remembering the other State is, the long intermission and discontinuance from
thinking of those things. For it is plain that such discontinuance or desuetude
bereaves us of the memory of such things as we were acquainted with in this
World. Insomuch as if an ancient man should read the Verses or Themes he made
when he was a Schoolboy, without his name subscribed to them, though he pumpt
and sweat for them when he made them, could not tell they were his own. How
then should the Soul remember what she did or observed many hundreds, nay
thousands of years ago?

But yet our Authors Antagonist has the face to make nothing of this Argument
neither: Because, forsooth, it is not so much the desuetude of thinking of one
thing, but the thinking of others, that makes us forget that one thing. What a
shuffle is this! For if the Soul thought on that one thing as well as on other
things, it would remember it as well as them. Therefore it is not the thinking
of other things, but the not thinking of that, that makes it forgotten. Usus
prompt^s facit, as in general, so in particular. And therefore disuse in any
particular slackens at first, and after abolishes the readiness of the Mind to
think thereof. Whence sleepiness and sluggishness is the Mother of
Forgetfulness, because it disuses the Soul from thinking of things. And as for
those seven Chronical Sleepers that slept in a Cave from Decius his time to the
reign of Theodosius junior, I dare say it would have besotted them without a
Miracle, and they would have rose out of their sleep no more wise than a Wisp;
I am sure not altogether so wise as this awkward Arguer for memory of Souls in
their Pre-existent state after so hugely long a discontinuance from it. But for
their immediately coming out of an Ethereal Vehicle into a Terrestrial, and
yet forgetting their former state, what Example can be imagined of such a
thing, unless that of the Messiah, who yet seems to remember his former
glorious condition, and to pray that he may return to it again? Though for my
part I think it was rather Divine Inspiration than Memory, that enabled him to
know that matter, supposing his Soul did pre-exist.

Our Authors third and last Argument to prove that lapsed Souls in their
Terrestrial condition forget their former state, is from observation how
deteriorating changes in this earthly Body spoils or quite destroys the Memory,
the Soul still abiding therein; such as. Casualties, Diseases, and old Age,
which changes the tenor of the Spirits, and makes them less useful for memory,
as also it is likely the Brain it self. Wherefore there being a more
deteriorating change to the Soul in coming into an earthly Body, instead of an
aereal or ethereal, the more certainly will her memory of things which she
experienced in that state, be washed out or obliterated in this.

Here our Authors Antagonist answers, That though changes in body may often
weaken, and sometimes utterly spoil the memory of things past, yet it is not
necessary that the Souls changing of her body should therefore do so, because
it is not so injurious to her faculties. Which if it were, not only our
Memory, but Reason also should have been casheered and loft by our migration
out of those Vehicles we formerly actuated, into these we now enliven; but that
still remaining sound and entire, it is a sign that our Memory would do so
too, if we had pre-existed in other bodies before, and had any thing to
remember. And besides, if the bare translocation of our Souls out of one body
into another, would destroy the memory of things the Soul has experienced, it
would follow, that when People by death are summoned hence into the other
state, that they shall be quite bereaved of their Memory, and so carry neither
applause nor remorse of Conscience into the other World; which is monstrously
absurd and impious. This is the main of his Answer, and most what in his own
words. But of what small force it is, we shall now discover, and how little
pertinent to the business.

For first, we are to take notice that the deteriorating change in the Body, or
deteriorating state by change of Bodies, is understood of a debilitative,
diminutive, or privative, not depravative deterioration; the latter of which
may be more injurious to the faculties of the Soul, though in the same Body,
such a deteriorating change causing Phrensies and outrageous Madness. But as
sor diminutive or privative deterioration by change, the Soul by changing her
Aereal Vehicle for a Terrestrial, is (comparing her latter state with her
former) much injured in her faculties or operations of them; all of them are
more slow and stupid, and their aptitude to exert the same Phantasms of things
that occurred to them in the other State, quite taken away, by reason of the
heavy and dull, though orderly constitution of the Terrestrial Tenement; which
weight and stupor utterly indisposes the Soul to recall into her mind the scene
of her former state, this load perpetually swaying down her thoughts to the
Objects of this.

Nor does it at all follow, because Reason is not lost, therefore Memory, if
there were any such thing as Pre-existence, would still abide. For the
universal principles of Reason and Morality are essential to the Soul, and
cannot be obliterated, no not by any death: but the knowledge of any particular
external Objects is not at all essential to the Soul, nor consequently the
memory of them; and therefore the Soul in the state of silence being stripped of
them, cannot recover them in her incorporation into a Terrestrial Body. But her
Reason, with the general principles thereof, being essential to her, she can,
as well as this State will permit, ex^rcise them upon the Objects of this Scene
of the Earth and visible World, so far as it is discovered by her outward
senses, she looking out at those windows of this her earthly Prison, to
contemplate them. And she has the faculty and exercise of Memory still, in such
a sense as she has of sensitive Perception, whose Objects she does remember,
being yet to all former impresses in the other state a mere Abrasa Tabula.

And lastly, it is a mere mistake of the Opposer, or worse, that he makes the
Pre-existentiaries to impute the loss of memory in Souls of their former state,
merely to their coming into other Bodies; when it is not bare change of Bodies,
but their descent into worser Bodies more dull and obstupifying, to which they
impute this loss of memory in lapsed Souls. This is a real death to them,
according to that ancient Aenigm of that abstruse Sage, (...) We live their
^eath, namely of separate Souls, but are dead to their life. But the changing
of our Earthly Body for an Aereal or Ethereal, this is not Death, but
Reviviscency, in which all the energies of the Soul are (not depressed, but)
exalted, and our Memory with the rest quickened; as it was in Esdras after he
had drunk down that Cup ofsered to him by the Angel, full of Liquor like Fire,
which filled his Heart with Understanding, and strengthened his Memory, as the
Text says.

Thus we see how all Objections against the three Reasons of lapsed Souls
losing the memory of the things of the other state, vanish into smoke.
Wheresore they every one of them single being so sound, all three put together
methinks should not fail of convincing the most refractory of this Truth, That
though the Soul did pre-exist and act in another state, yet she may utterly
forget all the Scenes thereof in this.

Page 46. Now if the reasons why we lose the remembrance of our former life be
greater, etc. And that they are so, does appear in our Answer to the Objections
made against the said Reasons, if the Reader will consider them.

Page 50. And thereby have removed all prejudices, etc. But there is yet one
Reason against Pre-existence which the ingenious Author never thought of, urged
by the Anti-Preexistentiaries, namely, That it implies the rest of the Planets
peopled with Mankind, it being unreasonable to think that all Souls descended
in their lapse to this only Earth of Ours. And if there be lapsed Souls there,
how shall they be recovered? shall Christ undergo another and another death for
them? But I believe the ingenious Author would have looked upon this but as a
mean and trifling Argument, there being no force in any part thereof. For why
may not this Earth be the only Hospital, Nosocomium or Coemeterium, speaking
Platonically, of sinfully lapsed Souls? And then suppose others lapsed in other
Planets, what need Christ die again for them, when one drop of his Blood is
sufficient to save myriads of Worlds? Whence it may seem a pity there is not
more Worlds than this Earth to be redeemed by it. Nor is it necessary they
should historically know it. And if it be, the Eclipse of the Sun at his
Passion by some inspired Prophets might give them notice of it, and describe to
them as orderly an account of the Redemption, as Moses does of the Creation,
though he stood not by while the World was framed, but it was revealed to him
by God. And lastly, it is but a rash and precarious Position, to say that the
infinite Wisdom of God has no more ways than one to save lapsed Souls. It is
sufficient that we are assured that this is the only way for the saving of the
Sons of Adam; and these are the fixed bounds of revealed Truth in the Holy
Scripture which appertains to us Inhabitants on Earth. But as for the Economy
of his infinite Wisdom in the other Planets, if we did but reflect upon our
absolute ignorance thereof, we would have the discretion not to touch upon that
Topic, unless we intended to make our selves ridiculous, while we endeavor to
make others so.

Chap. 6. page 51. Now as the infinite goodness of the Deity obliges him
always to do good, so by the same to do that which is best, etc. To elude the
force of this chief Argument of the Pre-existentiaries, an ingenious Opposer
has devised a way which seems worth our considering, which is this; viz. By
making the Idea of God to consist mainly in Dominion and Sovereignty, the
Scriptures representing him under no other notion than as the Supreme Lord and
Sovereign of the Universe. Wherefore nothing is to be attributed to him that
enterferes with the uncontroulableness of his Dominion. And therefore, says he,
they that assert Goodness to be a necessary Agent that cannot but do that which
is best, directly supplant and destroy all the Rights of his Power and
Dominion. Nay, he adds afterward, That this notion of Gods goodness is most
apparently inconsistent, not only with his Power and Dominion, but with all
his other moral Perfections. And for a further explication of his mind in this
matter, he adds afterward, That the Divine Will is endued with the highest
kind of liberty, as it imports a freedom not only from foreign Violence, but
also from inward Necessity: For spontaneity, or immunity from coaction, without
indifferency, carries in it as great necessity as those motions that proceed
from Violence or Mechanism. From whence he concludes, That the Divine Will
cannot otherwise be determined than by its own intrinsic energie. And lastly,
Forasmuch as no Courtisie can oblige, but what is received from one that had a
power not to bestow them, if God necessarily acted according to his Goodness,
and not out of mere choice and liberty of Will, there were no thanks nor praise
due to him; which therefore would take away the duties of Religion. This is the
main of his Hypothesis, whereby he would defeat the force of this Argument for
the Pre-existence of Souls, taken from the Goodness of God. Which this
Hypothesis certainly would do, if it were true; and therefore we will briefly
examine it.

First therefore I answer, That though the Scriptures do frequently represent
God as the Lord and Sovereign of the Universe, yet it does not conceal his
other Attributes of Goodness and Mercy, and the like. But that the former
should be so much inculcated, is in reference to the begetting in the People
Awe and Obedience to him. But it is an invalid consequence, to draw from hence
that the Idea of God does mainly consist in Dominion and Sovereignty; which
abstracted from his other Attributes of Wisdom and Goodness, would be a very
black and dark representation of him, and such as this ingenious Writer could
not himself contemplate without aversation and horror. How then can the Idea of
God chiefly consist in this? It is the most terrifying indeed, but not the most
noble and accomplishing part in the Idea of the Deity.

This Sovereignty then is such as is either bounded or not bounded by any other
Attributes of God. If bounded by none, then he may do as well unwisely as
wisely, unjustly as justly. If bounded by Wisdom and Justice, why is it bounded
by them, but that it is better so to be than otherwise? And Goodness being as
essential to God as Wisdom and Justice, why may not his Sovereignty be bounded
by that as well as by the other, and so he be bound from himself of himself to
do as well what is best as what is better. This consists with his absolute
Sovereignty, as well as the other. And indeed what can be absolute Sovereignty
in an intelligent Being, if this be not? viz. fully and entirely to follow the
will and inclinations of its own nature, without any check or control of any
one touching those over whom he rules.

Whence, in the second place, it appears that the asserting that Gods goodness
is a necessary Agent (in such a sense as Gods Wisdom and Justice are, which can
do nothing but what is wise and just) the asserting, I say, that it cannot but
do that which is the best, does neither directly nor indirectly supplant or
destroy any Rights of his Power or Dominion, forasmuch as he does fully and
plenarily act according to his own inclinations and will touching those that
are under his Dominion. But that his Will is always inclined or determined to
what is best, it is the Prerogative of the Divine Nature to have no other Wills
nor Inclinations but such.

And as for that in the third place, That this notion of Gods Goodness is
inconsistent with all his other moral Perfections, I say, that it is so far
from being inconsistent with them, that they cannot subsist without it, as they
respect the dealings of God with his Creatures. For what a kind of Wisdom or
Justice would that be that tended to no good? But I suspect his meaning is by
moral Perfections, Perfections that imply such a power of doing or not doing,
as is in humane actions; which if it be not allowed in God, his Perfections are
not moral. And what great matter is it if they be not, provided they be as they
are and ought to be, Divine? But to fancy moral actions in God, is to admit a
second kind of Anthropomorphitism, and to have unworthy conceits of the Divine
Nature. When it was just and wise for God to do so or so, and the contrary to
do otherwise, had he a freedom to decline the doing so? Then he had a freedom
to do unjustly and unwisely.

And yet in the fourth place he contends for the highest kind of liberty in the
Divine Will, such as imports a freedom not only from foreign Violence, but
also from inward Necessity, as if the Divine Will could be no otherwise
determined, than by its own intrinsic Energie, as if it willed so because it
willed so; which is a sad principle. And yet I believe this learned Writer will
not stick to say, that God cannot ^ye, cannot condemn myriads of innocent Souls
to eternal Torments. And what difference betwixt Impossibility and Necessity?
For Impossibility it self is only a Necessity of not doing; which is here
internal, arising from the excellency and absolute perfection of the Divine
Nature. Which is nothing like Mechanism for all that; Forasmuch as it is from a
clear understanding of what is best, and an unbyassed Will, which will most
certainly follow it, nor is determined by its own intrinsic Energy. That it is
otherwise with us, is our imperfection.

And lastly, That Beneficence does not oblige the Receiver of it to either
Praise or Thanksgiving when it is received from one that is so essentially
good, and constantly acts according to that principle, when due occasion is
offered, as if it were as absurd as to give thanks to the Sun for shining when
he can do no otherwise; I say, the case is not alike, because the Sun is an
inanimate Being, and has neither Understanding nor Will to approve his own
action in the exerting of it. And he being but a Creature, if his shining
depended upon his Will, it is a greater perfection than we can be assured would
belong to him, that he would unfailingly administer Light to the World with
such a steadiness of Will, as God sustains the Creation.

Undoubtedly all Thanks and Praise is due to God from us, although he be so
necessarily good, that he could not but create us and provide for us; forasmuch
as he has done this for our sakes merely (he wanting nothing) not for his own.
Suppose a rich Christian so inured to the works of Charity, that the Poor were
as certain of getting an Alms from him, as a Traveller is to quench his thirst
at a public Spring near the Highway; would those that received Alms from him
think themselves not obliged to Thanks? It may be you will say, they will thank
him, that they may not forfeit his Favor another time. Which Answer discovers
the spring of this Misconceit, which seems founded in self-love, as if all Duty
were to be resolved into that, and as if there were nothing owing to another,
but what implied our own profit. But though the Divine Goodness acts
necessarily* yet it does not blindly, but according to the Laws of Decorum and
Justice; which those that are unthankful to the Deity, may find the smart of.
But I cannot believe the ingenious Writer much in earnest in these points, he
so expressly declaring what methinks is not well consistent with them. For his
very words are these: God can never act contrary to his necessary and essential
properties, as because he is essentially wise, just and holy, he can do nothing
that is foolish, unjust, and wicked. Here therefore I demand, Are we not to
thank him and praise him for his actions of Wisdom, Justice, and Holiness,
though they be necessary?

And if Justice, Wisdom, and Holiness, be the essential properties of God,
according to which he does necessarily act and abstain from acting, why is not
his Goodness? when it is expressly said by the Wisdom of God incarnate, None is
good save one, that is God. Which must needs be understood of his essential
Goodness. Which therefore being an essential property as well as the rest, he
must necessarily act according to it. And when he acts in the Scheme of Anger
and Severity, it is in the behalf of Goodness; and when he imparts his Goodness
in lesser measures as well as in greater, it is for the good of the Whole, or
of the Universe. If all were Eye, where were the Hearing, etc. as the Apostle
argues? So that his Wisdom moderates the prompt outflowings of his Goodness,
that it may not outflow so, but that in the general it is for the best. And
therefore it will follow, that if the Pre-existence of Souls comply with the
Wisdom, Justice, and Holiness of God, that* none of these restrain his prompt
and parturient Goodness, that it must have caused humane Souls to pre-exist or
exist so soon as the Spirits of Angels did. And he must have a strange
quick-sightedness that can discern any clashing of that act of Goodness with
any of the abovesaid Attributes.

Chap. 7. page 56. God never acts by mere Will or groundless Humor, etc. We
men have unaccountable inclinations in our irregular and depraved Composition,
have blind lusts or desires to do this or that, and it is our present ease and
pleasure to fulfill them; and therefore we fancy it a privilege to be able to
execute these blind inclinations of which we can give no rational account, but
that we are pleased by fulfilling them. But it is against the Purity, Sanctity,
and Perfection of the Divine Nature, to conceive any such thing in Him; and
therefore a weakness in our Judgments to fancy so of him, like that of the
Anthropomorphites, that imagined God to be of Humane shape.

Page 59. That God made all things for himself. It is ignorance and ill nature
that has made some men abuse this Text to the proving that God acts out of
either an humourous or selfish principle, as if he did things merely to please
himself as self, not as he is that sovereign unself-inreressed Goodness, and
perfect Rectitude, which ought to be the measure of all things. But the Text
implies no such matter* For if you make (...) a Compound of a Preposition and
Pronoun, that so it may signify [for himself] which is no more than propter
se, it then will import that he made all things to satisfy his own Will and
Pleasure, whose Will and Pleasure results from the richness of his eternal
Goodness and Benignity of Nature, which is infinite and ineffable, provided
always that it be moderated by Wisdom, Justice, and Decorum. For from hence his
Goodness is so stinted or modified, that though he has made all things for his
own Will and Pleasure who is infinite Goodness and Benignity, yet there is a
day of Evil for the Wicked, as it follows in the Text, because they have not
walked answerably to the Goodness that God has offered them; and therefore
their punishment is in behalf of abused Goodness. And Bayns expressly interprets
this Text thus: Universa propter seipsum fecit Dominus; that is, says he,
Propter bonitatem suam; juxta illud Augustini, DE DOCTRINA CHRISTIANA, Quia
bonus est Deus, sumus and in quantum sumus boni sumus.

But (...) may be a Compound of a Participle and a Pronoun, and then it may
signify [for them that answer him] that is, walk anserably to his Goodness
which he affords them, or [for them that obey him] either way it is very good
sense. And then in opposition to these, it is declared, that the Wicked, that
is, the Disobedient or Despisers of his Goodness, he has (not made them wicked,
but they having made themselves so) appointed them for the day of Evil. For
some such Verb is to be supplied as is agreeable to the matter, as in that
passage in the Psalms; The Sun shall not burn thee by day, neither the Moon by
night. Where [burn] cannot be repeated, but some other more suitable Verb is to
be supplied.

Chap. 8. page 63. Since all other things are inferior to the good of Being.
This I suppose is to be understood in such a sense as that saying in Job, Skin
for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life. Otherwise the
condition of Being may be such, as it were better not to be at all, whatever
any dry-fancied Metaphysicians may dispute to the contrary.

Page 67. Indeed they may be morally immutable and illapsable; but this is
Grace, not Nature, etc. Not unless the Divine Wisdom has essentially interwoven
it into the natural constitution of our Souls, that as after such a time of the
exercise of their Plaistick on these Terrestrial Bodies, they, according to the
course of Nature, emerge into a plain use of their Reason, when for a time they
little differed from Brutes; so after certain periods of time well improved to
the perfecting their Nature in the sense and adherence to Divine things, there
may be awakened in them such a Divine Plastic faculty, as I may so speak, as
may eternally fix them to their Celestial or Angelical Vehicles, that they
shall never relapse again. Which Faculty may be also awakened by the free Grace
of the Omnipotent more maturely: Which if it be, Grace and Nature conspire
together to make a Soul everlastingly happy. Which actual Immutability does no
more change the species of a Soul, than the actual exercise of Reason does
after the time of her stupour in Infancy and in the Womb.

Page 67. I doubt not but that it is much better for rational Creatures, etc.
Namely, such as we experience our humane Souls to be. But for such kind of
Intellectual Creatures as have nothing to do with matter, they best understand
the privileges of their own state, and we can say nothing of them. But for us
under the conduct of our faithful and victorious Captain, the Soul of the
promised Messiah, through many Conflicts and Trials to emerge out of this
lapsed state, and regain again the possession of true Holiness and Virtue, and
therewith the Kingdom of Heaven with all its Beauty and Glories, will be such a
gratification to us, that we had never been capable of such an excess thereof,
had we not experienced the evils of this life, and the vain pleasures of it,
and had the remembrance of the endearing sufferings of our blessed Savior, of
his Aids and Supports, and of our sincere and conscientious adhering to him, of
our Conflicts and Victories to be enrolled in the eternal Records of the other
World.

Page 69. Wherefore as the Goodness of God obliges him not to make every
Planet a fixed Star, or every Star a Sun, etc. In all likelihood, as Galilaeus
had first observed, every fixed Star is a Sun. But the comparison is framed
according to the conceit of the Vulgar. A thing neither unusual with, nor
misbecoming Philosophers.

Page 69. For this were to tie him to Contradictions, viz. to turn one
specifical form or essence into another. Matter indeed may receive several
modifications, but is still real Matter, nor can be turned into a Spirit; and
so Spirits specifically different, are untransmutable one into another,
according to the distinct Idea's in the eternal Intellect of God. For else it
would imply that their essential properties were not essential properties, but
loose adventitious Accidents, and such as the essence and substance of such a
Spirit, could subsist as well without as with them, or as well with any others
as with these.

Page 69. That we should have been made peccable and liable to defection. And
this may the more easily be allowed, because this defection is rather the
affecting of a less good, than any pursuing of what is really and absolutely
evil. To cavil against Providence for creating a Creature of such a double
capacity, seems as unreasonable as to blame her for making Zooph^ton's, or
rather Amphibion's. And they are both to be permitted to live according to the
nature which is given them. For to make a Creature fit for either capacity, and
to tie him up to one, is for God to do repugnantly to the Workmanship of his
own hands. And how little hurt there is done by experiencing the things of
either Element to Souls that are reclaimable, has been hinted above. But those
that are wilfully obstinate, and do despite to the Divine Goodness, it is not
at all inconsistent with this Goodness, that they bear the smart of their
obstinacy, as the ingenious Author argues very well.

Chap. 9. page 73. Have asserted it to be impossible in the nature of the
thing, etc. And this is the most solid and unexceptionable Answer to this
Objection, That it is a Repugnancy in Nature, that this visible World that
consists in the motion and succession of things, should be either ab aeterno,
or insnite in extension. This is made ou^ clearly and amply in Dr. H. Moore's
Enchiridion Metaphysicum, cap. 10. which is also more briefly touched upon in
his Advertisements upon Mr. Jos Glanvil's Letter written to him upon the
occasion of the Stirs at Tedworth, and is printed with the second Edition of
his Saducismus Triumphatus. We have now seen the most considerable Objections
against this Argument from the Goodness of God for proving the Pre-existence of
Souls, produced and answered by our learned Author.

But because I find some others in an Impugner of the Opinion of Pre-existence
urged with great confidence and clamor, I think it not amiss to bring them
into view also, after I have taken notice of his acknowledgment of the peculiar
strength of this Topic, which he does not only profess to be in truth the
strongest that is made use of, but seems not at all to envy it its strength,
while he writes thus.

That God is infinitely good, is a Position as true as himself; nor can he that
is furnished with the Reason of a man, offer to dispute it. Goodness
constitutes his very Deity, making him to be himself: for could he be arrayed
with all his other Attributes separate and abstract from this, they would be so
f^r from denominating him a God, that he would be but a prodigious Fiend, and
plenipotentiary Devil This is something a rude and uncourtly Ass^veration, and
unluck^y div^on of the Godhead into two parts, and calling one part a Devil.
But it is not to be imputed to any impiety in the Author of No-Pre-existence,
but to the roughness and boarishness of his style, the texture whereof is not
only Fustian, but over-often hard and stiff Buckram. He is not content to deny
his assent to an Opinion, but he must give it disgraceful Names. As in his
Epistle to the Reader, this darling Opinion of the greatest and divinest Sages
of the World visiting of late the Studies of some of more than ordinary Wit and
learning, he compares it to a Bug and sturdy Mendicant, that pretends to be
some Person of Quality; but he like a skilful Beadle of Beggars, lifting up the
skirts of her Veil, as his Phrase is, shows her to be a Counterfeit. How this
busy Beadle would have behaved himself, if he had had the opportunity of
lifting up the skirts of Moses's Veil when he had descended the Mount, I know
not. I dare not undertake for him, but that according to the coarsness of his
fancy he would have mistaken that lucid Spirit shining through the skin of
Moses's face, for some fiery Fiend, as he has somewhere the Spirit of Nature
for an Hobgobling. But there is no pleasure in insisting upon the rudenesses of
his style; he is best where he is most unlike himself, as he is here in the
residue of his Description of the Divine Goodness.

It Is Goodness, says he, that is the Head and Glory of Gods perfect Essence;
and therefore when Moses importuned him for a Vision of his Glory, he engaged
to display his Goodness to him. Could a man think that one that had engaged
thus far for the infiniteness of Gods Goodness, for its Headship over the other
Attributes, for its Glory above the rest, nay for its Constitutiveness of the
very Deity, as if this were the only (...), or God himself, the rest of Him
divided from this, a prodigious Fiend, or plenipotentiary Devil, should prove
the Author of No-Pre-existence a very contradiction to this Declaration? For to
be able to hold No-Pre-existence, he must desert the (...) of God, and betake
himself to the Devil-part of him, as he has rudely called it, to avoid this
pregnant proof for Pre-existence taken from the infinite Goodness of God. And
indeed he has picked out the very worst of that black part of God to serve his
turn, and that is Self will in the worst sense. Otherwise Goodness making God
to be himself, if it were his true and genuine Self-will, it were the Will of
his infinite Goodness, and so would necessarily imply Pre-existence.

But to avoid the dint of this Argument, he declares in the very same Section
for the Supremacy of the Will over the Goodness of the Divine Nature. Which is
manifestly to contradict what he said before, That Goodness is the Head and
Glory of Gods perfect Essence. For thus Will must have a Supremacy over the
Head of the Deity. So that there will be an Head over an Head, to make the
Godhead a Monster. And what is most insufferable of all, That he has chosen an
Head out of the Devil-part of the Deity, to use his own rude expression, to
control and lord it over what is the only God himself, the rest a Fiend
separate from this, according to his own acknowledgment. These things are so
infinitely absurd, that one would think that he could have no heart to go about
to prove them; and yet he adventures on it, and we shall briefly propose and
answer what he produces.

And this Supremacy of the Will, says he, over the Goodness of the Divine
Nature, may be made out both by Scripture and other forcible Evidences. The
Scriptures are three; the first, Psalm. 135. 6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased,
that did he in heaven, and in the earth, and in the seas, and in all deep
places. Now if we remember but who this Lord is, viz. he whom Goodness makes to
be himself, we may easily be assured what pleased him, namely, that which his
Wisdom discerned to be the best to be done; and therefore it is very right,
that whatsoever he pleased he should do throughout the whole Universe. The
second place is Mat. 20. 15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with
mine own? Yes I trow, every one must acknowledge that God has an (...) (for the
word is (...) in the Original) to dispose of what is his own; and indeed all is
his. No one has either a right or power to control him. But this does not
prove that he ever disposes of any thing otherwise than according to his Wisdom
and Goodness. If his Goodness be ever limited, it is limited by his Wisdom, but
so then as discerning such a limitation to be for the best. So that the measure
of Wisdoms determination is still Goodness, the only Head in the Divine Nature,
to which all the rest is subordinate. For that there are different degrees of
the Communication of the Divine Goodness in the Universe, is for the good of
the Whole. It is sufficient to hint these things; it would require a Volume to
enlarge upon them. And then for the last place, Exodus 33. 19. I will be
gracious to whom I will be gracious. This only implies that he does pro suo
jure, and without any motive from any one but himself, communicate more of his
Goodness to some Men or Nations than others. But that his Wisdom has not
discovered this to be best for the whole constitution of things, I challenge
any one to prove. But of this we shall have occasion to speak more afterward.
These are the Scriptures.

The other forcible Evidences are these: The first, The late Production of the
World. The second, The patefaction of the Law but to one single People, namely,
the Jews. The third, The timing the Messias's Nativity, and bringing it to
pass, not in the Worlds Infancy or Adolescence, but (...), Heb. 1. 2. in its
declining Age. The fourth, The perpetuity of Hell, and interminableness of
those Tortures which after this life shall incessantly vex the impious. The
fifth and last, God's not perpetuating the Station of Pre-existent Souls, and
hindering them from lapsing into these Regions of Sin and Death. These he
pretends to be forcible Evidences of the Sovereignty of Gods Will over his
Goodness, forasmuch as if the contrary to all these had been, it had been much
more agreeable to the Goodness of God.

As for the first of these forcible Arguments, we have disarmed the strength
thereof already, by intimating that the World could not be ab aeterno. And if
it could not be ab aeterno, but must commence on this side of Eternity, and be
of finite years, I leave to the Opposer to prove that it has not been created
as soon as it could be; and that is sufficient to prove that its late
Production is not inconsistent with that principle, that Gods Goodness always
is the measure of his Actions. For suppose the World of as little continuance
as you will, if it was not ab aeterno, it was once of as little; and how can we
discern but that this is that very time which seems so little to us?

As for the second, which seems to have such force in it, that he appeals to
any competent Judge, if it had not been infinitely better that God should have
apertly dispensed his Ordinances to all Mankind, than have committed them only
to Israel in so private and clancular a manner; I say, it is impossible for any
one to be assured that it is at all better. For first, If this Privilege which
was peculiar, had been a Favor common to all, it had lost its enforcement that
it had upon that lesser number. Secondly, It had had also the less surprising
power with it upon others that were not Jews, who might after converse with
that Nation, and set a more high price upon the Truths they had traveled for,
and were communicated to them from that People. Thirdly, The nature of the
thing was not fitted for the universality of Mankind, who could not be
congregated together to see the Wonders wrought by Moses, and receive the Law
with those awful circumstances from Mount Sinai or any Mount else. Fourthly,
All things happened to them in Types, and themselves were a Type of the true
Israel of God to be redeemed out of their Captivity under Sin and Satan, which
was worse than any Egyptian Servitude: Wherefore it must be some peculiar
People which must be made such a Type, not the whole World. Fifthly,
Considering the great load of the Ceremonial Law which came along with other
more proper Privileges of the Jews, setting one against another, and
considering the freedom of other Nations from it, unless they brought any thing
like it upon themselves, the difference of their Conditions will rather seem
several Modifications of the communicated Goodness of God to his Creatures,
than the neglecting of any: Forasmuch as, sixthly and lastly, though all
Nations be in a lapsed condition, yet there are the Relics of the Eternal Law
of Life in them. And that things are no better with any of them than they are,
that is a thousand times more rationally resolved into their demerits in their
pre-existent state than into the bare Will of God, that he will have things for
many Ages thus squalid and forlorn, merely because he will. Which is a Woman's
Reason, and which to conceive to belong to God, the Author of No-Pre-existence
has no reason, unless he will allege that he was styled (...) of the Ancients
for this very cause.

Wherefore the Divine Nemesis lying upon the lapsed Souls of men in this
Terrestrial State, whose several Delinquencies in the other World and the
degrees thereof God alone knows, and according to his Wisdom and Justice
disposes of them in this: It is impossible for any one that is not half crazed
in his Intellectuals, to pretend that any Acts of Providence that have been
since this Stage of the Earth was erected, might have been infinitely better
otherwise than they have been, or indeed better at all. Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, sure did frame
This Universe, and still guide the same;
But thoughts from Passion sprung, deceive
Vain Mortals: No man can contrive
A better course than what is been run
Since the first circuit of the Sun.
This Poetical Rapture has more solid truth in it than the dry Dreams and
distorted Fancies, or Chimerical Metamorphoses of earthly either Philosophers
or Theologs, that prescinding the rest of the Godhead from his Goodness, make
that remaining part a foul Fiend or Devil; and yet almost with the same breath
pronounce the Will of this Devil of their own making, which is the most
poisonous part of him, to have a Supremacy over the (...), over the Divine
Goodness; which makes God to be Himself, that is, to be God, and not a
plenipotentiary Devil. Wherefore we see from these few small hints, (for it
were an infinite Argument fully to prosecute) how feeble or nothing forcible
this second Evidence is.

Now for the third Evidence, The timing of the Messiah's Nativity, That it was
not in the Infancy of the World, but rather in its declining Age, or in the
latter times. In which times the Ancient of Days, according to his counsel and
purpose, (which the Eternal Wisdom that was to be incarnate assented and
subscribed to) sent his Son into the World, the promised Messiah. This did the
Ancient of Days and the Eternal Wisdom agree upon. But oh the immense
Privilege of Tou^h and Confidence! The Author of No-Pre existence says, it had
been better by far, if they had agreed upon the Infancy of the World. As if
this young Divine were wiser than the Ancient of Days, or the Eternal Wisdom
itself. I, but he will modestly reply. That he acknowledges that the Ancient of
Days and the Eternal Wisdom are wiser than he, but that they would not make use
of their Wisdom. They saw as clearly as could be, that it was far better that
the Messiah should come in the Infancy of the World; but the Father would not
send him then, merely because he would not send him: That his Will might act
freely as mere Will prescinded from Wisdom and Goodness. This is the plain
state of the business, and yet admitted by him, who with that open freeness and
fullness professes, that (...) the Divine Goodness from the Godhead, what
remains is a prodigious Fiend or Devil. What is then mere Will and Power left
alone, but a blind Hurricane of Hell? which yet must have the Supremacy, and
overpower the Divine Wisdom and Goodness itself. His Zeal against.
Pre-existence has thus infatuated and blinded this young Writers Intellectuals,
otherwise he had not been driven to these Absurdities, if he had been pleased
to admit that Hypothesis.

As also that Wisdom and Justice, and Fitness and Decorum attend the
Dispensation of Divine Goodness; so that it is not to be communicated to every
Subject after the most ample manner, nor at every time, but at such times, and
to such Subjects, and in such measures as, respecting the whole compages of
things, is for the best. So that Goodness ^ears the Sovereignty, and according
to that Rule, perpetually all things are administered, though there be a
different Scene of things and particulars in themselves vastly varying in
Goodness and Perfection one from another as the parts of the Body do. And so
for Times and Ages, every season of the year yield different Commodities: nor
are we to expect Roses in Winter, nor Apples and Apricocks in Spring. Now the
infinite and incomprehensible Wisdom of God comprehending the whole entire
Scene of his Providence, and what references there are of one thing to another,
that this must be thus and thus, because such and such things preceded: and
because such things are, such and such must be consequent; which things past
and to come lie not under our eye: I say, if this hasty Writer had considered
this, he need not have been driven to such a rude solution of this present
Problem, why the Messiah came no sooner into the World, viz. Merely because God
willed it should be so, though it had been far better if it had been otherwise;
but he would have roundly confessed, that undoubtedly this was the best time
and the fittest, though it was past his reach to discover the reasons of the
fitness thereof.

This as it had been the more modest, so it had been the more solid solution of
this hard Problem. I but then it had not put a bar to this irrefragable
Argument from the Goodness of God, for proving Pre-existence: Which he is
persuaded in his own Conscience is no less than a demonstration, unless it be
acknowledged that the Will of God has a Supremacy over his Goodness; and
therefore in spite to that abhorred Dogma of Pre-existence, he had rather
broach such wild stuff against the glory of God, than not to purchase to
himself the sweet conceit of a glorious victory over such an Opinion that he
has taken a groundless toy against, and had rather adventure upon gross
Blasphemies than entertain it.

The devout Psalmist, Psalm. 36. speaking of the Decrees of God and his
Providence over the Creation, Thy righteousness, says he, is as the great
mountains, thy judgments are a great deep. And St. Paul, Romans 11. after he has
treated of intricate and amazing points, cries out, (...), Oh the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! Now according to the rudeness of our
young Writer, there is no such depth of Wisdom, or unsearchablen^ss in the
Judgments and Decrees of God and his Providence in the World that most amaze
us, but the reasons of them lie very obvious and shallow. Where we fancy that
things might have been better otherwise, (though of never so grand import, as
the coming of the Messiah is) it is easily resolved into the Supremacy of the
Will of God, which it has over his Wisdom and Goodness. He willed it should be
so, because he would it should be so, though it had been sar better if the
Messiah had come sooner. But see the difference betwixt an inspired Apostle,
and a young hotheaded Theologist: This latter resolves these unsearchable and
unintelligible Decrees of God and passag^s of Providence, into the mere Will of
God, lording it over the Divine Wisdom and Goodness: But the Apostle, by how
much more unsearchable his Judgments and Decrees are, and the ways of his
Providence past finding our, the greater he declares the depth of the richness
of his Wisdom, which is so ample, that it reaches into ways and methods of
doing for the best beyond the Understandings of men. For most assuredly, while
the depth of the Wisdom of God is acknowledged to carry on the ways of
Providence, it must be also acknowledged that it acts like itself, and chooses
such ways as are best, and most comporting with the Divine Goodness; or else it
is not an act of Wisdom, but of Humor or Oversight.

But it may be the Reader may have the curiosity to hear briesly what those
g^at Arguments are, that should induce this young Writer so confidently to
pronounce, that it had been far better that the Messiah should have come in the
Infancy of the World, than in the times he came. The very quintessence of the
force of his arguing extracted out of the verbosity of his affected style, is
neither more nor less than this: That the World before the coming of Christ,
who was to be the Light of the World, was in very great Darkness; and therefore
the sooner he came, the better. But to break the assurance of this Arguer for
the more early coming of Christ,

First, we may take notice out of himself, chap. 3. That the Light of Nature is
near akin not only to the Mosaic Law, but ^o the Gospel itself; and that even
then there were the assistances of the Holy Ghost to carry men on to such
virtuous Accomplishments as might avail them to eternal Salvation. This he
acknowledges probable, and I have set it down in his own words. Whence
considering what a various Scene of things there was to be from the Fall of
Adam to the end of the World, it became the great and wise Dramatist not to
bring upon the Stage the best things in the first Act, but to carry on things
pompously and by degrees; something like that Saying of Elias, Two thousand
years under the Light of Nature, two thousand under the Law, and then comes the
Nativity of the Messiah, and after a due space the happy Millennium, and then
the Final Judgment, the completed Happiness of the Righteous in Heaven, and
the Punishment of the Wicked in Hellfire. But to hasten too suddenly to the
best, is to expect Autumn in Spring, and Virility or Old Age in Infancy or
Childhood, or the Catastrophe of a Comedy in the first Act.

Secondly, we may observe what a weak Disprover he is of Pre-existence, which
like a Giant would break in upon him, were it not that he kept him out by this
false Sconce of the Supremacy of the Divine Will over his Wisdom and Goodness;
which Conceit, how odious and impious it is, has been often enough hinted
already. But letting Pre-existence take place, and admitting that there is,
according to Divine Providence, an orderly insemination of lapsed Souls into
humane Bodies, through the several Ages of the World, whose lapses had several
circumstantial differences, and that men therefore become differently sitted
Objects of Grace and Favor; how easy is it to conceive God according to the
fitnesses of the generality of Souls in such or such periods of times, as it
was more just, agreeable, or needful for them, so and in such measures to have
dispensed the Gifts of his ever-watchful and all-comprehending Providence to
them, for both time and place. This one would think were more tolerable than to
say, That God wills merely because he wills; which is the Character of a frail
Woman, rather than of a God, or else, as this Writer himself acknowledges, of a
Fiend or Devil. For such, says he, is God in the rest of his Attributes, if you
seclude his Goodness. What then is that action which proceeds only from that
part from which Goodness is secluded? So that himself has dug down the Sconce
he would entrench himself in, and lets Pre-existence come in upon him, whether
he will or no, like an armed Giant; whom let him abhor as much as he will, he
is utterly unable to resist.

And thirdly and lastly, Suppose there were no particular probable account to
be given by us, by reason of the shortness of our Understandings* and the vast
fetches of the all-comprehensive Providence of God, why the coming of the
Messiah was no earlier than it was; yet according to that excellent Aphorism in
Morality and Politics, Optime praesum^ndum est de Magistratu, we should hope,
nay ^e assured it was the best that he came when he did, it being by the
appointment of the infinite good and all-wise God* and cry out wi^h St. Paul,
Oh the depth of the riches of both the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! And in the
Psalmist, Thy judgments are like a great deep, O Lord, thou preservest man and
beast. And so acknowledge his Wisdom and Goodness in the ordering his
Creatures, even there where his ways are to our weak and scant Understandings
most inexplicable and unsearchable. Which Wisdom and Goodness as we have all
reason to acknowledge in all matters, so most of all in matters of the greatest
concernment, that there most assuredly God wills not thus or thus merely
because he wills, but because his Wisdom discerns that it is for the best. And
this is sufficient to show the weakness of this third Evidence for proving the
Supremacy of the Divine Will over his Wisdom an^ Goodness.

His fourth Evidence is, The Perpetuity of Hell, and interminableness of those
Tortures which after this life vex the Wicked. For, says he, had the penalties
of men's sins here been rated by pure Goodness, free and (...) by any other
principle, it is not pro^able that they should have been punished by an eternal
Calamity, the pleasures of them being (...) and sugitive. Thu^ he argues, (...)
in the very same ^ords; and there(...) (...), that the ^thority of Gods (...)
(...), and ^ro suo (...), having the Supremacy over his Goodness, over-swayed
the more benign Decree; and Will, because it would have it so, doomed sinners
to these eternal Torments. But I would ask this Sophister, Did the Will of God
in good earnest sentence sinners thus in Decree, merely because he willed it,
not because it was either good or just? What a black and dismal Reproach is
here cast upon the Divine Majesty! That he sentences sinners thus because he
will, not because it is just. The sense whereof is, So he will do, right or
wrong. But the Patriarch Abraham was of another mind, Shall not the Judge of
the whole Earth do right? This he said even to Gods face, as I may so speak.
Wherefore God doing nothing but what is just, does nothing but what is also
good. For Justice is nothing but Goodness modified.

Not is it asserted by those that make Goodness the measure of Gods Providence,
that the modification and moderation thereof is not by his Wisdom and Justice.
So that this Sophister pu^s [pure] to Goodness, merely to obscure the since,
and put a Fallacy upon his Reader. The sins of men here are not rated by pure
Goodness, but by that modification of Goodness which is termed Justice; which
is not a distinct principle from Goodness, but a branch thereof, or Goodness it
self under such a modification, not mere Will acting because it will, right or
wrong, good or evil. Wherefore the state of the Question is not, whether the
eternal Torments of Hell are consistent with the pure Goodness of God, but with
his Justice. But if they are eternal merely from his Will, without any respect
to Justice, his Will does will what is infinitely beyond the bounds of what is
just, because endless is infinitely beyond that which has an end. Such gross
Absurdities does this Opposer of Pre-existence run into, to setch an Argument
from the supposititious Supremacy of the Will of God over his Wisdom and
Goodness.

But as touching the Question rightly proposed, whether the Perpetuity of Hell
to sinners consists with the Justice of God, a man ought to be chary and wary
how he pronounces in this point, that he slip not into what may prove
disadvantageous to the Hearer. For there are that will be scandalized, and make
it serve to an ill end, whether one declare for eternal Torments of Hell, or
against them. Some being ready to conclude from their Eternity, that Religion
itself is a mere Scarecrow that frights us with such an incredible Mormo;
others to indulge to their Pleasures, because the Comm^tion is not frightful
enough to deter them from extravagant Enjoyments, if Hell Torments be not
eternal. But yet I cannot but deem it a piece of great levity in him that
decided the Controversy, as the complesant Parson did that about the May Pole;
they of his Parish that were for a May Pole, let them have a May Pole; but they
that were not for a May Pole, let them have no May Pole. But this in sobriety
one may say, that the use of (...) and (...) in Scripture is indifferent to
signify either that which is properly everlasting, or that which lasts a long
time. So that by any immediate infallible Oracle, we are not able to pronounce
for the Eternity or Perpetuity of Hell Torments. And the Creeds use the phrase
of Scripture, and so some may think that they have the same latitude of
interpretation. But it is the safest to adhere to the sense of the Catholic
Church, for those that be bewildered in such Speculations.

But what the Writer of No-Pre-existence argues from his own private Spirit,
though it be not inept, yet it is not over-firm and solid. But that the
Penancies of Reprobates are endless, I shall ever thus persuade my self, says
he, either the Torments of Hell are eternal, or the Felicities of Heaven are
but temporary (which I am sure they shall never be:) for the very same word
that is used to express the permanence of the one, measures out the continuance
of the other; and if (...) denotes everlasting life, a blessedness that shall
never end, (Mat. 25. ult.) what can (...) in the same verse signify, but
perpetual punishment, a misery that shall never cease? This is pretty handsomely
put together, but as I said, does not conclude firmly what is driven at. For it
being undeniably true that (...) signifies as well that which only is of a
long continuance, as what is properly everlasting; and it being altogether
rational, that when words have more significations than one, that signification
is to be applied that is most agreeable to the subject it is predicated of, and
(...) in that higher sense of property and absolutely everlasting, not being
applicable to (...), but upon this Writers monstrous supposition that the Will
of God has a Supremacy over his Wisdom, Goodness, and Justice (as if the
righteous God could act against his own Conscience, which no honest man can do)
it is plain, that though (...) in (...) signify properly everlasting, that
there is no necessity that it should signify so in (...), but have that other
signification of long continuance, though not of everlastingness, and that
continuance so long, as if considered, would effectually rouse any man out of
his sins; and Eternity not considered, will not move him. This one would think
were enough to repress the confidence of this young Writer.

But I will add something more out of his fellow Anti-Pre-existentiary. That
Comminations are not, though Promises be obligatory. Forasmuch as in
Comminations the Comminator is the Creditor, and he that is menaced the Debtor
that owes the punishment (with which that Latin Phrase well agrees, dare
poena^) but in Promises, he that promises becomes Debtor, and he to whom the
Promise is made, Creditor. Whence the Promiser is plainly obliged to make good
his Promise, as being the Debtor: But the Comminator, as being the Creditor, is
not obliged to exact the punishment, it being in the power of any Creditor to
remit the Debt owing him if he will. Wherefore in this Commination of eternal
fire, or everlasting punishment, though (...) signify here properly
everlasting, as well as in everlasting life, yet because this latter is a
Promise, the other only a Commination, it does not follow, that as surely as
the Righteous shall be rewarded with everlasting life, so surely shall the
Wicked be punished with everlasting fire, in the most proper and highest extent
of the signification of the word. Because God in his Comminations to the Wicked
is only a Creditor, and has still a right and power to remit either part or
the whole Debt; but to the Righteous, by virtue of his Promise, he becomes a
Debtor, and cannot recede, but must punctually keep his word.

To all which I add this Challenge: Let this Writer, or any else if they can,
demonstrate that a Soul may not behave herself so perversely, obstinately, and
despightfully against the Spirit of Grace, that she may deserve to be made an
everlasting Hackstock of the Divine Nemesis, even for ever and ever. And if she
deserve it, it is but just that she have it; and if it be just, it is likewise
good. For Justice is nothing else but Goodness modified in such fort, as Wisdom
and sense of Decorum sees fittest. But the Election of Wisdom being always for
the best, all things considered, it is plain that Justice and the execution
thereof, is for the best; and that so Goodness, not mere Will upon pretense of
having a Supremacy over Goodness, would be the measure of this sentencing such
obdurate sinners to eternal punishment. And this eternal punishment as it is a
piece of vindicative Justice upon these obdurate sinners, so it naturally
contributes to the establishment of the Righteous in their Celestial Happiness.
Which, this Opposer of Pre-existence objects somewhere, if Souls ever fell
from, they may fall from it again. But these eternal Torments of Hell, if they
needed it, would put a sure bar thereto. So that the Wisdom and Goodness also
of God is upon this account concerned in the eternal punishments of Hell, as
well as his Justice. That it be to the unreclaimable, as that Orphick
Hemistichium calls it, -- (...).


The fifth and last forcible Argument, as he calls them, for the proving the
Sovereignty of Gods Will over his Goodness, is this. If Gods Goodness, says
he, be not under the command of his Will, but does always what is best, why did
it not perpetuate the Station of Pre-existent Souls, and hinder us (if ever we
were happy in a sublimer state) from lapsing into these Regions of Sin and
Death? But who does not at first sight discern the weakness of this Allegation?
For it is plainly (...), an absurd thing, and contrary to Reason, to create
such a species of Being, whose nature is free and mutable, and at the first
dash to dam up or stop the exercise of that freedom and capacity of change, by
confining it to a fixed Station. As ridiculous as to suppose a living Creature
made with wings and feet, and yet that the Maker thereof should take special
care it should never fly nor go. And so likewise, that the mere making of such
an Order of Beings as have a freedom of Will, and choice of their Actions, that
this is misbecoming the Goodness of God, is as dull and idiotical a conceit,
and such as implies that God should have made but one kind of Creature, and
that the most absolutely and immutably happy that can be, or else did not act
according to his Goodness, or for the best: Which is so obvious a Falsehood,
that I will not confute it. But it is not hard to conceive that he making such
a free-willed Creature as the Souls of men, simul cum mundo condito, and that
in an happy condition, and yet not fixing them in that Station, may excellently
well accord with the Sovereignty of his Goodness, nor any one be constrained to
have recourse to the Supremacy of his Will over his Goodness, as if he did it
because he would do it, and not because it was best.

For what can this freedom of Will consist in so much as in a temptableness by
other Objects that are of an inseriour nature, not so divine and holy as the
other, to which it were the security of the Soul to adhere with all due
constancy, and therefore her duty. But in that she is temptable by other
Objects, it is a sign that her present enjoyment of the more Divine and
Heavenly Objects, are not received of her according to their excellency, but
according to the measure and capacity of her present state, which though very
happy, may be improved at the long run, and in an orderly series of times and
things, whether the Soul lapse into sin or no. For accession of new
improvements increases Happiness and Joy. Now therefore, I say, suppose
several, and that great numbers, even innumerable myriads of pre-existent
Souls, to lapse into the Regions of Sin and Death, provided that they do not
sin perversely and obstinately, nor do despite to the Spirit of Grace, nor
refuse the advantageous offers that Divine Providence makes them even in these
sad Regions, why may not their once having descended hither tend to their
greater enjoyment, when they shall have returned to their pristine S^tion? And
why may not the specifical nature of the Soul be such, that it be essentially
interwoven into our Being, that after a certain period of times or ages,
whether she sin or no, she may arrive to a fixedness at last in her heavenly
Station with greater advantage to such a Creature, than if she had been fixed
in that state at first.

The thing may seem least probable in those that descend into these Regions of
Sin and Mortality. But in those that are not obstinate and refractorie, but
close with the gracious means that is offered them for their recoverie, their
having been here in this lower State, and retaining the memory (as doubtless
they do) of the transactions of this Terrestrial Stage, it naturally enhances
all the enjoyments of the pristine selicitie they had lost, and makes them for
ever have a more deep and vivid resentment of them. So that through the
richness of the Wisdom and Goodness of God, and through the Merits and conduct
of the Captain of their Salvation, our Savior Jesus Christ, they are, after
the strong conslicts here with sin and the corruptions of this lower Region,
made more than Conquerours, and greater gainers upon the losses they sustained
before from their own solly. And in this most advantageous state of things,
they become Pillars in the Temple of God, there to remain for ever and ever. So
that unless straying Souls be exceedingly perverse and obstinate, the exitus of
things will be but as in a Tragic Comedy, and their perverseness and
obstinacy lies at their own doors for those that finally miscarrie, whose
number this confident Writer is to prove to be so considerable that the
enhanced happiness of the standing part of pre-existent Souls and the recovered
does not far preponderate the infelicitie of the others condition. Which if he
cannot do, as I am confident he cannot, he must acknowledge, That God in not
forcibly fixing pre-existent Souls in the state they were first created, but
leaving them to themselves, acted not from the Supremacy of his Will over his
Goodness, but did what was best, and according to that Sovereign Principle of
Goodness in the Deity.

And now for that snitling Dilemma of this eager Opposer of Pre-existence,
touching the freedom of acting and mutabilitie in humane Souls, whether this
mutabilitie be a Specific property and essential to them, or a separable
Accident. For if it were essential, says he, then how was Christ a persect man,
his humane nature being ever void of that lapsabilitie which is essential to
humanity? and how come men to retain their specific nature still, that are
translated to Celestial happiness, and made unalterable in the condition they
then are? To this I answer, That the Pre-existentiaries will admit, that the
Soul of the Messiah was created as the rest, though in an happy condition, yet
in a lapsable; and that it was his peculiar merit, in that he so faithfully,
constantly, and entirely adhered to the Divine Principle, incomparably above
what was done by others of his Classis, not withstanding that he might have
done otherwise; and therefore they will be forward to extend that of the Author
to the Hebrews. chap. 1. v. 8. (Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, the
Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom. Thou have loved
Righteousness, and hated Iniquity; therefore God, even thy God, has anointed
thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellows) to his behavior in his
pre-existent state, as well as in this. And whenever the Soul of Christ did
exist, if he was like us in all things, sin only excepted, he must have a
capacity of sinning, though he would not sin; that capacity not put into act
being no sin, but an Argument of his Virtue, and such as if he was always
devoid of, he could not be like us in all things, sin only excepted. For posse
peccare non est peccatum.

And as ^or humane Souls changing their Species in their unalterable heavenly
happiness, the Species is not then changed, but perfected and completed;
namely, that faculty or measure of it in their Plastic, essentially latitant
there, is by the Divine Grace so awakened, after such a series of time and
things, which they have experienced, that now they are sirmly united to an
heavenly Body or ethereal Vehicle for ever. And now we need say little to the
other member of the Dilemma, but to declare, that free will, or mutability in
humane Souls, is no separable Accident, but of the essential contexture of
them; so as it might have its turn in the series of things. And how consistent
it was with the Goodness of God and his Wisdom, not to suppress it in the
beginning, has been sufficiently intimated above. Wherefore now forasmuch as
there is no pretext that either the Wisdom or Justice of God should streighten
the time of the creation of humane Souls, so that their existence may not
commence with that of Angels, or of the Universe, and that this figment of the
Supremacy of Gods mere Will over his other Attributes is blown away, it is
manifest that the Argument for the Pre-existence of Souls drawn from the Divine
Goodness, holds firm and irrefragable against whatever Opposers.

We have been the more copious on this Argument, because the Opposer and others
look upon it as the strongest proof the Pre-existentiaries produce for their
Opinion. And the other Party have nothing to set against it but a fictitious
Supremacy of the Will of God over his Goodness and other Attributes. Which
being their only Bulwark, and they taking Sanctuary nowhere but here, in my
apprehension they plainly herein give up the cause, and establish the Opinion
which they seem to have such an antipathy against. But it is high time now to
pass to the next Chapter.

Chap. 10. p. 75. To have contracted strong and inveterate habits to Vice and
Lewdness, and that in various manners and degrees, etc. To the unbyassed this
must needs seem a considerable Argument, especially when the Parties thus
irreclaimably profligate from their Youth, some as to one Vice, others to
another, are found such in equal circumstances with others, and advantages, to
be good; born of the same Parents, educated in the same Family, and the like.
Wherefore having the same bodily Extraction, and the same advantages of
Education, what must make this great difference as they grow up in the Body,
but that their Souls were different before they came into it? And how should
they have such a vast difference in the proclivity to Vice, but that they lived
before in the state of Pre-existence, and that some were much deeper in
rebellion against God and the Divine Reason, than others were, and so brought
their different conditions with them into these Terrestrial Bodies?

Page 75. Then how a Swallow should return to her old trade of living after her
Winter sleep, etc. Indeed the Swallow has the advantages of Memory, which the
incorporate Soul has not in her incorporation into a Terrestrial Body after her
state of Silence. But the vital inclinations, which are mainly if not only
^ted in the Plastic, being not only revived, but (signally vicious of
themselves) revived with advantage, by reason of the corruption of this coarse
earthly Body into which the Soul is incorporate, they cannot fail of
discovering themselves in a most signal manner, without any help of memory, but
from the mere pregnancie of a corrupt Body, and formerly more than ordinarily
debauched Plastic in the state of Pre-existence.

Page 76. Whenas others are as fatally set against the Opinions, etc. And this
is done, as the ingenious Author takes notice, even where neither Education nor
Custom have interposed to sophisticate their Judgments or Sentiments. Nay, it
is most certain, that they sometime have Sentiments and entertain Opinions
quite contrary to their Education. So that that is but a slight account, to
restore this Phenomenon into Education and Custom, whenas Opinions are
entertained and stiffly maintained in despite of them. This I must confess
implies that the aerial Inhabitants philosophize, but conjecturally only, as
well as the Inhabitants of the Earth. And it is no wonder that such Spirits as
are lapsed in their Morals, should be at a loss also in their Intellectuals;
and though they have a desire to know the truth in Speculations, it suiting so
well with their pride, that yet they should be subject to various errors and
hallucinations as well as we, and that there should be different, yea opposite
Schools of Philosophy among them. And if there be any credit to be given to
Cardans story of his Father Facius Cardanus, things are thus de facto in the
aereal Regions. And two of the Spirits which Facius Cardanus saw in that Vision
(left upon Record by him, and of which he often told his Son Hieronymus while
he was living) were two Professors of Philosophy in different Academies; and
were of different Opinions; one of them apertly professing himself to be an
Aven-Roist. The story is too long to insert here. See Dr. H. Moore his
Immortality of the Soul, book 3. chap. 17.

So that lapsed Souls philosophizing in their Aerial State, and being divided
into Sects, and consequently maintaining their disserent or opposite Opinions
with heat and affection which reaches the Plastic, this may leave a great
propension in them to the same Opinions here, and make them almost as prone to
such and such Errors, as to such and such Vices. This, I suppose, the
ingenious Author propounds as an Argument credible and plausible, though he
does not esteem it of like force with those he produced before. Nor does his
Opposer urge any thing to any purpose against it. The main thing is, That these
Propensities to some one Opinion are not universal, and blended with the
constitution of every person, but are thin sown, and grow up sparingly. Where
there are five, says he, naturally bent to any one Opinion, there are many
millions that are free to all. If some, says he, descend into this life big
with aptnesses and proclivities to peculiar Theories, why then should not all,
supposing they pre-existed together, do the like? As if all in the other Aereal
State were Professors of Philosophy, or zealous Followers of them that were.
The solution of this difficulty is so easy, that I need not insist on it.

Page 78. Were this difference about sensibles, the influence of the body might
then be suspected for a cause, etc. This is very rationally alleged by our
Author, and yet his Antagonist has the face from the observation of the
diversity of men's Palates and Appetites, of their being differently affected by
such and such strains of Music, some being pleased with one kind of Melody,
and others with another, some pleased with Aromatic Odours, others offended
with them, to reason thus: If the Body can thus cause us to love and dislike
Sensibles, why not as well to approve and dislike Opinions and Theories? But
the reason is obvious why not; because the liking or disliking of these
Sensibles depends upon the grateful or ungrateful motion of the Nerves of the
Body, which may be otherwise constituted or qualified in some complexions than
in other some. But for Philosophical Opinions and Theories what have they to do
with the motion of the Nerves? It is the Soul herself that judges of those
abstractedly from the Senses, or any use of the Nerves or corporeal Organ. If
the difference of our Judgment in Philosophical Theories be resolvible into the
mere constitution of our Body, our Understanding itself will hazard to be
resolved into the same Principle also: And Body will prove the only
difference betwixt Men and Brutes. We have more intellectual Souls because we
have better Bodies, which I hope our Authors Antagonist will not allow.

Page 78. For the Soul in her first and pure nature has no Idiosyncrasies, etc.
Whether there may not be certain different Characters proper to such and such
Classes of Souls, but all of them natural and without blemish, and this for the
better order of things in the Universe, I will not rashly decide in the
Negative. But as the Author himself seems to insinuate, if there be any such,
they are not such as fatally determine Souls to false and erroneous
apprehensions. For that would be a corruption and a blemish in the very natural
Character. Wherefore if the Soul in Philosophical Speculations is fatally
determined to falsehood in this life, it is credible it is the effect of its
being inured thereto in the other.

Page 79. Now to say that all this variety proceeds primarily from the mere
temper of our Bodies, etc. This Argument is the less valid for Pre-existence, I
mean that which is drawn from the wonderful variety of our Genius's, or natural
inclinations to the employments of life, because we cannot be assured but that
the Divine Providence may have essentially, as it were, impressed such
Classical Characters on humane Souls, as I noted before. And besides, if that
be true which Menander says, (...)
(...).
That every man, as soon as he is born, has a Genius appointed him to be his
Instructor and Guide of his Life: That some are carried with such an impetus to
some things rather than others, may be from the instigations of his assisting
Genius. And for that Objection of the Author's Antagonist against his Opinion
touching those inclinations to Trades, (which may equally concern this
Hypothesis of Menander) that it would then be more universal, every one having
such a Genius; this truth may be smothered by the putting young people
promiscuously to any Trade, without observing their Genius. But the Chinese
suppose this truth, they commonly showing a Child all the Employs of the City,
that he may make his own choice before they put him to any.

But if the Opinion of Menander be true, that every man has his guardian
Genius, under whose conduct he lives; the Merchant, the Musician, the Plowman,
and the rest; it is manifest that these Genii cannot but receive considerable
impressions of such things as they guide their Clients in. And pre-existent
Souls in their aereal estate being of the same nature with these Demons or
Genii, they are capable of the same Employment, and so tincture themselves deep
enough with the affairs of those parties they preside over. And therefore when
they themselves, after the state of Silence, ar^ incorporated into earthly
Bodies, they may have a proneness from their former tincture to such methods of
life as they lived over whom they did preside. Which quite spoils the best
Argument our Author's Antagonist has against this Topic; which is, That there
are several things here below which the Geniusses of men pursue and follow with
the hottest chase, which have no similitude with the things in the other state,
as Planting, Building, Husbandry, the working of Manufactures, etc. This best
Argument of his, by Menander's Hypothesis, which is hard to confute, is quite
defeated.

And to deny nothing to this Opposer of Pre-existence which is his due, himself
seems unsatisfied, in resolving these odd Phenomenon into the temper of Body.
And therefore at last has recourse to a secret Causality, that is, to he knows
not what. But at last he pitches upon some such Principle as that whereby the
Birds build their Nest, the Spider weaves her Webs, the Bees make their Combs,
etc. Some such thing he says (though he cannot think it that prodigious
Hobgoblin the Spirit of Nature) may produce these strange effects, may bias
also the fancies of men in making choice of their Employments and Occupations.
If it be not the Spirit of Nature, then it must be that Classical Character I
spoke of above. But if not this, nor the preponderancies of the Pre-existent
state, nor Menander's Hypothesis, the Spirit of Nature will bid the fairest for
it of any besides, for determining the inclinations of all living Creatures in
these Regions of Generation, as having in itself vitally, though not
intellectually, all the Laws of the Divine Providence implanted into its
essence by God the Creator of it. And speaking in the Ethnic Dialect, the same
description may belong to it that Varro gives to their God Genius. Genius est
Deus qui praepositus est, ac vim habet omnium rerum gignendarum, and that is
the Genius of every Creature that is congenit to it in virtue of its
generation. And that there is such a Spirit of Nature (not a God, as Varro
vainly makes it, but an unintelligent Creature) to which belongs the Nascency
or Generation of things, and has the management of the whole matter of the
Universe, is copiously proved to be the Opinion of the Noblest and Ancientest
Philosophers, by the learned Dr. R. Cudworth in his System of the Intellectual
World, and is demonstrated to be a true Theorem in Philosophy by Dr. H. Moore
in his Euchiridion Metaphysicum, by many, and those irrefutable Arguments; and
yet I dare say both can easily pardon the mistake and bluntness of this rude
Writer, nor are at all surprised at it as a Noveltie, that any ignorant rural
Hobthurst should call the Spirit of Nature (a thing so much beyond his
capacity to judge of) a prodigious Hobgoblin.

But to conclude, be it so that there may be other causes besides the pristine
inurements of the Pre-existent Soul, that may something forcibly determine her
to one course of life here, yet when she is most forcibly determined, if there
be such a thing as Pre-existence, this may be rationally supposed to concur in
the efficiencie. But that it is not so strong an Argument as others to prove
Pre-existence, I have hinted already.

Page 79. For those that are most like in the Temper, Air, Complexion of their
Bodies, etc. If this prove true, and I know nothing to the contrary, this vast
difference of Genius's, were it not for the Hypothesis of their Classical
Character imprinted on Souls at their very creation, would be a considerably
tight Argument. But certainly it is more honest than for the avoiding
Pre-existence to resolve the Phenomenon into a secret Causality, that is to
say, into one knows not what.

Page 82. There being now no other way left but Pre-existence, etc. This is a
just excuse for his bringing in any Argument by way of overplus that is not so
apodictically concluding. If it be but such as will look like a plausible
solution of a Phenomenon (as this of such a vast difference of Genius's)
Pre-existence once admitted, or otherwise undeniably demonstrated, the
proposing thereof should be accepted with favor.

Chap. 11. page 85. And we know our Savior and his Apostles have given credit
to that Translation, etc. And it was the authentic Text with the Fathers of
the Primitive Church. And besides this, if we read according to the Hebrew
Text, there being no object of Job's knowledge expressed, this is the most
easy and natural sense: Know thou that thou wast then, and that the number
of thy days are many? This therefore was reckoned amongst the rest of his
ignorances, that though he was created so early, he now knew nothing of it. And
this easy sense of the Hebrew Text, as well as that Version of the Septuagint,
made the Jews draw it in to the countenancing of the Tradition of the (...),
that is, the Pre-existence of Souls, as Grotius has noted of them.

Page 85. As reads a very credible Version. R. Menasse Ben Israel reads it so:
[I gave thee Wisdom,] which Version, if it were sure and authentic, this place
would be fit for the defense of the Opinion it is produced for. But no
Interpreters besides, that I can find, following him, nor any going before him,
whom he might follow, I ingenuously confess the place seems not of force enough
to me to infer the conclusion. He read, I suppose, (...) in Piel, whence he
translated it,
Indidi ^ibi Sapientiam; but the rest read it in Call.


Page 86. And methinks that passage of our Saviors Prayer, Father, glorify me
with the glory I had before the World began, etc. This Text, without exceeding
great violence, cannot be evaded. As for that of Grotius interpreting [that I
had] that which was intended for me to have, though it make good sense, yet it
is such Grammar as that there is no Schoolboy but would be ashamed of it; nor
is there, for all his pretenses, any place in Scripture to countenance such an
extravagant Exposition by way of Parallelism, as it may appear to any one that
will compare the places which he alleadges, with this; which I leave the Reader
to do at his leisure. Let us consider the Context, Joh. 17. 4. I have glorified
thee upon earth, during this my Pilgrimage and absence from thee, being ^ent
hither by thee. I have finished the work which thou gave me to do, and for
the doing of which I was sent, and am thus long absent. And now, O Father,
glorify me, (...), apud teipsum, in thine own presence, with the glory which
I had before the world was, (...), apud te, or in thy presence. What can be
more expressive of a Glory which Christ had apud Patrem, or at his Fathers
home, or in his presence before the world was, and from which for such a time
he had been absent?

Now for others that would salve the business by communication of Idioms, I
will set down the words of an ingenious Writer that goes that way: Those
Predicates, says he, that in a strict and ^igorous acception agreed only to
his Divine Nature, might by a communication of Idioms (as they phrase it) be
attributed to his Humane, or at least to the whole Person compounded of them
both, than which nothing is more ordinary in things of a mixed and
heterogeneous nature, as the whole man is styled immortal from the
deathlessness of his Soul: thus he. And there is the same reason if he had said
that man was styled mortal (which certainly is far the more ordinary) from the
real death of his Body, though his Soul be immortal. This is wittily
excogitated. But now let us apply it to the Text, expounding it according to
his communication of Idioms, affording to the Humane Nature what is only
proper to the Divine, thus.

Father, glorify me [my Humane Nature] with the glory that I [my Divine
Nature] had before the world was. Which indeed was to be the Eternal, Infinite,
and Omnipotent brightness of the Glory of the Father (...). This is the Glory
which his Divine Nature had before the World was. But how can his Humane Nature
be glorified with that Glory his Divine Nature had before the world was, unless
it should become the Divine Nature, that it might be said to have pre-existed?
(But that it cannot be. For there is no confusion of the Humane and Divine
Nature in the Hypostasis of Christ:) Or else because it is hypostatically
united with the Divine Nature; but if that be the Glory, that he then had
already, and had it not (according to the Opposers of Pre-existence) before the
world was. So we see there is no sense to be made of this Text by communication
of Idioms, and therefore no sense to be made of it without the Pre-existence of
the Humane Nature of Christ. And if you paraphrase [me] thus, My Hypostasis
consisting of my Humane and Divine Nature, it will be as untoward sense. For if
the Divine Nature be included in [me] then Christ prays for what he has
already, as I noted above. For the Glory of the eternal Logos from everlasting
to everlasting, is the same, as sure as he is the same with himself.

Page 86. By his expressions of coming from the Father, descending from Heaven,
and returning thither again, etc. I suppose these Scriptures are alluded to,
John 3. 13. 6. 38. 16. 28. I came down from Heaven not to do my own will, but
the will of him that sent me. I came forth from the Father, and am come into
the world; again I leave the world, and go to the Father. Whereupon his
Disciples said unto him Lo now speak thou plainly, and speak no Parable.
But it were a very great Parable, or Aenigm, that one should say truly of
himself, that he came from Heaven, when he never was there. And as impossible a
thing is it to conceive how God can properly be said to come down from Heaven,
who is always present every where. Wherefore that in Christ which was not God,
namely his Soul, or Humane Nature, was in Heaven before he appeared on Earth,
and consequently his Soul did pre-exist. Nor is there any refuge here in the
communication of Idioms. For that cannot be attributed to the whole Hypostasis,
which is competent to neither part that constitutes it. For it was neither true
of the Humane Nature of Christ, if you take away Pre-existence, nor of the
Divine, that they descended from Heaven, etc. And yet John 3. 13, 14. where
Christ prophesying of his Crucifixion and Ascension, says, No man has
ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of man,
[(...)] who was in Heaven. So Erasmus says, it may be rendered a Participle of
the present tense, having a capacity to signify the time past, if the sense
require it, as it seems to do here. Qui erat in Coelo, viz. antequam
descenderat. So Erasmus upon the place.

Wherefore these places of Scripture touching Christ being such inexpugnable
Arguments of the Pre-existence of the Soul of the Messiah; the Writer of No
Pre-existence, methinks, is no where so civil or discreet as in this point.
Where, he says, he will not squabble about this, but readily yield that the
Soul of Christ was long extant before it was incarnate. But then he presently
flings dirt upon the Preexistentiaries, as guilty of a shameful presumption and
inconsequence, to conclude the Pre-existence of all other Humane Souls from the
Pre-existence of his. Because he was a peculiar favorite of God was to undergo
bitter sufferings for Mankind; and therefore should enjoy an happy Preexistence
for an Anti-praemium. And since he was to purchase a Church with his own most
precious Blood, it was fit he should pre-exist from the beginning of the world,
that he might preside over his Church as Guide and Governor thereof; which is
a thing that cannot be said of any other soul beside.

This is a device which, I believe, the Pre-existentiaries, good men, never
dreamt of, but they took it for granted, that the creation of all Humane Souls
was alike, and that the Soul of Christ was like ours in all things, sin only
excepted; as the Emperor Justinian, in his Discourse to Menas Patriarch of
Constantinople, argues from this very Topic to prove the Non-pre-existence of
our Souls, from the Nonpre-existence of Christ's, he being like us in all
things, sin only excepted. And therefore as to Existence and Essence there was
no difference. Thus one would have verily thought to have been most safe and
most natural to conclude, as being so punctual according to the declaration of
Scripture, and order of things. For it seems almost as harsh and repugnant to
give Angelical Existence to a Species not Angelical, as Angelical Essence. For
according to them, it belongs to Angels only to exist a mundo condito, not to
Humane souls. Let us therefore see what great and urgent occasions there are,
that the Almighty should break this order.

The first is, That he may remonstrate the Soul of the Messiah to be his most
special Favorite. Why? That is sufficiently done, and more opportunely, if
other souls pre-existed to be his corrivals. But his faithful adhesion above
the rest to the Law of his Maker, as it might make him so great a Favorite: so
that transcendent privilege of being hypostatically united with the Godhead,
or Eternal Logos, would, I trow, be a sufficient Testimony of Gods special
Favor to him above all his fellow Pre-existent Souls.

And then, which is the second thing for his Anti-praemial Happiness (though it
is but an Hysteron Proteron, and preposterous conceit, to fancy wages before
the work) had he less of this by the coexistence of other souls with him, or
was it not rather the more highly increased by their coexistencie? And how
oddly does it look, that one solitary Individual of a Species should exist for
God knows how many ages alone? But suppose the soul of the Messiah, and all
other souls created together, and several of them fallen, and the Soul of the
Messiah to undertake their recovery by his sufferings, and this declared
amongst them; surely this must hugely inhance his Happiness and Glory through
all the whole order of Humane souls, being thus constituted or designed Head
and Prince over them all. An^ thus, though he was rejected by the Jews and
despised, he could not but be caressed and adored by his fellowsouls above,
before his descent to this state of humiliation. And who knows but this might
be part at least of that Glory which, he says, he had before the world was? And
which this ungrateful world denied him, while he was in it, who crucified the
Lord of life.

And as for the third and last, That the Soul of the Messiah was to pre-exist,
that he might preside over the Church all along from the beginning of it: What
necessity is there of that? Could not the Eternal Logos and the Ministry of
Angels sufficiently discharge that Province? But you conceive a congruity
therein; and so may another conceive a congruity that he should not enter upon
his Office till there were a considerable lapse of Humane Souls which should be
his care to recover; which implies their Pre-existence before this stage of the
Earth: And if the Soul of the Messiah, united with the Logos, presided so early
over the Church; that it was meet that other unlapsed souls, they being of his
own tribe, should be his Satellitium, and be part of those ministering Spirits
that watch for the Churches good, and zealously endeavor the recovery of their
sister-souls, under the conduct of the great Soul of the Messiah, out of their
captivity of sin and death.

So that every w^y Pre-existence of other souls will handsomely fall in with the
Pre-existence of the soul of the Messiah, that there may be no breach of order,
whenas there is no occasion for it, nor violence done to the Holy Writ, which
expressly declares Christ to have been like to us in all things (as well in
Existence as Essence) sin only excepted; as the Emperor earnestly urges to
the Patriarch Menas. Wherefore we finding no necessity of his particular
pre-existing, nor convenience, but what will be doubled if other Souls
pre-exist with him; it is plain, if he pre-exist, it is as he is an Humane
soul, not as such a particular soul; and therefore what proves his soul to
pre-exist, proves others to pre-exist also.

Page 87. Since these places have been more diffusely urged in a late discourse
to this purpose. I suppose he means in the Letter of Resolution concerning
Origin, Where the Author opens the sense of Philip. 2. 6. learnedly and
judiciously, especially when he acknowledges Christ's being in the form of God,
to be understood of his Physical Union with the Divine Logos. Which is the
Ancient Orthodox Exposition of the Primitive Fathers, they taking this for one
notable Testimony of Scripture, for the Divinity of Christ. Whenas they that
understand it Politically of Christ's Power and Authority only, take an
excellent weapon out of the hands of the Church wherewith she used to oppose
the Impugners of Christ's Divinity. But how can Christ being God (verus Deus, as
Vatablus expounds (...),) empty himself, or any way deteriorate himself as to
his Divinity, by being incarnate, and taking upon him (...) the form of the
terrestrial Adam? For every earthly man is (...), as the Apostle seems to
intimate, Romans 8. 21. as this ingenious Writer has noted; and the Apostle
likewise seems so to expound it in the Text, by adding presently by way of
Exegesis, (...), and was made in the likeness of men; like that Genesis 5. 3. Adam
begot a son in his own likeness, a terrestrial man as himself was. Wherefore
the Incarnation of Christ being no exinanition to his Divinity, there was an
Humanity of Christ, viz. his Soul, in a glorious state of Pre-existence, to
which this voluntary exinanition belonged.

Page 87. Was it for this man's sin, or his fathers, that he was born blind? For
the avoiding the force of this Argument for proving that Pre-existence was the
Opinion of the Jews; and that Christ when it was so plainly implied in the
Question, by his silence, or not reproving it, seemed to admit it, or at least
to esteem it no hurtful Opinion: They allege these two things: First, That
these Enquirers having some notions of the Divine Prescience, might suppose
that God foreknowing what kind of person this blind man would prove, had
antedated his punishment. The other is, That the Enquirers may be conceived to
understand the blind man's original sin. So that when they enquired whether the
man was born blind for his own or his Parents sin, they might only ask whether
that particular Judgment was the effect of his Parents, or of his own original
pravity. This is Camerons.

But see what forced conceits Learned men will entertain, rather than not to
say something on a Text. What a distorted and preposterous account is that
found, that God should punish men before they sin, because he foresees they
will sin? And he only produces this example, and a slight one too, That
Jeroboams hand was dried up as he stretched it forth to give a sign to
apprehend the Prophet. And the other is as fond an account, That God should
send such severe Judgments on men for their original Pravity, which they cannot
help. And original Pravity being so common to all, it could be no reason why
this particular man should be born blind, more than others. Wherefore Grotius
far more ingenuously writes thus upon the place: Quaerunt ergo an ipse
peccaverit, quia multi Judaeorum credebant (...) animarum. And as our Savior
Christ passed it for an innocent Opinion, so did the Primitive Church, the Book
of Wisdom being an allowable book with them, and read in public, though it
plainly declare for Pre-existence, Chap. 8. 20.

Chap. 12. p. 93. Therefore let the Reader, if he please, call it a Romantic
Scheme, or imaginary Hypothesis, etc. This is very discreetly and judiciously
done of the Author, to propose such things as are not necessary members or
branches of Pre-existence, and are but at the best conjectura^, as no part of
that otherwise-useful Theory. For by tacking too fast these unnecessary tufts
or tassels to the main Truth, it will but give occasion to wanton or wrathful
whelps to worry her, and tug her into the dirt by them. And we may easily
observe how greedily they catch at such occasions, though it be not much that
they can make out of them, as we may observe in the next Chapter.

Chap. 13. page 96. Pill. 1. To conceive him as an immense and all-glorious
Sun, that is continually communicating, etc. And this as certainly as the Sun
does his light, and as restrainedly. For the Suns light is not equally imparted
to all subjects, but according to the measure of their capacity. And as Nature
limits here in natural things, so does the Wisdom and Justice of God in free
Creatures. He imparts to them as they capacitate themselves by improving or
abusing their Freedom.

Page 100. Pill. 3. Be resolved into a Principle that is not merely corporeal.
He suspects that the descent of heavy bodies, when all is said and done, must
be resolved into such a Principle. But I think he that without prejudice
peruses the Eleventh and Thirteenth Chapters (with their Scholia) of Dr. Mores
Enchiridion Metaphysicum, will find it beyond suspicion, that the Descent of
heavy bodies is to be resolved into some corporeal Principle; and that the
Spirit of Nature, though you should call it with the Cabalists by that
astartling name of Sandalphon, is no such prodigious Hobgoblin, as rudeness and
presumptuous ignorance has made that Buckeram Writer in contempt and derision
to call it.

Page 101. As naturally as the fire mounts, and a stone descends. And as these
do not so (though naturally) merely from their own intrinsic nature, but in
virtue of the Spirit of the Universe; so the same reason there is in the
disposal of Spirits. The Spirit of Nature will range their Plasticks as
certainly and orderly in the Regions of the World, as it does the matter it
self in all places. Whence that of Plotinus may fitly be understood, That a
Soul enveigled in vitiousness, both here and after death, according to her
nature (...), is thrust into the state and place she is, (...), as if she were
drawn thither by certain invisible or Magical strings of Natures own pulling.
Thus is he pleased to express this power or virtue of the Spirit of Nature in
the Universe. But I think that transposition she makes of them is rather (...),
than either (...) or (...), a transvection of them, rather than pulsion or
traction. But these are overnice Curiosities.

Page 101. As likely some things relating to the state of Spirits, etc. That is
to say, Spirits by the ministry of other Spirits may be carried into such
regions as the Spirit of Nature would not have transmitted them to, from the
place where they were before, whether for good or evil. Of the latter kind
whereof, I shall have occasion to speak more particularly in my Notes on the
next Chapter.

Page 102. Pill. 4. The souls of men are capable of living in other bodies
besides terrestrial; etc. For the Pre-existentiaries allow her successively to
have lived, first, in an Ethereal body, then in an Aereal; and lastly, after
the state of Silence, to live in a Terrestrial. And here I think, though it be
something early, it will not be amiss to take notice what the
Anti-pre-existentiaries allege against this Hypothesis; for we shall have the
less trouble afterward.

First, therefore, they say, That it does not become the Goodness of God to
make Man's Soul with a triple Vital Congruity, that will fit as well an Aereal
and Terrestrial condition, as an Ethereal. For from hence it appears, that
their Will was not so much in fault that they sinned, as the constitution of
their Essence: And they have the face to quote the account of Origin, page 49.
for to strengthen this their first Argument. The words are these: They being
originally made with a capacity to join with this terrestrial matter, it seems
necessary according to the course of nature that they should sink into it, and
so appear terrestrialmen. And therefore, say they, there being no descending
into these earthly bodies without a lapse or previous sin, their very
constitution necessitated them to sin.

The second Argument is, That this Hypothesis is inconsistent with the bodies
Resurrection. For the Aereal body immediately succeeding the Terrestrial, and
the Ethereal the Aereal, the business is done, there needs no resuscitation of
the Terrestrial body to be glorified. Nor is it the same numerical body or
flesh still, as it ought to be, if the Resurrectionbody be Ethereal.

The third is touching the Aereal Body; That if the soul after death be tied to
an Aereal body (and few or none attain to the Ethereal immediately after
death) the souls of very good men will be forced to have their abode amongst
the very Devils. For their Prince is the Prince of the Air, as the Apostle
calls him; and where can his subjects be, but where he is? So that they will be
enforced to endure the company of these foul Fiends; besides all the
incommodious changes in the Air, of Clouds, of Vapors, of Rain, Hail, Thunder,
tearing Tempests and Storms; and what is an Image of Hell it self, the darkness
of Night will overwhelm them every four and twenty hours.

The fourth Argument is touching the Ethereal state of Pre-existence. For if
souls when they were in so Heavenly and happy an estate could lapse from it,
what assurance can we have, when we are returned thither, that we shall abide
in it? it being but the same Happiness we were in before: and we having the
same Plastic with its triple Vital Congruity, as we had before. Why therefore
may we not lapse as before?

The fifth and last Argument is taken from the state of Silence. Wherein the
Soul is supposed devoid of perception. And therefore their number being many,
and their attraction to the place of conception in the Womb being merely
Magical, and reaching many at a time, there would be many attracted at once; so
that scarce a Foetus could be formed which would not be a multiform Monster, or
a cluster of Humane Foetus's, not one single Foetus. And these are thought such
weighty Arguments, that Pre-existence must sink and perish under their
pressure. But, I believe, when we have weighed them in the balance of
unprejudiced Reason, we shall find them light enough.

And truly, for the first; It is not only weak and slight, but wretchedly
disingenuous. The strength of it is nothing but a maimed and fraudulent
Quotation, which makes ashew as if the Author of the Account of Origin, bluntly
affirmed, without any thing more to do, that souls being originally made with a
capacity to join with this terrestrial matter, it seems necessary, according to
the course of nature, that they should sink into it, and so appear terrestrial
men: Whenas if we take the whole Paragraph as it lies, before they cast
themselves into this fatal necessity, they are declared to have a freedom of
will, whereby they might have so managed their happy Estate they were created
in, that they need never have fallen. His words are these: What then remains, but
that through the faulty and negligent use of themselves, whilst they were in
some better condition of life, they rendered themselves less pure in the whole
extent of their powers, both Intellectual and Animal; and so by degrees became
disposed for the susception of such a degree of corporeal life, as was less
pure, indeed, than the former; but exactly answerable to their present
disposition of Spirit. So that after certain Periods of time they might become
far less fit to actuate any sort of body, than the terrestrial; and being
originally made with a capacity to join with this too, and in it to exercise
the Powers and functions of life, it seems necessary, etc.

These are the very words of the Author of the Account of Origin, wherein he
plainly affirms, that it was the fault of the Souls themselves, that they did
not order themselves then right when they might have done so, that cast them
into this terrestrial condition. But what an Opposer of Pre-existence is this,
that will thus shamelesly falsify and corrupt a Quotation of an ingenious
Author, rather than he will seem to want an Argument against his Opinion!
Wherefore briefly to answer to this Argument, It does as much become the
Goodness of God to create souls with a triple Vital Congruity, as to have
created Adam in Paradise with free Will, and a capacity of sinning.

To the Second, the Pre-existentiaries will answer, That it is no more absurd
to conceive (nor so much) that the soul after death has an Airy body, or it
may be some an Ethereal one, than to imagine them so highly happy after death
without any body at all. For if they can act so fully and beatifically without
any body, what need there be any Resurrection of the body at all? And if it be
most natural to the soul to act in some body, in what a long unnatural estate
has Adams soul been, that so many thousand years has been without a body? But
for the soul to have a body, of which she may be the (...), certainly is most
natural, or else she will be in an unnatural state after the Resurrection to
all Eternity. Whence it is manifest, that it is most natural for the soul, if
she act at all, to have a body to act in. And therefore, unless we will be so
dull as to fall into the drouzie dream of the Pyschopannychites, we are to
allow the soul to have some kind of body or other till the very Resurrection.

But those now that are not Psychopannychites, but allow good Souls the joys
and glories of Paradise before the Resurrection of the Body, let them be
demanded to what end the soul should have a Resurrection-body; and what they
would answer for themselves, the Preexistentiaries will answer for their
position that holds the Soul has an Ethereal body already, or an Aereal one
which may be changed into an Ethereal body. If they will allege any
Concinnity in the business, or the firm promise of more highly completing our
Happiness at the union of our terrestrial bodies with our souls at the
Resurrection; This, I say, may be done as well supposing them to have bodies in
the mean time as if they had none. For those bodies they have made use of in
the interval betwixt their Death and Resurrection, may be so thin and dilute,
that they may be no more considerable than an Interula is to a Royal Robe lined
with rich Furrs, and embroidered with Gold. For suppose every man's body at the
Resurrection framed again out of its own dust, bones, sinews and flesh, by the
miraculous Power of God, were it not as easy for these subtle Spirits, as it
is in the (...), to enter these bodies, and by the Divine Power assisting, so
to inactuate them, that that little of their Vehicle they brought in with them,
shall no more destroy the individuation of the Body, than a draught of wine
drunk in, does the individuation of our body now, though it were, immediately
upon the drinking, actuated by the Soul. And the soul at the same instant
actuating the whole Aggregate, it is exquisitely the same numerical body, even
to the utmost curiosity of the Schoolmen. But the Divine Assistance working in
this, it is not to be thought that the soul will loose by resuming this
Resurrection-body, but that all will be turned into a more full and saturate
Brightness and Glory, and that the whole will become an heavenly, spiritual,
and truly glorified Body, immortal and incorruptible.

Nor does the being thus turned into an heavenly or spiritual Body, hinder it
from being still the same Numerical body, forasmuch as one and the same
Numerical matter, let it be under what modifications it will, is still the same
numerical matter or body; and it is gross ignorance in Philosophy that makes
any conceive otherwise.

But a rude and ill-natured Opposer of Pre-existence is not content that it be
the same numerical body, but that this same numerical body be still flesh,
peevishly and invidiously thereby to expose the Author of the Account of
Origin, who, page 120. writes thus: That the body we now have, is therefore
corruptible and mortal, because it is flesh; and therefore if it put on
incorruption and immortality, it must put off it self first, and cease to be
flesh. But questionless that ingenious Writer understood this of natural flesh
and blood, of which the Apostle declares, That flesh and blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God. But as he says, (...), There is a natural body and there is
a spiritual body: So if he had made application of the several kinds of Flesh
he mentions, of Men, of Beasts, of Fishes, and Birds, he would have presently
subjoyned, (...), There is a natural flesh and there is a spiritual flesh. And
it is this spiritual Flesh to which belongs incorruption and immortality, and
which is capable of the Kingdom of Heaven. But for the (...), the natural
flesh, it must put off it self, and cease to be natural flesh, before it can
put on immortality and incorruption.

So little inconsistency is there of this Hypothesis (as touching the souls
acting in either an Aereal of Ethereal Vehicle, during the interval betwixt
the Resurrection and her departure hence) with the Resurrection of the body.
But in the mean time, there is a strong bar thereby put to the dull dream of
the Psychopanychites, and other harshnesses also eased or smoothed by it.

Now as for the third Argument, which must needs seem a great Scarecrow to the
illiterate, there is very little weight or none at all in it. For if we take
but notice of the whole Atmosphere, what is the dimension thereof, and of the
three Regions into which it is distributed, all these Bugbears will vanish. As
for the Dimension of the whole Atmosphere, it is by the skilful reputed about
fifty to Italick miles high, the Unequal of the middle Region thereof about four
such miles, the Concave about half a mile. Now this distribution of the Air
into these three Regions being thus made, and the Hebrew tongue having no other
name to call the Expansum about us, but (...) Heaven, here is according to them
a distribution of Heaven into three, and the highest Region will be part of the
third Heaven.

This therefore premised, I answer, That though the souls of good men after
death be detained within the Atmosphere of the Air, (and the Air it self happily
may reach much higher than this Atmosphere that is bounded by the mere ascent
of exhalations and vapors) yet there is no necessity at all that they should
be put to those inconveniences, which this Argument pretends, from the company
of Devils, or incommodious changes and disturbances of the Air. For suppose
such inconveniences in the middle and lowest Region, yet the upper Region,
which is also part of the third Heaven, those parts are ever calm and serene.
And the Devils Principality reaching no further than through the middle and
lowest Region next the earth, (not to advertise that his quarters may be
restrained there also) the souls of the departed that are good, are not liable
to be pestered and haunted with the ungrateful Presence or Occursions of the
deformed and grim Retinue, or of the vagrant vassals of that foul Feind, that
is Prince of the Air, he being only so of these lower parts thereof, and the
good souls having room enough to consociate together in the upper Region of it.

Nor does that promise of our Savior to the thief on the Cross, that that very
day he should be with him in Paradise, at all clash with this Hypothesis of
Aereal Bodies, both because Christ by his miraculous power might confer that
upon the penitent thief his fellowsufferer, which would not fall to the share
of other penitents in a natural course of things; and also because this third
Region of the Air may be part of Paradise it self: (In my Fathers house there
are many Mansions) and some learned men have declared Paradise to be in the
Air, but such a part of the Air as is free from gross Vapors and Clouds; and
such is the third Region thereof. In the mean time we see the souls of good men
departed, freed from those Panick fears of being infested either by the
unwelcome company of Fiends and Devils, or incommodated by any dull cloudy
obscurations, or violent and tempestuous motions of the Air.

Only the shadowy Vale of the Night will be cast over them once in a
Nycthemeron. But what incommodation is that, after the brisk active heat of the
Sun in the daytime, to have the variety of the more mild beams of the Moon, or
gentle, though more quick and cheerful, scintillations of the twinkling Stars?
This variety may well seem an addition to the felicity of their state. And the
shadowyness of the Night may help them in the more composing Introversions of
their contemplative mind, and cast the soul into ineffably pleasing slumbers
and Divine ecstasies; so that the transactions of the Night may prove more
solacing and beatifick sometimes, than those of the day. Such things we may
guess at afar off, but in the mean time be sure, that these good and serious
Souls know how to turn all that God sends to them to the improvement of their
Happiness.

To the fourth Argument we answer, That there are not a few reasons from the
nature of the thing that may beget in us a strong presumption that souls
recovered into their Celestial Happiness will never again relapse, though they
did once.

For first, it may be a mistake that the Happiness is altogether the same that
it was before. For our first Paradisiacal Bodies from which we lapsed, might be
of a more crude and dilute Ether, not so full and saturate with Heavenly glory
and perfection as our Resurrection-body is.

Secondly, The soul was then unexperienced, and lightly coming by that
Happiness she was in, did the more heedlessly forgo it, before she was well
aware; and her mind roved after new adventures, though she knew not what.

Thirdly, It is to be considered, whether Regeneration be not a stronger tenor
for enduring Happiness, than the being created happy. For this being wrought
so by degrees upon the Plastic, (...), with ineffable groans and piercing
desires after that Divine Life, that the Spirit of God cooperating exciteth in
us; when Regeneration is perfected and wrought to the full by these strong
Agonies, this may rationally be deemed a deeper tincture in the soul than that
she had by mere Creation, whereby the soul did indeed become Holy, innocent and
happy, but not coming to it with any such strong previous conflicts and eager
workings and thirstings after that state, it might not be so firmly rooted by
far as in Regeneration begun and accomplished by the operation of Gods Spirit,
gradually but more deeply renewing the Divine Image in us.

Fourthly, It being a renovation of our Nature into a pristine state of ours,
the strength and depth of impression seems increased upon that account also.

Fifthly, The remembrance of all the hardships we underwent in our lapsed
condition, whether of Mortification or cross Rancounters, this must likewise
help us to persevere when once returned to our former Happiness.

Sixthly, The comparing of the evanid pleasures of our lapsed or terrestrial
life, with the fullness of those Joys that we find still in our heavenly, will
keep us from ever having any hankering after them any more.

Seventhly, The certain knowledge of everlasting punishment, which if not true,
they could not know, must be also another sure bar to any such negligencies as
would hazard their settled felicity. Which may be one reason why the
irreclaimable are eternally punished, namely, that it may the better secure
eternal Happiness to others.

Eighthly, Though we have our triple Vital Congruity still, yet the Plastic
life is so thoroughly satisfied with the Resurrection-body, which is so
considerably more full and saturate with all the heavenly richness and Glory
than the former, that the Plastic of the soul is as entirely taken up with
this one Body, as if she enjoyed the pleasures of all three bodies at once,
Ethereal, Aereal, and Terrestrial.

And lastly, Which will strike all sure, He that is able to save to the utmost,
and has promised us eternal life, is as true as able, and therefore cannot fail
to perform it. And who can deny but that we in this State I have described, are
as capable of being fixed there, and confirmed therein, as the Angels were
after Lucifer and others had fallen?

And now to the fifth and last Argument against the state of Silence, I say it
is raised out of mere ignorance of the most rational as well as most Platonical
way of the souls immediate descent (...). For the first Mover or stirrer in
this matter, I mean in the formation of the Foetus, is the Spirit of Nature,
the great (...) of the Universe, to whom Plotinus somewhere attributes (...)
The first Predelineations and prodrome Irradiations into the matter, before the
particular soul, it is preparing for, come into it. Now the Spirit of Nature
being such a spirit as contains Spermatically or Vitally all the Laws contrived
by the Divine Intellect, for the management of the Matter of the World, and of
all Essences else unperceptive, or quatenus unperceptive, for the good of the
Universe; we have all the reason in the world to suppose this Vital or
Spermatical Law is amongst the rest, viz. That it transmit but one soul to one
prepared conception. Which will therefore be as certainly done, unless some
rare and odd casualty intervene, as if the Divine Intellect it self did do it.
Wherefore one and the same Spirit of Nature which prepares the matter by some
general Predelineation, does at the due time transmit some one soul in the
state of Silence by some particularizing Laws (that fetch in such a soul rather
than such, but most sure but one, unless as I said some special casualty
happen) into the prepared Matter, acting at two places at once according to its
Synenergetical virtue or power.

Hence therefore it is plain, that there will be no such clusters of Foetus's
and monstrous deformities from this Hypothesis of the souls being in a state of
Silence. But for one to shuffle off so fair a satisfaction to this difficulty,
by a precarious supposing there is no such Being as the Spirit of Nature, when
it is demonstrable by so many irrefragable Arguments that there is, is a
Symptom of one that philosophizes at random, not as Reason guides. For that is
no reason against the existence of the Spirit of Nature, because some define it
A Substance incorporeal, but without sense and animadversion, etc. as if a
spirit without sense and animadversion were a contradiction. For that there is
a Spirit of Nature is demonstrable, though whether it have no sense at all is
more dubitable. But through it have no sense or perception, it is no
contradiction to its being a Spirit, as may appear from Dr. H. Mores Brief
Discourse of the true Notion of a Spirit. To which I direct the Reader for
satisfaction, I having already been more prolix in answering these Arguments
than I intended. But I hope I have made my presage true, that they would be
found to have no force in them to overthrow the Hypothesis of a threefold Vital
Congruity in the Plastic of the soul. So that this fourth Pillar, for any
execution they can do, will stand unshaken.

Page 103. For in all sensation there is corporeal motion, etc. And besides,
there seems an essential relation of the Soul to Body, according to Aristotle's
definition thereof, he defining it (...), that which actuates the boby. Which
therefore must be idle when it has nothing to actuate, as a Piper must be
silent, as to piping, if he have no Pipe to play on.

Chap. 14. page 113. The ignobler and lower properties or the life of the body
were languid and remiss, v^ as to their proper exercises or acting for
themselves, or as to their being regarded much by the Soul that is taken up
with greater matters, or as to their being much relished, but in subserviency
to the enjoyment of those more Divine and sublime Objects; as the Author
intimates toward the end of his last Pillar.

Page 114. And the Plastic had nothing to do but to move this passive and
easy body, etc. It may be added, and keep it in its due form and shape. And it
is well added [accordingly as the concerns of the higher faculties required]
For the Plastic by reason of its Vital Union with the vehicle, is indeed the
main instrument of the motion thereof. But it is the Imperium of the Perceptive
that both excites and guides its motion. Which is no wonder it can do, they
being both but one soul.

Page 114. To pronounce the place to be the Sun, etc. Which is as rationally
guessed by them, as if one should fancy all the Fellows and Students Chambers
in a College to be contained within the area of the Hearth in the Hall, and
the rest of the College uninhabited. For the Sun is but a common Focus of a
Vortex, and is less by far to the Vortex, than the Hearth to the Ichnographie
of the whole College, that I may not say little more than a Tennis-ball to the
bigness of the earth.

Page 115. Yet were we not immuta^ly so, etc. But this mutability we were
placed in, was not without a prospect of a more full confirmation and greater
accumulation of Happiness at the long run, as I intimated above.

Page 116. We were made on set purpose defatigable, that so all degrees of
life, etc. We being such Creatures as we are and finite, and taking in the
enjoyment of those infinitely perfect and glorious Objects only pro modulo
nostro, according to the scantness of our capacity, diversion to other Objects
may be an ease and relief. From whence the promise of a glorified body in the
Christian Religion, as it is most grateful, so appears most rational. But in
the mean time it would appear most irrational to believe we shall have eyes and
ears and other organs of external sense, and have no suitable Objects to
entertain them.

Page 117. Yea, methinks it is but a reasonable reward to the body, etc. This is
spoken something popularly and to the sense of the vulgar, that imagine the
body to feel pleasure and pain, whenas it is the soul only that is perceptive
and capable of feeling either. But it is fit the body should be kept in due
plight for the lawful and allowable corporeal enjoyments the soul may reap
therefrom for seasonable diversion.

Page 117, That that is executed which he has so determined, etc. Some fancy
this may be extended to the enjoying of the fruits of the Invigouration of all
the three Vital Congruities of the Plastic, and that for a soul orderly and in
due time and course to pass through all these dispensations, provided she keep
her self sincere toward her Maker, is not properly any lapse or sin, but an
harmless experiencing all the capacities of enjoying themselves that God has
bestowed upon them. Which will open a door to a further Answer touching the
rest of the Planets being inhabited, namely, That they may be inhabited by such
kind of souls as these, who therefore want not the Knowledge and assistance of
a Redeemer. And so the earth may be the only Nosocomium of sinfully lapsed
souls. This may be an answer to such far-fetched Objections till they can prove
the contrary.

Page 118. Adam cannot withstand the inordinate appetite, etc. Namely, after
his own remissness and heedlessness in ordering himself, he had brought himself
to such a wretched weakness.

Page 121. The Plastic faculties begin now fully to awaken, etc. There are
three Vital Congruities belonging to the Plastic of the Soul, and they are to
awake orderly, that is, to operate one after another downward and upward, that
is to say, In the lapse, the Aereal follows the Ethereal, the Terrestrial the
Aereal. But in their Recovery or Emergency out of the lapse, The Aereal follows
the Terrestrial, and the Ethereal the Aereal. But however, a more gross
turgency to Plastic operation may happily arise at the latter end of the Aereal
Period, which may be as it were the disease of the soul in that state, and
which may help to turn her out of it into the state of Silence, and is it self
for the present silenced therewith. For where there is no union with body,
there is no operation of the Soul.

Page 121. For it has an aptness and propensity to act in a Terrestrial body,
etc. This aptness and fitness it has in the state of Silence, according to that
essential order of things interwoven into its own nature and into the nature of
the Spirit of the World, or great Archeus of the Universe, according to the
eternal counsel of the Divine Wisdom. By which Law and appointment the soul
will as certainly have a fitness and propensity at its leaving the Terrestrial
body to actuate an Aereal o^e.

Page 122. Either by mere natural Congruity, the disposition of the soul of the
world, or some more spontaneous agent, etc. Natural Congruity and the disposal
of the Plastic soul of the world (which others call the Spirit of Nature) may
be joined well together in this Feat, the Spirit of Nature attracting such a
soul as is most congruous to the predelineated Matter which it has prepared for
her. But as for the spontaneous Agent, I suppose, he may understand his
ministry in some supernatural Birth. Unless he thinks that some Angels or Genii
may be employed in putting souls into bodies, as Gardiners are in setting Pease
and Beans in the beds of Gardens. But certainly they must be no good Genii then
that have any hand in assisting or setting souls in such wombs as have had to
do with Adultery, Incest, and Buggery.

Page 123. But some apish shows and imitations of Reason, Virtue and Religion,
etc. The Reason of the unregenerate in Divine things is little better than
thus, and Virtue and Religion which is not from that Principle which revives in
us in real Regeneration, are, though much better than scandalous vice and
profaness, mere pictures and shadows of what they pretend to.

Page 123. To its old celestial abode, etc. For we are Pilgrims and strangers
here on the earth, as the holy Patriarchs of old declared. And they that speak
such things, says the Apostle, plainly show (...), that they seek their native
country, for so (...) properly signifies. And truly if they had been mindful of
that earthly country out of which they came, they might, says he, have had
opportunity of returning. But now they desire a better, to wit, an heavenly,
Hebr. 11.

Page 124. But that they step forth again into Airy Vehicles. This is their
natural course, as I noted above. But the examples of Enoch and Elias, and much
more of our ever Blessed Savior, are extraordinary and supernatural.

Page 125. Those therefore that pass out of these bodies before their
Terrestrial Congruity be spoiled, weakened, or orderly unwound, according to
the tenor of this Hypothesis, etc. By the favor of this ingenious Writer,
this Hypothesis does not need any such obnoxious Appendage as this, viz. That
souls that are outed these Terrestrial bodies before their Terrestrial
Congruity be spoiled, weakened, or orderly unwound, return into the state of
Inactivity. But this is far more consonant both to Reason and Experience or
Story, that though the Terrestrial Congruity be still vigorous, as not having
run out it may be the half part, no not the tenth part of its Period, the soul
immediately upon the quitting of this body is invested with a body of Air, and
is in the state of Activity not of Silence in no sense. For some being murdered
have in all likelihood in their own persons complained of their murderers, as
it is in that story of Anne Walker; and there are many others of the same
nature.

And besides, it is far more reasonable, there being such numerous multitudes
of silent souls, that their least continuance in these Terrestrial bodies
should at their departure be as it were a Magical Kue or Tessera forthwith to
the Aereal Congruity of life to begin to act its part upon the ceasing of the
other, that more souls may be rid out of the state of Silence. Which makes it
more probable that every soul that is once besmeared with the unctuous moisture
of the Womb, should as it were by a Magic Ointment be carried into the Air
(though it be of a still-born Infant) than that any should return into the
state of Silence or Inactivity upon the pretense of the remaining vigor of the
Terrestrial Congruity of life. For these Laws are not by any consequential
necessity, but by the free counsel of the Eternal Wisdom of God consulting for
the best.

And therefore this being so apparently for the best, this Law is interwoven
into the Spirit of the World and every particular soul, that upon the ceasing
of her Terrestrial Union, her Aereal Congruity of life should immediately
operate, and the Spirit of Nature assisting, she should be dressed in Aereal
robes, and be found among the Inhabitants of those Regions. If souls should be
remanded back into the state of Silence that depart before the Terrestrial
Period of Vital Congruity be orderly unwound, so very few reach the end of that
Period, that they must in a manner all be turned into the state of Inactivity.
Which would be to weave Penelope's Web, to do and undo because the day is long
enough, as the Proverb is, whenas it rather seems too short, by reason of the
numerosity of Silent souls that expect their turn of Recovery into Life.

Page 125. But only follow the clew of this Hypothesis. The Hypothesis
requires no such thing, but it rather clashes with the first and chietest
Pillar thereof, viz. That all the Divine designs and actions are laid and
carried on by Infinite Goodness. And I have already intimated how much better
it is to be this way that I am pleading for, than that of this
otherwise-ingenious Writer.

Page 125. Since by long and hard exercise in this body, the Plastic Life is
well ta^ned and debilitated, etc. But this is not at all necessary, no not in
those souls whose Plastic may be deemed the most rampant. Disunion from this
Terrestrial body immediately tames it, I mean, the Terrestrial Congruity of
Life; and its operation is stopped, as surely as a string of a Lute never so
smartly vibrated is streightways silenced by a gentle touch of the finger, and
another single string may be immediately made to sound alone, while the other
is mute and silent. For, I say, these are the free Laws of the Eternal Wisdom,
but fatally and vitally, not intellectually implanted in the Spirit of Nature,
and in all Humane Souls or Spirits. The whole Universe is as it were the
Automatal Harp of that great and true Apollo; and as for the general striking
of the strings and stopping their vibrations, they are done with as exquisite
art as if a free intellectual Agent played upon them. But the Plastic powers in
the world are not such, but only Vital and Fatal, as I said before.

Page 126. That an Aereal body was not enough for it to display its force upon,
etc. It is far more safe and rational to say, that the soul deserts her Aereal
Estate by reason that the Period of the Vital Congruity is expired, which
according to those fatal Laws I spoke of before is determined by the Divine
Wisdom. But whether a soul may do any thing to abbreviate this Period, and
excite such symptoms in the Plastic as may shorten her continuance in that
state, let it be left to the more inquisitive to define.

Page 128. Where is then the difference betwixt the just and the wicked, in
state, place, and body? Their difference in place I have sufficiently shown, in
my Answer to the third Argument against the triple Congruity of Life in the
Plastic of Humane Souls, how fitly they may be disposed of in the Air. But to
the rude Buffoonry of that crude Opposer of the Opinion of Pre-existence, I
made no Answer. It being methinks sufficiently answered in the Scholia upon
Sect. 12. Cap. 3. Lib. 3. of Dr. H. Mores Immortalitas Animae, if the Reader
think it worth his while to consult the place. Now for State and Body the
difference is obvious. The Vehicle is of more pure Air, and the Conscience more
pure of the one than of the other.

Page 130. For according to this Hypothesis, the gravity of those bodies is
less, because the quantity of the earth that draws them is so, etc. This is an
ingenious invention both to salve that Phenomenon, why Bodies in Mines and
other deep subterraneous places should seem not so heavy nor hard to lift
there, as they are in the superior Air above the earth; and also to prove that
the crust of the earth is not of so considerable a thickness as men usually
conceive it is. I say, it is ingenious, but not so firm and sure. The
Quicksilver in a Torricellian Tube will sink deeper in an higher or clearer
Air, though there be the same Magnetism of the earth under it that was before.
But this is not altogether so fit an illustration, there being another cause
than I drive at conjoined thereto.

But that which I drive at is sufficient of it self to salve this Phenomenon.
A Bucket of water, while it is in the water comes up with ease to him that
draws it at the Well; but so soon as it comes into the Air, though there be the
same earth under it that there was before, it feels now exceeding more weighty.
Of which I conceive the genuine reason is, because the Spirit of Nature, which
ranges all things in their due order, acts proportionately strongly to reduce
them thereto, as they are more heterogeniously and disproportionately placed as
to their consistencies. And therefore by how much more crass and solid a body
is above that in which it is placed, by so much the stronger effort the Spirit
of Nature uses to reduce it to its right place; but the less it exceeds the
crassness of the Element it is in, the effort is the less or weaker.

Hence therefore it is, that a stone or such like body in those subterraneous
depths seems less heavy, because the air there is so gross and thick, and is
not so much disproportionate to the grossness of the stone as our air above the
earth here is; nor do I make any doubt, but if the earth were all cut away to
the very bottom of any of these Mines, so that the Air might be of the same
consistency with ours, the stone would then be as heavy as it is usually to us
in this superioor surface of the earth. So that this is no certain Argument for
the proving that the crust of the earth is of such thinness as this Author
would have it, though I do not question but that it is thin enough.

Page 131. And the mention of the Fountains of the great Deep in the Sacred
History, etc. This is a more considerable Argument for the thinness of the
crust of the earth; and I must confess I think it not improbable but that there
is an Aqueous hollow Sphaericum, which is the Basis of this habitable earth,
according to that of Psalm 24. 2. For he has founded it upon the seas, and
established it upon the floods.

Page 131. Now I intend not that after a certain distance all is fluid matter
to the Center; That is to say, After a certain distance of earthly Matter, that
the rest should be fluid Matter, namely, Water and Air, to the Center, etc. But
here his intention is directed by that veneration he has for Des Carts.
Otherwise I believe if he had freely examined the thing to the bottom, he would
have found it more reasonable to conclude all fluid betwixt the Concave of the
Terrestrial Crust and the Center of the Earth, as we usually phrase it, though
nothing be properly Earth but that Crust.

Page 131. Which for the most part very likely is a gross and foetid kind of
air, etc. On this side of the Concave of the Terrestrial Crust there may be
several Hollows of foetid air and stagnant water, which may be so many
particular lodgings for lapsed and unruly Spirits. But there is moreover a
considerable Aqueous Sphaericum upon which the earth is founded, and is most
properly the Abyss; but in a more comprehensive notion, all from the Unequal
thereof to the Center may be termed the Abyss, or the Deepest place that
touches our imagination.

Page 131. The lowest and central Regions may be filled with flame and ether,
etc. That there was the Relics of a Sun after the Incrustation of the Earth
and Aqueous Orb, is according to this Hypothesis reasonable enough. And a kind
of Air and Ether betwixt this diminished Sun and the Concave of this Aqueous
Orb, but no crass and opake concamerations of hard Matter interposed betwixt.

Which is an Hypothesis the most kind to the ingenious Author of Telluris
Theoria Sacra, that he could wish. For he holding that there was for almost two
thousand years an opake earthy Crust over this Aqueous Orb unbroke till the
Deluge, which he ascribes to the breaking thereof, it was necessary there
should be no opake Orb betwixt the Central Fire and this Aqueous Orb; for else
the Fishes for so long a time had lived in utter darkness, having eyes to no
purpose, nor ability to guide their way or hunt their prey. Only it is
supposed, which is easy to do, that they then swam with their backs toward the
Center, whenas as now they swim with their bellies thitherward; they then
plying near the Concave, as now near the Unequal of this watery Abyss. Which
being admitted, the difference of their posture will necessarilly follow
according to the Laws of Nature, as were easy to make out, but that I intend
brevity in these Annotations.

Only I cannot forbear by the way to advertise how probable it is that this
Central Fire which shone clear enough to give light to the Fishes swimming near
the Concave of this Watery Orb, might in process of time grow dimmer and dimmer,
and exceeding much abate of its light, by that time the Crust of the Earth
broke and let in the light of the Sun of this great Vortex into this Watery
Region, within which, viz. in the Air or Ether there, there has been still a
decay of light, the Air or Ether growing more thick as well as that little
Central Fire or Sun, being more and more inveloped with fuliginous stuff about
it. So that the whole Concavity may seem most like a vast duskish Vault, and
this dwindling overclouded Sun a Sepulchral Lamp, such as, if I remember right,
was found in the Monuments of Olybius and Tulliola. An hideous dismal forlorn
Place, and sit Receptacle for the Methim and Rephaim.

And the Latin Translation, Job 26. 5. excellently well accords with this sad
Phenomenon. Ecce Gigantes gemunt sub Aquis, and qui habitant cum eis. Here is
that (...), or (...), as Symmachus translates the word. And it follows in the
verse, Nudus est Infernus coram eo, Hell is naked before God. And Symmachus in
other places of the Proverbs puts (...) and (...) together, which therefore is
the most proper and the nethermost Hell. And it will be (...) in the highest
sense, whenever this lurid Light (as it seems probable to me it sometime will
be) is quite extinct, and this Central Fire turned into a Terrella, as it may
seem to have already happened in Saturn. But we must remember, as the Author
sometimes reminds us, that we are embellishing but a Romantic Hypothesis, and
be sure we admit no more than Reason, Scripture, and the Apostolic Faith will
allow.

Page 132. Are after death committed to those squalid subterraneous
Habitations, etc. He seems to suppose that all the wicked and degerate souls
are committed hither, that they may be less troublesome to better souls in this
air above the earth. But considering the Devil is called the Prince of the Air,
and that he has his Clients and Subjects in the same place with him; we may
well allow the lower Regions of the Air to him, and to some wicked or
unregenerate souls promiscuously with him, though there be subterraneous
Receptacles for the worst and most rebellious of them, and not send them all
packing thither.

Page 132. That they are driven into those Dungeons by the invisible Ministers
of Justice, etc. He speaks of such Dungeons as are in the broken Caverns of the
Farth, which may be so many vexatious Receptacles for rebellious Spirits which
these invisible Ministers of Justice may drive them into, and see them
committed; and being confined there upon far severer penalties if they submit
not to that present punishment which they are sentenced to, they will out of
fear of greater Calamity be in as safe custody as if they were under lock and
key. But the most dismal penalty is to be carried into the Abyss, the place of
the Rephaim I above described. This is a most astonishing commination to them,
and they extremely dread that sentence. Which makes the Devils, Luke 8. 31. so
earnestly beseech Christ that he would not command them (...) to pack away into
the Abyss.

This punishment therefore of the Abyss where the Rephaim or (...) groan, is
door and lock that makes them, whether they will or no, submit to all other
punishments and confinements on this side of it. Michael Psellus takes special
notice how the Demons are frighted with the menaces (...), with the menaces of
the sending them away packing into the Abyss and subterraneous places. But
these may signify no more than Cavities that are in the ruptues of the earth,
and they may steal out again if they will adventure, unless they were
perpetually watched, which is not so probable. Wherefore they are imprisoned
through fear of that great horrid Abyss above described, and which as I said is
an iron lock and door of brass upon them.

But then you will say, What is the door and lock to this terrible place? I
answer, The inviolable Adamantine Laws of the great Sandalphon or Spirit of the
Universe. When once a rebellious Spirit is carried down by a Minister of
Justice into this Abyss, he can no more return of himself, than a man put into
a Well forty fathoms deep is able of himself to ascend out of it.

The unlapsed Spirits, it is their privilege that their Vehicles are wholly
obedient to the will of the Spirit that inactuates them, and therefore they
have free ingress and egress every where; and being so little passive as they
are, and so quick and swift in their motions, can perform any Ministries with
little or no incommodation to themselves. But the Vehicles of lapsed Spirits
are more passive, and they are the very chains whereby they are tied to certain
Regions by the iron Laws of the Spirit of the Universe, or Hylarchick
Principle, that unfailingly ranges the Matter every where according to certain
orders. Wherefore this Sergeant of Justice having once deposited his Prisoner
within the Concave of the Aqueous Orb, he will be as certainly kept there, and
never of himself get out again, as the man in the bottom of the Well
abovementioned. For the Laws of the same Spirit of Nature that keeps the man
at the bottom of the Well (that every thing may be placed according to the
measure of its consistencie) will inhibit this Captive from ever returning to
this Superior Air again, because his Vehicle is, though foul enough, yet much
thinner than the Water; and there will be the the same ranging of things on the
Concave side of the Aqueous Orb, as there is on the Unequal.

So that if we could suppose the Ring about Saturn inhabited with any living
creatures, they would be born toward the Concave of the Ring as well as toward
the Unequal, and walk as steadily as we and our Antipodes do with our feet on
this and that side of the earth one against another. This may serve for a brief
intimation of the reason of the thing, and the intelligent will easily make out
the rest themselves, and understand what an ineluctable fate and calamity it is
to be carried into that duskish place of dread and horror, when once the Angel
that has the Keys of the Abyss or bottomless pit has shut a rebellious Spirit
up there, and chained him in that hideous Dungeon.

Page 133. Others to the Dungeon, and some to the most intolerable Hell the
Abyss of fire. The Dungeon here, if it were understood with an Emphasis, would
most properly denote the Dungeon of the Rephaim, of which those parts nearest
the Center may be called the Abyss of Fire more properly than any Vulcano's in
the Crust of the earth. Those souls therefore that have been of a more fierce
and fiery nature, and the Causers of Violence and Bloodshed, and of furious
Wars and cruel Persecutions of innocent and harmless men, when they are
committed to this Dungeon of the Rephaim, by those inevitable Laws of the
subteraqueous Sandalphon, or Demogorgon if you will, they will be ranged
nearest the Central Fire of this Hellish Vault. For the Vehicles of souls
symbolizing with the temper of the mind, those who are most haughty, ambitious,
fierce, and fiery, and therefore, out of Pride and contempt of others in
respect of themselves and their own Interest, make nothing of shedding innocent
blood, or cruelly handling those that are not for their turn, but are faithful
adherers to their Maker, the Vehicles of these being more thin and fiery than
theirs who have transgressed in the Concupiscible, they must needs surmount
such in order of place, and be most remote from the Concave of the Aqueous Orb
under which the Rephaim groan, and so be placed at least the nearest to that
Abyss of Fire, which our Author terms the most intolerable Hell.

Page 133. Have a strict and careful eye upon them, to keep them within the
confines of their Goal, etc. That this, as it is a more tedious Province, so a
needless one, I have intimated above, by reason that the fear of being carried
into the Abyss will effectually detain them in their confinements. From whence
if they be not released in time, the very place they are in may so change their
Vehicles, that it may in a manner grow natural to them, and make them as
incapable of the Superior Air as Bats and Owls are, as the ingenious Author
notes, to bear the Suns Noon-day-Beams, or the Fish to live in these thinner
Regions.

Page 134. Under severe penalties prohibit all unlicensed excursions into the
upper World, though I confess this seems not so probable, etc. The Author seems
to reserve all the Air above the earth to good souls only, and that if any bad
ones appear, it must be by either stealth or license. But why bad souls may not
be in this lower Region of the Air as well as Devils, I understand not. Nor do
I conceive but that the Kingdom of Darkness may make such Laws amongst
themselves, as may tend to the ease and safety of those of the Kingdom of
Light. Not out of any good will to them, but that themselves may not further
smart for it if they give license to such and such exorbitancies. For they are
capable of pain and punishment, and though they are permitted in the world, yet
they are absolutely under the power of the Almighty, and of the Grand Minister
of his Kingdom, the glorious Soul of the Messiah.

Page 137. The internal Central Fire should have got such strength and
irresistible vigor, etc. But how or from whence, is very hard to conceive: I
should rather suspect, as I noted above, that the Fire will more and more decay
till it turn at last to a kind of Terrella, like that observed within the Ring
of Saturn, and the Dungeon become utter Darkness, where there will be weeping
and wailing and gnashing of teeth, as well as in the furnace of Fire.

Page 141. And so following the Laws of its proper motion shall fly away out of
this Vortex, etc. This looks like an heedless mistake of this ingenious Writer,
who though he speak the language of Cartesius, seems here not to have recalled
to mind his Principles. For the Earth according to his Principles is never like
to become a Sun again. Nor if it had so become, would it then become a Comet.
Forasmuch as Comets according to his Philosophy are incrustated Suns, and
Planets or Earths in a manner, and so to be deemed so soon as they settle in
any Vortex, and take their course about the Center thereof. Nor if the Earth
become a Sun again, is it like to leave our Vortex according to the Cartesian
Principles, but rather be swallowed down into the Sun of our Vortex, and
increase his magnitude; the ranging of the Planets according to Des Carts
Mechanical Laws being from the difference of their solidities, and the least
solid next to the Sun. Whither then can this Sol redivivus or the Earth turned
wholly into the Materia subtilissima again be carried, but into the Sun it
self? This seems most likely, especially if we consider this Sol Redivivus or
the Earth turned all into the Materia subtilissima, in itself. But if we take
into our consideration its particular Vortex which carries about the Moon, the
business may bear a further debate which will require more time than to be
entered upon here. But it seems plain at first sight, that though this Sol
Redivivus should by virtue of its particular Vortex be kept from being
swallowed down into the Sun and Center of the great Vortex, yet it will never
be able to get out of this great Vortex, according to the frame of Des Carts
Philosophy. So that there will be two Suns in one Vortex, a Planetary one and a
fixed one. Which unexpected monstrositie in Nature will make any cautious
Cartesian more wary how he admits of the Earths ever being turned into a Sun
again; but rather to be content to let its Central Fire to incrustrate it self
into a Terrella, there seeming to be an example of this in that little Globe in
the midst of the Ring of Saturn; but of an Earth turned into a Sun no example
at all that I know of.

Page 142. So that the Central Fire remains unconcerned, etc. And so it well
may, it being so considerable a distance from the Concave of the Aqueous Orb,
and the Aqueous Orb it self betwixt the Crust of the Earth and it. But the
Prisoners of this Gaol of the Rephaim will not be a little concerned. This Hell
of a sudden growing so smothering hot to them all, though the Central Fire no
more than it was. And whatever becomes of those Spirits that suffer in the very
Conflagration it self, yet Ab hoc Inferno nulla est redemptio.

Page 147. Those immediate births of unassisted nature will not be so tender,
etc. Besides, the Air being replenisht with benign Demons or Genii, to whom it
cannot but be a pleasant Spectacle to behold the inchoations and progresses of
reviving Nature, they having the Curiosity to contemplate these births, may
also in all likelihood exercise their kindness in helping them in their wants;
and when they are grown up, assist them also in the methods of Life, and impart
as they shall find fit the Arcana of Arts and Sciences and Religion unto them,
nor suffer them to symbolize overmuch in their way of living with the rest of
their fellow terrestrial Creatures. If it be true that some hold, that even now
when there is no such need, every one has his (...), his Genius or Guardian
Angel, it is much more likely that at such a season as this, every tender
Foetus of their common Mother the Earth, would be taken into the care of some
good Demon or other, even at their very first budding out into life.

Page 148. But all this is but the frolic exercise of my Pen choosing a
Paradox. And let the same be said of the Pen of the Annotator, who has bestowed
these pains not to gain Proselytes to the Opinions treated of in this
Discourse, but to entertain the Readers Intellectuals with what may something
enlarge his thoughts; and if he be curious and anxious, help him at a pinch to
some ease of mind touching the ways of God and his wonderful Providence in the
World.

Page 149. Those other expressions of Death, Destruction, Perdition of the
ungodly, etc. How the entering into the state of Silence may well be deemed a
real Death, Destruction and Perdition, that passage in Lucretius does
marvelously well set out. Nam si tantopere est animi mutata potestas,
Omnis ut actarum exciderit retinentia rerum,
Non, ut opinor, ea ab letho jam longiter errat
Quapropter fateare necesse est, quae fuit ante
Interiisse, etc. De Rerum Natura, Lib. 3.
And again in the same book he says, though we were again just as we were
before, yet we having no memory thereof, it is all one as if we were perfectly
lost. And yet this is the condition of the soul which the Divine Nemesis sends
into the state of Silence, because afterward she remembers nothing of her
former life. His words are these: Nec, si materiam nostram collegerit aetas
Post obitum, rursumque redegerit ut sita nunc est,
Atque iterum nobis fuerint data lumina vitae,
Pertineat quicquam tamen ad nos id quoque factum
Interrupta semel quom sit retinentia nostri.


Page 150. In those passages which predict new Heavens and a new Earth, etc. I
suppose he alludes especially to that place in the Apocalypse, Chap. 21. where
presently upon the Description of the Lake of Fire in the precedent Chapter
which answers to the Conflagration, it is said, And I saw a new Heaven and a
new Earth. But questionless that passage, as in other places, is Politically to
be understood, not Physically, unless this may be the ingenious Authors
meaning, That the Writer of the Apocalypse adorning his style with allusions to
the most rouzing and most notable real or Physical Objects (which is observable
all along the Apocalypse) it may be a sign that a new Heaven and a new Earth
succeeding the Conflagration, is one of those noble Phenomenon true and real
amongst the rest, which he thought fit to adorn his style with by alluding
thereto. So that though the chief intended sense of the Apocalypse be
Political, yet by its allusions it may countenance many noble and weighty
Truths whether Physical or Metaphysical. As, The existence of Angels, which is
so perpertually inculcated all along the Book from the beginning to the ending:
The Divine Shechina in the celestial Regions: The Dreadsul Abyss in which
rebellious Spirits are chained, and at the commination whereof they so much
tremble: The Conflagration of the Earth; and lastly, The renewing and restoring
this Earth and Heaven after the Conflagration.

Page 150. The main Opinion of Pre-existence is not at all concerned, etc. This
is very judiciously and soberly noted by him. And therefore it is by no means
fairly done by the Opposers of Pre-existence, while they make such a pudder to
confute any passages in this Hypothesis, which is acknowledged by the
Pre-existentiaries themselves to be no necessary or essential part of that
Dogma. But this they do, that they may seem by their Cavils (for most of them
are no better) against some parts of this unnecessarie Appendage of
Pre-existence, to have done some execution upon the Opinion it self; which how
far it extends, may be in some measure discovered by these Notes we have made
upon it. Which stated as they direct, the Hypothesis is at least possible; but
that it is absolutely the true one, or should be thought so, is not intended.
But as the ingenious Author suggests, it is either this way or some better, as
the infinite Wisdom of God may have ordered. But this possible way shows
Pre-existence to be neither impossible nor improbable.

Page 151. But submit all that I have written to the Authority of the Church of
England, etc. And this I am persuaded he heartily did, as it is the duty of
every one, in things that they cannot confirm by either a plain demonstration,
clear authority of Scripture, Manifestation of their outward Senses, or some
rouzing Miracle, to compromise with the Decisions of the National Church where
Providence has cast them, for common peace and settlement, and for the ease and
security of Governors. But because a fancy has taken a man in the head, that
he knows greater Arcana than others, or has a more orthodox belief in things
not necessary to Salvation than others have, for him to affect to make others
Proselytes to his Opinion, and to wear his badge of Wisdom, as of an
extraordinary Master in matters of Theory, is a mere vanity of Spirit, a
ridiculous piece of pride and levitie, and unbeseeming either a sober and
stanched man or a good Christian. But upon such pretenses to gather a Sect, or
set up a Church or Independent Congregation, is intolerable Faction and Schism,
nor can ever bear a free and strict examination according to the measures of
the truest Morals and Politics.

But because it is the fate of some men to believe Opinions, to others but
probable, nor it may be so much (as the motion of the Earth suppose, and Des
Carts his Vortices, and the like) to be certain Science, it is the interest of
every National Church to define the truth of no more Theories than are plainly
necessary for Faith and good manners; because if they either be really, or seem
to be mistaken in their unnecessary Decisions or Definitions, this with those
that are more knowing than ingenuous will certainly lessen the Authority and
Reverence due to the Church, and hazard a secret enmity of such against her.
But to adventure upon no Decisions but what have the Authority of Scripture
(which they have that were the Decisions of General Councils before the
Apostasy) and plain usefulness as well as Reason of their side, this is the
greatest Conservative of the Honor and Authority of a Church (especially
joined with an exemplary life) that the greatest Prudence or Politics can ever
excogitate. Which true Politics the Church of Rome having a long time ago
deserted, has been fain, an horrid thing to think of it! to support her
Authority and extort Reverence by mere Violence and Blood. Whenas, if she had
followed these more true and Christian Politics, she would never have made
herself so obnoxious, but for ought one knows, she might have stood and
retained her Authority for ever.

In the mean time, this is suitable enough, and very well worth our noting,
That forasmuch as there is no assurance of the Holy Ghost's assisting
unnecessary Decisions, though it were of the Universal Church, much less of any
National one, so that if such a point be determined, it is uncertainly
determined, and that there may be several ways of holding a necessary Point,
some more accommodate to one kind of men, others to another, and that the
Decisions of the Church are for the Edification of the people, that either
their Faith may be more firm, or their Lives more irreprehensible: these
things, I say, being premised, it seems most prudent and Christian in a Church
to decline the Decision of the circumstances of any necessary point, forasmuch
as by deciding and determining the thing one way, those other handles by which
others might take more fast hold on it are thereby cut off, and so their assent
made less firm thereto.

We need not go far for an example, if we but remember what we have been about
all this (...) It is necessary to believe that we have (...) Immortal Spirit
capable of Salvation (...) ^ording as we shall behave (...) revealed to us,
(...). But though this Opinion or rather Article of Faith be but one, yet there
are several ways of holding it. And it lies more easy in some men's minds, if
they suppose it created by God at every conception in the Womb; in othersome,
if they conceive it to be ex Traduce; and lastly in others, if it pre-exist.
But the ways of holding this Article signisie nothing but as they are
subservient to the making us the more firmly hold the same. For the more firmly
we believe it, the greater influence will it have upon our lives, to cause us
to live in the fear of God, and in the ways of Righteousness like good
Christians.

Wherefore now it being supposed that it will stick more firm and fixed in some
men's minds by some one of these three ways, rather than by either of the other
two, and thus of any one of the three; It is manifest, it is much more
prudently done of the Church not to cut off two of these three handles by a
needless, nay, a harmful Decision, but let every one choose that handle that he
can hold the Article fastest by, for his own support and Edification. For thus
every one laying firm hold on that handle that is best sitted for his own
grasp, the Article will carry all these three sorts of believers safe up to
Heaven, they living accordingly; whenas two sorts of them would have more
slippery or uncertain hold, if they had no handle ossered to them but those
which are less suitable to their grasp and Genius.

Which shows the Prudence, Care, and Accuracy of Judgment in the Church of
England, that as in other things, so in this, she has made no such needless and
indeed hurtful Decisions, but left the modes of conceiving things of the
greatest moment, to every ones self, to take it that way that he can lay the
fastest hold of it, and it will lie the most easily in his mind without doubt
and wavering. And therefore there being no one of these handles but what may be
useful to some or other for the more easy and undoubted holding that there is
in us an Immaterial and Immortal Soul or Spirit, my having taken this small
pains to wipe off the soil, and further the usefulness of one of them by these
Annotations, if it may not merit thanks, it must, I hope, at least deserve
excuse with all those that are not of too sour and tetrick a Genius, and
prefer their own humors and sentiments before the real benefit of others.

But now if any one shall invidiously object, that I prefer the Christian
Discretion of my own Church the Church of England, before the Judgment and
Wisdom of a General Council, namely, the fisth Ecumenical Council held at
Constantinople in Justinians time under the Patriarch Eutychius, who succeeded
Menas lately deceased, to whom Justinian sent that Discourse of his against
Origin and his errors, amongst which Pre-existence is reckoned one: In answer
to this, several things are to be considered, that right may be done our Mother.

First, What number of Bishops make a general Council, so that from their
Numerosity we may rely upon their Authority and infallibility that they will
not conclude what is false.

Secondly, Whether in whatsoever matters of debate, though nothing to the
Salvation of men's souls, but of curious Speculation, fitter for the Schools of
Philosophers than Articles of Faith for the edification of the people (whose
memory and conscience ought to be charged with no notions that are not
subservient to the rightly and duly honoring God and his only begotten Son
our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the faithful discharging their duty to man) the
assistance of the Spirit of God can rationally be expected; or only in such
things as are necessary to be professed by the people, and very useful for the
promoting of Life and Godliness. And as Moses has circumscribed his Narrative
of the Creation within the limits of Mundus Plebeiorum, and also the Chronology
of time according to Scripture is bounded from the first Adam to the coming
again of the second to Judgment, and Sentencing the wicked to everlasting
punishment, and the righteous to life everlasting: so whether the Decisions of
the Church are not the most safely contained within these bounds, and they
faithfully discharge themselves in the conduct of Souls, if they do but
instruct them in such truths only as are within this compass revealed in sacred
Scripture. And whether it does not make for the Interest and Dignity of the
Church to decline the meddling with other things, as unprofitable and
unnecessary to be decided.

Thirdly, Whether if a General Council meet not together in via Spiritus
Sancti, but some stickling embittered Grandees of the Church out of a pique
that they have taken against some persons get through their interest a General
Council called, whether is the assistance of the Holy Ghost to be expected in
such a meeting, so that they shall conclude nothing against truth.

Fourthly, Whether the Authority of such General Councils as Providence by some
notable prodigy may seem to have intimated a dislike of, be not thereby justly
suspected, and not easily to be admitted as infallible deciders.

Fifthly, Whether a General Council that is found mistaken in one point,
anathematizing that for an Heresy which is a truth, forfeits not its Authority
in other points, which then whether falsehoods or truths, are not to be deemed
so from the Authority of that Council, but from other Topics.

Sixthly, Since there can be no commerce betwixt God and man, nor he
communicate his mind and will to us but by supposition, That our senses rightly
circumstantiated are true, That there is skill in us to understand words and
Grammar, and schemes of speech, as also common notions and clear inferences of
Reason, whether if a General Council conclude any thing plainly repugnant to
these, is the Conclusion of such a Council true and valid; and whether the
indeleble Notices of truth in our mind that all Mankind is possessed of,
whether Logical, Moral, or Metaphysical, be not more the dictates of God, than
those of any Council that are against them.

Seventhly, If a Council, as general as any has been called, had in the very
midnight of the Churches Apostasy and ignorance met, and concluded all those
Corruptions that now are obtruded by the Church of Rome, as Transubstantiation,
Invocation of Saints, Worshipping of Images, and the like, whether the
Decisions of such a Council could be held infallible or valid. What our own
excellently well Reformed Church holds in this case, is evident out of her
Articles. For,

Eighthly, The Church of England plainly declares, That General Councils when
they be gathered together, forasmuch as they be an Assembly of men whereof all
are not governed with the Spirit and Word of God, they may err, and sometimes
have erred even in things pertaining to God. Wherefore, says she, things
ordained by them as necessary to Salvation have neither strength nor Authority,
unless it may be declared that they be taken out of Holy Scripture. Artic. 21.

Ninthly, And again, Artic. 20. where she allows the Church to have power to
decree Rites and Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies of Faith, but with
this restriction, That it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that
is contrary to Gods Word written, neither may it so expound one place of
Scripture that it be repugnant to another; she concludes: Wherefore although
the Church be a Witness and Keeper of Holy Writ, yet as it ought not to decree
any thing against the same, so besides the same ought it not to enforce any
thing to be believed for necessity of Salvation. What then, does she null the
Authority of all the General Councils, and have no deference for any thing but
the mere Word of God to convince men of Heresy? No such matter. What her sense
of these things is, you will find in 1 Eliz. cap. 1. Wherefore,

Tenthly and lastly, What General Councils the Church of England allows of for
the conviction of Heretics you may understand out of these words of the
Statute: They shall not adjudge any matter or cause to be Heresies, but only
such as heretofore have been adjudged to be Heresy by the Authority of the
Canonical Scriptures, or by the first four General Councils or any of them, or
by any other General Council wherein the same was declared Heresy by the
express and plain words of the said Canonical Scriptures,

By brief reflections upon some of these ten Heads, I shall endeavor to lessen
the Invidiousness of my seeming to prefer the Discretion of the Church of
England before the Judgment of a General Council, I mean of such a General
Council as is so unexceptionable that we may rely on the Authority of their
Decisions, that they will not fail to be true. Of which sort whether the fifth
reputed General Council be, we will briefly first consider.

For reflecting on the first head, It seems scarcely numerous enough for a
General Council. The first General Council of Nice had above three hundred
Bishops; That of Chalcedon above six hundred: This fifth Council held at
Constantinople had but an hundred sixty odd. And which still makes it more
unlike a General Council, in the very same year, viz. 553, the Western Bishops
held a Council at Aquileia, and condemned this fifth Council held at
Constantinople.

Secondly, The Pre-existence of Souls being a mere Philosophical Speculation,
and indeed held by all Philosophers in the affirmative that held the Soul
incorporeal; we are to consider whether we may not justly deem this case
referrible to the second Head, and to look something like Pope Zacharies
appointing a Council to condemn Virgilius as an Heretic, for holding Antipodes.

Thirdly, We may very well doubt whether this Council proceeded in via Spiritus
Sancti, this not being the first time that the lovers and admirers of Origin
for his great Piety and Knowledge, and singular good service he had done to the
Church of Christ in his time, had foul play played them. Witness the story of
Theophilus Bishop of Antioch, who to revenge himself on Dioscorus and two
others that were lovers of Origin and Anti-Anthropomorphites, stickled so, that
he caused Epiphanius in his See, as he did in his own, to condemn the Books of
Origin in a Synod. To which condemnation Epiphanius an Anthropomorphite, and
one of more Zeal than Knowledge, would have got the subscription of Chrysostom
the Patriarch of Constantinople; but he had more Wisdom and Honesty than to
listen to such an injurious demand.

And as it was with those Synods called by Theophilus and Epiphanius, so it
seems to be with the fifth Council. Piques and Heartburnings amongst the
Grandees of the Church seemed to be at the bottom of the business. Binius in
his History of this fifth Council takes notice of the enmity betwixt Pelagius,
Pope Vigilius's Apocrisiarie, and Theodorus Bishop of Caesarea Cappadociae an
Origenist. And Spondanus likewise mentions the same, who says, touching the
business of Origin, that Pelagius the Popes Apocrisiarie, eam quaestionem in
ipsius Theodori odium movisse existimabatur. And truly it seems to me
altogether incredible, unless there were some hellish spite at the bottom,
that they should not have contented themselves to condemn the errors supposed
to be Origens (but after so long a time after his death, there being in his
writings such choppings and changings and interpolations, hard to prove to be
his) but have spared his name, for that unspeakable good service he did the
Church in his lifetime. See Dr. H. Mores Preface to his Collectio
Philosophica, Sect. 18. where Origens true Character is described out of
Eusebius. Wherefore whether this be to begin or carry on things in via Spiritus
Sancti, so that we may rely on the Authority of such a Council, I leave to the
impartial and judicious to consider.

Fourthly, In reference to the fourth Head, That true wisdom and moderation,
and the holy assistance of Gods Spirit did not guide the affairs of this
Council, seems to be indicated by the Divine Providence, who to show the effect
of their unwise proceedings in the self-same year the Council sat, sent a most
terrible Earthquake for forty days together upon the City of Constantinople
where the Council was held, and upon other Regions of the East, even upon
Alexandria it self and other places, so that many Cities were levelled to the
ground. Upon which Spondanus writes thus: Haea vero praesagia fuisse malorum
quae sunt praedictam Synodum consecuta, nemo negare poterit quicunque ab
eventis facta noverit judicare.

This also reminds me of a Prodigy as it was thought that happened at the sixth
reputed General Council, where nigh three hundred Fathers were gathered
together to decide this nice and subtle Point, namely, whether an operation or
volition of Christ were to be deemed, Una operatio sive volitio (...),
according to that Axiom of some Metaphysicians, that Actio est suppositi, and
so the Humane and Divine Nature of Christ being coalescent into one person, his
volition and operation be accounted one as his person is but one; or because of
the two Natures, though but one person, there are to be conceived two
operations or two volitions. This latter Dogma obtained, and the other was
condemned by this third Constantinopolitan Council: whereupon, as Paulus
Diaconus writes, abundance of Cobwebs or Spiders webs fell or rained, as it
were, down upon the heads of the people, to their very great astonishment. Some
interpret the Cobwebs of Heresies: others happily more rightfully of troubling
the Church of Christ with overgreat niceties and curiosities of subtle
Speculation, which tend nothing to the corroborating her Faith, and promoting a
good Life; and are so obscure, subtle, and lubricous, that look on them one
way they seem thus, and another way thus.

To this sixth General Council there seemed two Operations and two Wills in
Chri^, because of his two Natures. To a Council called after by Philippicus the
Emperor, and John Patriarch o^ Constantinople, considering Christ as one
person ^ere appeared Numerosissimo Orientalium Episcoporum collecto Conven^ui*
as Spondanus ^as (...) but as Binius, Innumerle Orientalium Episcoporum
multitudini congregat^e, but one will and one operation. And ce^tainly this
numerous or innumerable company of Bishops must put as fair sor a General
Council as that of less than three hundred* But that the Authority of both
these Councils are lessened upon the account of the second Head, in that the
matter they consulted about tended nothing to the corroboration of our Faith,
or the promotion of a good Life, I have already intimat^d.

These things I was tempted to note, in reference to the tenth Head. For it
seems to me an undeniable Argument, that our First Reformers, which are the
Risen Witnesses, were either exquisitely well seen in Ecclesiastic History, or
the good Hand of God was upon them that they absolutely admitted only the four
first General Councils; but after them, they knew not where to be, or what to
call a General Council, and therefore would not adventure of any so called for
the adjudging any matters Heresy. But if any pretended to be such, their
Authority should no further prevail, than as they made out things by express
and plain words of Canonical Scripture. And for other Synods, whether the
Seventh, which is the second of Nice, or any other that the Church of Rome
would have to be General in defense of their own exorbitant points of Faith or
Practice, they will be found of no validity, if we have recourse to the sixth,
seventh, eighth and ninth Heads.

Fifthly, In reference to the fifth Head. This fifth Council loses its
Authority in anathematizing what in Origin seems to be true according to that
express Text of Scripture, John 16. 28. (especially compared with others. See
Notes on Chap. II.) I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world;
again I leave the world, and go to the Father. He came forth from his Father
which is in Heaven, accordingly as he taught us to pray to him (the Divine
Shechina being in a peculiar manner there) He leaves the world and goes to the
Father, which all understand of his Ascension into Heaven, whence his coming
from the Father must have the same sense, or else the Antithesis will plainly
fail. Wherefore it is plain he came down from Heaven (as he signifies also in
other places) as well as returns thither. But he can neither be truly said to
come from heaven, nor return thither, according to his Divine Nature. For it
never lest Heaven, nor removes from one place to another; and therefore this
Scripture does plainly imply the Pre existence of the Soul of the Messiah,
according to the Doctrine of the Jews, before it was incarnate. And this
stricture of the old Cabala may give light to more places of St. John's Writings
than is fit to recite in this haste; I will only name one by the by, 1 John 4.
2. Every Spirit that confesses (...), that Jesus is the Christ come in the
flesh, that is to say, is the Christ incarnate, is of God. For the Messiah did
exist, viz. his Soul, before he came into the flesh, according to the Doctrine
of the Jews. Which was so well known, that upon the above cited saying (John
16. 28.) of our Savior, they presently answered, Lo, now speak thou
plainly, and speak no Parable; because he clearly discovers himself by this
Character to be the expected Messiah incarnate. Nor is there any possible
evasion out of the clearness of this Text from the communication of Idioms,
because Christ cannot be said to come down from Heaven according to his Humane
Nature before it was there, therefore his Humane Nature was there before it was
incarnate.

And lastly, The Authority of the Decision of this Council (if it did so
decide) is lessened, in that contrary to the second Head (as was hinted above)
it decides a point that Faith and Godliness is not at all concerned in. For the
Divinity of Christ, which is the great point of Faith, is as firmly held
supposing the Soul of the Messiah united with the Logos before his incarnation,
as in it. So that the spite only of Pelagius against Theodorus to multiply
Anathematisms against Origin, no use or necessity of the Church required any
such thing. Whence again their Authority is lessened upon the account of the
third Head.

These things may very well suspend a careful mind, and loath to be imposed
upon, from relying much upon the Authority of this fifth Council. But suppose
its Authority entire, yet the Acts against Origin are not to be found in the
Council. And the sixth Council in its Anathematisms, though it mention
Theodorets Writings, the Epistle of Ibas and Theodorus Mopsuestenus who were
concerned in the fifth Council; yet I find not there a syllable touching
Origin. And therefore those that talk of his being condemned by that fifth
Co^ncil, have an eye, I suppose, to the Anathematisms at the end of that
Discourse which Justinian the Emperor sent to Menas Patriarch of
Constantinople, according to which form they suppose the errors of Origin
condemned. Which if it were true, yet simple Pre-existence will escape well
enough.

Nor do I think that learned and intelligent Patriarch Photius would have
called the simple Opinion of Pre-existence of souls (...), but ^or those
Appendages that the injudiciousness and rashness of some had affixed (...) it.
Partly therefore re^lecting upon that first Anathematism in the Emperors
Discou^se that makes the pre-existent souls of men first to be (...) as if
their highest felicity consisted in having no body to inactuate (which plainly
clashes with both sound Philosophy and Christianity, as if the (...) and
Rephaim were all one, and they were not (...) till they were (...), grown cold
to the Divine Love, and only gathered body as they gathered corruption, and
were alienated from the Life of God; which is point blank against the Christian
Faith, which has promised us, as the highest prize, a glorified body:) And
partly what himself adds, that one soul goes into several bodies; Which are
impertinent Appendages of the Pre-existence of the soul, false, useless and
unnecessary; and therefore those that add these Appendages thereto, violate the
sincerity of the Divine Tradition to no good purpose.

But this simple Doctrine of Pre existence is so unexceptionable and harmless,
that the third collection of Councils in Justellus, which is called (...),
though it reckon the other errors of Origin condemned in the fifth Council,
omits this of Pre-existence. Certainly that Ecclesiastic that framed that
Discourse for the Emperor, if he did it not himself, had not fully,
deliberately and impartially considered the Dogma of Pre-existence taken in its
self, nor does once offer to answer any Reasons out of Scripture or Philosophy
that are produced for it. Which if it had been done, and this had been the
only error to be alleged against Origin. I cannot think it credible, nay
scarce possible, though their spite had been never so much against some lo^ers
of Origin, that they could have got any General Council to have condemned so
holy, so able, so victorious a Champion for the Christian Church in his
lifetime for an H^retick, upon so tolerable a punctilio, about three hundred
years after his death. What Father that wrote before the first four General
Councils, but might by the Malevolent, for some odd passage or other, be doomed
an Heretic, if such severity were admittable amongst Christians?

But I have gone out further than I was aware; and it is time for me to be
think me what I intended. Which was the justif^ing of my self in my seeming to
prefer the Discretion of our own Church in leaving us free to hold the
Incorporeity and Immortality of the soul by any of the three handles that best
fitted every man's Genius, before the Judgment of the fifth General Council,
that would abridge us of this liberty. From which Charge I have endeavored to
free my self, briefly by these two ways: First, by showing how hard it is to
prove the fifth Ecumenical Council so called, to be a legitimate General or
Ecumenical Council, and such as whose Authority we may rely on. And secondly,
if it was such, by showing that it did not condemn simply the Pre-existence of
souls, but Pre-existence with such and such Appendages. So that there is no
real clashing betwixt our Church and that Council in this.

But however this is, from the eighth and ninth Heads it is plain enough that
the Church of England is no favourer of the Conclusions of any General Council
that are enjoined as necessary to Salvation, that be either repugnant to Holy
Scripture, or are not clearly to be made out from the same; which
Non-pre-existence of Souls certainly is not, but rather the contrary. But being
the point is not sufficiently clear from Scripture either way to all, and the
Immortality of the Soul and subsistence after death is the main useful point;
that way which men can hold it with most firmness and ease, her Candor and
Prudence has left it free to them to make use of.

And as for General Councils, though she does not in a fit of Zeal, which
Theodosius a Prior in Palestine is said to have done, anathematize from the
Pulpit all people that do not give as much belief to the four first General
Councils as to the four Gospels themselves; yet, as you may see in the tenth
Head, she makes the Authority of the first four General Councils so great, that
nothing is to be adjudged Heresy but what may be proved to be so either from
the Scripture or from these four Councils. Which Encomium might be made with
less skill and more confidence by that Prior, there having been no more than
four General Councils in his time. But it was singular Learning and Judgment,
or else a kind of Divine Sagacity in our first Reformers, that they laid so
great stress on the first four General Councils, and so little on any others
pretended so to be.

But in all likelihood they being persuaded of the truth of the prediction of
the Apostasi^ of the Church under Antichrist how universal in a manner it would
be, they had the most confidence in those General Councils which were the
earliest, and that were held within those times of the Church which some call
Symmetral. And without all question, the two first General Councils, that of
Nice, and that other of Constantinople, were within those times, viz. within
four hundred years after Christ; and the third and fourth within the time that
the ten-horned Beast had his horns growing up, according to Mr. Mede's
computation. But the Definitions of the third and fourth Councils, that of
Ephesus, and that other of Chalcedon (which are to establish the Divinity of
Christ, which is not to be conceived without the Union of both Natures into one
person; as also his Theanthropy, which cannot consist with the confusion of
both Natures into one) were vertually contained in the Definitions of the first
and second Councils. So that in this regard they are all of equal Authority,
and that unexceptionable. First, because their Decisions were concerning points
necessary to be decided one way or other, for the settlement of the Church in
the objects of their Divine Worship. And therefore they might be the better
assured that the assistance of the Holy Ghost would not be wa^ing upon so
weighty an occasion. And secondly, in that those two first Councils were called
while the Church was Symmetral, and before the Apostasy came in, according to
the testimony of the Spirit in the Visions of the Apocalypse.

Which Visions plainly demonstrate, that the Definitions of those Councils
touching the Triunity of the Godhead and Divinity of Christ are not Idolatrous,
else the Apostasy had begun before the time these Oracles declare it did; and
if not Idolatrous, then they are most certainly true. And all these four
Councils driving at nothing else but these necessary points to be decided, and
their decision being thus plainly approved by the suffrage of the Holy Ghost in
the Apocalypse, I appeal to any man of sense and judgment if they have not a
peculiar prerogative to be believed above what other pretended General Council
soever; and consequently with what special or rather Divine sagacity our first
Reformers have laid so peculiar a stress on these four, and how consistent our
Mother the Church of England is to herself, that the decisions of General
Councils have neither strength nor Authority further than the matter may be
cleared out of the Holy Scriptures. For here we see, that out of the Holy
Scriptures there is a most ample testimony given to the Decisions of these four
General Councils. So that if one should with Theodosius the Prior of Palestine
in a fit of Zeal anathematize all those that did not believe them as true as
the four Evangelists, he would not want a fair Plea for his religious fury.

But for men after the Symmetral times of the Church, upon Piques and private
quarrels of Parties, to get General Councils called as they fancy them, to
conclude matters that tend neither to the confirmation of the real Articles of
the Christian Faith, or of such a sense of them as are truly useful to life and
godliness, and herein to expect the infallible assistances of the Holy Spirit,
either upon such terms as these, or for rank worldly interest, is such a
presumption as to a free Judgment will look little better than Simony, as if
they could hire the assistance of the Holy Ghost for money.

Thus have I run further into the consideration of General Councils, and the
measure of their Authority, than was requisite upon so small an occasion; and
yet I think there is nothing said, but if seriously weighed may be useful to
the intelligent Reader, whether he favor Pre-existence or not. Which is no
further to be favored than is consistent with the known and approved Doctrines
of the Christian Faith, nor clashes any thing with the soundest Systemes of
Divinity, as Dr. H. More shows his way of exhibiting the Theorie does not, in
his General Preface to his Collectio Philosophica, Sect. 19. whose cautious and
castigate method I have imitated as near as I could in these my Annotations.
And he has indeed been so careful of admitting any thing in the Hypothesis that
may justly be suspected or excepted against, that his Friend Mr. Glanvil might
have enlarged his Dedication by one word more, and called him Repurgatorem
Sapientioe Orientalis, as well as Restauratorem, unless Restaurator imply both:
It being a piece of Restoration, to free an Hypothesis from the errors some
may have corrupted it with, and to recover it to its primeval purity and
sincerity.

And yet when the business is reduced to this harmless and unexceptionable
state, such is the modesty of that Writer, that he declares that if he were as
certain of the Opinion as of any demonstration in Mathematics, yet he holds
not himself bound in conscience to profess it any further than is with the
good-liking or permission of his Superiors. Of which temper if all men were,
it would infinitely contribute to the peace of the Church. And as for my self,
I do freely profess that I am altogether of the self-same Opinion and Judgment
with him.

Annotations UPON THE Discourse of TRUTH.

Into which is inserted By way of DIGRESSION, A brief Return To Mr. BAXTER's
Reply, Which he calls A Placid COLLATION With the Learned Dr. HENRY MORE,
Occasioned by the Doctors ANSWER to a LETTER of the Learned Psychopyrist.

Whereunto is annexed A DEVOTIONAL HYMN, Translated for the use of the sincere
Lovers of true PIETY.

LONDON: Printed for J. Collins, and S. Lownds, over against Exeter-Change in
the Strand. 1683.

THE Annotatour TO THE READER.
ABout a fortnight or three weeks ago, while my Annotations upon the two
foregoing Treatises were a printing, there came to my hands Mr. Baxter's Reply
to Dr. Mores Answer to a Letter of the learned Psychopyrist, printed in the
second Edition of Saducismus Triumphatus: Which Reply he styles a Placid
Collation with the Learned Dr. Henry More. I being fully at leisure, presently
fell upon reading this Placid Collation; which I must confess is so writ, that
I was much surprised in the reading of it, I expecting by the Title thereof
nothing but fairness and freeness of Judgment, and calmness of Spirit, and love
and desire of Truth, and the prosperous success thereof in the World, whether
our selves have the luck to light on it, or where ever it is found.

But instead of this, I found a Magisterial loftiness of Spirit, and a study
of obscuring and suppressing of the Truth by petty crooked Artifices, strange
distortions of the sense of the Doctors Arguments, and Falsifications of
Passages in his Answer to the Letter of the Psychopyrist. Which surprise moved
me, I confess, to a competent measure of Indignation in the behalf of the
injured Doctor, and of the Truth he contends for: And that Indignation,
according to the Idiosyncrasie of my Genius, stirred up the merry Humor in me,
I being more prone to laugh than to be severely angry or surly at those that do
things unhandsomely; And this merry humor stirred up, prevailing so much upon
my Judgment as to make me think that this Placid Collation was not to be
answered, but by one in a pleasant and jocular humor; And I finding my self
something so disposed, and judging the matter not of that moment as to be
buzzed upon long, and that this more light some, brisk and jocular way of
answering the Placid Collation might better besit an unknown Annotatour, than
the known Pen and Person of the Doctor, I presently betook my self to this
little Province, thinking at first only to take notice of Mr. Baxters
Disingenuities toward the Doctor; but one thing drawing on another, and that
which followed being carefully managed and apparently useful, I mean the
Answering all Mr. Baxters pretended Objections against the Penetrability or
Indiscerpibility of a Spirit, and all his smaller Criticisms upon the Doctors
Definition thereof, in finishing these three Parts, I quickly completed the
whole little Work of what I call the Digression, (inserted into my Annotations
upon Bishop Rusts ingenious Discourse of Truth) which, with my Annotations, and
the serious Hymn annexed at the end (to recompose thy Spirits, if any thing
over-ludicrous may chance to have discomposed them) I offer, courteous Reader,
to thy candid perusal; and so in some have take leave, and rest

Your humble Servant, The ANNOTATOUR.

Annotations UPON THE Discourse of TRUTH.
Sect. 1. page 165. AND that there are necessary mutual respects, etc. Here was
a gross mistake in the former Impression. For this clause there ran thus: By
the first I mean nothing else, but that things necessarily are what they are.
By the second, that there are necessary mutual Respects and Relations of things
one unto another. As if these mutual Respects and Relations of Things one to
another were Truth in the Subject, and not Truth in the Object; the latter of
which he handles from the fourth Section to the eighteenth, in which last
Section alone he treats of Truth in the Subject or Understanding. The former
part of the Discourse is spent in treating of Truth in the Object; that is to
say, of Truth in the nature of things, and their necessary Respects and mutual
Relations one to another. Both which are antecedent in the order of nature to
all Understandings, and therefore both put together make up the first branch of
the Division of Truth. So grossly had the Authors MS. been depraved by passing
through the hands of unskilful Transcribers, as Mr. J. Glanvil complains at the
end of his Letter prefixed to this Discourse. And so far as I see, that MS. by
which he corrected that according to which the former Impression was made, was
corrupt it self in this place. And it running glibly, and they expecting so
suddenly the proposal of the other member of the Division, the error, though
so great, was overseen. But it being now so seasonably corrected, it gives
great light to the Discourse, and makes things more easy and intelligible.

Sect. 2. page 166. That any thing may be a suitable means to any end, etc. It
may seem a monstrous thing to the sober, that any man's Understanding should be
so depraved as to think so. And yet I have met with one that took himself to be
no small Philosopher, but to be wiser than both the Universities, and the Royal
Society to boot, that did earnestly affirm to me, that there is no natural
adaptation of means to ends, but that one means would be as good as another for
any end if God would have it so, in whose power alone every thing has that
effect it has upon another. Whereupon I asked him, whether if God wo^ld a
Football might not be as good an Instrument to make or mend a Pen withal, as a
Penknife. He was surprised; but whether he was convinced of his madness and
folly, I do not well remember.

Page 167. Is it possible there should be such a kind of Geometry, wherein any
Problem should be demonstrated by any Principles? Some of the Cartesians bid
fair toward this Freakishness, whenas they do not stick to assert, that, If
God would, he could have made that the whole should be lesser than the part,
and the part bigger than the whole. Which I suppose they were animated to, by a
piece of raillery of Des Carts, in answering a certain Objection; where, that
he may not seem to violate the absolute Power of God for making what Laws he
pleased for the ordering of the matter of the Universe (though himself seems to
have framed the world out of certain inevitable and necessary Mechanical Laws)
does affirm, that those Laws that seem so necessary, are by the arbitrarious
appointment of God, who, if he would, could have appointed other Laws, and
indeed framed another Geometry than we have, and made the power of the
Hypotenusa of a Right-angled Triangle unequal to the powers of the Basis and
Cathetus. This piece of Drollery of Des Carts some of his followers have very
gravely improved to what I said above of the Whole and Part. As if some
superstitious Fop, upon the hearing one being demanded, whether he did believe
the real and corporeal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, to answer roundly
that he believed him there booted and spurred as he rode in triumph to
Jerusalem, should become of the same Faith that the other seemed to profess,
and glory in the improvement thereof by adding that the Ass was also in the
Sacrament, which he spurred and rid upon. But in the mean time, while there is
this Frenzy amongst them that are no small pretenders to Philosophy, this
does not a little set off the value and usefulness of this present Discourse of
Truth, to undeceiv^ them if they be not wilfully blind.

Page 167. Therefore the three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two right
ones; namely, Because a Quadrangle is that which is comprehended of four right
lines. It is at least a more operose and ambagious Inference, if any at all.
The more immediate and expedite is this, That the two internal alternate Angles
made by a right line cutting two parallels, are equal to one another: Therefore
the three Angles of a Triangle are equal to two right ones, P. Ram. Geom. Lib.
6. Prop. 9. Is the reasoning had been thus: A Quadrangle is that which is
comprehended of ^our right lines, Therefore the three Angles of a Triangle are
not equal to two right ones; as the Conclusion is grossly salse, so the proof
had been egregiously ali^n and impertinent. And the intention of the Author
seems to be carried to Instances that are most extravagant and surprising;
which makes me doubt whether [equal] was read in the true MS. or [not equal]
but the sense is well enough either way.

Sect. 4. page 168. The Divine Understanding cannot be the fountain of the
Truth of things, etc. This seems at first sight to be a very harsh Paradox, and
against the current Doctrine of Metaphysicians, who define Transcendental or
Metaphysical Truth to be nothing else but the relation of the Conformity of
things to the Theoretical (not Practical) Intellect of God; His Practical
Intellect being that by which he knows things as produced or to be produced by
him, but his Theoretical that, by which he knows things as they are; but yet in
an Objective manner, as existent objectively, not really. And hence they make
Transcendental Truth to depend upon the Intellectual Truth of God, which alone
is most properly Truth, and indeed the fountain and origin of all Truth. This
in brief is the sense of the Metaphysical Schools. With which this passage of
our Author seems to clash, in denying the Divine Intellect to be the fountain
of the Truth of things, and in driving rather at this, That the things
themselves in their Objective Existence, such as they appear there unalterably
and unchangeably to the Divine Intellect, and not at pleasure contrived by it
(for as he says, it is against the nature of all understanding to make its
Object) are the measure and fountain of Truth. That in these, I say, consists
the Truth in the Object, and that the Truth in the Subject is a conception
conformable to these, or to the Truth of them whether in the uncreated or
created Understanding.

So that the niceness of the point is this: Whether the Transcendental Truth of
things exhibited in their Objective Existence to the Theoretical Intellect of
God consists in their Conformity to that Intellect, or the Truth of that
Intellect in its Conformity with the immutable natures and Relations or
Respects of things exhibited in their Objective Existence, which the Divine
Intellect finds to be unalterably such, not contrives them at its own pleasure.
This though it be no (...) or strife about mere words, yet it seems to be such
a contest, that there is no harm done whethersoever side carries the Cause, the
two seeming sides being but one and the same Intellect of God necessarily and
immutably representing to it self the natures, Respects, and Aptitudes of all
things such as they appear in their Objective Existence, and such as they will
prove whenever produced into act.

As for example, The Divine Understanding quatenns exhibitive of Idea's (which
a Platonist would call (...)) does of its infinite pregnancy and fecundity
necessarily exhibit certain and unalterable Idea's of such and such determinate
things, as suppose of a Cylinder, a Globe and a Pyramid, which have a settled
and unalterable nature, as also immutable properties, references and aptitudes
immediately consequential thereto, and not arbitrariously added unto them,
which are thus necessarily extant in the Divine Intellect, as exhibitive of
such Idea's. So likewise a Fish, a Fowl, and a four-footed beast, an Ox, Bear,
Horse, or the like, they have a settled nature exhibited in their Idea's, and
the properties and aptitudes immediately flowing therefrom. As also have all
the Elements, Earth, Water and Air, determinate natures, with properties and
aptitudes immediately issuing from them. Nor is a Whale fitted to fly in the
Air, nor an Eagle to live under the Water, nor an Ox or Bear to do either, nor
any of them to live in the Fire. But the Idea's of those things which we call
by those names being unchangeable (for there are differences indeed of Idea's,
but no changing of one Idea into another state, but their natures are
distinctly settled; and to add or take away any thing from an Idea, is not to
make an alteration in the same Idea, but to constitute a new one; As Aristotle
somewhere in his Metaphysics speaks of Numbers, where he says, that the adding
or taking away of an Unite quite varies the species. And therefore as every
number, suppose, Binary, Quinary, Ternary, Denary, is such a settled number and
no other, and has such properties in it self, and references immediately
accrewing to it, and aptitudes which no other number besides it self has; so it
is with Idea's) the Idea's I say therefore of those things which we call by
those names aboverecited being unchangeable, the aptitudes and references
immediately issuing from their nature represented in the Idea, must be also
unalterable and necessary. Thus it is with Mathematical and Physical Idea's;
and there is the same reason concerning such Idea's as may be called Moral.
Forasmuch as they respect the rectitude of Will in whatever Mind, created or
uncreated:

And thus, lastly, it is with Metaphysical Idea's, as for example; As the
Physical Idea of Body, Matter or Substance Material contains in it immediately
of its own nature or intimate specific Essence real Divisibility or
Discerpibility, Impenetrability and mere Passivity or Actuability, as the
proper fruit of the Essential Difference and intimate Form thereof, unalterably
and immutably as in its Idea in the Divine Intellect, so in any Body or
Material Substance that does exist: So the Idea of a Spirit, or of a Substance
Immaterial, the opposite Idea to the other, contains in it immediately of its
own nature Indiscerpibility, Penetrability, and Self-Activity, as the
inseparable fruit of the essential difference or intimate form thereof
unalterably and immutably, as in its Idea in the Divine Intellect, so in any
Immaterial Substance properly so called that does exist. So that as it is a
contradiction in the Idea that it should be the Idea of Substance Immaterial,
and yet not include in it Indiscerpibility, etc. so it is in the being really
existent, that it should be Substance Immaterial, and yet not be Indiscerpible,
etc. For were it so, it would not answer to the Truth of its Idea, nor be what
it pretends to be, and is indeed, an existent Being Indiscerpible; which
existent Being would not be Indiscerpible, if any could discerp it.

And so likewise it is with the Idea of Ens sum and absolute perfectum, which
is a settled determinate and immutable Idea in the Divine Intellect, whereby,
were not God himself that Ens sum and absolute perfectum, he would discern
there were something better than Himself, and consequently that he were not
God. But he discerns Himself to be this Ens sum and absolute perfectum, and
we cannot but discern that to such a Being belongs Spirituality, which implies
Indiscerpibility, (and who but a mad man can imagine the Divine Essence
discerpible into parts?) Infinity of Essence, or Essential Omnipresence,
Self-Causality, or necessary Existence immediately of it self or from it self,
resulting from the absolute and peculiar perfection of its own nature, whereby
we understand that nothing can exist ab aeterno of it self but He. And lastly,
Omniscience and Omnipotence, whereby it can do any thing that implies no
contradiction to be done. Whence it necessarily follows, that all things were
Created by Him, and that he were not God, or Ens sum perfectum, if it were
not so: And that amongst other things he created Spirits (as sure as there are
any Spirits in the world) indiscerpible as himself is, though of finite
Essences and Metaphysical Amplitudes; and that it is no derogation to his
Omnipotence that he cannot discerp a Spirit once created, it being a
contradiction that he should: Nor therefore any argument that he cannot create
a Spirit, because he would then puzzle his own Omnipotence to discerp it. For
it would then follow, that he cannot create any thing, no not Metaphysical
Monads, nor Matter, unless it be Physically divisible in infinitum; and God
Himself could never divide it into parts Physically indivisible; whereby yet
his Omnipotence would be puzzled: And if he can divide matter into Physical
Monads no further divisible, there his Omnipotence is puzzled again; And by
such sophistical Reasoning, God shall be able to create nothing, neither Matter
nor Spirit, nor consequently be God, or Ens sum and absolute perfectum, the
Creator and Essentiator of all things.

This is so Mathematically clear and true, that I wonder that Mr. Rich. Baxter
should not rather exult, (in his Placid Collation) at the discovery of so plain
and useful a truth, than put himself, p. 79. into an Histrionical (as the
Latin) or (as the Greek would express it) Hypocritical fit of trembling, to
amuze the populacy, as if the Doctor in his serious and solid reasoning had
verged toward something hugely exorbitant or profane. The ignorant fear where
no fear is, but God is in the generation of the knowing and upright. It Is
plain, this Reasoning brings not the existence of God into any doubt, (For it
is no repugnance to either his nature or existence, not to be able to do what
is a contradiction to be done) but it puts the Indiscerpibility of Spirits
(which is a Notion mainly useful) out of all doubt. And yet Mr. Baxter his
phancie stalking upon wooden stilts, and getting more than a spit and a stride
before his Reason, very magisterially pronounces, It Is a thing so high, as
required some show of proof to intimate that God cannot be God if he be
Almighty, and cannot conquer his own Omnipotency. Ans. This is an expression so
high and in the Clouds, that no sense thereof is to be seen, unless this be it:
That God cannot be God, unless he be not Almighty; as he would discover himself
not to be, if he could not discerp a Spirit of a Metaphysical amplitude when he
has created it. But it plainly appears from what has been said above, that this
discerping of a Spirit, which is immediately and essentially of its own nature
indiscerpible, as well as a Physical Monad is, implying a contradiction, it is
no derogation to the Almightiness of God that he cannot do it; all Philosophers
and Theologers being agreed on that Maxim, That what implies a contradiction to
be done, is no Object of Gods Almightiness. Nor is he less Almighty for not
being able to do it. So that the prick-ear'd Acuteness of that trim and smug
saying, that seemed before to shoot up into the Sky, flags now like the slaccid
lugs of the over-laden Animal old Silenus rid on when he had a Plot upon the
Nymph^ by Moonshine. Pardon the tediousness of the Periphrasis: For though the
Poet was pleased to put old Silenus on the Ass, yet I thought it not so civil
to put the Ass upon old Mr. Baxter.

But he proceeds, page 80. Your words, says he, like an intended Reason, are
[For that cannot be God from whom all other things are not produced and
created] to which he answers, (1.) Relatively, says he, (as a God to us) it is
true, though quoad existentiam Essentiae, he was God before the Creation. But,
I say, if he had not had the power of creating, he had been so defective a
Being, that he had not been God. But he says (2.) But did you take this for any
show of a proof? The sense employed is this [All things are not produced and
created by God, if a spiritual ample substance be divisible by his Omnipotency
that made it: Yea; Then he is not God. Negatur consequentia. Ans. Very
scholastically disputed! Would one think that Reverend Mr. Baxter, whom Dr.
More for his Function and Grandevity sake handles so respectfully, and forbears
all such Juvenilities as he had used toward Eugenius Philalethes, should play
the Doctor such horse-play, having been used so civilly by him before? What
Buffoon or Antic Mime could have distorted their bodies more ill-favour'dly
and ridiculously, than he has the Doctors solid and well-composed Argument? And
then as if he had done it in pure innocence and simplicity, he adds a
Quaker-like [Yea] thereunto. And after all, like a bold Scholastic Champion,
or Polemick Divine, courageously cries out, Negatur consequentia. What a fardle
of freaks is there here, and illiberal Artifices to hide the Doctors sound
Reasoning in the 28th Section of his Answer to the Psychopyrists Letter? Where
having plainly proved that God can create an Indiscerpible Being though of a
large Metaphysical amplitude, and that there is nothing objected against it,
nor indeed can be, but that then he would seem to puzzle his own Omnipotency,
which could not discerp such a Being; the Doctor shows the vanity of that
Objection in these very words: The same, says he, may be said of the
Metaphysical Monads (namely, that God cannot discerp them) and at that rate he
shall be allowed to create nothing, no not so much as Matter (which consists of
Physical Monads) nor himself indeed to be. For that cannot be God, from whom
all other things are not produced and created. What reason can be more clear or
more convincing, That God can create a Spirit in the proper sense thereof,
which includes Indiscerpibility? there being no reason against it but what is
false, it plainly implying that he can create nothing, and consequently that he
cannot be God. Wherefore that Objection being thus clearly removed, God, as
sure as himself is, can create a Spirit, penetrable and indiscerpible, as
himself is, and is expressly acknowledged to be so by Mr. Baxter himself, page
51. And he having created Spirits or Immaterial Substances of an opposite
Species to Material, which are impenetrable and discerpible of their immediate
nature, how can these Immaterial substances be any other than Penetrable and
Indiscerpible? Which is a very useful Dogma for assuring the souls personal
subsistence after Death. And therefore it is a piece of grand Disingenuity in
Mr. Baxter, to endeavor thus to slur and obscure so plain and edifying a
Truth, by mere Antic Distortions of words and sense, by alterations and
mutilations, and by a kind of sophistick Buffoonry. This is one specimen of his
Disingenuity toward the Doctor, who in his Answer has been so civil to him.
And now I have got into this Digression, I shall not stick to exemplify it in
several others.

As secondly, page 4. in those words: And when I presume most, I do but most
lose my self, and misuse my understanding. Nothing is good for that which it
was not made for. Our Understandings, as our Eyes, are made only for things
revealed. In many of your Books I take this for an excess. So Mr. Baxter. Let
me now interpose a word or two in the behalf of the Doctor. Is not this a plain
piece of Disingenuity against the Doctor, who has spent so great a part of his
time in Philosophy (which the mere Letter of the Scripture very rarely reveals
any thing of) to reproach him for his having used his understanding so much
about things not revealed in Scripture? Where should he use his Understanding
and Reason, if not in things unrevealed in Scripture; that is, in Philosophical
things? Things revealed in Scripture are Objects rather of Faith than of
Science and Understanding. And what a Paradox is this, that our Understandings,
as our Eyes, are made only for things revealed? When our Eyes are shut, all
the whole visible world, by the closing of the palpebroe is veiled from us, but
it is revealed to us again by the opening of our eyes; and so it is with the
eye of the Understanding. If it be shut through Pride, Prejudice, or
Sensuality, the mysteries of Philosophy are thereby veiled from it; but if by
true virtue and unfeigned sanctity of mind that eye be opened, the Mysteries of
Philosophy are the more clearly discovered to it, especially if points be
studied with singular industry, which Mr. Baxter himself acknowledges of the
Doctor, page 21. only he would there pin upon his back an Humble Ignoramus in
some things, which the Doctor, I dare say, will easily admit in many things,
yea in most; and yet, I believe, this he will stand upon, that in those things
which he professes to know, he will challenge all the world to disprove if they
can. And for probable Opinions, especially if they be useless, which many Books
are too much stuffed withal, he casts them out as the lumber of the mind, and
would willingly give them no room in his thoughts. Firmness and soundness of
Life is much better than the multiplicitie of uncertain Conceits.

And lastly, whereas Mr. Baxter speaking of himself, says, And when I presume
most, I do but most lofe my self; He has so bewildered and lo^ himself in the
multifarious, and mostwhat needless points in Philosophy or Scholastic
Divinity, that if we can collect the measures of the Cause from the amplitude
of the Effect, he must certainly have been very presumptuous. He had better
have set up his Staff in his Saints everlasting Rest, and such other edifying
and useful Books as those, than to have set up for either a Philosopher or
Polemick Divine. But it is the infelicity of too many, that they are ignorant
-- Quid valiant humeri, quid far recusent, as the Poet speaks, or as the
Pythagoreans -- (...). And so taking upon them a part in a Play which they are
unfit for, they both neglect that which they are fit for, and miscarry, by
reason of their unfitness, in their acting that Part they have rashly
undertaken; as Epictetus somewhere judiciously observes.

But if that passage, And when I presume most, I do but most lose my self, was
intended by him as an oblique Socratical reproof to the Doctor; let him
instance if he can, where the Doctor has presumed above his strength. He has
meddled but with a few things, and therefore he need not envy his success
therein, especially they being of manifest use to the serious world, so many as
God has fitted for the reception of them. Certainly there was some grand
occasion for so grave a preliminary monition as he has given the Doctor. You
have it in the following Page, p. 5. This premised, says he, I say, undoubtedly
it is utterly unrevealed either as to any certainty or probability, That all
Spirits are Souls, and actuate Matter. See what Heat and Have, or some worse
Principle has engaged Mr. Baxter to do; to father a downright falsehood upon
the Doctor, that he may thence take occasion to bestow a grave admonition on
him, and so place himself on the higher ground. I am certain it is neither the
Doctors opinion, That all Spirits are Souls, and actuate Matter, nor has he
writ so any where. He only says in his Preface to the Reader, That all created
Spirits are (...) [Souls] in all probability, and actuate some matter. And his
expression herein is both modest and true. For though it is not certain or
necessary, yet it is very probable. For if there were of the highest Orders of
the Angels that fell, it is very probable that they had corporeal Vehicles,
without which it is hard to conceive they could run into disorder. And our
Savior Christ's Soul, which actuates a glorified spiritual Body, being set
above all the Orders of Angels, it is likely that there is none of them is so
refined above his Humane Nature, as to have no bodies at all. Not to add, that
at the Resurrection we become (...), though we have bodies then; which is a
shrewd intimation that the Angels have so too, and that there are no created
Spirits but have so.

Thirdly, Mr. Baxter, page 6. wrongfully blames the Doctor for being so
defective in his studies as not to have read over Dr. Glisson De Vita Naturae;
and says he has talked with diverse high pretenders to Philosophy, and asked
their judgment of that Book, and found that none of them understood it, but
neglected it, as too hard for them; and yet contemned it. His words to Dr. More
are these: I marvel that when you have dealt with so many sorts of Dissenters,
you meddle not with so subtle a piece as that of old Dr. Glissons, De Vita
Naturae. He thinks the subtilty of the Book has deterred the Doctor from
reading it, as something above his Capacity, as also of other high Pretenders
to Philosophy.

This is a Book it seems calculated only for the elevation of Mr. Baxters
subtle and sublime wit. And indeed by the benefit of reading this Book he is
most dreadfully armed with the affrightful terms of Quoddities and Quiddities,
of Conceptus formalis and fundamentalis, of Conceptus adaequatus and
inadaequatus, and the like. In virtue of which thwacking expressions he has
fancied himself able to play at Scholastic or Philosophic Quarter-staff with
the most doughty and best appointed Wits that dare enter the Lists with him;
and as over-neglectful of his flock, like some conceited Shepherds, that think
themselves no small fools at the use of the Staff or Cudgil-play, take Vagaries
to Fairs or Wakes to give a specimen of their skill; so he ever and anon makes
his Polemick sallies in Philosophy or Divinity to entertain the Spectators,
though very often he is so rapt upon the knuckles, that he is forced to let fall
his wooden Instrument, and blow his fingers. Which is but a just Nemesis upon
him, and he would do well to interpret it as a seasonable reproof from the
great Pastor of Souls, to whom we are all accountable.

But to return to his speech to the Doctor; I will adventure to answer in his
behalf, That I marvel that whenas Mr. Baxter has had the cur^osity to read so
many Writers, and some of them sure but of small concern, that he has not read
that sound and solid piece of Dr. More, viz. his Epistola altera ad V. C. with
the Scholia thereon, where Spinozius is confuted. Which if he had read he might
have seen Volum. Philosoph. Tom. 1. page 604, 605, etc. that the Doctor has not
only read that subtle Piece of Doctor Glissons, but understands so thoroughly
his Hypothesis, that he has solidly and substantially confuted it. Which he did
in a faithful regard to Religion. For that Hypothesis, if it were true, were as
safe, if not a sa^er Refuge for Atheists, than the mere Mechanic Philosophy
is: And therefore you may see there, how Cuperus, brought up amongst the
Atheists from his very childhood, does confess, how the Atheists now-a-daies
explode the Mechanic Philosophy as not being for their turn, and betake
themselves wholly to such an Hypothesis as Dr. Glissons Vita Naturae. But, God
be thanked, Dr. H. More in the forecited place has perfectly routed that fond
and foul Hypothesis of Dr. Glisson, and I dare say is sorry that so good and
old a Knight errant in Theology and Philosophy as Mr Richard Baxter seems to
be, should become benighted, as in a wood, at the Close of his days, in this
most horrid dark Harbor and dismal Receptacle or Randevouz of wretched
Atheists. But I dare say for him, it is his ignorance* not choice, that has
lodged him there.

The fourth Disingenuity of Mr. Baxter toward the Doctor is, in complaining of
him as if he had wronged him by the Title of his Answer to his Letter, in
calling it an Answer to a Psychopyrist, page 2. 82. As if he had asserted that
materiality of Spirits which belongs to bodies, page 94. In complaining also of
his inconsistency with himself, page 10. as if he one while said that Mr.
Baxter made Spirits to be Fire or material, and another while said he made them
not Fire or material. But to the first part of this Accusation it may be
answered, That if it is Mr. Baxter that is called the Learned Psychopyrist, how
is the thing known to the world but by himself? It looks as if he were
ambitious of the Title, and proud of the civil treating he has had at the hands
of the Doctor, though he has but ill repai'd his civility in his Reply. And
besides this, there is no more harshness in calling him Psychopyrist, than if
he had called him Psycho-Hylist, there being nothing absurd in Psychopyrism but
so far forth as it includes Psycho-Hylism, and makes the Soul material.

Which Psycho-Hylism that Mr. Baxter does admit, it is made evident in the
Doctors Answer, Sect. 16. And Mr. Baxter in his Placid Collation (as he
mis-calls it, for assuredly his mind was turbid when he wrote it) page 2.
allows that Spirits may be called Fire Analogice and Eminenter, and the Doctor
in his Preface intimates that the sense is to be no further stretched, than the
Psychopyrist himself will allow.

But now that Mr. Baxter does assert that Materiality in created Spirits that
belongs to bodies in the common sense of all Philosophers, appears Sect. 16.
where his words are these: But custom having made MATERIA, but especially
CORPUS to signify only such grosser Substance as the three passive Elements
are (he means Earth, Water, Air) I yield, says he, so to say, that Spirits are
not Corporeal or Material. Which plainly implies that Spirits are in no other
sense Immaterial, than Fire and Ether are, viz. than in this, that they are
thinner matter.

And therefore to the last point it may be answered in the Doctors behalf, that
he assuredly does nowhere say, That Mr. Baxter does not say that Spirits are
Material, as Material is taken in the common sense of all Philosophers for what
is impenetrable and discerpible. Which is Materia Physica, and in opposition to
which, a Spirit is said to be Immaterial. And which briefly and distinctly
states the Question. Which if Mr. Baxter would have taken notice of, he might
have saved himself the labor of a great deal of needless verbosity in his
Placid Collation, where he does over-frequently, under the pretense of more
distinctness, in the multitude of words obscure knowledge.

Fifthly, Upon Sect. 10. page 21. where Mr. Baxters Question is, How a man may
tell how that God that can make many out of one, cannot make many into one,
etc. To which the Doctor there answers: If the meaning be of substantial
Spirits, it has been already noted, that God acting in Nature does not make
many substances out of one, the substance remaining still entire; for then
Generation would be Creation. And no sober man believes that God assists any
creature so in a natural course, as to enable it to create: And then I suppose
that he that believes not this, is not bound to puzzle himself why God may not
as well make many substances into one, as many out of one, whenas he holds he
does not the latter, etc. These are the Doctors own words in that Section. In
reply to which, Mr. Baxter: But to my Question, says he, why God cannot make
two of one, or one of two, you put me off with this lean Answer, that we be not
bound to puzzle our selves about it. I think, says he, that Answer might serve
to much of your Philosophical disputes. Here Mr. Baxter plainly deals very
disingenuously with the Doctor in perverting his words, which affirm only,
That he that denies that God can make two substances of one in the sense
above-declared need not puzzle himself how he may make one of those two again.
Which is no lean, but full and apposite Answer to the Question there propounded.

And yet in this his Placid Collation, as if he were wroth, he gives ill
language, and insinuates, That much of the Doctors Philosophical Disputes are
such as are not worth a man's puzling himself about them; whenas it is well
known to all that know him or his Writings, that he concerns himself in no
Theories but such as are weighty and useful, as this of the Indiscerpibility of
Spirits is, touching which he further slanders the Doctor, as if it were his
mere Assertion without any Proof. As if Mr. Baxter had never read, or forgot
the Doctors Discourse of the true Notion of a Spirit, or what he has writ in
the further Defense thereof. See Sect. 26, 28, 30, 31. Thus to say any thing in
an angry mood, verily does not become the Title of a Placid Collation.

Sixthly, The Doctor in Sect. 11. of his Defense of his Notion of a Spirit,
writes thus: I desire you to consider the nature of Light thoroughly, and you
shall find it nothing but a certain motion of a Medium, whose parts or
particles are so or so qualified, some such way as Cartesianism drives at. To
this Mr. Baxter replies against the Doctor, page 59. Really, sa^es he, when I
read how far you have escaped the delusions of Cartesianism, I am sorry you yet
stick in so gross a part of it as this is; when he that knows no more than
motion in the nature of Fire, which is the Active Principle by which Mental and
Sensitive Nature operateth on Man and Brutes and Vegetables, and all the
Passive Elements; and all the visible actions in this lower world are
performed, what can that man's Philosophy be worth? I therefore return your
Counsel, study more thoroughly the nature of Ethereal Fire

Satis pro imperio! very Magisterially spoken! and in such an igneous Rapture,
that it is not continuedly sense. Does Mental and Sensitive Nature act on
Brutes and Vegetables and all the Passive Elements? But to let go that: Is all
the Doctors Philosophy worth nothing if he hold with Des Carts touching the
Phenomenon of Light as to the Material part thereof? It is the ignorance of
Mr. Baxter, that he rejects all in Des Carts, and Judiciousness in the Doctor,
that he retains some things, and supplies where his Philosophy is deficient.
He names here only the Mechanical Cause of Light, viz. Motion, and duly
modified Particles. But in his Enchiridium he intimates an higher principle
than either Fire or Ether, or any thing that is Material, be it as fine and
pure as you please to fancy it. See his Enchirid. Metaphys. Cap. 19. where he
shows plainly, that Light would not be Light, were there not a Spiritus
Mundanus, or Spirit of Nature, which pervades the whole Universe; Mr. Baxters
ignorance whereof has cast him into so deep a dotage upon Fire and Light, and
fine discerpible Corporeities, which he would by his Magisterial Prerogative
dubb Spirits, when to nothing that Title is due, but what is Penetrable and
Indiscerpible by reason of the immediate Oneness of its Essence, even as God
the Father and Creator of all Spirits is one Indiscerpible Substance or Being.
And therefore I would advise Mr. Baxter to study more thoroughly the true
nature of a Spirit, and to let go these Ignes Fatui that would seduce him into
thick mists and bogs. For that universal Spirit of Nature is most certainly the
Mover of the matter of the world, and the Modifier thereof, and thence exhibits
to us not only the Phenomenon of Light and Fire, but of Earth and Water, and
frames all Vegetables into shape and growth; and Fire of it self is but a dead
Instrument in its hand, as all is in the hand of God, who is (...) and (...),
as Synesius, if I well remember, somewhere calls him in his Hymns.

Seventhly, That is also less ingenuously done of Mr. Baxter, when the Doctor
so friendly and faithfully puts him in a way of undeceiving himself, Sect. 17.
touching the Doctrine of Atoms, that he puts it off so slightly. And so Sect.
18. where he earnestly exhorts him to study the nature of Water, as Mr. Baxter
does others to study the nature of Fire; he, as if he had been bitten, and
thence taken with that disease the Physicians call (...), and which signifies
the fear of Water, has slunk away and quite neglected the Doctors friendly
monition; and is so small a Proficient in Hydrostaticks, that page 68. he
understands not what greater wonder there is in the rising of the Dr.'s Rundle,
than in the rising of a piece of Timber from the bottom of the Sea. Which is a
sign he never read the 13th Chapter of the Dr.'s Enchiridion Metaphysicum, much
less the Scholia thereon. For if he had, he would discern the difference, and
the vast usefulness of the one above that of the other to prove a Principium
Hylarchicum distinct from the matter of the Universe, against all evasions and
tergiversations whatsoever. But these things cannot be insisted on here.

Eighthly, Mr. Baxter, page 76. charges the Doctor with such a strange Paradox
as to half of it, that I cannot imagine from whence he should fetch it. Tou
seem, says he, to make all substance Atoms, Spiritual Atoms and Material Atoms.
The latter part of the charge the Doctor I doubt not but will acknowledge to be
true: But may easily prove out of Mr. Baxter, page 65. that he must hold so
too. For his words there are these: That God is able to divide all matter into
Atoms or indivisible parts I doubt not. And can they be Phy^ically divided into
parts of which they don't consist? But Mr. Baxter by the same reason making
Spirits divisible by God, though not by any Creature, makes them consist of
Spiritual Atoms, for they cannot but consist of such parts as they are
divisible into. And if they be divisible by God into larger shreds only but
not into Atoms, then every created Spirit, especially particular ones, are so
many subtle living Puppets made up of spiritual rags and clouts. But if God can
divide them neither into spiritual Atoms nor larger spiritual parcels, he cannot
divide them at all. And so according to what the Doctor contends for, they will
be, as they ought to be, absolutely indiscerpible.

I omit here to take notice of another absurdity of Mr. Baxters, That though
the substance of a Spirit he will have to be divisible, yet he will have the
form indivisible, page 50, 99. and yet both parts to be Spirit still; which
implies a contradiction. For then one of the parts will be without the form of
a Spirit, and consequently be no Spirit, and yet be a Spirit according to Mr.
Baxter, who makes Spirits divisible into parts of the same denomination, as
when water is divided into two parts, each part is still water, page 53.

Ninthly. That which occurrs page 48. is a gross Disingenuity against the
Doctor, where Mr. Baxter says, And when you make all Spirits to be Souls and to
animate some matter, you seem to make God to be but Anima Mundi. How unfair and
harsh is this for you Mr. Baxter, who has been so tenderly and civilly handled
by the Doctor in his Answer to your Letter, he constantly hiding or mollifying
any thing that occurred therein that might overmuch expose you, to represent
him as a savourer of so gross a Paradox as this, That there is no God but an
Anima Mundi, which is the Position of the Vaninian Atheists, which himself has
expressly confuted in his Mystery of Godliness, and declared against lately in
his Advertisements on Jos. Glanvils Letter to himself, in the second Edition of
Saducismus Triumphatus? This looks like the breaking out of unchristian
rancour, in a Reply which bears the Specious Title of a Placid Collation. Which
is yet exceedingly more aggravable, for that this odious Collection is not made
from any words of the Doctor, but from a siction of Mr. Baxter. For the Doctor
has nowhere Written, nor ever thought that all Spirits, but only all Created
Spirits, might probably be Souls, that is to say, actuate some matter or other.
And those words are in his Preface to his Answer to the Letter of the
Psychopyrist, as I noted before. I might reckon up several other Disingenuities
of Mr. Baxters toward the Doctor in this his Placid Collation; but I have
enumerated enough already to weary the Reader, and I must remember I am but in
a Digression.

I shall only name one Disingenuity more, which was antecedent to them all,
and gave occasion both to Mr. Baxters Letter, and to the Doctors Answer
thereto, and to this Reply of Mr. Baxter. And that was, That Mr. Baxter in his
Methodus Theologiae (as he has done also in a little Pamphlet touching Judge
Hales) without giving any reasons, which is the worst way of traducing any man
or his sentiments, slighted and slurred those two essential Attributes of a
Spirit, Penetrability and Indiscerpibility, which for their certain Truth and
usefulness the Doctor thought fit to communicate to the World.

But forasmuch as Mr. Baxter has in this his Reply produced his Reasons against
them, I doubt not but the Doctor will accept it for an amends. And I, as I must
disallow of the Disingenuity of the omission before, yet to be just to Mr.
Baxter, I must commend his discretion and judgment in being willing to omit
them; they appearing to me now they are produced, so weak and invalid. But such
as they are, I shall gather them out of his Reply, and bring them into view.

First then, page 13. It is alleged, That nothing has two forms univocally so
called. But if Penetrabilitie and Indiscerpibilitie be added to the Virtus
Vitalis, to the Vital Power of a Spirit, it will have two forms. Therefore
Penetrabilitie and Indiscerpibilitie are to be omitted in the notion of a
Spirit. See also p. 22.

Secondly, page 14. Penetrable and Indiscerpible can be no otherwise a form to
Spirits, than Impenetrable and Discerpible are a form to Matter. But
Impenetrable is only a modal Conceptus of Matter, and Discerpible a Relative
notion thereof, and neither one nor both contrary to Virtus vitalis in a Spirit.

Thirdly, page 14. He sees no reason why Quantity, and the Trina Dimensio, may
not as well be part of the form of Matter as Discerpibilitie and
Impenetrabilitie.

Fourthly, page 15, 16. Nothing is to be known without the mediation of Sense,
except the immediate sensation itself, and the acts of intellection and
volition or nolition, and what the Intellect infers of the like, by the
perception of these. Wherefore as to the modification of the substance of
Spirits, which is contrary to Impenetrabilitie and Divisibilitie, I may grope,
says he, but I cannot know it positively for want of sensation.

Fifthly, page 16, 17. If Indiscerpibilitie be the essential character of a
Spirit, then an Atom of matter is a Spirit, it being acknowledged to be
Indiscerpible. Wherefore Indiscerpibilitie is a false character of a Spirit.

Sixthly, page 17, 18. [Penetrable] whether actively or passively understood,
can be no proper Character of a Spirit, forasmuch as Matter can penetrate a
Spirit, as well as a Spirit Matter, it possessing the same place. See page 23.

Seventhly, page 40, 41. Immaterialitie, says he, Penetrabilitie and
Indiscerpibilitie, in your own judgment I think are none of them proper to
Spirit. For they are common to diverse Accidents in your account, viz. to
Light, Heat, Cold. And again in his own words,

Eighthly, page 77. If your Penetrabilitie, says he, imply not that all the
singular Spirits can contract themselves into a Punctum, yea that all the
Spirits of the world may be so contracted, I find it not yet sufficiently
explained. See also page 52, 78, 89, 90.

Ninthly, page 50. Seeing, says he, you ascribe Amplitude, Q^antitie, and
Dimensions and Logical Materialitie to the Substantialitie of Spirits, I see
not but that you make them Intellectually divisible, that is, that one may
think of one part as here, and another there. And if so, though man cannot
separate and divide them, if it be no contradiction, God can.

Tenthly, and lastly, page 90. The putting of Penetrability and
Indiscerpibility into the notion of a Spirit, is needless, and hazardous, it
being sufficient to hold that God has made Spirits of no kind of parts but
what do Naturally abhor Separation, and so are inseparable unless God will
separate them, and so there is no fear of losing our Personality in the other
State. But Penetrability and Indiscerpibility being hard and doubtful words,
they are better left out, lest they tempt all to believe that the very Being of
Spirits is as doubtful as those words are.

Thus have I faithfully though briefly brought into view all Mr. Baxters
Arguments against the Penetrability and Indiscerpibility of Spirits, which I
shall answer in order as they have been recited.

To the first therefore I say, that the Doctors Definition of a Spirit, which
is [A Substance immaterial intrinsecally endued with life and a faculty of
motion] where Substance is the Genus, and the rest of the terms comprize the
Differentia (which Mr. Baxter calls Conceptus formalis and Forma) I say, that
this Difference or Form though it consist of many terms, yet these terms are
not Heterogeneal, as he would insinuate, page 22. but Congenerous, and one in
order to another, and essentially and inseparably united in that one substance
which is rightly and properly called Spirit, and in virtue of that one
substance, though their Notions and Operations differ, they are really one
inseparable specific Disserence or Form, as much as Mr. Baxters Virtus vitalis
una-trina is; that is to say, they are specific knowable terms, succedaneous
to the true intimate specific Form that is utterly unknowable; and therefore I
say, in this sense these knowable terms are one inseparable specific
Difference or Form whereby Spirit is distinguished from Body or Matter in a
Physical acception. Which the Universality of Philosophers hold to consist in
Impenetrability, and Discerpibilitie, and Self-inactivitie. Which if Mr. Baxter
would have been pleased to take notice of, viz. that a Spirit is said to be a
Substance Immaterial in opposition to Matter Physical, he might have saved
himself the labor of a deal of tedious trifling in explication of words to no
purpose.

But to show that this Pretense of more Forms than one in one Substance is but
a Cavil, I will offer really the same Definition in a more succinct way, and
more to Mr. Baxters tooth, and say, As Corpus is Substantia Materialis (where
Materialis is the specific Difference of Corpus comprised in one term:) so
Spiritus is Substantia Immaterialis (where Immaterialis the specific
Difference of Spiritus is likewise comprised in one term, to please the humor
of Mr. Baxter.) But now as under that one term [Materialis] are comprised
Impenetrabilitie, Discerpibilitie, and Self-Inactivity; so also under that one
term [Immaterialis] are comprised, as under one head, Penetrability,
Indiscerpibility, and Intrinsccal life and motion, that is, an essential
faculty of life and motion, which in one word may be called Self-Activity.
Whence Penetrability, Indiscerpibility, and Self-Activity are as much one Form
of a Spirit, as Mr. Baxters Vita,. Perceptio, and Appetitus, is one Form
thereof. For though in both places they are three distinct notions, at least as
Mr. Baxter would have it, yet they are the essential and inseparable Attributes
of one substance, and the immediate fruit and result of the Specific nature
thereof. They are inseparably one in their Source and Subject.

And this I think is more than enough to take off this first little Cavil of
Mr. Baxters against the Doctors including Penetrability and Inseparability in
the Form or Specific difference of a Spirit. For all that same is to be called
Form, by which a thing is that which it is, as far as our Cognitive faculties
will reach, and by which it is essentially distinguished from other things. And
if it were not for Penetrabilitie and Indiscerpibilitie, Spirit would be
confounded with Body and Matter. And Body or Physical Matter might be
Self-Active, Sentient, and Intelligent.

To the Second I answer, That whosoever searches things to the bottom, he will
sind this a sound Principle in Philosophy, That there is nothing in the whole
Universe but what is either Substantia or Modus. And when a Mode or several
Modes put together are immediately and essentially inseparable from a
Substance, they are looked upon as the Form, or the only knowable Specific
difference of that Substance. So that Impenetrability and Discerpibility, which
are immediately essential to, and inseparable from Body or Matter, and
Self-Inactivitie, (as Irrational is made the specific difference of a Brute)
may be added also: These, I say, are as truly the Form or Specific difference
of Body or Matter, as any thing knowable is of any thing in the world. And
Self-Inactivity at least, is contrary to the Virtus vitalis of a Spirit, though
Impenetrability and Discerpibility were not. So that according to this
economy, you see how plainly and exquisitely Body and Spirit are made opposite
Species one to another. And it is these Modal differences of Substances which we
only know, but the Specific Substance of any thing is utterly unknown to us,
however Mr. Baxter is pleased to swagger to the contrary, p. 44, 62. Where he
seems to mis-understand the Doctor, as if by Essence he did not understand
Substance, as both (...) and Essentia usually signify (especially with the
Ancients) but any Being at large.

But of Substance it is most true, we know it only by its essential Modes, but
the Modes are not the Substance it self of which they are Modes; otherwise the
Substance would want Modes, or every Substance would be more substances than
one. And Mr. Baxter himself says, page 62. To know an essential Attribute, and
to know ipsam essentiam scientia inadaequata, is all one. Which inadequate or
partial knowledge, say I, is this, the knowing of the Essential Mode of the
Substance, and not knowing the Substance it self; Otherwise if both the
Essential Modes were known, and also the Specific Substance to which the Modes
belong (more than that those Modes belong to that Substance) the knowledge
would be full and adequate, and stretched through the whole Object. So that Mr.
Baxters Scientia inadoequata, and the Doctors denying the bare Substance it
self to be known, may very well consist together, and be judged a mere (...).
Which is an exercise more grateful it is likely to Mr. Baxter, than to the
Doctor.

To the third I say, Any one that considers may find a necessary reason why
Quantity or Trina Dimensio should be left out in the Form of Body or Matter,
especially why the Doctor should leave it out, because he does professedly
hold, That whatever is, has Metaphysical Quantity or Metaphysical Trina
Dimensio; Which no man can deny that holds God is Essentially present
everywhere. And no man, I think, that does not dote can deny that. Wherefore
allowing Matter to be Substance; in that Generical nature, Trina Dimensio is
comprised, and need not be again repeated in the Form. But when in the Forma or
Differentia, Discerpible and Impenetrable is added, this is that which makes
the Trina Dimensio (included in the Genus, Substantia) of a Corporeal kind, and
does constitute that Species of things, which we call Corpora. This is so plain
a business, that we need insist no longer upon it.

Now to the fourth, I answer briefly, That from what knowledge we have by the
mediation of the Senses and inference of the Intellect, we arrive not only to
the knowledge of like things, but of unlike, or rather contrary: As in this
very example, we being competently well instructed, indeed assured by our
Senses, that there is such a kind of thing as Body, whose nature is to be
Impenetrable and Discerpible, and our Reason certainly informing us, as was
noted even now, that whatever is, has a kind of Amplitude more or less, or else
it would be nothing; hence we are confirmed, that not Extension or Trina
Dimensio, but Impenetrabilitie and Discerpibilitie is the determinate and
adequate nature of what we call Body; and if there be any opposite species to
Body, our Reason tells us it must have opposite Modes or Attributes, which are
Penetrability and Indiscerpibility. This is a plain truth not to be groped
after with our fingers in the dark, but clearly to be discerned by the eye of
our understanding in the light of Reason. And thus we see (and many examples
more we might accumulate) That by the help of our Senses and Inference of our
Understanding, we are able to conclude not only concerning like things, but
their contraries or opposites. I must confess I look upon this allegation of
Mr. Baxter as very weak and faint.

And as for his fifth, I do a little marvel that so grave and grandaevous a
person as he should please himself in such little flirts of Wit and Sophistry
as this of the Indiscerpibility of an Atom or Physical Monad. As if
Indiscerpibility could be none of the essential or specifical Modes or
Attributes of a Spirit, because a Physical Monad or Atom is Indiscerpible also,
which is no Spirit. But those very Indiscerpibilities are Specifically
different. For that of a Spirit is an Indiscerpibility that arises from the
positive perfection and Oneness of the Essence, be it never so ample; that of
an Atom or Physical Monad, from imperfection and privativeness, from the mere
littleness or smalness thereof, so small that it is impossible to be smaller,
and thence only is Indiscerpible.

The sixth also is a pretty juvenile Ferk of Wit for a grave ancient Divine to
use, That Penetrability can be no proper Character of a Spirit, because Matter
can penetrate Spirit as well as Spirit Matter, they both possessing the same
space. Suppose the body A. of the same amplitude with the body B. and thrust
the body A. against the body B. the body A. will not nor can penetrate into
the same space that the body B. actually occupies. But suppose the body A. a
Spirit of that amplitude, and according to its nature piercing into the same
space which the body B. occupies, how plain is it that that active piercing
into the same space that the body B. occupies, is to be attributed to the
Spirit A. and not to the body B? For the body A. could not get in. These are
pretty forced distortions of Wit, but no solid methods of due Reason. And
besides, it is to be noted, that the main Character of a Spirit is, as to
Penetrability, that Spirit can penetrate Spirit, but not Matter Matter.

And now the Seventh is as slight as the Fifth. Diverse Accidents, says he,
penetrate their Subjects, as Heat, Cold, etc. Therefore Penetrabilitie is no
proper Character of a Spirit. But what a vast difference is there here! The one
pierce the matter, (or rather are in the matter merely as continued Modes
thereof) the other enters into the matter as a distinct Substance therefrom.
Penetration therefore is here understood in this Character of a Spirit, of
Penetratio Substantialis, when a substance penetrates substance, as a Spirit
does Spirit and matter, which Matter cannot do. This is a certain Character of
a Spirit. And his instancing in Light as Indiscerpible, is as little to the
purpose. For the substance of Light, viz. the Materia sub^ilissima and Globuli,
are discerpible. And the motion of them is but a Modus, but the point in hand
is Indiscerpibilitie of Substance.

To the Eighth I Answer, That Mr. Baxter here is hugely unreasonable in his
demands, as if Penetrabilitie of Spirits were not sufficiently explained,
unless it can be made out, that all the Spirits in the world, Universal and
particular, may be contracted into one Punctum: But this is a Theme that he
loves to enlarge upon, and to declaim on very Tragically, as page 52. If
Spirits have parts which may be extended and contracted, you will hardly so
easily prove as say, that God cannot divide them. And when in your Writings
shall I find satisfaction into how much space one Spirit may be extended, and
into how little it may be contracted, and whether the whole Spirit of the World
may be contracted into a Nut-shell or a Box, and the Spirit of a Flea may be
extended to the Unequal of all the world? And again, page 78. You never tell
into how little parts only it may be contracted; And if you put any limits, I
will suppose that one Spirit has contracted itself into the least compass
possible; and then I ask, Cannot another and another Spirit be in the same
compass by their Penetration? If not; Spirits may have a contracted Spissitude
which is not Penetrable, and Spirits cannot penetrate contracted Spirits, but
only dilated ones. If yea; then quoero, whether all created Spirits may not be
so contracted. And I should hope that the Definition of a Spirit excludes not
God, and yet that you do not think that his Essence may be contracted and
dilated. O that we knew how little we know!

This grave moral Epiphonema with a sorrowful shaking of the Head is not in
good truth much misbecoming the sly insinuating cunning of Mr. Richard Baxter,
who here makes a show, speaking in the first person [We] of lamenting and
bewailing the ignorance of his own ignorance, but friendly hooks in, by
expressing himself in the plural number, the Doctor also into the same
condemnation. Solamen miseris -- as if He neither did understand his own
ignorance in the things he Writes of, but will be strangely surprised at the
hard Riddles Mr. Baxter has propounded, as if no Oedipus were able to solve
them. And I believe the Doctor if he be called to an account will freely
confess of himself, That in the things he positively pronounces of, so far as
he pronounces, that he is indeed altogether ignorant of any ignorance of his
own therein; But that this is by reason that he according to the cautiousness
of his Genius does not adventure further than he clearly sees ground, and the
notion appears useful for the Public. As it is indeed useful to understand
that Spirits can both Penetrate matter and Penetrate one another, else God
could not be Essentially present in all the parts of the Corporeal Universe,
nor the Spirits of Men and Angels be in God. Both which notwithstanding are
most certainly true, to say nothing of the Spirit of Nature, which particular
Spirits also Penetrate, and are Penetrated by it.

But now for the Contraction and Dilatation of Spirits, that is not a property
of Spirits in general as the other are, but of particular created Spirits, as
the Doctor has declared in his Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul. So
that that hard Question is easily answered concerning Gods contracting and
dilating himself; That he does neither, he being no created Spirit, and being
more absolutely perfect than that any such properties should be competible to
him. And it is reasonable to conceive that there is little actually of that
property in the Spirit of Nature, it being no particular Spirit, though
created, but an Universal one, and having no need thereof. For the corporeal
world did not grow from a small Embryo into that vast amplitude it is now of,
but was produced of the same largeness it now has, though there was a
successive delineation and orderly polishing and perfecting the vast distended
parts thereof. And to speak compendiously and at once, That God that has
Created all things in number, weight and measure, has given such measures of
Spiritual Essence and of the faculty of contracting and dilating the same, as
also of Spiritual Subtilty of substance, as serves the ends of his Wisdom and
Goodness in creating such a species of Spirit. So that it is fond, unskilful,
and ridiculous, to ask if the whole Spirit of the world can be contracted into
a Nut-shell, and the Spirit of a Flea extended to the Unequal of the Universe.
They that talk at this rate err, as Aliens from the Wisdom of God, and
ignorant of the Laws of Nature, and indeed of the voice of Scripture itself.
Why should God make the Spirit of a Flea, which was intended for the
constituting of such a small Animal, large enough to fill the whole world? Or
what need of such a contraction in the Spirit of Nature or Plastic Soul of the
corporeal Universe, that it may be contrived into a Nut-shell?

That it has such Spiritual subtlety as that particular Spirits may contract
themselves in it so close together, as to be commensurate to the first
Inchoations of a Foetus, which is but very small, stands to good reason, and
Effects prove it to be so. As also this smalness of a Foetus or Embryo that
particular Spirits are so far contracted at first, and expand themselves
leisurely afterward with the growth of the body which they regulate. But into
how much lesser space they can or do contract themselves at any time, is
needless to know or enquire. And there is no Repugnancie at all, but the Spirit
of Nature might be contracted to the like Essential Spissitude that some
particular Spirits are; but there is no reason to conceit that it ever was or
ever will be so contracted, while the World stands.

Nor lastly is there any Inconvenience in putting indefinite limits of
Contraction in a Spirit, and to allow that after such a measure of Contraction,
though we cannot say just what that is, it naturally contracts no further, nor
does another so contracted naturally penetrate this thus contracted Spirit. For
as the usefulness of that measure of Self-Penetrability and Contraction is
plain, so it is as plain, that the admitting of it is no incongruitie nor
incommoditie to the Universe, nor any confusion to the Specific modes of
Spirit and Body. For these two Spirits, suppose, contracted to the utmost of
their natural limits, may naturally avoid the entering one another, not by a
dead (...) as in Bodies or Matter, but by a vital Saturitie, or natural
Uneasiness in so doing. Besides that, though at such a contracted pitch they
are naturally impenetrable to one another, yet they demonstrate still their
Spirituality, by Self-Penetration, happily a thousand and a thousand times
repeated. And though by a Law of life (not by a dead (...)), they are kept from
penetrating one another, yet they both in the mean time necessarily penetrate
Matter, as undergoing the diverse measures of essential Spissitude in the same.
So that by the increase of that essential Spissitude, they may approach near to
a kind of Hylopathick disposition of Impenetrability, and thence, by the Matter
of the Universe (out of which they never are) be curbed from contracting
themselves any further, than to such a degree; and I noted at first, that
spiritual Subtilty, as well as Amplitude, is given in measure to created
Spirits. So that Penetrabilitie is still a steadie Character of a Spiritual
Essence or Substance, to the utmost sense thereof. And to argue against
Impenetrability its being the property of Matter from this kind of
Impenetrability of contracted Spirits, is like that quibbling Sophistry
against Indiscerpibility being the property of a Spirit, because a Physical
Monad is also indiscerpible.

The ninth Objection is against. the Indiscerpibility of Spirits, and would
infer, that because the Doctor makes them intellectually divisible, therefore
by Divine Power, if it imply no contradiction, a Spirit is Discerpible into
Physical parts. But this is so fully satisfied already by the Doctor in his
Discourse of the true Notion of a Spirit, and its Defense, to say nothing of
what I have said already above to prove it does imply a contradiction, that I
will let it go, and proceed.

To the tenth and last Allegation, which pretends, That these two terms
Penetrable and Indiscerpible are needless and hazardous in the Notion of a
Spirit. But how useful or needful Pene^rability is, is manifest from what we
have said to the eighth Objection. And the needfulness of Indiscerpibility is
also susficiently shown by the Doctor in his Defense of the true Notion of a
Spirit, Sect. 30. But now for the Hazardousness of these terms, as if they were
so hard, that it would discourage men from the admitting of the Existence of
Spirits; It appears from what has been said to the eighth Objection, That
Penetrability is not only intelligible and admittable, but necessarily to be
admitted, in the Notion of a Spirit, as sure as God is a Spirit, and that there
are Spirits of men and Angels, and that the Souls of men are not made of
Shreds, but actuate their whole grown body, though at first they were
contracted into the compass of a very small Foetus. And that there is no
Repugnancie that an Essence may be ample, and yet indiscerpible, Mr. Baxter
himself must allow, who, page 51. plainly declares, That it is the vilest
contradiction to say that God is capable of division. So that I wonder that he
will call [Penetrable] and [Indiscerpible] hard and doubtful words, and such as
might stumble men's belief of the Existence of Spirits, when they are terms so
plain and necessary. Nor can that Unity that belongs to a Spirit be conceived
or understood without them, especially without Indiscerpibilitie. And indeed if
we do not allow Penetrability, the Soul of a man will be far from being one,
but a thing discontinued, and scattered in the pores of his corpcreal
consistencie.

We will conclude with Mr. Baxters Conceit of the Indivisibleness of a Spirit,
and see how that will corroborate men's faith of their Existence, and put all
out of hazard. Various Elements, says he, page 50. vary in Divisibility; Earth
is most divisible; Water more hardly, the parts more inclining to the closest
contact; Air yet more hardly; and in Fire, no doubt the Discerpibility is yet
harder: And if God have made a Creature so stongly inclined to the unity of
all the parts, that no Creature can separate them but God only, as if a Soul
were such, it is plain that such a Being need not fear a dissolution by
Separation of parts. Ans. This is well said for an heedless and credulous
multitude; but this is not to Philosophize, but to tell us that God works a
perpetual Miracle in holding the small tenuious parts of the Soul together,
more pure and fine than those of Fire or Ether; but here is no natural cause
from the thing it self offered, unless it be, that in every Substance, or
rather Matter, the parts according to the tenuitie and purity of the
Substance, incline to a closer Contact and inseparable Union one with another;
which is a conceit repugnant to experience, and easily confuted by that
ordinary accident of a Spinner hanging by its weak thread from the brim of
ones Hat; which seeble line yet is of force enough to divide the Air, and for
that very reason, because it consists of thinner parts than Water or Earth. As
also, we can more easily run in the Air than wade in the Water, for the very
same reason. These things are so plain, that they are not to be dwelt upon.

But Mr. Baxter is thus pleased to show his Wit in maintaining a weak Cause,
which I am persuaded he has not so little judgment as that he can have any
great confidence in. And therefore in sundry places he intimates that he does
allow or at least not deny but that Penetrabilitie and Indiscerpibilitie is
contained in the Notion of a Spirit; but not as part of the Conceptus formalis,
but as Dispositio or Modus substantiae, but yet withal such a Dispositio as is
essential to the substance that with the Conceptus formalis added, makes up the
true Notion of a Spirit. See page 30, 32, 61, 85. And truly if Mr. Baxter be in
good earnest and sincere in this agreement without all equivocation, that
Penetrabilitie and Indiscerpibilitie is Essential to the true Notion of a
Spirit, only they are to be admitted as Dispositio Substantiae, not as Pars
Formae, I confess, as he declares page 94. That the difference betwixt him and
the Doctor lies in a much smaller matter than was thought; and the Doctor I
believe will easily allow him to please his own fancy in that. But then he must
understand the terms of Penetrabilitie and Indiscerpibilitie in the Doctors
sense, viz, of a Spirits penetrating not inter parts, but per parts materiae,
and possessing the same space with them. And of an Indiscerpibleness not
arising from thinner and thinner parts of matter, as he imagines Air to be more
hardly discerpible than Earth or Water, forasmuch as by reason of its thinness
its parts lie closer together, as was above noted; but from the immediate
essential Oneness of substance in a Spirit, according to the true Idea of an
Indiscerpible Being in the Divine Intellect, which, whether in Idea or in
Actual Existence, it would cease to be, or rather never was such, if it were
discerpible, and therefore implies a contradiction it should be so. But if a
Spirit be not Penetrable in the Doctors sense, it is really Impenetrable; and
if not Indiscerpible in his sense, it is really Discerpible, and consequently
divisible into Physical Monads or Atoms, and therefore constituted of them, and
the last Inference will be that of the Epigrammatist: (...).
(...). To this sense: All a vain Jest, All Dust, All Nothing deem,
For of mere Atoms all composed been.




And thus the sairest and firmest structures of Philosophical Theorems in the
behalf of the Providence of God, the Existence of Spirits, and the Immortality
of the Soul, will become a Castle of Come-Down, and fall quite to the ground.
Whence it was rightfully done of the Doctor to lay such stress upon these two
terms Penetrabilitie and Indiscerpibilitie, they being the essential
Characteristicks of what is truly a Spirit, and which if they were taken out of
the world, all would necessarily be Matter, I mean Physical Matter (to prevent
all quibblings and fiddlings about words and phrases) and this Physical Matter
would be the Subject and Source of all Life whatever, Intellective, Sensitive
and Vegetative. And Mr. Baxter did ill in not only omitting these terms
himself in his Notion of a Spirit, but in publicly slighting and disgracing of
the Doctors using of them, and afterward in so stomaching his vindication of
the same in public, whenas we see that without them there can be nothing but
Physical Matter in the world, and God and Angels and the Souls of men must be
such Matter, if they be any thing at all: and therefore in such an error as
this, Mr. Baxter with Christian patience might well have born with the Doctors
calling it, not only a Mistake, but a Mischief. And I hope by this time he is
such a proficient in that Virtue, that he will cheerfully bear the publication
of this my Answer in the behalf of the Doctor to all his Objections against
these two essential and necessary Characters of a Spirit; and not be offended
if I briefly run over his smaller Criticisms upon the Doctors Definition of the
same, which do occur, page 80, 81. and elsewhere, as I shall advertise.

The Doctors Definition of a Spirit in his Discourse of that Subject, Sect. 29.
is this [A Spirit is a Substance immaterial intrinsecally endued with life and
the faculty of motion] where he notes that Immaterial contains virtually in it
Penetrability and Indiscerpibility. Now let us hear how Mr. Baxter criticizes
on this Definition.

First, says he, page 80. Your Definition is common, good and true, allowing
for its little imperfections, and the common imperfection of man's knowledge of
Spirits. If by [Immaterial] you mean not [without Substance] it signifies
truth, but a negation speaks not a formal Essence. Ans. How very little these
imperfections are, I shall note by passing through them all; and for the common
imperfection of man's knowledge of Spirits, what an unskilful or hypocritical
pretense that is, the Doctor has so clearly shown in his Discourse of the true
Notion of a Spirit, Sect. 16, 17, 18, 19. that it is enough to send the Reader
thither for satisfaction. But as for [Immaterial] how can any one think that
thereby is meant [without Substance] but those that think there is nothing but
Matter in the Physical sense of the word, in the world? As if [Substance
Immaterial] was intended to signify [Substance without Substance]! And lastly,
the Doctor will deny that [In] in Immaterial signifies negatively here more
than in Immortal, Incorruptible, or Infinite, but that it is the indication of
opposite properties to those of Physical Matter, viz. Impenetrability and
Discerpibility, and that therefore Immaterial here includes Indiscerpibility
and Penetrability.

Secondly, page 81. Spirit it self, says he, is but a metaphor. Ans. Though
the word first signified other things before it was used in the sense it is
here defined, yet use has made it as good as if it were originally proper. With
your Logicians, in those Definitions, Materia est Causa ex qua res est, Forma
est Causa per quam res est id quod est; Materia and Forma are Metaphorical
words, but use has made them in those Definitions as good as proper; nor does
any sober and knowing man move the least scruple touching those Definitions on
this account. To which you may add, that Aristotle's caution against Metaphors
in defining things, is to be understood of the Definition it self, not the
Definitum; but Spirit is the Definitum here, not the Definition.

Thirdly, [Intrinsecally endued with life] tells us not that it is the Form.
Qualities, and proper Accidents are intrinsecal. Ans. Mr. Baxter, I suppose,
for clearness sake, would have had Form written over the head of this part of
the Definition, as the old bungling painters were wont to write, This is a
Cock, and this a Bull; or as one wittily perstringed a young Preacher that
would name the Logical Topics he took his Arguments from, saying he was like a
Shoemaker that offered his Shoes to sale with the Lasts in them. I thought Mr.
Baxter had been a more nimble Logician than to need such helps to discern what
is the Genus in the Definition, what the Differentia or Forma. And for
[intrinsecally indued] I perceive he is ignorant of the proper force and sense
of the word Intrinsecus, which signifies as much as (...) not (...) only,
which implies that this life is from the intimate Essence of a Spirit quatenus
a Spirit, and therefore can be no common quality nor a faculty clarted on, as
Mr. Baxter fancies God may clart on Life the specific Form of Spirit, as he
himself acknowledges, on Matter, though Materia quatenus Materia implies no
such thing; but, I say, Spiritus quatenus Spiritus does, which is both the
Source and proper Subject of life. But it is the effect of an ill perturbed
sight, to fancy flaws where there are really none. And to fancy that a Vis
Vitalis, or Power of living can belong to Materia Physica immediately, which
power must necessarily be the Result of an Essence specifically distinct from
Physical Matter, I think may justly be called clarting of this Power on a
Subject it belongs not to, nor is intrinsecal to it, there being no new
specific Essence from whence it should spring.

Fourthly, The [Facultie of motion] says he, is either a Tautologie included
in Life, or else if explicatorie of Life, it is defective. Ans. It is neither
Tautological nor Exegetical, no more than if a man should define Homo, Animal
rationale risibile. [Risibile] there, is neither Tautological, though included
in Animal rationale; nor Exegetical, it signifying not the same with Rationale.
And the Definition is as true with Risibile added to it, as if omitted. But the
addition of Risibile being needless, is indeed ridiculous. But it is not
Ridiculous to add the faculty of motion in this Definition of a Spirit, because
it is not needless, but is added on purpose to instruct such as Mr. Baxter,
that an intrinsecal faculty of motion belongs to Spirit quatenus Spirit, and
endued with Life; whenas yet he, page 35. will not admit that selfmotion is an
indication of Life in the subject that moves itself, although it is the very
prime argument that his beloved and admired Dr. Glisson uses to prove, that
there is universally life in Matter. But it is the symptom of an over-
Polemical Fencer, to deny a thing merely because he finds it not for his turn.
In the mean time it is plain the Doctor has not added [the faculty of motion]
rashly out of oversight, but for the instructing the ignorant in so important a
truth, That there is no (...) but there is Life and Spirit. This is so great a
truth, that the Platonists make it to be the main Character of Soul or Spirit,
to be (...), as you may see in Proclus.

Fifthly, No man, says he, can understand that the Negative [Immaterial], by
the terms, includes Penetrabilitie and Indiscerpibilitie. Ans. No man that
rightly understands himself but must conceive that [Immaterial] signifies an
opposite or contrary condition to [Material]: and he knowing (as who is
ignorant of it?) that the proper and essential characters of [Material] in
substantia materialis, is to be Impenetrable and Discerpible, he will
necessarily, even whether he will or no, discover that [Immaterial] which
signifies the opposite to these in substantia immaterialis, must denote
Penetrability and Indiscerpibility.

Sixthly, You do not say here, says he, that they are the Form, but elsewhere
you do; and the Form should be expressed, and not only vertually contained, as
you speak. Ans. What would you have him in the very Definition it self, which
is so clear an one, say, This is the Genus, this the Form, as those bunglers I
mentioned above writ the names of the Animals they had so badly drawn? And that
the Form should be expressed is true, but it is sufficient it be expressed in such
a comprehensive term as contains under it all that belongs to such a Species.
As when we have divided Vivens into Planta and Animal, if we then define Animal
to be Vivens sensu praeditum, that one word sensus, is sufficient, because it
reaches any Species of Animal, and none but Animals. And yet here the Doctor is
not so niggardly as to pinch the expression of all the Form or Difference, into
that one word Immaterial, whereby he here only intimates Penetrability and
Indiscerpibility; but for fuller explication adds, Intrinsecally induced with
Life and the faculty of motion. But lastly, For his elsewhere calling
Penetrability and Indiscerpibility the Form of a Spirit, he nowhere makes them
the whole Form of a Spirit, but makes the Logical Form or Differentia of a
Spirit, to be all that which he has expressed in this Definition, viz.
[Immaterial] which denotes Penetrability and Indiscerpibility, and [Intrinsecal
life and motion]. And it is evident that when he calls this Differentia in his
Definition, Form, that he does not mean the very specific Substance or
Essence, whereby a Spirit is a Spirit, but only essential or inseparable
Attributes, which only are known to us, and which are only in an improper
sense said to be the Form it self, or specific Nature. They are only the
Result of the Form and Notes of an Essence or Substance Specifically distinct
from some other Substance.

It is not so in substantial Forms as in Geometrical Forms or Figures, as to
Visibilitie or Perceptibilitie. Dic tu formam hujus lapidis, says Scaliger to
Cardan, and Phyllida solus habeto. But there are inseparable and essential
Properties of a substantial Form, necessarily resulting from the Form it self,
as there are in external Forms or Figures. As for example, from the form of a
Globe, which is a round Form, defined from the equality of all lines from one
point drawn thence to the Superficies. From this form does necessarily and
inseparably result the Character of an easy rouling Mobilitie. That a body of
this Form is the most easily moved upon a Plain, of any body in the world. And
so from the Form of a piece of Iron made into what we call a Sword; Fitness for
striking, for cutting, for stabbing, and for defending of the hand, is the
necessary result from this Form thereof. And so I say that from the intimate
and essential Form of a Spirit, suppose, essentially and inseparably result
such and such properties by which we know that a Spirit is a distinct Species
from other things, though we do not know the very specific essence thereof.
And therefore here I note by the by, that when the Doctor says any such or
such Attributes are the Form of a Spirit, he does data opera balbutire cum
balbutientibus, and expresses himself in the language of the Vulgar, and speaks
to Mr. Baxter in his own Dialect. For it is the declared opinion of the Doctor,
that the intimate Form of no Essence or Substance is knowable, but only the
inseparable Fruits or Results thereof. Which is a Principle wants no proof, but
an appeal to every man's faculties that has ordinary wit and sincerity.

Seventhly, They are not the Form, says he, but the Dispositio vel Conditio ad
formam. Ans. You may understand out of what was said even now, that
Penetrabilitie and Indiscerpibilitie are so far from being Dispositio ad
formam, that they are the Fruits. and Results of the intimate and Specific
Form of a Spirit, and that they suppose this Specific Form in order of nature
to precede them, as the Form of a Globe precedes the rouling mobilitie thereof.
In virtue of a Spirits being such a Specific substance, it has such
inseparable attributes resulting from it, as a Globe has mobilitie. And as the
Globe is conceived first, and mobilitie inseparably resulting from it; so the
Specific Nature of a Spirit, which is its true and intimate Form, and made
such according to the eternal Idea thereof in the Intellect of God, being one
simple Specific substance or Essence, has resulting from it those essential or
inseparable properties which we attribute to a Spirit, itself in the mean time
remaining but one simple self-subsistent Actus Entitativus, whose
Penetrabilitie and Indivisibilitie Mr. Baxter himself, page 99. says is easily
defendible. And the Doctor, who understands himself, I dare say for him,
defends the Penetrabilitie and Indivisibilitie of no Essences but such.

Eighthly, If such Modalities, says he, or Consistence were the Form, more such
should be added which are left out. Ans. He should have nominated those which
are left out. He means, I suppose, Quantity and Trina Dimensio, which it was
his discretion to omit, they being so impertinent as I have shown above, in my
Answer to his third Objection against the Penetrabilitie and Indiscerpibilitie
of a Spirit.

Ninthly, Penetrabilitie and Indiscerpibilitie are two Notions, and you should
not give us, says he, a compound Form. Ans. This implies that Penetrability and
Indiscerpibility are the Form of a Spirit; but I have said again and again,
they are but the Fruits and Result of the Form. A Spirit is one simple
Specific Essence or substance, and that true Specifickness in its Essence, is
the real and intimate Form, or Conceptus formalis thereof, but that which we
know not (as I noted above out of Julius Scaliger) though we know the essential
and inseparable Attributes thereof, which may be many, though in one simple
specific Substance, as there are many Attributes in God immediately and
inseparably resulting from his most simple specific Nature.

Tenthly, Yea you compound, says he, Penetrabilitie and Indiscerpibilitie with
a quite disserent notion [life and the faculty of motion], which is truly the
Form, and is one thing, and not compounded of notions so difse^ent as
Consistence and Virtue or Power. Ans. I say ag^in as I said before, that
neither Penetrability nor Indiscerpibility, nor Life nor Motion, are the
specific Form it sel^ of a Spirit, which is a simple Substance, but the Fruits
and Results of this specific Form; and all these have a proper Cognation with
one another, as agreeing in Immateriality or Spirituality: and how the common
sagacitie of mankind has presaged, that the most noble functions of life are
performed by that which is most subtle and most one, as Penetrability and
Indiscerpibility makes the consistence of a Spirit to be, the Doctor has noted
in his Discourse of the true notion of a Spirit. Mr. Baxter in reading
Theological Systems may observe, That Attributes as much dissering among
themselves as these, are given to the most simple Essence of God.

Eleventhly, You say, says he, page 82. Life intrin^ecally issues from this
Immaterial Substance: But the Form is concreated with it, and issues not from
it. Ans. I grant that the Form is concreated with the Spirit. For a Spirit is
nothing else but such a specific simple Substance or Essence, the
Specifickness of whose nature only is its real intimate Form. And if we could
reach by our Conception that very Form it self, it would be but the Conceptus
inadaequatus of one simple Substance, and be the true Conceptus formalis
thereof; and the Conceptus fundamentalis, to speak in Mr. Baxters or Dr.
Glissons language, would be Substance in general, which is contracted into this
Species by this real intimate Form; which both considered together, being but
one simple Essence, they must needs be created together, according to that Idea
of a Spirit which God has conceived in his eternal mind. And life will as
naturally and necessarily issue from such a Species or Specific Essence, or
from Substance contracted into such a Species by the abovesaid Form, as
Mobility does issue from the form of a Globe. From whence it is plainly
understood how Life does intrinsecally issue from immaterial Substance, nor is
the Form it self but the Fruit thereof. And as it were but trifling to say that
the power of easy rolling every way on a Plain were the very Form of a Globe,
the word Power or Virtue being but a dark, loose, general, dilute term, and
which belongs to every thing, and is restrained only by its Operation and
Object; but it is the Form or Figure of the Globe that is the immediate cause
that that Virtue or Power in general is so restrained to this easy rolling: so
it is in Mr. B^xters pretended Form of a Spirit, which he makes Virtus vitalis,
a power of living: Power there, is such a dark dilute term, loose and general.
But that it is determined to life, it is by that intimate specific Form, which
we know not; but only this we know, That it is to the Power of living as the
Figure of a Globe is to the Power of easy rolling, and that in neither, one
can be without the other. There must be a Specific Essence, which is the root
of those Powers, Properties, or Operations from whence we conclude distinct
Species of things: For it is too coarse and slovenly to conceit, that these are
clarted on them, but the Specific Powers arise immediately, and inseparably
from the Specific Nature of the thing; else why might they not be other powers
as well as these?

Twelfthly and lastly, page 32. But do you verily believe, says he, that
Penetrability or Subtility is a sufficient Efficient or Formal cause of
Vitalitie, Perception and Appetite, and so of Intellection and Volition? I hope
you do not. Ans. I hope so of the Doctor too; and before this, I hoped that Mr.
Baxter had more insight into the nature of a Formal cause and into the Laws of
Logic, than once to imagine that any one in his Wits could take Penetrability
to be the Formal cause of Intellection and Volition. For then every Spirit
being Penetrable, every Spirit even of a plant, at least of the vilest
Animalculum, would have Intellection and Volition. Nor, for the same reason,
can any body think that Penetrability is a sussicient Esficient cause of
Intellection and Volition. Nor is it so much as the Essicient cause of
Vitality, Perception, Appetite, much less the Formal. So infinitely is Mr.
Baxter out in these things. But the case stands thus: The Substance of that
species of things which we call a Spirit, and is so by that intimate specific
Form which I named before, this substance is the cause of Vitality in such a
sense as the round Form of a Globe, or any matter of that Form is, quatenus of
that Form, the cause of its own rolling Mobilitie. I say therefore, that
Vitality is as immediate and necessary a Fruit or Effect of the real and
intimate Form of a Spirit, as that easy mobilitie is of the Form of a Sphere
or Globe; And such a kind of Vitality, Vegetative, Sensitive, Intellective of
such a Species of Spirit: These kinds of Vitalities are the Fruits or Effects
necessary and immediate of the abovesaid so specificated Substances; that is
to say, they are immediately Self-living, and all of them Penetrable and
Indiscerpible of themselves, quatenus Spirits, all these essential attributes
arising from the simple essence or specificated substance of every Spirit, of
what Classis soever, created according to its own Idea eternally shining in the
Divine Intellect.

As for example; In the Idea of a Plastic Spirit only; Penetrability,
Indiscerpibility, and Plastic Vitality, whereby it is able to organize Matter
thus and thus, are not three Essences clarted upon some sourth Essence, or
glewed together one to another, to make up such an Idea: But the Divine
Intellect conceives in itself one simple specific Ess^nce immediately and
intrinsecally of it self, endued with these essential Properties or Attributes.
So that when any thing does exist according to this Idea, those three
properties are as immediately Consequential to it, and as e^ectually, as
Mobility to the Form o^ a Globe. It is the specific Substance that is the
necessary Source of them, and that acts by them as its own connate or natural
instruments, sitted for the ends that the et^rnal Wisdom and Goodness of God
has conceiv^d or contrived them for.

For it is manifest, that those essential Attributes of a Spirit contrary to
Matter are not in vain. For whenas a Plastic Spirit is to actuate and organize
Matter, and inwardly dispose it into certain forms, Penetrability is needful,
that it may possess the Matter, and order it throughout; As also that Oneness
o^ Essence and Indiscerpibility, that it may hold it together. For what should
make any mass of Matter one, but that which has a special Oneness of Essence in
it self, quite di^erent from that of Matter? And f^rasmuch as all S^uls are
endued with the Plastic whether of Brutes or Men, not to add the Spirits of
Angels; still there holds the same reason in all ranks, that Spirits should be
as well Penetrable and Indiscerpible as Vital. And if there be any Platonic
Ni^, that have no Plastic, yet Penetrability must belong to them, and is of
use to them, if they be found to be within the verges of the Corporeal Universe
(and why not they as well as God himself?) and Indiscerpibility maintains their
Supposital Unity, as it does in all Spirits that have to do with Matter, and
are capable of a vital coalescencie therewith. But I have accumulated here more
Theorie than is needful. And I must remember that I am in a Digression.

To return therefore to the particular point we have been about all this while.
I hope by this time I have made it good, that the Dr.'s Desinition of a Spirit
is so clear, so true, so express, and usefully instructive (and that is the
scope of the Doctors Writings) that neither he himself, nor any body else, let
them consider as much as they can, will ever be able to mend it. And that these
affected Cavils of Mr. Baxter argue no defects or flaws in the Doctors
Definition, but the ignorance and impotencie of Mr. Baxters Spirit, and the
undue elation of his mind, when notwithstanding this unexceptionableness of the
Definition, he, page 82. out of his Magisterial Chair of Judicature pronounces
with a gracious nod, You mean well -- but all our Conceptions here must have
their ALLOWANCES, and we must confess their weakness. This is the Sentence
which grave Mr. Baxter, alto supercilio, gives of the Doctors accurate
Definition of a Spirit, to humble him, and exalt himself, in the sight of the
populacie. But is it not a great weakness, or worse, to talk of favorable
allowances, and not to allow that to be unexceptionable against which no just
exception is found?

But to give Mr. Baxter his due, though the extreme or extimate parts of this
Paragraph, page 82. which you may fancy as the skin thereof, may seem to have
something of bitterness and toughness in it, yet the Belly of the Paragraph is
full of plums and sweet things. For he says, And we are all greatly beholden
to the Doctor for his so industrious calling foolish Sensualists to the study
and notion of invisible Beings, without which, what a carcass or nothing were
the world?

But is it not pity then, while the Doctor does discharge this Province with
that faithfulness and industry, that Mr. Baxter should disturb him in his
work, and hazard the fruits and efficacy thereof, by eclipsing the clearness
of his Notions of Spiritual Beings, (for Bodies may be also invisible) by the
interposition or opposition of his own great Name against them, who, as himself
tells the world in his Church History, has wrote fourscore Books, even as old
Dr. Glisson his Patron or rather Pattern in Philosophy arrived to at least
fourscore Years of age? And Mr. Baxter it seems is sor the common Proverb, The
older the wiser; though Elihu in Job be of another mind, who says there, I
said Days should speak, and multitude of Years should teach Wisdom; But there
is a Spirit in man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives him
Understanding. But whither am I going?

I would conclude here according to promise, having rescued the Doctors
Definition of a Spirit from Mr. Baxters numerous little Criticisms, like so
many shrill busy Gnats trumpeting about it, and attempting to infix their
feeble Proboscides into it; and I hope I have silenced them all.

But there is something in the very next Paragraph which is so wrongfully
charged upon the Doctor, that I cannot sorbear standing up in his
justification. The Charge is this: That he has fathered upon Mr. Baxter an
Opinion he never owned, and nicknamed him Psychopyrist from his own ^ction. As
if, says he, we said that Souls are ^re, and also took Fire, as the Doctor
does, for Candles and hot Irons, etc. only. But I answer in behalf of the
Doctor, as I have a little touched on this matter before, That he does indeed
entitle a certain Letter (which he answers) to a Learned Psychopyrist as the
Author thereof: But Mr. Baxters name is with all imaginable care concealed. So
that he by his needless owning the Letter, has notched that nickname (as he
calls it) of Psychopyrist upon himself, whether out of greediness after that
alluring Epithet it is baited with, I know not; but that he hangs thus by the
gills like a Fish upon the Hook, he may thank his own self for it, nor ought to
blame the Doctor. Much less accuse him for saying, that Mr. Baxter took Fire in
no other sense than that in Candles and hot Iron, and the like. For in his
Preface, he expressly declares on the Psychopyrists behalf, that he does not
make this crass and visible Fire the Essence of a Spirit, but that his meaning
is more subtle and refined. With what conscience then can Mr. Baxter say, that
the Doctor affirms that he took Fire in no other sense than that in Candles and
hot Iron, and the like, and that he held all Souls to be such Fire? whenas the
Doctor is so modest and cautious, that he does not affirm that Mr. Baxter
thinks any to be such; though even in this Placid Collation, he professes his
inclination toward the Opinion, that Ignis and Vegetative Spirit is all one,
page 20, 21. I have often professed, says he, that I am ignorant whether Ignis
and Vegetative Spirit be all one, (to which I most incline) or whether Ignis be
an active nature made to be the instrument, by which the three spiritual
natures, Vegetative, Sensitive, and Mental work on the three passive natures,
Earth, Water, Air.

And again, page 66. If it be the Spirit of the world that is the nearest cause
of illumination, by way of natural activity, then that which you call the
Spirit of the World, I call Fire; and so we differ but de nomine. But I have
(says he as before) professed my ignorance, whether Fire and the Vegetative
nature be all one, (which I incline to think) or whether Fire be a middle
active nature between the spiritual and the mere Passive, by which Spirits work
on body. And, page 71. I doubt not but Fire is a Substance permeant and
existent in all mixed bodies on Earth. In your blood it is the prime part of
that called the Spirits, which are nothing but the igneous principle in a pure
Aereal Vehicle, and is the organ of the Sensitive faculties of the Soul. And if
the Soul carry any Vehicle with it, it is like to be some of this. I doubt you
take the same thing to be the Spirit of the world, though you seem to vilify
it. And, page 74. I suppose you will say, the Spirit of the world does this.
But call it by what name you will, it is a pure active Substance, whose form is
the Virtus motiva, illuminativa and calefactiva, I think the same which when it
operateth on due seminal Matter is Vegetative. And lastly, page 86. I still
profess my self in this also uncertain, whether Natura Vegetativa and Ignea be
all one, or whether Ignis be Natura Organica by which the three Superior (he
means the Vegetative, Sensitive, and Intellective Natures) operate on the
Passive. But I incline most to think they are all one, when I see what a
glorious Fire the Sun is, and what operation it has on Earth, and how unlikely
it is that so glorious a Substance should not have as noble a formal nature as
a Plant.

This is more than enough to prove that Mr. Baxter in the most proper sense is
inclined to 'Psychopyrism as to the Spirit of the world, or Vegetative soul of
the Universe; that that Soul or Spirit is Fire: And that all created Spirits
are Fire, analogice and eminenter, I have noted above that he does freely
confess.

But certainly if it had not been for his ignorance in the Atomick Philosophy
which he so greatly despises, he would never have taken the Fire it self, a
Congeries of agitated particles of such figures and dimensions, for the Spirit
of the world. But without further doubt have concluded it only the instrument
of that Spirit in its operations, as also of all other created Spirits,
accordingly as the Doctor has declared a long time since in his Immortalitas
Animae, Lib. 2. Cap. 8. Sect. 6. And finding that there is one such universal
Vegetative Spirit (properly so called) or (...) of the world, he could not miss
of concluding the whole Universe one great Plant, or if some obscure degree of
sense be given to it, one large Zoophyton or Plant-animal, whence the Sun will
be endued or actuated as much by a Vegetative Nature as any particular Plant
whatsoever; whereby Mr. Baxter might have took away his own disficultie he was
entangled in. But the truth is, Mr. Baxters defectiveness in the right
understanding of the Atomick Philosophy, and his Aversness therefrom, as also
from the true System of the world, which necessarily includes the motion of the
Earth, we will cast in also his abhorrence from the Pre-existence of Souls
(which three Theories are hugely nec^ssary to him that would Philosophize with
any success in the deepest points of natural Religion and Divine Providence)
makes him utter many things that will by no means bear the Test of severer
Reason.

But in the mean time this Desectiveness in sound Philosophy neither hinders
him nor any one else from being able Instruments in the Gospel-Ministrie, if
they have (...) and (...) in a due measure; If they have a firm Faith in the
revealed Truths of the Gospel, and skill in History, Tongues and Criticism, to
explain the Text to the people, and there be added a sincere Zeal to instruct
their Charge, and (that they may appear in good earnest to believe what they
teach) they lead a life devoid o^ scandal and osfence, as regulated by those
Go^pel-Rules they propose to others; this, though they have little of the (...)
properly so called, that reaches to the deepest account of things, (but instead
thereof, Prudence and Ingenuity) will sufficiently enable them to be Guides to
the people, especially by adhering in Matters of moment to the Ancient
Apostolic and unapostatized Church, and presuming nothing upon their private
spirit against the same. Such, questionless, will prove able and safe Pastors,
and will not fail of being approved of by our Lord Jesus the great Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls.

But if any such, as I noted above, for that they conceit themselves also
dapper fellows at Cudgils or Quarter-stafs, shall, leaving their Flocks
solitary in the fields, out of an itch after applause from the Country-Fry, gad
to Wakes and Fairs to give a proof of their dexterity at those Rural exercises;
if they shall, I say, for their pains return with a bruised knuckle or broken
pate, who can help it? it will learn them more wit another time. Thus much by
way of Digression I thought fit to speak, not out of the least ill will to Mr.
Baxter, but only in behalf of the Doctor, hoping, though it is far from all
that may be said, that yet it is so much, and so much also to the purpose, that
it will save the Doctor the labor of adding any thing more thereto. So that he
may either enjoy his Repose, or betake himself to some design of more use and
moment.

In the mean time, I having dispatched my Digression, I shall return to the main
business in hand. I think it may plainly appear from what has been said, that
it is no such harsh thing to adventure to conclude, That the Truth of the
Divine Intellect quatenus conceptive, speculative, or observative, which a
Platonist would be apt to call (...), as the Divine Intellect exhibitive (...),
(for though it be but one and the same Intellect, yet for distinctness sake we
are fain to speak as of two) does consist in its Conformity with the Divine
Intellect exhibitive, with the immutable Idea's, Respects and References of
things there. In conceiving and observing them (as I may so speak) to be such
as they are represented in the said Intellect quatenus necessarily and
unalterably representing such Idea's with the immediate Respects and References
of them. In this consists the Truth of the Divine Intellect Speculative. But
the Transcendental Truth of things consists in their Conformity to the Divine
Intellect Exhibitive. For every thing is true as it answers to the immutable
Idea of its own nature discovered in the Divine Intellect Exhibitive. To which
also the same Divine Intellect quatenus Conceptive, Speculative, or
Observative, gives its suffrage steadily and unalterably, conceiving these
immutable Idea's of things in their Objective Existence what their natures will
be, with their necessary references, aptitudes or ineptitudes to other things
when they are produced into act.

From whence we may discern, how that saying of this ingenious Author of the
Discourse of Truth is to be understood. Where he writes, It is against the
nature of all Understanding to make its Object. Which if we will heartily
interpret, must be understood of all understanding quatenus merely conceptive,
speculative or observative, and of framing of its Object at its pleasure. Which
as it is not done in the settled Idea of a Sphere, Cylinder and Pyramid, no more
is it in any other Idea's with their properties and aptitudes immediately
issuing from them, but all the Idea's with their inevitable properties,
aptitudes, or ineptitudes are necessarily represented in the Divine Intellect
Exhibitive, immutably such as they are, a Triangle with its three Angles equal
to two right ones, a right-angled Triangle with the power of its Hypotenusa
equal to the powers of the Basis and Cathetus both put together: Which things
seem necessary to every sober man and rightly in his wits, our understanding
being an Abstract or Copy of the Divine Understanding. But those that say that
if God would, he might have made the three Angles of a Triangle unequal to two
right ones, and also the powers of the Basis and Cathetus of a right-angled
Triangle unequal to the power of the Hypotenusa, are either Bussoons and
Quibblers, or their Understandings being but creatural huffiness of mind and an
ambition of approving themselves the Broachers and maintainers of strange
Paradoxes, has crazed their Intellectuals, and they have already entered the
suburbs of downright Frenzy and Madness.

And to conclude; Out of what has been insinuated, we may reconcile this harsh
sounding Paradox of our Author, that seems so pointblank against the current
doctrine of the Metaphysical Schools, who make Transcendental Truth to depend
upon the Intellectual Truth of God, which they rightly deem the Fountain and
Origin of all Truth, whenas he plainly declares, That the Divine Understanding
cannot be the Fountain of the Truth of things: But the seeming absurdity will
be easily wiped away, if we take notice of our distinction touching the Divine
Understanding quatenus merely conceptive, speculative or observative, and
quatenus necessarily (through its own infinite and immutable pregnancie and
foecundity) Exhibitive of the distinct and determinate Idea's or natures of
things, with their immediate Properties, Respects or Habitudes in their
Objective Existence, representing them such as they certainly will be if
reduced into act. His assertion is not to be understood of the Divine
Understanding in this latter sense, but in the former. But being it is one and
the same Understanding, though considered under this twofold Notion, our
Author, as well as the ordinary Metaphysicians, will agree to this truth in
the sense explained; That the Divine Understanding is the Fountain of the truth
of things, and that they are truly what they are, as they answer to their
Idea's represented in the Exhibitive Intellect of God. How the Author himself
comes off in this point, you will better understand when you have read the
fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth Sections of his Discourse. Let this
suffice in the mean time for the removing all stumbling blocks from before the
Reader.

Page 168. Nor the foundation of the references one to another; that is to say,
The Divine Understanding quatenus Conceptive or Speculative, is most certainly
not the Foundation of the references of things one to another; but the Divine
Understanding quatenus Exhibitive, that represents the Idea's or natures of
things in their Objective Existence such as they would be if reduced really
into act, represents therewith all the references and habitudes they have one
to another. Which habitudes are represented not as flowing from or
arbitrariously founded in any Intellect whatsoever, but as resulting from the
natures of the things themselves that respect one another, and are represented
in the Exhibitive Understanding of God. Which is the main thing that this
ingenious Author would be at, and such as will serve all his intents and
purposes.

Page 168. It is the nature of Understanding ut moveatur, illuminetur, etc.
namely, of Understanding quatenus Conceptive or Speculative, not quatenus
Exhibitive.

Page 169. No Idea's or Representations either are or make the things they
represent, etc. This Assertion is most certainly true. But yet they may be such
Idea's and Representations as may be the measure of the Truth of those things
they represent: And such are all the Idea's in the Divine Intellect Exhibitive,
their settled distinct natures necessarily exhibited there in virtue of the
absolute perfection of the Deity, though only in their Objective Existence,
are the measures of the Truth of those things when they are reduced into act,
as I have noted above; but they are not the things themselves reduced into act,
no more than an Autographon is the very Copy.

Ibid. All Understanding is such; that is, Idea's and Representations of the
natures of things in their Objective Existence, the Patterns of what and how
they are when they Exist, and what references and aptitudes they have. I
suppose he means here by Understanding, not any power of the mind to conceive
any thing, but Understanding properly so called, viz. that, whose Objects are
(...) or (...), as the Platonists speak, the Idea's or Representations of such
things as are necessarily and unalterably such, not fictions at pleasure. Let
the Intellect Speculative be such Idea's or Representations as these, and then
what it perceives, conceives, or observes, it does not make, but it is made to
its hand, as not being able to be otherwise, nor it self to think otherwise.
And therefore it is rightly inferred as follows: That no Speculative
Understanding in that restrict sense abovenamed makes at pleasure the natures,
respects and relations of its Objects represented in the Intellect Exhibitive
in their Objective Existence, but finds them there. Nor does any Intellect
whatsoever make them at pleasure, but they are necessarily and unalterably
represented in the Exhibitive Intellect of the Deity, both their natures,
respects, and habitudes, as Inoted above.

Sect. 5. page 169. It remains then that absolute, arbitrarious and independent
Will must be the Fountain of all Truth, etc. It being supposed that the Divine
Understanding and the independent Will of God are the only competitours who
should be the Fountain of all Truth, and the former Section proving in a sense
rightly understood, that the Divine Understanding cannot be the Fountain of
Truth, it remains that the mere Will of God should be the Fountain of Truth,
and that things are true only because he wills they be so. As if four bore a
double proportion to two because God would have it so; but if he would that Two
should bear a double proportion to Four, it would immediately be so.

Ibid. Which Assertion would in the first place destroy the nature of God, etc.
Nay, if he will, it destroys his very Existence. For if all Truths depend upon
Gods Will, then this Truth, That God Exists, does. And if he will the contrary
to be true, namely, That he does not Exist, what becomes of him then?

Ibid. And rob him of all his Attributes. That it robs him of Science and
assured Knowledge, whose Objects are (...), Things immutable and necessary,
this Section makes good. And that it despoils him of his Rectitude of Nature,
the Eighth Section will show.

Page 170. Any Angel or man may as truly be said to know all things as God
himself, etc. Because this supposition takes away all the steadie and
scientifick Knowableness in things, it taking away their settled, fixed and
necessary habitudes one to another, as if double proportion of Four to Two did
no more belong to it in Truth and Reality than Sub-double, and that Four in
Truth were no more the Quaternarie number than the Binary, but indifferently
either, as the Will of God will have it. This plainly pulls up by the roots all
pretense of Science or Knowledge in God, Angels, and Men. And much more, flatly
to assert, That if God will, contradictions may be true. For this plainly
implies that there is really no Repugnancy nor Connection of one thing with
another, and that therefore no one thing can be proved or disproved from
another.

Page 171. If we distinguish those two Attributes in God, etc. namely, of
Wisdom and Knowledge, as if the one were Noematical, the other Dianoetical;
although that discursiveness is more quick than lightning, or rather an eternal
intuitive discernment of the consequence or cohesion of things at once.

Sect. 6. page 172. Because they suppose that God is immutable and
unchangeable, etc. This can be no allegation against the other Arguings,
because we cannot be assured of the Immutability or Unchangeableness of God,
but by admitting of what those arguings drive at, namely, That there is an
immutable, necessary and unchangeable reference and respect or connection of
things one with another. As for example, of Immutableness or Unchangeableness
with Perfection, and of Perfection with God. For to fancy God an imperfect
Being is nonsense to all men that are not delirant; and to fancy him Perfect,
and yet Changeable in such a sense as is here understood, is as arrant a
Contradiction or Repugnancie. Wherefore they that would oppose the foregoing
Arguings by supposing God Unchangeable, must acknowledge what is aimed at, That
there is a necessary and unchangeable respect and connection betwixt things, or
else their opposition is plainly weak and vain. But if they grant this, they
grant the Cause, and so Truth has its just victory and triumph. This Section is
abundantly clear of it self.

Sect. 8. page 174. Will spo^l God of that universal Rectitude which is the
greatest perfection of his nature, etc. In the fifth Section it was said, That
the making the Will of God the Fountain of all Truth robs him of all his
Attributes. And there it is proved how it robs him of his Wisdom and Knowledge.
Here it is shown how it robs him of his Justice, Mercy, Faithfulness, Goodness,
etc.

Page 175. For to say they are indispensably so because God understands them
so, etc. This, as the Author says, must be extreme Incogitancy. For the Truth
of the Divine Understanding Speculative consists in its Conformity with the
Idea's of things and their Respects and Habitudes in the Divine Understanding
Exhibitive, which necessarily, unchangeably and unalterably represents the
natures of things with their Respects and Habitudes in their Objective
Existence, such as they necessarily are when they do really exist. As of a
Sphere, Pyramid, Cube and Cylinder. And there is the same reason of all natures
else with their Respects and Habitudes, that they are as necessarily exhibited
as the Cube and Cylinder, and their Habitudes and Respects one to another, as
the proportion that a Cylinder bears to a Sphere or Globe of the same altitude
and equal diameter. Which Archimedes with incomparable clearness and subtlety
of wit has demonstrated in his Treatise De Sphaera and Cylindro, to be ratio
sesq^altera, as also the Superficies of the Cylinder with its Bases to bear the
same proportion to the Superficies of the Sphere. And as these Idea's are
necessarily and unalterably with their Respects and (...) represented, so are
all Idea's else, Physical and Moral, as I have noted above. And the nature of
Justice, Mercy, Faithfulness and Goodness are with their habitudes and respects
as fixedly, determinately and unalterably represented in their Idea's, as the
Sphere and Cylinder, or any other Form or Being whatsoever.

Sect. 9. page 178. For we are to know that there is a God, and the Will of
God, etc. That is to say, If there be no settled natures and respects and
habitudes of things in the order of Nature antecedent to any Will whatever,
Meditation or Contrivance, nor there be any certain nature, respects,
habitudes, and connections of things in themselves; it will be necessary that
we first know there is a God, and what his Will is touching the natures,
respects and habitudes of things. Whether these which we seem to discern and do
argue from are the same he means and wills, or some other. And so there will be
a necessity of knowing God and his Will, before we have any means to know him;
or, which is all one, we shall never have any means to know him upon this false
and absurd Hypothesis.

Sect. 11. page 181. Then it infallibly follows that it is all one what I do or
how I live, etc. This, as the following words intimate, is to be understood in
reference to the pleasing God, and to our own future Happiness. But it is
manifest it is not all one what I do or how I live (though I did suppose there
were no real distinction betwixt Truth and Falsehood, Good and Evil in the sense
here intended) in reference to this present condition in this World, where the
sense of pain and ease, of imprisonment and liberty, and of the security or
safety of a man's own person will oblige him to order his life in such a manner
as has at least the imitation of Temperance, Faithfulness, and Justice.

Sect. 12. page 183. If the opposition of Contradictory Terms depend upon the
arbitrarious resolves of any Being whatsoever. The plainness and
irrefragableness of this Truth, that the opposition of contradictory Terms is
an affection, habitu^e or (...) betwixt those terms that no power in Heaven or
Earth can abolish, methinks should assure any that are not pure Sots or crazie
Fantasticks, that there may be many other such unalterable and immutable
habitudes of Terms, Natures or Things that are every jot as unabolishable as
this. Which is no derogation to the Divine Perfection, but an Argument of it;
unless we should conceit that it is the height of the Perfection of Divine
Omnipotence to be able to destroy himself. And truly to fancy an ability in
him of destroying or abolishing those eternal, necessary and immutable
habitudes or respects of the natures of things represented in their Idea's by
the Divine Intellect Exhibitive, is little less than the admitting in God an
ability of destroying or abolishing the Divine Nature it self, because ipso
facto the Divine Wisdom and Knowledge would be destroyed, as was shown in the
fifth Section, and what a God would that be that is destitute thereof!

Wherefore it is no wonder that those men that are sober and in their wits,
find it so impossible in themselves but to conceive that such and such natures
are steadily such and no other, and betwixt such and such natures there are
steadily and immutably such habitudes and respects and no others. Forasmuch as
the Intellect of man is as it were a small compendious Transcript of the Divine
Intellect, and we feel in a manner in our own Intellects the firmness and
immutability of the Divine, and of the eternal and immutable Truths exhibited
there. So that those that have their minds so cracked and shattered as to be
able to fancy that if God would, he could change the (...) or common notions
into their Contradictories, as The whole is less than its Part, etc. must have
very crazy Intellectuals, and have taken their lodging at least in the suburbs
of downright dotage or Frenzy, as I noted above.

Page 184. If any one should affirm that the Terms of common notions have an
eternal and indispensable relation to one another, etc. That this privilege is
not confined to the common notions they are abundantly convinced of, that have
bestowed any competent study upon Mathematics, where the connection of every
link of the demonstration is discerned to be as firmly and indissolubly knit,
as the Terms of a common notion are the one with the other. And it is our
Impatience, Carelessness or Prejudices that we have not more conclusions of such
certitude than we have in other studies also.

Sect. 13. page 184. For if there be Truth antecedently to the Divine
Understanding, etc. This Objection of the Adversaries is framed something
perversely and invidiously, as if the other party held, That there were Truth
antecedently to the Divine Understanding, and as if from thence the Divine
Understanding would be a mere passive Principle actuated by something without,
as the Eye by the Sun. But it is a plain case, out of what has been declared,
that the Divine Understanding (though there be such eternal Natures and
unchangeable respects and habitudes of them represented in the Idea's that are
in the Exhibitive Intellect of the Deity) that it is, I say, before any
external Object whatever, and yet always had exhibited to it self the eternal
and unalterable natures and respects of things in their Idea's. And it was
noted moreover, that the Truth of the external Objects, when brought into act,
is measured by their Conformity to these Idea's.

Besides, the Divine Understanding being before all things, how could there be
any Truth before it, there being neither Understanding nor Things in which this
Truth might reside? Or the Divine Understanding be a mere passive Principle
actuated by something without, as the eye by the Sun, whenas questionless the
Divine Intellect quatenus Exhibitive is the most active Principle conceivable;
nay, indeed Actus purissimus, the most pure Act, as Aristotle has defined God?
It is an eternal, necessary, and immutable Energy, whose very Essence is a true
and fixed Ideal Representation of the natures of all things, with their respects
and habitudes resulting eternally from the Divine foecundity at once. How then
can this, which is so pure and pregnant an Energy, be a mere passive Principle,
or be actuated by any external Object, when it was before any thing was? But a
further Answer is to be found of the Author himself in the Fifteenth Section.

Page 185. Which is to take away his independency and self sufficiency. Namely,
If there be mutual and unalterable Congruities and Incongruities of things, as
if they would determine God in his actions by something without himself. Which
is a mere mistake. For the pregnant fullness of the Divine Essence and
perfection eternally and necessarily exerting it self into an Ideal display of
all the natures, properties, respects and habitudes of things, whether
Congruities or Incongruities, and these fixed, immutable, necessary and
unchangeable in their Ideal or Objective Existence; And in time producing
things according to these Paradigms or Patterns into actual Existence by his
Omnipotence, and ever sustaining, supporting and governing them by his
unfailing Power and steady and unchangeable Wisdom and Counsel; I say, when all
things are thus from God, sustained by God, and regulated according to the
natures he has given them, which answer the Patterns and Paradigms in him, how
can any such determination of his Will any way clash with his Self-sufficiency
or Independency, whenas we see thus, that all things are from God and depend of
him, and his actions guided by the immutable Idea's in his own nature,
according to which all external things are what they are, and their Truth
measured by their Conformity with them. But there is a fuller answer of the
Author's, to this Objection, in the sixteenth and seventeenth Sections.

Sect. 14. page 187. And to fetter and imprison Freedom and Liberty it self in
the fatal and immutable chains and respects of things, etc. This is a
misconceit that savours something of a more refined Anthropomorphitism, that is
to say, Though they do not make the Essence of God finite and of an Humane
figure or shape, yet they imagine him to have two different Principles in him,
an extravagant and undetermined lust or appetite, as it is in man, and an
Intellectual or rational Principle, whose Laws are to correct the luxuriancies
and impetuosities of the other, and to bridle and regulate them. But this is a
gross mistake; For there is no such blind and impetuous will in God upon which
any Intellectual Laws were to lay a restraint, but his whole nature being pure
and Intellectual, and he acting according to his own nature, which contains
those Idea's and immutable respects, Congruities and Incongruities of things
there eternally and unalterably represented, he acts with all freedom
imaginable, nor has any chains of restraint laid upon him, but is at perfect
liberty to do as his own nature requires and suggests. Which is the most
absolute liberty that has any sound or show of Perfection with it, that can be
conceived in any Being.

Sect. 15. page 189. And does as it were draw them up into its own beams. This
is something a sublime and elevate expression. But I suppose the meaning
thereof is, That the natures and respects of the things of this lower Creation,
the Divine Understanding applies to the bright shining Idea's found in his own
exalted nature, and observes their Conformity therewith, and acknowledges them
true and right as they answer to their eternal Patterns.

Sect. 16. page 189. To tie up God in his actions to the reason of things,
destroys his Liberty, Absoluteness, and Independency. This is said, but it is a
very vain and weak allegation, as may appear out of what has been suggested
above. For reasons of things and their habitudes and references represented in
the eternal Idea's in their Objective Existence, which is the Pattern of their
natures when they exist actually, is the very life and nature of the Divine
Understanding; And as I noted above, the most true and perfective liberty that
can be conceived in any Being is, that without any check or tug, or lubricity
and unsteadiness, it act according to its own life and nature. And what greater
Absoluteness than this? For that which acts according to its own nature, acts
also according to its own will or appetite. And what greater Independencie than
to have a power upon which there is no restraint, nor any modification of the
exercise thereof, but what is taken from that which has this power? For the
eternal and immutable reasons of things are originally and Paradigmatically in
the Divine Understanding, of which those in the Creatures are but the Types and
transitory Shadows. The Author in this Section has spoke so well to this
present Point, that it is needless to superadd any thing more.

Sect. 17. page 191. In this seventeenth Section the Author more fully answers
that Objection, As if Gods acting according to the reasons of things inferred a
dependency of him upon something without himself; Which he does with that
clearness and satisfaction, that it is enough to commend it to the perusal of
the Reader.

Sect. 18. page 193. Truth in the power or faculty is nothing else but a
Conformity of its conceptions or Idea's unto the natures and relations of
things which in God we may call, etc. The Description which follows is (though
the Author nowhere takes notice of that distinction) a Description of the
Divine Understanding quatenus Exhibitive, not Conceptive or Speculative. The
Truth of which latter does indeed consist in the Conformity of its Conception
unto the natures and relations of things, but not of things ad extra, but unto
the natures, habitudes and respects of things as they are necessarily,
eternally and immutably represented in the Divine Understanding Exhibitive,
which is the Intellectual World, which the Author here describes, and (...) the
vast Champion or boundless field of Truth. So that in those words [unto the
natures and relations of things which in God we call an actual, steady,
immovable, eternal omniformity, etc.] Which is to be referred to [the Natures
and Relations of things] as is evident to any that well considers the place.
And with this sense that which follows the description is very coherent.

Page 194. Now all that Truth that is in any created Being, is by participation
and derivation from this first Understanding (that is, from the Divine
Understanding quatenus Exhibitive) and Fountain of Intellectual Light. That is,
according to the Platonic Dialect, of those steady, unalterable and eternal
Idea's ((...)) of the natures and respects of things represented there in the
Divine Understanding Exhibitive in their Objective Existence; In conformity to
which the Truth in all created things and Understandings does necessarily
consist.

Page 195. Antecedently to any Understanding or Will, etc. That is,
Antecedently to any Understanding Conceptive, Observative or Speculative
whatsoever, or to any Will; but not antecedently to the Divine Understanding
Exhibitive. For that is antecedent to all created things, and contains the
steady, fixed, eternal, and unalterable natures and respects or habitudes,
before they had or could have any Being. I say it contains the Truth and
measure of them; nor can they be said to be truly what they are, any further
than they are found conformable to these eternal, immutable Idea's, Patterns
and Paradigms, which necessarily and eternally are exerted, and immutably in
the Divine Understanding Exhibitive. And of these Paradigmatical things there,
what follows is most truly affirmed.

Page 195. For things are what they are, and cannot be otherwise without a
Contradiction, etc. This was true before any external or created things did
exist. True of every Form in that eternal Omniformity, which the Platonists
call the Intellectual World, as the Author has observed above in this Section.
A Circle is a Circle, and a Triangle a Triangle there, nor can be otherwise
without a Contradiction. And so of a Globe, Cylinder, Horse, Eagle, Whale,
Fire, Water, Earth, their Ideal fixed and determinate natures, habitudes,
aptitudes, and respects necessarily and immutably there exhibited, are such as
they are, nor can be otherwise without a contradiction. And because it is thus
in the Divine Nature or Essence, which is the root and fountain of the
exterior Creation, the same is true in the created Beings themselves. Things
are there also what they are, nor can they be a Globe suppose, or a Cylinder,
and yet not be a Globe or a Cylinder at once, or be both a Globe and Cylinder
at once; and so of the rest. As this is a contradiction in the Intellectual
World, so is it in the Exterior or Material World, and so, because it is so in
the Intellectual. For the steadiness and immutableness of the nature of all
things, and of their respects and habitudes, arise from the necessity,
immutability, and unchangeableness of the Divine Essence and Life, which is
that serene, unclouded, undisturbed, and unalterable Eternity, where all things
with their respects and aptitudes, their order and series, are necessarily,
steadily and immutably exhibited at once.

P. 195. As they conform and agree with the things themselves, etc. (...) The
more Platonical sense, and more conformable to that we have given of other
passages of this learned and ingenious Author is, if we understand the things
themselves, at least primarily, to be the (...) of Plato, which is the term
which he bestows upon his Idea's, which are the Patterns or Paradigms according
to which every thing is made, and is truly such so far sorth as it is found to
agree with the Patterns or Originals in which all Archetypal Truth is immutably
lodged. All created things are but the Copies of these, these the Original, the
(...) or Writing it self, from whence Plato calls them (...), as if those
Archetypal Forms were the forms or things themselves, but the numerous created
Beings here below, only the Copies or Imitations of them. Wherefore no
Conception or Idea's that we frame, or any Intellect else as Conceptive merely
and Speculative, can be true, but so far as they agree with these (...), in
that sense we have declared, or with cre^ted things so far as they are
answerable to the (...) or Archetypal things themselves. And from hence is
sufficiently understood the nature of Truth in the Subject.

These few cursory Notes I thought worth the while to make upon these two
lear^ed and ingenious Writers, the Subjects they have written on being of no
mean importance and use, and the things written in such a time of their age, as
if men be born under an auspicious Planet, best fits their minds for the
relishing and ruminating upon such noble Theories. For I dare say, when they
wrote these Discourses or Treatises, they had neither of them reached so much
as half the age of man as it is ordinarily computed. Which has made them write
upon these Subjects with that vigor and briskness of Spirit that they have.

For the constitution of Youth, in those that have not an unhappy Nativity, is
far more heavenly and Angelical than that of more grown age, in which the
Spirit of the World is more usually awakened, and then begins that Scene which
the Poet describes in his De Art Poetica, Quoerit opes and amicitias, inservit
honori.
their mind then begins to be wholly intent to get wealth and riches, to
enla^ge their Interest by the friendship of great Persons, and to hunt after
Dignities and Preferments, Honors and Employments in Church or State, and ^o
those more heavenly and Divine Sentiments through disuse and the presence of
more strong and filling Impressions are laid asleep, and their Spirits
thickened and clouded with the gross fumes and steams that arise from the
desire of earthly things; and it may so fall out, if there be not special care
taken, that this mud they have drawn in by their coarse desires, may come to
that opaque hardness and incrustation, that their Terrestrial body may prove a
real dungeon, and cast them into an utter oblivion of their chiefest concerns
in the other State. -- Nec auras
Respicient clausi tenebris and carcere coeco.
Which I thought sit to take notice of, as well for the instruction of others,
as for a due Appretiation of these two brief Treatises of these florid Writers,
they being as it were the Virgin-Honey of these two Attick Bees, the Primitioe
of their intemerated Youth, where an happy natural complexion, and the first
Rudiments of Christian Regeneration may seem to have conspired to the writing
of two such useful Treatises.

Useful, I say, and not a little grateful to men of refined Fancies and gay
Intellectuals, of benign and Philosophical tempers, and Lovers of great Truths
and Goodness. Which natural constitution were a transcendent privilege indeed,
were there not one great danger in it to those that know not how to use it
skilfully. For it does so nearly ape, as I may so speak, the Divine Benignity
it self, and that unselfinteressed Love that does truly arise from no other
seed than that of real Regeneration (which Self-mortification and a serious
endeavor of abolishing or utterly demolishing our own will, and quitting any
thing that would captivate us, and hinder our union with God and his Christ,
does necessarily precede) that too hastily setting up our rest in these mere
complexional seize, which is not Spirit but Flesh, though it appear
mavelous sweet and goodly to the owner, if there be not ^ue care taken to
advance higher in that Divine and Eternal Principle of real Regeneration, by a
constant mortification of our own will there may be a perpetual hazard of this
Flesh growing corrupt and fly-blown, and sending up at l^st no sweet savor
into the nostrils of the Almighty. That which is born of the flesh is flesh,
and that which is born of the spirit is spirit; And all flesh is grass, and the
beauty thereof as the slower of the field; but that which is born of the
eternal Seed of the living Word, abides for ever and ever.

And therefore there is no safe Anchorage for the Soul, but in a perpetual
endeavor of annihilating of her own Will, that we may be one with Christ, as
Christ is with God. Otherwise if we follow the sweet enticing Counsels of mere
Nature, though it look never so smugly on it, it will seduce us into a false
liberty, and at last so corrupt our Judgment, and blind us, that we shall
scarce be able to discern him that is that great Light that was sent into the
world, but become every man an Ignis Fatuus to himself, or be so silly as to be
led about by other Ignes Fatui, whenas it is most certain that Christ is the
only way, the Truth and the Life, and he that does not clearly see that, when
he has opportunity to know it, let his pretense to other knowledge be what it
will, it is a demonstration that as to Divine things he is slark blind. But no
man can really adhere to Christ, and unwaveringly, but by union to him through
his Spirit; nor obtain that Spirit of life, but by resolved Mortification of
his own will, and a deadness to all worldly vanities, that we may be restored
at last to our solid happiness which is through Christ in God, without whose
Communion no soul can possibly be happy.

And therefore I think it not amiss to close these my Theoretical Annotations
on these two Treatises, with that more Practical and Devotional Hymn of A. B.
that runs much upon the mortification of our own Wills, and of our Union and
Communion with God, translated into English by a Lover of the Life of our Lord
Jesus.

THE Devotional HYMN.
1.
O Heavenly Light! my Spirit to Thee draw,
With powerful touch my senses smite,
Thine arrows of Love into me throw.
With flaming dart
Deep wound my heart,
And wounded seize for ever, as thy right.
2.
O sweetest Sweet! descend into my Soul,
And sink into its low'st abyss,
That all false Sweets Thou may control,
Or rather kill,
So that Thy will
Alone may be my pleasure and my bliss.
3.
Do thou my faculties all captivate
Unto thy self with strongest tie;
My will entirely regulate:
Make me thy Slave,
Naught else I crave,
For this I know is perfect Liberty,
4.
Thou art a Life the sweetest of all Lives,
Naught sweeter can thy Creature taste;
It Is this alone the Soul revives.
Be Thou not here,
All other cheer
Will turn to dull satiety at last.
5.
O limpid Fountain of all virtuous Leare!
O wellspring of true Joy and Mirth!
The root of all contentments dear!
O endless Good!
Break like a flood
Into my Soul, and water my dry earth,
6.
That by this Mighty power I being reft
Of every Thing that is not ONE,
To Thee alone I may be left
By a firm will
Fixed to Thee still,
And inwardly united into one.
7.
And so let all my Essence, I Thee pray,
Be wholly filled with thy dear Son,
That thou thy Splendor may display
With blissful rays
In these hid ways
Wherein Gods nature by frail Man is won.
8.
For joined thus to Thee by thy sole aid
And working (whilst all silent stands
In mine own Soul, nor ought's assayed
From Self-desire)
I Am made entire
An instrument fit for thy glorious Hands.
9.
And thus henceforwards shall all workings cease,
Unless't be those Thou do excite
To perfect that Sabbatick Peace
Which does arise
When Self-will dies,
And the new Creature is restored quite.
10.
And so shall I with all thy Children dear,
While naught debars Thy workings free,
Be closely joined in union near,
Nay with thy Son
Shall I be one,
And with thine own adored Deity.
11.
So that at last I being quite released
From this strait-lac'd Egoity,
My soul will vastly be increased
Into that ALL
Which ONE we call,
And one in it self alone does all imply.
12.
Here Is Rest here is Peace, here is Joy and holy Love,
The H^aven's here of true Content,
For those that hither sincerely move,
Here Is the true Light
Of Wisdom bright,
And Prudence pure with no self-seeking mient.
13.
Here Spirit, Soul and cleansed Body may
Bathe in this Fountain of true Bliss
Of Pleasures that will never decay,
All joyful Sights
And hid Delights;
The sense of these renewed here daily is.
14.
Come therefore come, and take an higher flight,
Things perishing leave here below,
Mount up with winged Soul and Spright,
Quick let us be gone
To him that is One,
But in this One to us can all things show.
15.
Thus shall you be united with that ONE,
That ONE where is no Duality;
For from this perfect GOOD alone
Ever does spring
Each pleasant thing,
The hungry Soul to feed and satisfy.
16.
Wherefore, O man! consider well what is said,
To what is best thy Soul incline,
And leave off every evil trade.
Do not despise
What I advise;
Finish thy Work before the Sun decline.
FINIS.
Books Printed for, or Sold hy Samuel Lownds, over against Exeter Exchange in
the Strand.
PArthenissa, that Famed Romance. Written by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Orrery.

Clelia, an Excellent new Romance, the whole Work in Five Books. Written in
French, by the exquisite pen of Monsieur de Scudery.

The Holy Court. Written by N. Cansinus.

Bishop Saundersons Sermons.

Herberts Travels, with large Additions.

The Complete Horseman, and Expert Farrier, in Two Books: 1. Showing the best
manner of breeding good Horses, with their Choice, Nature, Riding and Dieting,
as well for Running as Hunting; as also, Teaching the Groom and Keeper his true
Office. 2. Directing the most exact and approved manner how to know and Cure
all Diseases in Horses: a Work containing the Secrets and best Skill belonging
either to Farrier or Horse-Leach: the Cures placed Alphabetically, with
Hundreds of Medicines never before imprinted in any Author. By Thomas de Gray.

Claudius Mauger's French and English Letters upon all Subjects enlarged, with
Fifty new Letters, many of which are on the late great Occurrences and
Revolutions of Europe; all much Amended and Refined, according to the most
quaint and Courtly Mode; wherein yet the Idiom and Elegancy of both Tongues are
far more exactly suited than formerly. Very useful to those who aspire to good
Language, and would know what Addresses become them to all sorts of persons.
Besides many Notes in the end of the Book, which are very necessary for
Commerce.

Paul Festeau's French Grammar, being the newest and exactest Method now
extant, for the attaining to the Elegancy and Purity of the French Tongue.

The Great Law of Consideration; a Discourse showing the Nature, Usefulness,
and absolute necessity of Consideration, in order to a truly serious and
Religious Life. The Third Edition, Corrected and much Enlarged, by Anthony
Horneck, D. D.

The Mirror of Fortune, or the true Characters of Fate and Destiny, Treating of
the Growth and Fall of Empires, the Misfortunes of Kings and Great Men, and the
ill fate of Virtuous and handsome Ladies.

Saducismus Triumphatus: or full and plain Evidence concerning Witches and
Apparitions, in Two parts, the first Treating of their Possibility, the second
of their Real Existence; by Joseph Glanvil, late Chaplain to His Majesty, and
Fellow of the Royal Society. The Second Edition. The advantages whereof above
the former, the Reader may understand out of Dr. Henry More's Account prefixed
thereunto. With two Authentic but wonderful stories of Swedish Witches, done
into English by Anthony Horneck, D. D.

French Rogue, being a pleasant History of his Life and Fortune, adorned with
variety of other Adventures of no less rarity.

Of Credulity and Incredulity in things Divine and Spiritual, wherein (among
other things) a true and faithful account is given of Platonic Philosophy, as
it has reference to Christianity. As also the business of Witches and
Witchcraft, against a late Writer, fully argued and disputed. By Merick
Causabon, D. D. one of the Prebends of Canterhury.

Cicero against Catiline, in Four Invective Orations, containing the whole
manner of discovering that notorious Conspiracy. By Christopher Wase.

(...) Jests, being Witty Alarms for Melan^ Spirits. By a Lover of Ha, Ha, He.

FINIS.

