Apocalypsis Apocalypseos; OR THE REVELATION OF St JOHN the Divine unveiled.
CONTAINING A Brief but perspicuous and continued EXPOSITION From Chapter to
Chapter, and from Verse to Verse, of the whole Book of the APOCALYPSE.

By HENRY MORE D. D.

Ecclesiastic. Chap. 39. He that gives his mind to the Law of the most High,
and is occupied in the Meditation thereof, will seek out the Wisdom of all the
Ancient, and be occupied in Prophecies.

Ezech. Chap. 43. verse. 10. Thou Son of Man show the House to the house of
Israel, that they may be ashamed of their Iniquities; and let them measure the
pattern.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for I. Martyn, and W. Kettilby, at the Bell, and the
Bishops-Head in St Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
THat thou may with better acceptance peruse my Exposition of this Book of
Prophecies, The Authentickness of the Apocalypse.
the Apocalypse, I thought fit to say something by way of Preface: First,
concerning the Book it self, not only the Authentickness and Intelligibleness,
but also concerning the Excellency thereof: Secondly, concerning the grounds I
go upon, and the Truth of my Exposition: And thirdly and lastly, concerning the
great Usefulness thereof.

That this Book is Canonical and of Divine Inspiration, is confirmed by the
Authority and Suffrage of the Church Universal, both Roman and Reformed: And
though it had no external Confirmation, the truth of Predictions in that large
comprehension of things that it reaches to, and the holiness of that Spirit
that breaths in it, to any intelligent Reader will certainly prove it to be a
Book Divinely inspired. Not to add, that the very Wit, as I may so say, and
Artifice in it seems not to be Humane but Angelical. It was indeed doubted of
at first, and the Authority thereof called into question; but the occasion of
questioning it was, because it was in the hands of very few, it being dangerous
for the Christians to let this Book of the Apocalypse (that does plainly
predict, as it might seem, the burning of the City of Rome, situated on seven
Hills, and having Rule then over the whole Earth) so freely to go about as
those others of the New Testament did. And therefore this Book being so
generally unknown, when they began to determine what Books were Authentic and
what not, they might very well be at a loss concerning it. Besides that,
Cerinthus and others overmuch Judaizing Christians who drew those things
written of the first and second Resurrection, and the New Jerusalem, and the
thousand years Reign of Christ, to their Carnal Iudaical conceits, made them
more shie how they admitted this Book for Authentic. Nay some, as Gaius an
ancient Author in Eusebius, relate that Cerinthus the Chiliast was the writer
of it. Others, who yet thought well of the Book, that John the Presbyter, a
Disciple of the Apostle, not John himself was the Author thereof. The occasion
of which might be, as Grotius ingeniously conjectures, because that John the
Presbyter had the Book in his custody, whence some out of mistake might deem
him the Author thereof. But by the Authority of the chiefest Fathers, and upon
a more narrow search and examination of the business, it is now out of question
with all Christian Churches, that this Book of the Apocalypse is Authentic and
Canonical, and writ by John the Evangelist and Divine, so called for his more
plainly and peculiarly declaring the Divinity of Christ beyond any other of the
Evangelists.

Now for the Intelligibleness of the Book. The Intelligibleness of the
Apocalypse.
Though there is a mavelous artifice of Concealment in it, yet there is as
sure an artifice of Revealment, as I hope will appear by this our Exposition.
And why Prophecies should be obscurely writ, and in what this obscurity
consists, I have sufficiently Synops. Prophet. Book 1. chap. 2.
elsewhere declared. The chief obscurity is in the Prophetic style, which when
it is opened to a Man, the sense will run clear. As he that understands any
other Language different from the Vulgar, if the Book it is writ in be good
sense, he without difficulty will find it out. And as it would be absurd in him
that understands not that language to complain of the obscurity of the Book, so
it is as childish for him that will not take the pains, (which is not much) to
understand the Prophetic style, to complain of the obscurity of the
Apocalypse. But that it is intelligible, all sorts of Christians Reformed and
Unreformed have given their suffrage thereto, in writing Commentaries upon it:
And it is no less than blasphemy against the Holy Ghost that inspired this
Prophecy, to say it is simply unintelligible, as if Christ trifled with his
Church in a thing so exceeding serious, as this Book of Prophecies seems to be.

The Excellency of the Book of the Apocalypse.
The Excellency whereof is notably set out, if not also the necessity of reading
and understanding it, chap. 1. verse. 3. Blessed is he that reads and they
that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things that are written
therein; which they cannot do unless they understand them. And so, chap. 22.
verse. 7. Blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book:
Which is chiefly performed by Faith and Constancy to the True Church of Christ
against either the Dragon or Antichrist, which he cannot do if these Prophecies
were unintelligible: nor can there any blessedness accrue to a man from reading
a Book he understands not: But the sayings thereof understood and kept being so
effectual a way to blessedness, it must needs argue the excellency of the Book.

But there is yet a further illustration of the Excellency thereof from what
occurrs, chap. 5. verse. 2. which concerns the greatest part by far of this
Book, and that which some fancy the only Prophetical part thereof, namely the
Visions of the Sealed Book, and of the Opened Book. For what was contained in
the Opened Book lay open by virtue of the breaking up of the Seals. In that
Chapter is the highest Encomium of this Book of Prophecies that the Wit and
Rhetoric of men or Angels can invent or utter. For first it is said, verse. 2.
And I saw a strong Angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to open
the Book and to loose the Seals thereof? And no man in Heaven nor in Earth,
neither under the Earth was able to open the Book, neither to look thereon.
This therefore must be a most excellent and transcendent Book of Secrets and
Predictions that neither Angels, Men, nor Infernal Spirits can reach to the
knowledge of by virtue of their own faculties. And then it follows, And I wept
much because no man was found worthy to open and read the Book and to look
thereon. Which further argues that it is a Book not only of rare secrets and
vast comprehensive Predictions, but more than ordinary desirable, if not
necessary to be known. And lastly, when the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, that
is, Christ, the Lamb under another expression and figuration, was found worthy,
and had taken the Book, what acclamations in Heaven were there thereupon? For
the four Beasts, and four and twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, having
every one of them harps and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers
of the Saints. And they sung a new Song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the
Book and open the Seals thereof, for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to
God by thy blood. As if this privilege of obtaining such a wonderful power of
predicting things to come, and communicating such a Book as this of the
Apocalypse unto his Church, were one special fruit of his Passion, and the
shedding his most precious blood upon the Cross.

The peril of slighting the Apocalypse, and the study of understanding it.
And therefore let them take heed that despise this Book of the Apocalypse so
much, and all endeavors to understand it aright, that they be not found in the
number of them that tread under-foot the Son of God, even in those things for
which he is the most highly admired and extolled by the blessed Saints and
Angels (which is the greatest slight and affront of him imaginable) and count
his precious blood shed upon the Cross (whereby he procured this transcendent
privilege to himself and them, of fore-knowing things that concern all Ages of
his Church) an unholy thing, and do despite to the Spirit of Prophecy.

In the mean time, this may at least excuse them that seriously and soberly
endeavor rightly to understand the Visions of this Book from being reputed men
less judicious, or else very unfortunate to spend their time and labor on so
mean and obscure an argument as this Book of the Apocalypse; as some for want
of judgment or good will have perstringed that excellently learned and pious
person Mr Joseph Mede: But what a vast difference is there betwixt the Spirit
of the holy Evangelist John and the great Spirits or Wits, as they would be
accounted, of this Age! He wept out of an eager desire of understanding the
Prophecies of this Book, they laugh at any one for a fool that pretends the
endeavoring to understand them, or thinks they are to be understood. But I
hope that will be found true that Solomon says, Prove. chap. 14. verse. 6. A
scorner seeks wisdom and finds it not, but knowledge is easy to him that
understands.

Which I distrust not but will be made good in any intelligent Reader of my
Exposition of this Book. The grounds the Author goes upon in his Exposition of
the Apocalypse, how assured they be.
It will prove easy to him upon his taking notice of the meaning of the
Prophetic style, and supposing the grounds I go upon, which are but few, and
allowed generally by all Protestant Churches that I know of, (viz.) That the
Church of Rome is Idolatrous, which will imply, that the Greek Church also was
so, as is plain from the second Nicene Council, which the Romanists allege.
That the said Church is murderous, as having put to death many and many
thousands of innocent Souls, because their consciences would not allow them to
join with this Church in their Idolatrous Worship. And lastly, that she is
Imposturous, in pretending to many miraculous Acts that exceed the power of
Nature, or the faculties of any ordinary men. As changing the Elements, as they
call it, of Bread into real Flesh, and of Wine into real Blood, by saying
certain words over it: In exorcising or enchanting of Statues, or Images, and
of Water, Oil, and other things, by certain words, into a power of keeping off
Enemies, repelling Diseases, ceasing Thunder and Lightening, and driving away
the Devil; nay, in pretending to a Power of thunder-striking men down into
hell, which is only in the hand of God Almighty, to do at his pleasure, and not
for men to do at their pleasures, because others will not join with them in
their gross Doctrines, and Idolatrous Worship. This if it were true were a
stupendous Miracle indeed, thus to bring fire from heaven to thunder-strike
innocent men into the pit of hell. But such pretended feats as these this Book
elegantly expresses by the phrase of Sorcery or Magic, as it may be called, as
being an imitation of the pretenses of Magicians thus to act above Nature, by
words and charms. These are the main things that are supposed concerning the
Church of Rome, which if they be admitted the sense of the Apocalypse will run
as glib as may be upon a little knowledge of the Prophetic style: And I shall
wonder at any one that is satisfied concerning these, that shall stick at the
truth of our Interpretation; which as touching this part is so thoroughly
demonstrated in my Joynt-Exposition, or rather in the eight last Chapters of
the first Book of my Synopsis Prophetica, that I cannot tell what can be more
fully evidenced to the reason of a man; namely, That the Beast that was, and is
not, and yet is, is the Roman Empire, and the Woman that rides him, the Roman
Hierarchy, after the times of the seventh King, that was to stay but a little
while, which are the pure Christian Caesar's: Wherefore the Roman Hierarchy
after that time being set out by the symbol of a Whore, for so that Woman is
called, (viz.) the Whore of Babylon, and the Beast she rides on, said to be
full of Names of Blasphemy, it is manifest, that both the Empire and Hierarchy
are become Idolatrous. Besides that, if the Apocalypse were silent in this
matter of their being Idolatrous, the Writers of the Protestants have over and
over again demonstrated them to be so, and for them that are so persuaded, not
to acknowledge their condition to be predicted in the Apocalypse, but to
conceit it silent therein, is to envy God and Christ the Glory of foretelling
things to come, and the Church the privilege of having them foretold her, and
the advantage of confounding her enemies thereby.

And now for the state of the Reformed Church that it will be at last so well
Reformed, and so largely amplified, that Peace, Truth and Righteousness shall
at last overspread as it were the face of the earth, and that herewith the
Jews will be called, and make one part of the Catholic Church, this is a thing
both believed and hoped for by all good men, and expressly pointed at in several
places of Scripture, as well as in the Apocalypse. And lastly, for the first
Resurrection, the proper privilege of the Martyrs at the entrance of the
Millennial Reign of Christ upon Earth, that this was the general Opinion of the
Primitive Church is made out notably by Mr J. Mede in sundry places of his
Writings: And that way that I have explained it here in my Exposition, it
cannot have the least scandal or offense, the Martyrs according to my
Explication, not living upon Earth, but being revivificated into their Glorious
Bodies, reign with Christ in Heaven.

Wherefore the things that I suppose being so certain or unexceptionable, and
my Exposition consequential to these, and perpetually made out according to the
known meaning of the Prophetic style, and agreeably to the truth of History,
without any violence done to either Grammatical Criticisme, or the Rules of
Rhetoric, and observable Genius of the very style of this Book of the
Apocalypse it self, if such an Exposition for so far as the time of Prophecies
is already past, be not true, what Exposition of any Prophecy, or of any thing
else can be thought to be true? And the things that are to come, as the Calling
of the Jews, and the utter breaking in pieces of the Roman Idolatrous Hierarchy
sore against their will, considering the sweet relish of domineering and
imposing upon the world, and their obdurate pretense of Infallibility, it were
a Miracle indeed, to think they will ever confess themselves convinced of
those enormous Errors and Crimes that are so justly laid to their charge: And
being they would fall of themselves did not some Secular Power support them, it
therefore is rational to conceive that some Remnant of the Roman Empire may
stick to them to the last Vial: So solid is our Exposition in that part also.
And concerning the Calling of the Jews, I have noted already how generally the
Opinion is allowed of, and how often intimated in the Scriptures. To which I
may add, that it does not seem probable, that they are preserved a distinct
People from the rest of the world all this time for naught. And then for the
flourishing of Peace, and Truth, and Righteousness in the times of the New
Jerusalem so universally over the face of the Earth; It is a thing that has
been so little done already, and so fully and repeatedly inculcated by the
ancient Prophets, as well as set down so exactly in the Apocalypse, that unless
a man will question the Truth of Scripture, he cannot but admit it to be true.
From which considerations I hope it will appear that our Exposition of the
Apocalypse is throughout true, and that I have not rashly called it Apocalypsis
Apocalypseos, it being a plain and true unveiling of the Apocalypse, or
stripping it of all those coverings and disguisings contained in the Prophetic
style, and whatever other Artifices of Concealment, and laying the sense bare
and open to the eyes of all that will not wilfully wink that they may not see
the Truth.

How grossly Grotius has overshot himself in his Interpreting the Apocalypse.
And that there may be no distrust of the assuredness of our Interpretation by
pretending that others have interpreted the Apocalypse another way, I shall
give notice here by the bye, that I have with all care and diligence perused
other Interpreters, and the very best of them, Grotius and Ribera; (for as for
some Modern Buffoones rather, and abusers of the Apocalypse, than serious
Interpreters of it, no sober man will think-himself obliged to take notice of
them) and in those two chefest Chapters, as to the Controversy betwixt the
Church of Rome and us, whether they are not to be proved from thence Idolaters,
(I mean the thirteenth and seventeenth Chapters, of which I have made a
Joynt-Exposition in my Synopsis Prophetica) I have showed how absurd and
impossible both Ribera's and Grotius his Interpretations of those Chapters are.
And in Grotius his Exposition of them, who yet is now accounted the Chiefest
Interpreter, and most accommodate to baffle the true and genuine meaning of
those Prophecies, I have noted near fourscore such flawes, as I should be loath
any one should be able to find one in my whole Exposition of the Apocalypse;
besides his absurd mis-timing of the Visions, which would show, though
otherwise his Expositions were more tolerable, that they were nothing to the
purpose: And that they are mis-timed, I have abundantly demonstrated in my
Synopsis Prophetica, Book II. Chap. 2. So that there is the greatest assurance
imaginable of my Exposition of the thirteenth and seventeeth Chapters of the
Apocalypse, as you may be fully satisfied by the reading of my Joynt-Exposition
of them, Synops. Prophet. Book I. Chap. 12, 13, 14, 15. And if this Bulwark of
my Joynt-Exposition stand impregnable, as most certainly it will, none that
perceives the force thereof, but will easily admit of the rest of our
Interpretations as solid and true. And thus much briefly of the Truth of our
Exposition of the Apocalypse.

The Usefulness of the Authors Exposition against Atheism, and for the defense
of Natural Religion.
Now the usefulness thereof, which I proposed in the third and last place, it is
exceeding considerable: First, against Atheists, and those that believe neither
Angel nor Spirit; for there being a deduction of things foretold from the
beginning of the Church to the end of all, so natural, so solid, and so true,
and every way unexceptionable to any Rational Man, this is the greatest
Evidence desirable to evince a Divine Providence over the Church, and the
Affairs of Mankind, and consequently the existence of a God; as also of Angels,
the Ministers of his Providence, which is all along inculcated in this Book of
the Apocalypse. And particularly it is asserted in the beginning of the Book
that this Revelation was made to St John by the Ministry of an Angel: And that
this can be no imagination of St John's, as the profane Hobbians and
Spinozians would be ready to suggest out of the Principles of their stupid and
incredulous minds, but a real thing, the Book it self is an ample Testimony and
plain demonstration, it being out of the reach of any man by his own natural
wit or foresight, to write a Book of such comprehensive Prophecies, and so
continuedly true: to say nothing of the manner of writing it, the very Wit and
Artifice thereof, which seems to imply (...), the Style and Wit is not the
Style and Wit of a Man, but certainly of an Angel.

Nor does the Apocalypse only support the truth of Natural Religion, The
usefulness of it for the confirming of Christianity.
which is the belief of the Existence of a God, and of Spirits or Angels good
and bad, and of a Blessed Immortality after this life; but it is a most special
and extraordinary confirmation of the truth of the Revealed Religion of
Christianity, and the most assured Argument, and most lasting and satisfactory
of the Apotheosis of Christ, that the Wit of Man can excogitate, or his heart
desire. For reading this Book, and comparing it with the History of the Affairs
of the Church, and of the Nations, so far forth as they have had any thing to
do with the Church, or the Church with them* he may as it were see with his own
eyes, and feel with his hands the Truth of our Religion in the veracity of our
Great Prophet and Savior, and in the exact completion of the Predictions he
has communicated to his Church as hitherto. Which standing Miracle is of as
much weight with the Intelligent, for the confirmation of their Faith in
Christ, if not more, than if they lived in our Saviors time to see his
Miracles, or conferr with the eyewitnesses of them. And it is an extraordinary
glorious privilege of the Christian Church to have such a Book of Prophecies
as these (and peculiar to her above all Religions else in the world that ever
was) and so easy and naturally applicable to the events predicted: And
therefore they deserve very ill of the Christian Church, who either rashly, or
out of design, instead of the true and genuine meaning of the Visions of the
Apocalypse give unnatural, forced senses of them, disterting them from their
intended scope, applying mean, sapless, insignificant, useless and inept
meanings to them, instead of those that are proper and adequate: Which not to
dissemble the Truth, Grotius, though otherwise a Learned Writer, has most
wretchedly done. For this makes the very pretense of understanding Prophecies
ridiculous, and deprives Christ of his Glory, and of one of the most
Illustrious Fruits of the Passion and Apotheosis, and the Church of her so
Eminent Privilege above all other Religions: For such meager, dry, distorted,
and contradictions Expositions, as Grotius has given of the Apocalypse, if
there were no other to be had than those, would never argue it a Book Divinely
Inspired, but to be rather a confused heaping up of vagrant thoughts, and
fortuitous imaginations: And yet these fond conceits of Grotius (forsooth) must
stifle the genuine meaning, and due efficacy of the Apocalypse; that is, We
must rob Christ of his Glory, and the Christian Church of her high peculiar
Privilege above any other Churches or Religions; nay, take take away that
extraordinary support, which not only Christianity, but even Natural Religion
it self has from this Book of the Apocalypse, in a mere Complement to the
Church of Rome, that she may not seem as well by Divine Testimony, as by Humane
Reason guilty of Idolatry: See my Synopsis Prophetica, Book II. Chap. 2, 3, 4.
and my Mystery of Godliness, Book V. Chap. 16. Which Chapters if you
attentively read, though with the Favorers of Rome and Grotius, you may think
me not over-civil, yet you will certainly conclude me very true and just in
this my censure. This I thought fit, though it is against my Genius to lessen
any ones performances, plainly to declare, that no man may be fobbed off from
embracing the Truth, by the specious name of Hugo Grotius prefixed to such weak
and imperfect Essays upon the Book of the Apocalypse; where amongst other
things it is to be noted, that the six first Seals, and the six first Trumpets,
which are indeed all the Visions of the Sealed Book, he interprets of things
which were transacted before the Prophecy was writ, than which nothing can be
more wild and preposterous.

And for the justifying the Reformed Churches from all imputation of Schism.
A third considerable Usefulness of our Exposition, is, that it is a plain
justification of all Reformed Churches, Prince and People, for their having
left the Communion of the Church of Rome, and a discharging of them of that
perverse and unjust imputation of Schism, which the Church of Rome would fain
cast upon them: For though they do loudly miscall them by the name of
Heretics, yet they have nothing to lay to their charge, but the disowning
those things which it were Heresy for them to embrace, and are nothing but
unsound Doctrines, and foul Trumperies, and Principles of Idolatry, which
pretended Holy Church holds up for her unholy and secular ends, or worldly
interest: For the main Body of Protestants hold all that were accounted
Articles of Faith in the first Ages of the Church about the first four hundred
years while the Church was deemed Symmetral, as is intimated in the Apocalypse,
Chap. 11. whence it is impossible they should be Heretics: And that neither
Prince nor People in the Reformed Churches are guilty of Schism, besides the
nature of the thing it self, that no man is bound to disobey God under pretense
of obeying a Church that is Idolatrous, there is not only a Commission but a
Command to all to leave her Communion, Apoc. Chap. 2. ver. 20. and Chap. 18.
verse. 4. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my people,
etc. So that both Prince and People every where have a Commission from Heaven
to leave her Communion, so far are they from being Schismatics for leaving it.

A fourth Usefulness may be, And for moving them to repentance, and amendment
of their lives.
and that again to the Reformed Churches, which are the Church in Sardis, who
are reprehended by Christ in his Epistle to that Church, for having a name of
living, as having a zeal one against another about things of smaller
consequence, and from thence making Schisms and Dissentions in the Reformed
Churches, but being even dead otherwise to that which is the only Life of a
True Christian, which is Charity or Love, the character of the Philadelphian
Church: Which the Sardian Church is heartily to breath after, that all their
breaches may be healed, and defects made up, and that Peace, and Truth, and
Righteousness may flourish amongst them: But as yet it is too true that her
works are not found perfect before God, as Christ complains of her in his
Epistle: Which Epistle of Christ to the Church in Sardis, I wish all the
Reformed Churches would seriously peruse and take notice of the heavy
Commination against them; If they do not watch and stand upon their guard, and
endeavor to strengthen the things that are ready to dye, namely true Faith in
God, and in Jesus Christ, and the promised asssistances of his Holy Spirit to
subdue our Corruptions to the Scepter of his Kingdom, and a sincere Zeal
against all scandal and debauchery of Life, and gross Superstition, and
Idolatry, and against hankering after the Fleshpots of Egypt, as the
Israelites did when God had brought them out of the House of Bondage into the
Wilderness: Which state is something analogous to the Sardian Interval in
respect of the Philadelphian, which is as it were the taking possesssion of the
Holy Land, and more analogous than we could wish in murmuring against their
Governors, and that Government which obtained in the Church even in those
times, which by the Spirit of God were accounted Symmetral, Apoc. cap. 11.1. If
they do not remember how they have received and heard, and hold fast and
repent; namely how they have received from the Apostles themselves by their
Writings, and from Apostolic men raised up in the late Reformation, who
generally declared against the Idolatries of the Church of Rome, and declared
the Pope with his Hierarchy to be that Man of Sin, the Antichrist, even those
that professed themselves not to know what to make of the Book of the
Apocalypse, as Luther and Calvin, whom Cornelius a Lapide affirms to have cast
it out of the Canon, which is a sign that the Idolatry and Antichristianisme of
the Roman Church was to their judgments so gross, that they wanted no such
helps to assure them thereof: How they have received from St Paul; Children
obey your Parents in the Lord; as well as, Fathers provoke not your Children to
wrath, Ephesians. 6.4. And that Love is the fulfilling of the Law, Galat. 5.14. For
all the Law is fullfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self: but if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye
be not consumed one of another. These and the like sins is the Sardian Church
to repent of, and to stand upon their watch, lest the judgment of God suddenly
surprise them before they be aware, Apoc. 3.3.

A fifth Usefulness of our Exposition is in reference to the Jews, The
Usefulness of his Exposition in reference to the Jews.
for the facilitating their before in Jesus, the true Messiah. For that
perverse Objection of theirs against the Messiah having been already come above
sixteen hundred years ago; seeing such gross Idolatry, and bloody persecution
has been so long a time in the Church against those men that have had the most
Conscience touching the Purity of Gods Worship, and the greatest Zeal against
Idolatry; This Objection, I say, is easily answered out of our Exposition of
the Apocalypse, that these things are no otherwise than the True Messiah has
predicted they would be, whence the Argument is retorted against themselves,
that it is the greater Demonstration that Jesus is the True Messiah, and not
only this, but moreover, which is the chiefest of all, That all things
predicted in the Apocalypse, from the beginning of the Church to this day, have
exactly come to pass, which is a pledge of Christ's veracity touching the future
state of the Church, that is, That this bloody and Idolatrous Hierarchy will be
put an end to, and that both Jew and Gentile will become One Fold under One
Shepherd, Jesus the True Messiah, namely, at the descending of the New
Jerusalem out of Heaven from God, in which will be accomplished all the Glorious
Promises of God touching his Church, predicted by the mouths of his Holy
Prophets: Which cannot but be a full Answer to this Objection of the Jews.

The sixth is a particular Usefulness for the undeceiving the
Fifth-Monarchy-Men, A particular usefulness for the undeceiving the
Fifth-Monarchy-men.
as they are called, and any others that are inclinable to such Opinions as
they are of, (viz.) That upon the Rising of the Witnesses a Fifth Monarchy must
be erected, in which Jesus Christ is personally to Reign with the revived
Martyrs in the Millennium here upon Earth, and that the way to these Times is
to be made by the Sword. For according to our Exposition the Witnesses are
already risen in the late Reformation, and the Time of the One thousand two
hundred* and sixty days expired, that no watchword may be taken to any
Tumults from any such indication of Time. But the most certain sign of the
downfall of Antichrist will be the raising again in the Reformed Churches a
sincere and fervent Zeal after Truth and Holiness, hearty Love and Amity
amongst themselves, and a Conversation unspotted and unexceptionable, and such
as will convince their very Adversaries that they are in good earnest
Christians, and demonstrate their faith by their works, and that they have not
shaken off the Yoke of the Pope to serve themselves, or to turn Slaves to their
own Lusts, but to be the Faithful Servants of him that redeemed them out of
that House of Bondage. If this were seriously minded in the Reformed Churches,
and due discipline kept up to that purpose, the Papacy would melt away like a
bank of snow in the summer-sun, or consume as the fat of Lambs, as the Psalmist
speaks, yea, even as the smoke would they consume away. And as for any Fifth
Monarchy, in which Jesus Christ shall visibly and personally Reign as the
Monarch thereof, or any one else as an Universal Monarch over all those many
and large Kingdoms that shall then be Christian; (that the Fifth-Monarchy-men
may not substitute this instead of the other) our Exposition is not at all
favorable to any such conceit, as neither to that of the Reign of the revived
Martyrs upon Earth in the blessed Millennium. And I am so far from
countenancing the Opinion, that these Times are to be brought in by the Sword,
unless it be by the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, that that
most dismal Prophecy, Chap. 14. verse. 20. where it is said, that blood came out
of the Wine Press even unto the horse bridles by the space of a thousand and
six hundred furlongs; and that Prophecy of the battle of that Great Day of God
Almighty, Chap. 16. and the other of the rider of the white horse, Chap. 19.
where the Fowls of the Air are called unto the Supper of the great God, to eat
the flesh of Kings, of Captains, and of Mighty Men, etc. that I interpret, I
say, all these not literally but mystically, not of slaying of bodies, but of
converting and saving of souls. And I hope the Reader will be convinced, when
he considers the places, that my interpretation is true.

The seventh and last Usefulness of my Exposition redounds to the Pontifician
party themselves, The usefulness of it in the behalf of the Pontifician Party.
as many as are predisposed to hear plain and evident truth. For according to
our Exposition, which how true it is I have above made good, and it will
approve it self true to any Intelligent and unprejudiced Reader, those that
stay in the Communion of the Roman Church, when as they should be the faithful
Members of Christ, they are, ipso facto, the Members of an Harlot, that is, of
an Idolatrous Church, which the style of the Apocalypse calls the Whore of
Babylon. And how assured a man can be of his Salvation in such a state, I Will
leave to himself to judge: Or rather let him hear what the Angel says, Chap.
18. verse. 4. Come out of her my People lest ye partake of her sins and of her
plagues: As also what another Angels says, chap. 14. verse. 9, 10. If any one
worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his Mark in his forehead, or in
his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God which is poured
out without mixture into the cup of his Indignation, and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence
of the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever.
This is the doom of those that forsake not the Communion of the Church of Rome,
but obey the Two-hundred Idolatrous Beast, that has the horns of a Lamb but the
voice of a Dragon, decreeing gross Idolatries and bloody Persecutions.

This plain therefore and evident Exposition of the Apocalypse, I hope may be
an Instrument to bring off those that are any thing well disposed, out of those
gross and damnable Errors into the way of Saving Truth, and keep those more
steadfast that are in it. For though there will be those, and they not a few
that will remain obstinate and unconvinced, especially of the Roman Hierarchy
it self, even until the effusion of the last Vial, yet there may be many
particular gleanings, and some larger harvests in the mean time, to which so
sound and faithful a sense of the Apocalypse, as our Exposition exhibits to the
Reader, may be effectually subservient: And truly this one usefulness thereof
may very well seem a sufficient compensation for my labors, to any sincere
lover of the Souls of Men.

Wherefore to come to a Conclusion: The Conclusion.
Since this Book of the Apocalypse is so Excellent and transcendant a Book as
well as Authentic and Intelligible, and our Exposition thereof so sound and
assured, and the use of it so manifold and so great, I hope that every
Intelligent Man that is a Well-willer to the Truth, and a sincere Lover of the
Church of Christ will allow of my design of publishing it, as a thing laudable
at least, if not indispensable. For though in things of mere speculation, it is
a piece of prudence for a man to seem no wiser than others can bear, lest
instead of being admired he be looked upon for a fool, or a man of extravagant
conceits; yet in such points of knowledge as we are assured of, and as assured
of their manifold usefulness for the Church, and the good of mankind, it is a
piece of Conscience that we communicate them to the world, it being a Depositum
we are entrusted with from God, and of which we must give an account to him at
that great day.

Of his Epilogue to be annexed at the end of his Exposition.
And thus much I think is competently well for a Preface. What may further
occurr I shall reserve for an Epilogue: Where amongst other things I shall
exhibit to thy view the Ichnography of the Temple with the Inner and Outer
Court, for the better understanding of the eleventh Chapter of the Apocalypse,
as also a Table of Synchronismes with a Defense of them: Which will both
refresh thy memory after thy reading my Exposition, and the more fully assure
thee of the truth thereof: As will also that admirable Key of the Visions of
the Sealed and Opened Book Prophecies, (viz.) the Angels Interpretation of the
Beast, Chap. 17. and the Woman that rides him. And lastly, the wonderful
Harmony that is to be observed of the Antemedial, Medial and Postmedial
Synchronals, the Harmony of all of them, in each Order, amongst themselves, and
with the Times, to which in virtue of the Interpretation of the Angel they are
necessarily affixed, so far namely as the Prophecies have been already
fulfilled or are in fulfilling; which is a pledge of the Truth or Credibility
of our Exposition touching what is to come. This Harmony, I say, is so
admirable and surprising, that unless thou have a Genius dead or stupid to
matters of this nature, thou can not fail to be enravished with the
consideration thereof; as also with the Divine Artifice of the whole Book of
the Apocalypse; Much whereof is opened in the said Epilogue: So that it may go
for a kind of Technology to our Exposition. In the mean time I will only
advertise thee, That I have taken care that the entire Text of the Apocalypse
go along with my Interpretation, printed in a black English Letter, the more
easily to be distinguished from the Comment, that thou having it so entirely in
thy sight, and continuedly with the Comment, thou may with the more ease and
assuredness judge of the Faithfulness and Agreeableness of our Exposition.

ERRATA sic corrige.
PReface, Page xviii. Line 21. read His Passion.] Page 10. l. 11. r. Spondanus.
p. 26. l. 9. r. Sardian. p. 30. l. 9. r. Churches especially, let. p. 40. l.
17. r. Paronomastical. p. 41. l. 14. dele the. p. 47. l. 20. r. him. Sealed
with seven Seals. p. 67. l. 34. r. comes. p. 77. l. 12. r. Narses. p. 81. l.
29. r. Scorpio-locusts. p. 86. l. 2. r. a voice. l. 21. r. and Iconium. p. 93.
l. 11. r. good. p. 98. l. 9. r. Trumpet suppose, as. p. 108. l. 16. r. (...).
p. 122. l. 7. r. Cruelty. p. 128. l. 24. r. Lolhards. p. 140. l. 8. r. decrees.
l. 11. r. Iconomachus. p. 147. l. 18. r. Lineaments. p. 152. l. 11. r.
enlargment. p. 200. l. 24. r. (...). p. 211. l. 26. r. and briefly. p. 227. l.
1. r. Topazos. p. 257. l. 4. r. Antemedial. p. 260. l. 12. r. Assenter. p. 270.
l. 2. r. he. p. 272. l. 1. and p. 283. l. 2. r. Antemedial. p. 293. l. 24. r.
(...). p. 298. l. 3. r. R. H. Chapter 9. p. 315. l. 4. r. Hills. p. 331. l. 7. r.
with these. p. 346. l. 5. r. that is, One.

APOCALYPSIS APOCALYPSEOS, OR THE Revelation of St John UNVEILED.
CHAPTER I.
1. THe Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave unto him to show unto his
servants things which must shortly come to pass: Not therefore the Revelation
of things * manifestly foreshewn by him already, or that are already past, so
that any entire Visions or Prefigurations should be here expected of them,
which would but make them more obscure; but of things which are to come some
sooner and some later, but all of them shortly in respect of some successions
of Ages in the Church or other, that they may perpetually be advertised of
their concerns, and stand upon their guard. And he sent and signified it by his
Angel unto his servant John: This Revelation I say was made to Jesus Christ by
God, that he might communicate it to his servants; for which end he sent his
holy Angel, by whose ministry these things through prophetic Visions and
Prefigurations wrought and impressed upon his Inward Man were conveyed to John.

2. Who bare record of the Word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ,
and of all things that he saw. This is he who is usually called John the
Divine; for giving that Record of the Word of God in the beginning of his
Gospel, and of the Divinity of Jesus, and who declared that which was from the
beginning, which he had heard, seen and handled of the Word of Life, and did
testify in writing the Actions of Jesus, and all things that he faw.

3. Blessed is he that reads and they that hear the words of this prophecy,
and keep those things that are written therein. That are written in the volume
of these Prophecies, consisting chiefly of three parts; the Vision of the Seven
Churches, the Vision of the Seven Seals, the seventh whereof contains the seven
Trumpets, all which belong to the sealed Book, and the Visions that appertain
to the opened Book, (amongst which are the seven Vials) and all the rest of the
Visions of this Volume, that some way or other are reducible to these: Blessed
is he that observes the things written in this Book of Prophecies, that he may
order his life accordingly, and always approve himself such as he is by these
Visions admonished to be, and adhere to Christ sincerely, and to his True
Church in all conditions. For the time is at hand, namely, for the fulfilling
of such Vision as appertain to the earlier Scene of the Affairs of the Church,
and will ever be at hand to the end of the world for the fulfilling of some
Visions of this Book or other.

4. John to the seven Churches which are in Asia. To the * truly Catholic and
Apostolic Church distinguished into seven successions, reaching from the
beginning of the Church to the end of the world, * and dispensed on the face of
the Earth Grace he unto you and peace, all favor, happiness and prosperity.
From him which is, and which was, and which is to come: from the Eternal
Jehovah, who graspeth all past, present and to come in the eternity of his
Wisdom and Power. And from the seven spirits which are before his throne. And
from all his holy Angels that are assisting at his Throne, and in a readiness
to be sent upon messages, and to minister for the good of his people.

5. And from Jesus Christ who is the faithful Witness, and the first-begotten
of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth. From Jesus Christ that
faithful Witness of the Will of his Father when he was upon Earth, and the
first-begotten of the dead, the first fruits of them that slept, to whom is
given the right of all the Kingdoms of the Earth, to be Prince over them all,
and to rule them in Righteousness and Peace: To him that loved us, and washed
us from our sins in his own blood, That so loved us, that he laid down his life
for us, for a propitiation for our sins, and to wash us from all the silth
thereof through sincere repentance and mortification of our lusts out of a due
and grateful return of love to him that died for us.

6. And has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, namely, by this
victory over our corruptions through faith in him, to offer spiritual
sacrifices of Prayers and Thanksgiving, with an utter resignation of our selves
to the will of God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. To him be glory and
Dominion for ever and for ever. Amen.

7. Behold he comes in the clouds, (so vast a prospect have the prophecies of
this Book) and will judge the whole world at the last day. And every eye shall
see him, and they also that pierced him, either in his own person, or wounded
him, and killed him in the persecution and murdering of his living members. And
all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him; namely, all those that
have thus outragiously sinned against him: Even so Amen. This is a certain
truth, let scoffers and unbelievers say and imagine what they please.

8. And that this may not seem strange, that his Providence and Power reaches
so far as to the very last, there is presently added, I am Alpha and Omega, the
Beginning and the Ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is
to come, the Almighty: whose administration therefore of Affairs, and the
presence of his Power is palpably to be felt, and plainly to be discerned from
the beginning of the Church to the end of the world. He is the Almighty,
grasping all things in the hand of his All-comprehending Providence.

9. I John who also am your brother and companion in tribulation, and in the
kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, both which he has bequeathed to his
faithful followers. Was in the Isle that is called Patmos, one of the Cyclades
so called in the Aegean Sea, for the word of God, and for the testimony of
Jesus Christ, thither banished for the preaching the Word of God, and bearing
witness to the Truths of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus.

10. And it came to pass in this Island, that I was in the spirit on the Lords
day, actuated and impressed upon in my inward man, my mind being vacant from
this earthly body, and external senses, and wholly seized by this Divine and
Angelical Power, which caused in it the following Visions, and Prophetical
Impressions, but as lively and clear as any objects to the outward or corporeal
senses: And when I was thus in the Spirit, and had as it were left the body in
this ecstasie, I heard behind me a great voice as of a Trumpet;

11. Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, and shall declare
unto thee such things as concern the Church continuedly, from the first
beginning thereof to the end of the world. And what therefore thou see write
in a Book, and send it unto the Seven Churches which are in Asia, unto Ephesus,
and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamus, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardis and
Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea; that is to say, send it to the truly Catholic
and Apostolic Church dispread upon the Sea Notes verse. 4.
face of the Earth, and divided into seven successions, unto the Ephesine
succession, and unto the Smyrnean succession, and unto the Pergamenian
succession, and unto the Thyatirian succession, and unto the Sardian
succession, and unto the Philadelphian succession, and unto the Laodicean
succession: Which seven successions one after another fill up the whole time of
the Church Universal, from the beginning thereof to the end of the world.

12. And I turned to see the voice that spoke with me, to see who it was that
spoke thus to me: And being turned, I saw seven golden Candle-sticks.

13. And in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, one like unto the Son
of Man; the Representation, namely, of Christ, as he is also one with his
Church. For we are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; They
two shall be one flesh: Ephesians. 5.30.
This is a great Mystery, says the Apostle, but I speak of Christ and his
Church. Clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the pops with
a golden girdle, in token that he is our High Priest, this habit alluding to
the High Priests Vestments.

14. His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow, for the
greater venerableness of this High Priests person, and in token he is that
Christ that the Prophet calls Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting
Father: For these are the symbols of his Wisdom, and Paternal Authority. And
his eyes were as a flame of fire, to signify the penetrancy of his Providence,
and spirit of discerning both in himself, and in his Church.

15. And his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a furnace; which
shows the stability and purity of his ways in himself, and the constancy of
his Church in the furnace of affliction and fiery trials: And his voice as the
sound of many waters: Which plainly discovers that Christ is here represented
in union with his Church; Waters signifying a Multitude in the prophetic
style, as most certainly they do.

16. And he had in his right hand seven stars: The seven stars according to his
own Interpretation are the seven Angels of the seven successions of the Church,
whom he bears up, sustains, and strengthens throughout all Ages. And out of his
mouth went a hard two-edged sword; a Symbol of Christ as he is the Living Word
of God quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword. And denotes
also the powerful Word of the Gospel preached by the Living Members of his
Church. And his countenance was as the Sun that shines in his strength. This
is spoke in reference to him as he is called the Sun of Righteousness, or in
reference to the Church in the state of the New Jerusalem; of which it is said,
There shall be no night there, and they need no candle, nor the light of the
Sun: For the Lord God gives them light, and they shall reign for ever and ever.

17. And when I saw him I fell at his feet as dead, as being exceedingly afraid
that this fight might portend some great evil to the people of God. And he laid
his right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not, I am the First and the Last:
And though there may be some great Afflictions and Trials of my Church
represented to thee in what thou see; yet thou must remember, nothing shall
come to pass without my Providence, who am the First and the Last, and will
carry you through all Persecutions and Deaths, and make you at length more than
Conquerours.

18. I am he that lives and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore,
Amen, and have the Keys of Hell and of Death; as if he should say, For I am now
alive, though I was my self dead once and crucified, but behold I am alive for
Ever. Amen. This is most certainly true of him whom this Vision represents, and
that he has the Keys of Hell and Death. And therefore no man need fear to
undergo martyrdom for his Cause, who will certainly make him partaker of a
Blessed Immortality, and plunge his barbarous persecutors into everlasting
perdition. Wherefore after this encouragement to John, he says,

19. Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are, and the
things which shall be hereafter; that is, write the things which thou have seen
and known already as being past, and the things that are present, and the
things that are to come after, (viz.) The affairs of the first succession of
the Church, which is the Ephesine succession; the affairs of the present
succession of the Church (in which St John wrote these Visions) which is the
Smyrnean; and of the rest of the successions of the Church which are to come
afterward.

20. Which affairs thus distributed into seven successions, or intervals, are
indeed, the mystery of the seven stars which thou saw in my right hand, and
the seven golden candlesticks: For, the seven stars are the Angels of the seven
Churches, that is, the seven successions of Bishops and Pastors that are to
shine forth in the brightness and purity of their Life and Doctrine in the
seven successions of the Churches: And the seven candlesticks which thou saw
are the seven successions of the Apostolic Church, here called seven Churches.

NOTES. CHAPTER I. Verse. 1.
Manifestly shown already by him, or that are past, etc. This is spoken in
reference to the absurd Interpretations of Grotius, in the first six Seals, and
the first six Trumpets, who fixes the Scene of all those Visions in Judea, and
ends them with the sacking of the City: which was before St John wrote the
Apocalypse, for he wrote it in Domitian's time. But what will not prejudiced
Wits imagine, rather than stoop to the Truth? See my Mystery of Godliness, Book
5. chap. 16. And Synops. Prophetic. Book 2. chap. 2. sect. 4, 5, etc.

Verse. 4. Truly Catholic and Apostolic Church, etc. This I conceive to be
comprehended in the name Asia, in allusion to the Hebrew word (...), Asia,
signifying Fundamentum; as if he should say, To all the Churches that keep the
Apostolical Foundation in Doctrine and Practice, that keep in it, and swerve
not from it by admitting any thing contrary thereto.

And dispersed on the face of the earth, etc. This also is comprised in the
word Asia, by allusion to another Hebrew word of a like nearness of sound
(...), that is Asia again, and is the lowest of those four Worlds notoriously
known amongst the Cabbalists, Aziluth, Briah, Jetzirah, Asia, of which last the
lowest part is this Earth we tread upon: So evidently is the allusion to the
nearness of sound in words made use of in this Book of the Apocalypse. See
another reason from (...) in my Exposition of the seven Churches.

Verse. 19. The affairs of the first succession of the Church, which is the
Ephesine succession; the affairs of the present, etc. That the affairs of the
Ephesine succession were past when St John received those Visions in Patmos is
plain from hence; because he received them about the end of Domitians Reign:
But the beginning of the Smyrnean succession is in the tenth of Nero, or not
long before: which is about thirty years before St John received the Visions in
Patmos. Besides that the Ephesine succession is described amongst other
characters, as not yet being stained with the doctrine and deeds of the
Nicolaitans: But the Nicolaitans appeared in the twelfth year of Nero, as you
may see in Spandanus the Epitomizer of Baronius: Therefore the Ephesine
succession was to expire before that time. So plain is it that it was past when
St John was in Patmos.

But hence emerges a difficulty that well may stumble some, (viz.) Being the
Ephesine succession was then past, why should there be an Epistle directed to
it, which is as if one should write to the deceased? To which I answer, That
this Book of Prophecies being designed a Representation of the State of the
Church, or of the Empire in reference to the Church, from the very beginning of
the Church (that the Representation might be the more complete by not leaving
out that little Time that was then past) to the end of the world, in that way,
I say, it is comprised, whether Epistolar or other, it is to be begun and
continued throughout: And therefore in the Prophetical Vision of the Seals; as
the first Seal is rather an History than a Prophecy, though disguised under
Prophetic Iconismes (For the time of the thing signified there by the Rider of
the White Horse (which the whole stream of Interpreters understand of Christ
guiding and assisting the Apostles and his Church in the Apostolic times) was
in a manner quite expired when John wrote the Apocalypse:) So this Epistle to
the Ephesine succession of the Church, is to be conceived an Historical
Description of that State of the Church, rather than an Epistle, though for
conformity-sake it is put into this Epistolar disguise.

And since it is not so proper to write Epistles to any but those who are in
present Being; surely they who are satisfied there is no absurdity in writing
in this Epistolar way to the successions of the Church not yet come, ought to
think the using this Epistolar form to a succession already past, the more
tolerable.

But supposing the Apocalypse a designed Representation, as I hinted above, of
the affairs or state of the Church set out by a triple Prophecy, this of the
Seven Churches, the second of the Sealed Book, and the last of the Opened Book,
and that the Prophecy of the Sealed Book, and of the Opened Book, each of them,
though in a Prophetic style, yet in the entrance of the Prophecies represent
Things or Times partly past and partly present (neither of which are the proper
objects of Prophecy) when St John was in Patmos, and therefore so far are
rather an History than Prophecy, though disguised or adorned with Prophetic
Iconismes, and consequently that that little snip of time, the Ephesine
Interval contains, though an History rather than an Epistle, may as well be set
down in an Epistolar form, as the other in a Prophetical: These things, I say,
being considered, the using this form of an Epistle to the Ephesine succession,
that it might keep conformity with the rest (the usefulness of which Epistolar
forms I have declared in my Chap. 1. Sect. 6.
Prophetical Exposition of the Seven Churches) is not only tolerable but very
fit and commendable.

And yet this is not all that I have to say: For being there was a Real Church
in Ephesus in St John's time, which according to the literal sense of these
Epistles might be concerned therein, and that there is also a Moral use and
sense of them, according to which they may be applicable to this or that state
of any particular Church of Christ, in any particular Place or Age of the World
(so richly useful is the contrivance of this holy writing for the edification
of the Church of Christ, though the main be the Prophetical design, as to the
illustration and Confirmation of his Providence over his Church, and that the
Vision of the Seven Churches is a Prophecy properly so called, I have by no
less than twenty Arguments confirmed in my Chap. 10.
Exposition of the Seven Churches) this Epistolar Form, I say, to the Ephesine
succession is not only tolerable, fit, and commendable, but altogether
necessary. Which things, though I have sufficiently noted and confirmed in my
said Exposition of the Seven Churches, yet I thought fit to give an hint of
them here, that no man unawares may stumble, as is said, at the very threshold.

CHAPTER II.
1. UNto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write; that is, to the Bishops and
Pastors, etc. of the Ephesine succession of the Church (which begins with the
beginning of the Church of Christ, and ends in the tenth year of Nero) * whose
name bears with it the signification of its condition. These things says he
that holds the seven stars in his right hand, and walks in the midst of the
seven golden candlesticks. And he salutes you under the Title of this part of
his former Representation, that you may run the race more cheerfully that now
is begun, he going along with you, even to the end thereof. He supports,
comforts and guides all the seven successions of the Bishops and Pastors of the
Church that labor in the Word and Doctrine, and is in the midst of all the
seven successions of the Church throughout all Ages, minding their
Conversation, and assisting them that are true of heart even to the end of the
world.

2. I know thy works, thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not bear
them which are evil. I know your works, and approve of your labor, industry
and patience, and commend you for that loathing and detestation you have of
lewd and wicked men. And thou have tried them that say they are Apostles and
are not, and have found them liars. That also I commend, that you can sift and
try such as pretend to be sent from me, and to be Apostles, and are not, but
are Liars and Deceivers, mere Impostors and Counterfeits.

3. And have born, and have patience, and for my names sake have labored, and
have not fainted. I commend you for this your first great fervency and desire
of enlarging my Church or Kingdom, and bearing patiently all crosses and
difficulties you meet with in the carrying on the work, and for your not
fainting under so great pains and travail.

4. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
Love. There is not that earnestness of affection for me as at the first, nor
fervency and zeal for the enlargement of my Kingdom, but you are more cold and
remiss.

5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the
first works, that is, act with that constancy, fervency and sincerity you did
before. Or else I will come unto thee quickly and will remove thy candlestick
out of his place, except thou repent; that is, I will raise such a tempest of
Persecution against the Church, that she will not be able to keep her place but
be shaken and driven with the violence thereof. This you must expect unless you
repent.

6. But this thou have, that thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I
also hate. This was yet the privilege of this Ephesine Interval of the Church,
that she was not then tainted with the lusts of that filthy Sect of the
Nicolaitans, which the soul of Christ so abhors.

7. He that has an ear let him hear what the spirit says unto the Churches in
these Prophetical Parables. For it is of great concern and edification for them
to consider and understand them through all the successions of the Churches,
that what is recommended they may follow and eschew the contrary at all times.
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of Life which is in the
midst of the paradise of God; that is, he that overcomes through his much
labor and pains, he shall be refreshed with the food of the Tree of Life, and
for his patience and sufferings enjoy a Paradise of pleasure in Heaven.

8. And unto the Angel of the Church of Smyrna write: To the Bishops and
Pastors, etc. of the Smyrnean succession of the Church (which reaches from the
end of the Ephesine succession to about the three hundred twenty fourth year of
Christ, * and bears the signification of its condition in its name) write to
them thus: These things says the first and the last, which was dead and is
alive. Who salutes you therefore with this part of his former Representation as
his most proper Title here, for an encouragement in the bloody persecuting
times you are in: For if you dye Martyrs, you shall as assuredly be alive again
as I am that was once Martyred and Crucified. And I am the First and the Last,
and will make my Church hold out to the End, and stand Conqueror in the Field.

9. I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty, but thou art rich. I know
how you are destitute of all the comforts of life, and conflict with the
greatest necessities, but yet ye are really rich, full of Christian patience
and meekness, and of invincible courage amidst all the dangers of death. And I
know the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews and are not, but are the
Synagogue of Satan. That say they are Christians and are not; (for so Jews
signifies in the Apocalyptick style) and so by their dastardliness and
perfidiousness blaspheme and dishonor that Noble Name and Calling, by proving
themselves of the Synagogue of Satan, and betrayers of the Kingdom of their
Lord that bought them, fast slaves to the flesh, and impatient of all
persecution, worse than Peter, whom notwithstanding when he would have
discouraged me from my sufferings on the Cross, I sharply rebuked with a Get
thee behind me Satan, Matt. 16.23.
for thou savourest not the things of God.

10. Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer, nor imitate that base
cowardice of that Synagogue of Satan, for they are no Church of mine, but a
cage of perfidious hypocrites. Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into
prison that ye may be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days. The Devil
and his Ministers under Paganism will cast some of you into prison for the
trial of your faith and constancy; and you shall have the tribulation of ten
days, even of those ten bloody persecutions under the Pagan Emperors. Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life: Be in no wise
discouraged, but continue faithful unto death, and I will give you a Crown of
Life, even the Imperial Crown, Constantine turning Christian, which will be a
Crown of Life and security to you my Church, and save you from death and
persecution: This shall be the external effect and fruit of your sufferings, or
the Political reward thereof.

11. He that has an ear let him hear what the spirit says unto the Churches.
He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death. He that stands out
this trial, and valiantly suffers martyrdom shall not be hurt of the second
death, but have his part in the first resurrection accordingly as it is
written, Apoc. 20.6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
resurrection, on such the second death has no power. This is the promised
privilege of those Martyrs that suffered persecution in this Smyrnean
succession of the Church under the Ten hot Persecutions. And as that other
promise that preceded the Parabolical Epiphonema was external and political: So
this reward that follows the said Epiphonema is invisible, and belonging to the
other State: which distinction is to be observed in the rest of the Epistles;
and that the promise that follows the Epiphonema, He that has ears let him
hear, etc. belongs to what is spiritual and invisible.

12. And to the Angel of the Church in Pergamus write, (viz.) to the Bishops
and Pastors, etc. of the Pergamenian succession of the Church (which reaches
from the end of the Smyrnean succession, namely from the year three hundred
twenty four, to the year one thousand two hundred forty two, when the Popes
Legate Ameline with Trancavel the Bastard Son of Count Beziers ended the War
against the Albigenses, * and which has its condition signified by its name)
write thus: These things says he which has the sharp sword with two edges.
Who salutes them wearing the Title of this part of his Representation by a kind
of Antithesis, this Sword that comes out of his mouth being the Sword of the
Spirit, in opposition to the Sword and Arm of Flesh, that persecuted the True
Church in this succession.

13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is; and
thou hold fast my Name, and have not denied my Faith: I observe how well
thou carryest thy self, though thou dwell under the Dominion and
Jurisdiction of the firstborn of Lucifer, that man of Sin, and Son of Pride, a
right Pergamenian, lofty and haughty, under whose Jurisdiction notwithstanding
thou art found to dwell, and yet hold fast to my Authority, and the pure
Christian Profession, nor have apostatised from the Ancient Faith and Purity of
Worship, untainted with Superstition and Idolatry: Even in those days wherein
Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain among you where Satan dwells:
No not in those days when Antipas, those faithful and courageous Opposers of
Holy Father, the Pope (for so the word plainly signifies) the Waldenses and
Albigenses were cruelly slain with the Sword within the Jurisdiction of that
firstborn of Lucifer.

14. But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them that
hold the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling block before
the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit
fornication. You have those that comply with the Pseudo-prophet Balaam, the
lofty Lord of the People, for so Balaam signifies, who has taught Balac the
Secular Power, now but a shadow or cipher, it being in this Interval, evacuate
in a manner (as the name imports) by the over-topping of the Power
Ecclesiastical, to force the Israelites, that is, the true and genuine
Christians (of which the Israelites were a type) to come to Mass, and by
partaking thereof to partake of Idolatry, they making by their Idolatrous
usages there, the Lords Supper, which is a Feast upon a Sacrifice, like to the
feeding upon Idolothyta, upon things sacrificed unto Idols.

15. So have thou also them that hold the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which
thing I hate. And besides these complyers with the Mass, though they be in
their own judgments against it, there are amongst you also that indulge too
much to the liberty of the flesh, and imitate the Sect of the Nicolaitans, a
thing which my soul abhors.

16. Repent, or else I will come unto thee quickly; amend these faults, or else
I will come unto you quickly by a more strict vigilaney of the Lords of the
Inquisition (whose Rule was most notorious in the succeeding Interval of the
Church) and then the more frequent terror of being burnt at the stake will
more effectually extinguish the flames of your wantonness and lust: Be ye
therefore pure and holy as I also am pure and holy. And will fight against them
with the sword of my mouth. And as for those that opress my faithful ones, I
will fight against them with the sword of my mouth, and cut off whole Nations
by virtue thereof, (namely of the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God
convincingly preached) from the Idolatrous Roman Church. This is a reward
political and visible to be fulfilled in the next Interval at the close thereof.

17. He that has an ear let him hear what the spirit says unto the Churches.
To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden manna. He that stands
out in purity of heart and a good conscience, he instead of that sweet
consecrated wafer, that pretended visible Manna, shall eat of the true hidden
spiritual Manna, spoken of John 6. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is
drink indeed: For the words I there speak, they are spirit and they are life.
And if he dye he shall eat Angels food, and pass unto their Communion and
Society. And will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new Name written,
which no man knows saving he that receives it; that is, though he be accused
and condemned for an Heretic by this lofty Roman or Pergamenian Church where
Satan the Accuser dwells, yet I will give him a white Stone, and absolve him in
Foro Divino. Or I will give him the white Stone in which a New Name is written,
that is to say, I will confirm and establish him in the new Birth, and give to
him that pure and permanent inestimable Pearl of the Divine Nature, which none
knows but he that has it. And thus he shall be abundantly compensated for all
the evil, or loss he may seem to sustain by his quitting the Communion of this
Idolatrous Church of Pergamus or Rome. For the * signification of their names
do very nearly agree.

18. And unto the Angel of the Church of Thyatira write. To the Bishops and
Pastors, etc. of the Thyatirian succession of the Church (which begins at the
ending of the former succession, and reaches till the time that whole Nations
forsook the Communion of the Church of Rome, * and whose condition is
represented in the signification of its name) write thus: These things says
the Son of God, who has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet like
fine brass. These things says the Son of God to a people that live amongst
those that make the Virgin Mary in as high a way or higher (as to worship) the
Daughter of God. But his eyes like a flame of fire denote the penetrancy of his
Providence, as also the kindling of his just anger against the fiery
persecutions of his servants by Thyatira, the Roman Church again, in this
Interval. And that his feet are said to be like to fine brass, if we refer it
to him as he is in union with his Church, that supplement is to be remembered,
As if they burned in a furnace; which is an intimation of the frequent burnings
of the Servants of Christ at the stake in this Interval.

19. I know thy works, and charity, and service, and faith, and thy patience,
and thy works, and the last to be more than the first; that toward the latter
end of this Thyatirian succession they were more and greater than before: Which
is a noble testimony to the zeal and sincerity of those that began the
Reformation.

20. Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer
that woman Iezebel, the Roman Hierarchy or Priesthood, when now in this
Interval things are come to that maturity, that thou may cast her off, and
free thy self from this unjust and Idolatrous Yoke: This is spoke to the Powers
and Principalities held under by her. Which calls her self a Prophetess, but
is indeed a Pseudoprophetess, a false teacher and seducer of my Servants, the
same with the false Prophet elsewhere mentioned in the Apocalypse: To teach and
seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto
Idols. That thou suffer her to bring them to the Communion of the Mass which
she has made so Idolatrous, that my Supper being a Feast upon a Sacrifice, she
makes it look altogether like the eating of things sacrificed unto Idols, and
so seduces to spiritual fornication, which is Idolatry: Wherefore let Iezebel *
according to the omen and fate in her name be cast out and reputed as the dung
of the earth.

21. And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not.
Since my monition to her by the Waldenses and Albigenses, but she remains still
obdurate and impenitent.

22. Behold I will cast her into a bed of languishment, instead of that large
bed of wantonness, in which the Kings of the Earth have so universally
committed fornication with her. And them that commit adultery with her into
great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds, unless they desist from
their usual gross Idolatries so scandalous in the eyes of all sober Christians.

23. And I will kill her Children with death, that is, either by the sword that
comes out of my mouth, I shall make them dead to her by their conversion to
the truth, they being mortified and made dead to all the vain trumperies of
that false, deceitful, idolatrous Church, or I will kill them by a natural
death; namely, their Emissaries and Armies that may be sent against my True
Church. And all the Churches shall know that I am be which searches the reins
and hearts: And I will give unto every one of you according to his works. So
that all the Christian World shall ring of the Righteousness of my Judgments,
who have mine eyes like a bright flame of fire piercing into the reins and
hearts of men to discover what they are, that I may give to every one according
to his demerits.

24. But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatica, as many as have not
this doctrine, nor comply with the Idolatrous Form of the Roman Religion. And
which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak: Those deep reasons of
State as they phrase it; that frame Religion so as if there were no God really,
nor Christ that superintends his Church, but that Religion were only to be a
trick of State to Rule or Fool the people with: Unto you, I say, that are
better minded, I will put upon you no other burden, I will give you no further
trouble.

25. But that which you have already, hold fast till I come. Persist only in
the good way you are in, and hold fast to the Truth till I come, and take the
Papal Yoke from off your neck.

26. And he that overcomes and keeps my words unto the end, to him will I
give power over the nations; that is, they that with invincible patience and
courage stand out to the last, and keep my works unto the end, remembering to do
what I command, that keep faith and good conscience in despite of all the
Thyatirian persecutions: These People, with their Princes and Governors shall
at the end, namely, in the last Semi-time of the Seven get the Nations under
them, that is, the Paganochristians, nor shall be any longer subject to their
Dominion, who had become in a manner Heathens by their Idolatrous practices,
and barbarous Cruelties.

27. ( And he shall rule them with a rod of iron, as the vessels of a potter
shall they be broken to shivers; that is, they shall rigidly enough, and
severely rule them, so that they shall not be able to whinch but at their own
peril, and all their strength shall be broken to fitters as a potters vessel)
even as I have received of my Father; that is, so far as I shall have received
of my Father, as to the propagating of my Kingdom at this time, so will I give
to them.

28. And I will give him the morning star: Not the Bright Morning Star, which
state belongs rather to the seventh Vial, the commencement of the Philadelphian
Interval, or to the Millennial Empire of Christ; but the Morning Star, which
shall appear, though not so bright, yet very early or unexpectedly, but a
little beyond the middle of the seventh Semitime, after the Time and Times are
expired.

29. He that has an ear let him hear what the spirit says unto the Churches.
Nothing following this Epiphonema, or rather the promises of reward going
before it, it shows plainly, that they belong to this Life, and the visible
state of the Church on Earth.

NOTES. CHAPTER II. Verse. I.
Whose name bears in it the signification of its condition, etc. And that by an
allusion either to (...) and (...), the Bar, Lists, or Beginning of a Race; for
that this Ephefine Interval is the beginning of the whole decursion and
succession of the Church to the end of the world, and the Christian man's life
is compared to a race by St Paul: Or in allusion to (...), which is an earnest
desire, suppose, of promoting our own salvation, and propagating the Kingdom of
Christ upon Earth, and of winning the Imperial Crown, which he on the White
Horse with Bow in his hand aims at, whose Vision begins with this Ephesine
Interval: For which zealous design this Ephesine Church is commended in the
second and third verses of this Chapter: But in the fourth Verse Christ says,
I have somewhat against thee, (...), because thou have left thy first Love,
remitted it, or slackened it: So that there may be an allusion to (...) in
another sense, as it signifies, relaxation or remisness of Duty, as well as to
(...). Both which, one after another was the condition of this Interval of the
Church; first earnest zeal and love, after remisness and coolness.

Verse. 8. And bears the signification of its condition in its name, etc. For
(...), Smyrna is the same that Myrrha, Myrrh, from the Syriac (...), amara. By
Smyrna therefore is understood the bitterness of affliction, and persecution in
this second Interval of the Church.

Verse. 12. And has its condition signified in its name, etc. For by (...) are
signified (...), all high and lofty structures, though the Towers of Troy were
properly at first so called, wherefore this name (...), of the Church in
Pergamus, partly denotes the exaltation of the Church out of her Smyrnean
humiliation and affliction, and partly the excessive pride and fastuosity of
the Idolatrous Hierarchy growing up to the top in this Interval. In which
Pergamus notwithstanding, or proud Luciferian Church, the true Apostolic
Church was fain to have its abode, being the Woman in the Wilderness, as she is
set out in other Visions.

Verse. 17. Signification of their names do very nearly agree, etc. Pergamus
signifying, as was observed above, (...), all lofty and stately Structures, and
Rome having its name from (...) exaltari, as some Critics are pleased to
observe.

Verse. 18. And whose condition is represented in the signification of the name,
etc. For it is (...), the Church in Thyatira: which either alludes to (...), by
reason of the effeminacy of the Church of Rome at that time, and her
worshipping the Virgin Mary as the Daughter of God in the highest sense (for
Thyatira signifies Daughter, from whence this City had its denomination) more
by far than the Son of God himself: Or else it alludes to (...), Altars of
Burnt Offerings, the burnings of the Martyrs of Jesus for their testimony
against the foul corruptions, and gross Idolatries of the Church of Rome, being
more than ordinarily frequent in that Interval: For either of these reasons, or
rather for them both, is this succession of the Church, called the Church in
Thyatira.

Verse. 20. According to the omen and fate in her name, etc. For (...) may be
derived from (...) which signifies, either Habitaculum or Stercus, and from
(...) or, (...), which considered together will signify her casting out of her
habitation, and the loathing of her, as the dung of the Earth. See my
Exposition of the Seven Churches, Chap. 6.

CHAPTER III.
1. ANd unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis write: To the Bishops and
Pastors especially, (and those committed to their charge) of the Sardinian
succession (which begins where the Thyatirian succession ends; that is, when
Protestantisme had become the Religion of Nations and Kingdoms, and reaches to
the last Vial, Apoc. 16. * whose condition is notified in their name) write
thus: These things says he that has the seven Spirits of God and the seven
Stars; that has in his power and disposal all the Divine Graces, and heavenly
hosts or companies of Angels for the assistance of his Church, and all the
Bishops and Pastors thereof, which are here typified by the seven Stars; as by
having them in his hand, that they are under his power and protection; a
description of Christ, like that in the Epistle to the Ephesine Church. Which
description is here repeated for the encouragement of Renewing his Church
again, and the Reforming it into the Ancient Apostolic Faith and Practice. As
if it were the very beginning and emerging again of the truly Apostolic Church
that had lien hid in the wilderness of Paganochristian Romanism. Which through
these helps, though it began hopefully and commendably, yet was never at any
great pitch of perfection, and has also degenerated from what she at first
appeared. Of which Christ complains, saying, I know thy works, that thou have a
name that thou live and art dead. I observe how mean and wretched thou art in
comparison of what thou ought to be, and that thou have a name that thou
live, as being so full of zeal for or against this Ceremony, and that
Opinion, with hot and nice disputes about Faith and Justification; but I will
assure thee, be thou as full of life and activity as thou will about such
things, if thou have not that Faith which works by Love, thou art nothing in
my esteem. Whosoever is devoid of a due degree of charity, and
unself-interessed love, let him be reputed to live as much as he will, he is
accounted dead in my sight.

2. Be watchful: Keep a guard over thine own heart, and breath after unfeigned
charity, which is the bond of perfection, and will prevent all Schisms and
Factions, and tie the Members of Reformed Christendom in one heart and one mind
to their Governors Temporal and Spiritual, and to one another. And strengthen
the things which remain that are ready to dye. Revive and corroborate in you
the things that remain, (viz.) Faith in God, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
of a blessed Immortality after this life; these you yet profess, though
Infidelity and Atheism, with Sensuality and Libertinism have grown much upon
you, so that the belief even of these necessary things are ready to dye also.
For I have not found thy works perfect before God. For you do not go on toward
perfection, nor are ye in a growing state, though ye have not yet reached your
due stature approvable before God, which is a sign you are in a state of
languishment and vergency toward death.

3. Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and hold fast and
repent: Since you profess your selves reformed into a true Apostolic Church,
remember what you have heard out of the Apostles writings. How that I so loved
my Church that I gave my self for it, that I might sanctify it, that I might
make it a glorious Church, having neither spot nor wrinkle, nor any such thing,
but that it should be holy and without blemish. And let not the vain glosses of
any faint-hearted hypocrites deceive or discourage you. Remember also what ye
heard of Antichrist, That man of sin, that exalts himself above all that is
called God and worshipped, and for ever abandon that wicked and Idolatrous
Communion. And take heed of that nauseous and detestable ingratitude of not
setting a due value of my redeeming you from that worse than Egyptian or
Babylonian Captivity into the Gospel-liberty: And be not imposed upon by the
fine words and subtle sophistry of either known enemies, or perfidious
brethren. These and such like things as these taught by my Apostles, and
repeated again by the first Reformers, be sure to hold fast, and repent of your
slipperiness and remisness, of your easiness and inclinableness again to the
fleshpots of Egypt, the carnal entertainments under that mystical Pharaoh at
Rome. If therefore thou shall not watch I will come on thee as a thief, and
thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee. These things therefore I
strictly command thee and charge thee to do, which if thou will not carefully
and diligently observe, and have a due watch over thy ways, I will come on
thee of a sudden, and surprise thee with some terrible judgment for thy gross
ingratitude, and thou shall not know what hour I come upon thee before the
storm certainly overtake thee. God make the Reformed Churches sensible of this
sad commination, which is foretold them for no other purpose, than that by
their timely repentance, and careful watchfulness they may avoid it.

4. Thou have a few names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their
garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy. There be
some few excellent persons, and of a true Christian Spirit scattered up and
down in the Reformed Churches, (though the generality be so bad and imperfect)
who have not defiled their Garments, the inward nor outward clothing of their
Soul, nor spotted the decency of their conversation by any scandal of the
flesh. With these innocent and spotless souls not soiled or stained with the
filth of the usual tinctures of the flesh, will I converse by my spirit,
whereby they shall be able to walk with me with all innocence and integrity of
heart for ever: For they are persons meet and fit for such converse.

5. He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment: They that
overcome all difficulties inward and outward, and persist in purity and true
holiness, they shall be clothed in white raiment, that is, they shall be
successful and prosperous in the affairs of my Kingdom, which they endeavor
to propagate. And I will not blot out his name out of the Book of Life: that
is, this sort of men shall continue to the Philadelphian succession, and
onwards to the end of the world. And this Book of Life to them shall be as the
Crown of Life to the Smyrnean succession, shall be their security from
persecution and death. That Church which they introduce into the world, which
is the Philadelphian, shall never be brought again under the Subjection,
Tyranny and Persecution of any Power whatsoever. But I will confess his Name
before my Father, and before his Angels. I will in a special manner recommend
them to the good Providence of God, and the watchful Ministry of his holy
Angels.

6. He that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.
The Reformed Churches, especially let them take particular notice what the Holy
Ghost has here delivered. That Christ who holds the seven Stars in his right
hand, and appears thus to the Reformed Churches, as he did to the Ephesine or
first Apostolic Church, is as ready and serious in the renewing, and the
reforming of his Church as he was then in setting it on foot first in the
world. And he appears, as then walking in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks;
(which signifies his helpful presence to his Church) so here with the succor
of his Divine Graces, and Ministry, and assistance of his holy Angels: So that
nothing is wanting to rouse us effectually out of this carnal drousiness toward
the attainment of the dispensation of the Spirit and Power, except our own
sincerity and diligent attention to, and firm belief of the Oracles of God: So
that the main success of things hitherto, as to the effect of Religion in the
Reformed Churches, lies at our own doors: God give us grace to consider it.

7. And to the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia write: To the Bishops and
Pastors especially (but together with their Charge) of the Philadelphian
succession, (which begins where the Sardian ends and reaches to the fourth
Thunder, * and discovers its nature and condition in its name) write thus:
These things says he that is holy, and speaks to a Church that willingly
listens to such monitions as these: Be ye holy for I am holy, and, Be ye
perfect as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. He that is true: And will
verify all his glorious promises in the Philadelphian succession, or blessed
Millennium to all those that trust in his Word. He that has the key of David:
He that is the Chief Minister of State to the Eternal God, * whom the Apostle
John calls LOVE. He that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man
opens: He that when he will can open the door of success to his own, and shut
it again when he will against his Enemies, and so administer all things
prosperously.

8. I know thy works and designs, and highly approve of them; I know thou do
nothing out of bitter zeal, faction, or self-seeking, nothing out of
vainglory, or any other worldly end, but simply out of love of Me, and of my
Righteousness, and out of love to all Mankind, for the promoting of whose both
present and future happiness thou do all thy endeavors; and therefore,
Behold I have set before thee an open door and no man can shut it, against
thee: For thou have a little strength, and have kept my Word, and have not
denied my Name: Though thou had but a little Force or Army in comparison of
the rest of the world, yet thou have been valiant, and stood for my Word
stoutly and courageously against all gainsayers, and have never behaved thy
self otherwise than becomes a sound and faithful Christian, and such as is
resolved never to dishonor that Profession or Name.

9. Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan (which say they are Jews
and are not, but do lie:) Behold I will make them that are the Synagogue of the
Devil, for their pride, falsities, and murderous cruelties, and yet call
themselves Jews, that is, Christians [nay, Holy Church] (the Type as above
being used for the Antitype) but are so far from being so, that really they are
but Pseudochristians, or rather the Synagogue of Antichrist, who under pretense
of professing Christ do most wickedly oppose him, by nulling his Laws, and
barbarously murdering his true and faithful Subjects for not committing
Idolatry, and other abominations they would force upon them: whereby it is
manifest, though they call themselves Holy Church and Christians, they are
counterfeits and liars. Behold I will make them to come and worship before thy
feet, and to know that I have loved thee. Behold I will make them to come,
instead of kissing the Popes Slipper, to worship before thy feet, to be
subjected unto thee, and to do thee homage: And to acknowledge how much I have
loved thee, and set thee above all the other Princes of the Earth.

10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from
the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world to try them that
dwell upon the Earth: Because thou have showen all along such invincible
meekness and patience in maintaining my cause, and undaunted faithfulness; in
that great confusion, commotion and temptation under the last Vial, which shall
come upon all the world to try the Inhabitants of the Earth, I will keep thee
and protect thee, and thou shall be safe and victorious in all.

11. Behold I come quickly: Even in this last Vial, into which thou art already
entered. Hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy Crown. Thou art a
Church after my own hearts desire, O Philadelphia, nor do I accuse thee of any
thing, thou carriest thy self with that integrity and sincerity, only hold fast
to that perfection thou have attained, that thou may not be deprived of the
Crown I intend for thee: For in thee shall be accomplished all the glorious
Promises concerning my Kingdom upon Earth.

12. Him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he
shall go no more out. To you that overcome, to you it shall be given to be
Pillars in the Temple of my God, you shall be an holy, fixed and stable People,
the true, holy Catholic Church that shall never fail, but shall endure till I
come in the clouds to judgment at the last day. All other forms and
denominations shall perish, but this shall obtain the Dominion unto the end.
And I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the City of my
God, which is New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God, and I
will write upon him my new Name. And on these lasting Pillars shall the Name of
my God be written, and the new Nature in you shall be visible and legible, as
it were, to all, how heavenly it is and Divine, and how you are really that
Church represented by the City in Ezechiel, which is called Jehovah Shammah,
God is there. For your conversation will be such, that every man will be ready
to say, God is amongst you of a truth, and that you are really, as well as
called the New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from my God. And
lastly, I will write upon you my New Name, not the Morning Star, but the Bright
Morning Star, or that newly purchased Title in the Battle, where the Beast and
False Prophet are taken and cast into a lake burning with brimstone, and the
rest slain with the sword of him that sat on the White Horse, which sword
comes out of his mouth, (viz.) the Title of King of Kings, and Lord of Lords:
For it is then that you shall be the greatest Empire upon Earth.

13. He that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

14. And unto the Angel of the Church in Laodicea write: Unto the Bishops and
Pastors especially, and the charge under them in the Laodicean succession
(which reaches from the fourth Thunder till Christ visibly appear in the clouds
of Heaven, * and whose name denotes the nature thereof) write thus: These
things says the Amen, the faithful and true witness; in whom all the Promises
are Yea and Amen. Whose faithfulness is seen in bringing to pass the
Philadelphian Estate, that mavelous purity and external prosperity of that
succession of the Church, and therefore we are to believe his Promises of the
Eternal Felicity he reminds us of in this: A Blessed Immortality after this
Life, and his visible coming to judge the quick and the dead, and his putting
an end to this Terrestrial Scene, though in this declining Age of the Church in
the Laodicean succession some may be too slow to believe it: And therefore
these Titles of assuredness and veracity are here used. And he is called a
Faithful Witness also, because he so impartially witnesses of the State of the
Laodiceans, and does not flatter them. The beginning of the Creation of God. It
may be well understood of the New Creation, or Constitution of things under the
Gospel; which he having carried on all along hitherto according to Prophecy and
Prediction, he is the more certainly and readily to be believed in this last
Catastrophe of things: Or taking the beginning of the Creation of God, with an
higher reference to that Title of his (...), which respects his Divinity, or
the Eternal Logos, without whom nothing was made or created; Then the
importance of of it is this, That as sure as he made this Earth, this habitable
round world, so we may be as sure that he both can by the same power, and also
will destroy it again in this Laodicean succession by a final Conflagration,
taking vengeance of the wicked, and resetling all true Believers in an Eternal
State of Glory.

15. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: But that you are
careless, formal, lukewarm Christians. Thou retainest indeed still the external
form of the Philadelphian Church, as to Doctrine and Worship; but thou art
destitute of that Spirit of Life in the New Birth, which was the proper
character of thy deceased Sister Philadelphia. I would thou were cold or hot.
For though it be not better in it self to be quite cold, yet it were for thee,
that thou might the more easily be convinced of thine own wants, and by
repentance and mortification enter into the state of Regeneration, and be made
partaker of my Spirit.

16. So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spew
thee out of my mouth. I will show how nauseous and loathsome thou art to me in
a torrent of Reproof, as a sign of my disgust against thee; and upon thy
impenitence at length being weary of thee (as concerning God it is said before
his bringing the deluge of water on the Earth, that it repented him that he had
made man) I will spew thee out from my self, who fill all things, and
exterminate thee out of Being by a deluge of Fire that shall put an end to this
Terrestrial Scene of things, and the Laodicean Church shall be no more.

17. But in the mean time, that I may faithfully admonish thee, Because thou
say I am rich and increased with goods and have need of nothing, whilst thou
considerest, that Peace and Plenty, that Power and Rule, and security from
Enemies which thou enjoyest, and the purity of Doctrine and Worship free from
Superstition and Idolatry, and the abundance of both Natural and Divine
Knowledge, and clear understanding of Prophecies, by reason of their completion
now, and skillful Interpretations of thy Predecessors, and Universal Freedom
from all persecution; I tell thee, notwithstanding all these thou art mistaken
in thy condition. And know not that thou art wretched and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked, in that thou art destitute of the Glories and
Treasures of the Inward Man, and art ignorant of the mysteries of Regeneration,
and of the Spirit of Life in the New Birth, and art content with a covering,
but not of my Spirit, whereby thou do but add sin to sin.

18. I counsel thee therefore, to buy of me Gold tried in the fire, that thou
may be rich. Gold refined in the fire, and so pure, that it is transparent
like glass. New Jerusalem Gold, which is the New Nature or Creature, mine own
Image: And the price is, thy sincere endeavoring and breathing after that
state, that thou may possess those durable Riches which shall not be melted,
when the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the Earth and the works
therein shall be burnt up, namely, at the Conflagration. And white raiment,
that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not
appear. And buy of me white raiment, that is, groan in thy self, O spiritless
Laodicea, and desire to be clothed with thy Spiritual Tabernacle from Heaven,
that being so clothed thou may not be found naked, and that the shame of
thy nakedness may not appear at the last day. And anoint thine eyes with
eye salve that thou may see. Clear thy judgment and understanding by a
diligent purification of thy Soul from all corruptions of flesh and spirit, and
perfect holiness in my fear, that thou may see, and have a right discerning
in all things.

19. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore and repent.
As many as I love I chasten, and I have a love to thee even for thy outward
resemblance of thy deceased Sister Philadelphia, and therefore I chastise thee
with sharp reproofs to bring thee to an inward sense of things, and shall
further afflict thee by outward straits and distress to awaken thee. For thine
Enemies Gog and Magog by reason of thy remisness in Religion, security and
neglect of the Interest of my Kingdom will grow upon thee, and at last
encompass the Beloved City. Be zealous therefore, and repent thee of thy dead
formality and remisness in the affairs of my Kingdom, that so thou may
recover the Philadelphian love and fervency.

20. And do not complain of difficulties; Behold I stand at the door and knock;
if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him and will sup
with him, and he with me. I offer my aid unto you, and solicit you ever and
anon by good monitions and suggestions, and if you obey sincerely my dictates
and succors of Light and Grace I offer you, and by this your sincerity open me
the door, I will sup with you, I will communicate my Nature and Spirit unto
you. You shall feed on my flesh which is meat indeed, and drink of my blood
which is drink indeed, and that saying shall be fullfilled in you; John 14.20,
23.
I in my Father and you in me, and I in you. If any man love me and keep my
Word, my Father will love him, and will come to him, and abide with him.

21. And that I may the more effectually rouse thee up out of this dead
formality and tepidity, out of this dullness and lethargy, I add further, To him
that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne. You shall not only
enjoy Me and my Father in this life, but if you will stand to the conflict, and
so attain to the state of the Spirit of Life and real Regeneration into the
Living Image of my self, I will exalt you to the same happiness with my self,
your bodies being transformed into the Image of my glorious Body, and so fitted
to ascend into the Throne that he has given me, whose Throne is Heaven, as
Earth his footstool. Nay, you shall sit with me in my Throne, and judge the
Apostate Angels at the last day. This is a great and stupendous promise, but
you ought to consider, that he has promised it, who is the Amen, the true and
faithful Witness, and the Beginning of the Creation of God, and therefore both
will and can bring all his counsels, purposes and promises to pass: Even so.
Amen.

22. He that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

NOTES. CHAPTER III. Verse. I.
Whose condition is notified in their name, etc. Namely, by way of allusion to
the Lapis Sardius, whose virtue is to exhilarate the mind of him that wears it,
and make him courageous, and is an Amulet against witchcraft and poison: Which
may intimate the comfortable doctrine of Justification by Faith, and the
defeating the poison of that cup of Fornication in the hand of the Whore of
Babylon, that the Sardian Church is not infected with that poison of Idolatry,
as being out of the reach of that enchanted Cup of the Whore. Sardis also
signifies Canticum Laetitiae, which suits well with the Joy of the Reformed
Churches at the rising of the Witnesses, signified by those Harpers with the
Harps of God in their hand, chapter 15. But being the Sardius Stone is in Hebrew
called (...), Odem, which sounds near to Edom, and by the Latins termed
Carnalina, this insinuates the defectuousness of the Sardian Church, and her
Carnality in several points of Doctrine and Practice. Concerning which see my
Exposition of the seven Churches, Chap. 7.

Verse. 7. And discovers its nature and condition in its name, etc. For (...) is
the Love of the Brethren, and indeed consequently the Love of God and all Men,
these Virtues are so nearly linked together when they are sincere, and in a due
degree. See my Exposition of the Seven Churches, Chap. 8.

The Apostle John calls Love: And so (...) signifies Amor, as also dilectus,
amatus, which will answer to the (...) of the Platonists; which is the highest
(...) of all.

Verse. 14. And whose name denotes the nature thereof, etc. For Laodicea
signifies either the Righteousness of the People, that is, an external popular
mode of Righteousness, the inward Life and Spirit decaying; which is too much
the state of Laodicea: Or it signifies the judging of the People, because in
this Interval of the Church, namely at the end thereof, Christ will come
visibly to Judge and Sentence all People to their final doom.

CHAPTER IV.
HItherto reaches the first part of this Book of Prophecies, which has this
peculiar and distinctly from the other two that follow, That as they run
altogether upon real Symbols or Iconismes, Representations or Images of what is
foretold taken from Things; this first part did most what run upon Nominal or
Paranomastical Iconismes or Images, consisting in allusion to Words or Names
that signified the condition of things foretold, as was obvious to observe in
the explication of that first part of this Book. The second part now begins,
and that as high, and reaches as far as the first, that is, it reaches from the
beginning of the Christian Church to the end of the world. And it is to be
observed, that as this former part, the so far extended Prophecy of the
Churches, was ushered in by a voice like a Trumpet, and the glorious
Representation of Christ in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks; so here in
this sealed Book-Prophecy here is again the voice like a Trumpet, and Christ
again represented in a glorious manner, to show the parity of these two
Prophecies, and that they are of the like concern and extent: Which will appear
more plain in the Interpretation, after the Introduction in this Sealed
Book-Prophecy, which takes up the fourth and fifth Chapters, is explained.

1. After this I looked and behold a door was opened in Heaven. After this
Vision of the Seven Churches was past, and I come to my self again, having
occasion to look upwards; behold a door seemed to be opened in Heaven: And the
first voice which I heard, was as if it were of a Trumpet talking with me. And
lo! the first voice which I heard before the Vision of the Seven Churches, as
of a Trumpet talking with me, saying, Come up hither and I will show thee the
things which must be hereafter; that is, the Representations or Prefigurations
of those future things.

2. And immediately I was in the spirit, which is a sign he was again come to
himself before. And behold a Throne was set in Heaven, and one sat on the
Throne. Being thus caught up in Spirit, in this Ecstasie I presently saw a
Throne set in Heaven, and one sitting on that Throne with great Majesty.

3. And he that sat was to look upon like a Jasper and a Sardine Stone: A
Jasper and Sardine Stone, the one famous for the firmness thereof, denoting the
strength, or rather the Omnipotency of the Divinity; the other for the red,
fiery color of it, denoting the piercing activity of the Divine Nature: or the
color of Fire is here made choice of, as being the root of Light, to show,
that he that sits here on the Throne is God the Father: Which answers to that
appearance of Fire in him that sits on the Throne in Ezechiel's Vision, to whom
the Rainbow belongs: Which is there God the Father, with which this Vision has
no small affinity, as may appear, because the Rainbow is seen also here about
the Throne in sight like an Emerald, that imitates the most pleasing color of
the Rainbow or Halo, as it follows in the Text: And there was a Rainbow round
about the Throne in sight much like unto an Emerald.

4. And round about the Throne were four and twenty seats, and upon the seats I
saw four and twenty Elders sitting clothed in white raiment, and they had on
their heads Crowns of Gold. Here it also varies from that Vision of Ezechiel,
as being framed for a Type of the future State of the Church, when the New
Jerusalem descends from Heaven, and the Tabernacle of God is with men: And
therefore the four and twenty Elders are here said to sit round about the
Throne, as the Priests and Levites were pitched next the Tabernacle: But in
that they wear Crowns as well as white Raiment, it implies the sanctity of the
Kings in that State of the Church which this Type points at, those renewed
Apostolic Times in the New Jerusalem, when the Conversion of the Jews will add
the Heads of their twelve Tribes to the number of the twelve Apostles, which
these twenty four Elders or Princes of Nations may answer to. And in that there
is no one besides God and the Lamb here that appears to be Supreme over them;
it signifies, that in those Times the Popes Pretenses will vanish, and that
Kings and Princes then of the Christian Profession will know themselves, and be
acknowledged by all to be in all Causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil within
their own Dominions next and immediately under Christ Supreme Heads and
Governors.

5. And out of the Throne proceeded lightnings and thunderings, and voices: and
there were seven Lamps of fire burning before the Throne, which are the seven
Spirits of God. There is also mention of Lamps, and Fire, and Lightning, though
no Thundering in the Vision of Ezechiel, which is the Representation of the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, which is here again typified, but as a State to
come of the Church here on Earth. And the seven Lamps of Fire are, either * all
the ministering Angels, or all the living and quickening Graces of the Spirit of
God.

6. And before the Throne there was a sea of glass like unto Crystal. This is
not found neither in the Vision of Ezechiel, but is an Emblem also of the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, it being the pure laver of Regeneration, the being
baptized with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, which the seven Lamps also betoken.
And in that it is called a sea of glass, it may signify the pure transparent
condition of the Church, which is a multitude [as Sea signifies] the fixed
purity thereof being ever penetrated by the presence of the seven Lamps of
Fire, which are the seven Spirits of God. And * in the midst of the Throne, and
round about the Throne were four Beasts full of eyes before and behind. These
four Beasts full of eyes before and behind have plainly a resemblance of the
four Beasts in Ezechiel's Vision, but may here more particularly relate to the
four Camps of Israel, which was a Type of the New Israel of God: But in that
they are said to be full of eyes before and behind, it implies, they look
backward and forward into the Histories of Times past, and unto the Prophecies
and Predictions of things to come, for the better managing the Affairs of
Christ's Kingdom.

7. And the first Beast was like a Lion, which was the Standard of Judah, on the
East side of the Camp. The second Beast like a Calf, which was the Standard of
Ephraim on the West side of the Camp. The third Beast had the face of a man,
which was the Standard of Reuben on the South side. And the fourth Beast was
like a flying Eagele, which was the Standard of Dan on the North. And note that
these four Beasts were thus situated in the Vision of Ezechiel. And that this
only is a Type of that Church that shall be, cast thus into four parts, the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ signified in both Visions.

8. And the four Beasts had each of them six wings about him, (...), which is
but hard sense if (...), as it must, signify in a circle about him. And
therefore Grotius judiciously joins (...) together: And so the Text runs thus.
Had each of them six wings. And they were full of eyes without and within: And
they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty which
was, and is, and is to come. Now that the four Beasts are said each of them to
have six wings, as the Beasts in Ezechiel's Vision also have, undoubtedly they
have them for that use the Seraphims are said to make of them in the Prophet
Esaias; Cap. 6. verse. 2.
With twain to cover their faces, with twain to cover their feet, and with
twain to fly: Which implies a Reverence of the Divine Majesty, an activity and
readiness in his Service, and a carefulness over our Affections, that we walk
in clean paths. And whereas they are presently said to be full of eyes without
and within, it implies, that with one eye regarding outward objects, and the
other their own nature, and so comparing them together they will ever behave
themselves decorously and becomingly, with due reverence to that which is above
them in dignity and excellency, and at a due distance from those things that
are unworthy of them and beneath them: And therefore if any such thing be
offered them from without as is repugnant to the innate Light and immutable
Principles of an Intellectual Creature, their eyes within will easily discern
the Proposer to be either a Fool or an Impostor. This is the state even of the
whole People of God in those days: But as for their Reverence and devotional
sense of their Maker and Redeemer it is in a manner perpetual, they rest not
day and night saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is,
and is to come: who fills all things and times with his Presence and
Providence. And as the People are, so are their Priest-like Princes and Rulers.
For it follows immediately in the next Verses:

9. And when those Beasts give glory, and honor, and thanks to him that sat on
the Throne, who lives for ever and ever,

12. The four and twenty Elders also, Prince and People being of one heart and
mind, fall down before him that sat on the Throne, and worship him that lives
for ever and ever, and taste their Crowns before the Throne, in humble
acknowledgment from whom and for whom they Reign, even for the manifesting of
the Glory, and Honor, and Power of God in the Kingdom of his Saints: And
therefore they are introduced, Saying;

11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory and Honor, and Power, for thou
have Created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were Created.

NOTES. CHAPTER IV. Verse. 5.
All the Ministering Angels, or all the Living, etc. For Seven we substitute,
All, in this place, the Septenary Number with the Cabbalists signifying
Universality, whence of the Pythagoreans it is called (...). And the full
comprehension of the numbers of sundry things in this Book of the Apocalypse is
terminated in Seven.

Verse. 6. In the midst of the Throne, and round about the Throne, etc. The
Beasts seem to have been placed to St John's sight, so as that one appeared
just in the midst before the Throne, and the spectacle being exhibited to him
shelvingly, another appeared beyond the Throne in the same line; and two other,
the one on this side, and the other on that side in a line, cutting that other
in right Angles; so that they at due distances encompassed the Throne in a
Circle exterior to the twenty four Elders. And in that they were not only
seen, as it were in the middle of the Throne in the sense abovesaid, but on
each side also, and so encompassed the Throne placed in the common sections or
conterminations of the four quadrants of the Circle drawn about it, they are
said to be not only in the midst of the Throne but about the Throne in a Circle
at equal distances: Or else in the midst, that is, within the Circle of the
Throne which is thus conceived to be drawn about it, but so near that the
Beasts supposed like those in Ezechiel, will have the same faces appear within
the verges of the Throne that appeared without, but in opposite places: But
then the Elders must be placed in a Circle without the Beasts, which will make
these Priestly Kings, less answer to the Levites. But thereby we are the better
assured that they are Kings and not Priests. It Is possible both these ways may
be glanced at in the Vision, and that it may reflect both on the Camp of
Israel, and Vision of Ezechiel at once.

CHAPTER V.
1. ANd I saw in the right hand of him that sat on the Throne, that is, in the
hand of God, a Book written within and on the backside: (viz.) A Book that had
a more outward sense in the mere Letter which consists of Representations
Symbolical or Hieroglyphical, of Iconismes or Images of things future; and a
more inward sense, which is the sense of the future things themselves thus
represented in Symbols or Images; This Book of Prophecies was in the hand of
God the Father, in his power to impart it to whom he pleased, as it is
intimated in the beginning of the Apocalypse, which is said to be the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, but that God gave it unto him: sealed with seven
seals: And in that this Book is said to be sealed with seven seals, it shows
what a great Arcanum or Secret it was, it being a Representation of a Scene of
Affairs reaching from the beginning of the Church to the end of the world.

2. And I saw a strong Angel proclaiming with a loud voice, Who is worthy to
open the Book, and to loose the Seats thereof? And that the inestimable worth
of this Book of Prophecies, which sottish and profane Spirits so much slight
and vilify, and crafty Politicians so much harden themselves against, may
appear, here is proclamation made by a strong Angel with a loud voice, Who is
worthy to open? etc. that is, Who is worthy to have so vast a foresight of
things communicated to him from God, as to endite such a Book of Prophecies as
this?

3. And no man in Heaven nor in Earth, neither under the Earth was able to open
the Book, neither to look thereon. And this proclamation being made there was
none found neither of the Angels in Heaven, or Men upon Earth, or Infernal
Spirits under the Earth, who are vulgarly accounted so wise and cunning, and in
whom Witches and Wizards so confide for the knowledge of things to come, that
were able to open the Book or look thereon, (i. e.) That had so reaching a
foresight as to pierce through such a large series of future things as is
contained in this Book, which intimates, that nothing but the holy Power of God
could be the Author thereof.

4. And I wept much because no man was found worthy to open and to read the
Book, neither to look thereon: That is to say, I was sorely grieved that there
was none found meet or worthy to have imparted to him so stupendous a faculty
of foretelling things to come, in such a manner as they are in this Book: So
useful a gift of Prophecy. Where John personates every good Christian that is
solicitous for the affairs of the Church, and thoughtfull what will become of
her.

5. And one of the Elders says to me, weep not. Cease to be so grieved and
troubled in spirit. Behold the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the root of David
has prevailed to open the Book, and to loose the seven Seals thereof. Christ
has by his courageously fulfilling the will of his Father obtained this
privilege, That he may open the Book and loose the Seals thereof; that is, to
have so wonderful a comprehension of future things, and piercing foresight by
the gift of his Father, as to foresee all that is contained in this Book, and
to communicate it to his Church.

6. And I beheld, and lo, in the midst of the Throne and of the four Beasts,
and in the midst of the Elders; That is, betwixt God the Father and the Church,
stood a Lamb as it had been slain, and with bleeding wounds upon him; the
blessed Jesus Mediator betwixt God and Man, as he is here placed betwixt the
Throne and the four Beasts: Having seven horns, which are the Emblems of Power,
as being he to whom All Power is given in Heaven and in Earth: And seven Eyes:
All manner of Wisdom and Counsel, and all the Angels of God at his beck to
execute his Counsel and his Will; which is implied in what follows, which are
the seven Spirits of God sent forth unto all the Earth.

7. And he came and took the Book out of the right hand of him that sat upon
the Throne: That is, it was given to him of his Father to have so vast a
foresight of things to come, from the beginning of the Church even to the end
of the World, and Power to effect what was foreknown, according to the
beginning of this Book of the Apocalypse, The Revelation of Jesus Christ which
God gave unto him, etc. which shows, that the whole Book of the Apocalypse, the
Epistles to the seven Churches, as well as the Visions that follow, is a
Prophetical Revelation of things to come.

8. The consideration of which wonderful Gift and Power signified by this
receiving of the Book, being made so exceeding manifest in the times of the
Spiritual Reign of Christ in the New Jerusalem, which Times this pompous
Introduction to the Prophecy of the sealed Book does typifie, (For the four and
twenty Elders belong to that state of the Church) will raise a wonderful strain
of Faith and Devotion in them, and admiration of the stupendous Providence of
Christ over his Church, as it is signified by what follows: And when he had
taken the Book, the four Beasts, and four and twenty Elders fell down before
the Lamb, having every one of them Harps and golden Uials full of Odours, which
are the praises and prayers of the Saints.

9. And they sing a new Song, saying, And then will they sing a new Song,
namely, they will then praise their Creator and Redeemer for that new
constitution of things in the Reign of the Spirit, (as it is written, Chap. 21.
And he that sat upon the Throne said, Behold I make all things new: And he
said straightway to John, It is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the end, I will give him that is a thirst of the fountain of life freely; that
is, I will communicate unto him my Spirit here, and make him partaker of
Eternal Life hereafter in my heavenly Kingdom) and they will say as follows:
Thou, O Christ, were worthy to take the Book and open the seals thereof; that
is, to have communicated unto thee so vast a comprehension of the futurity of
things, as is contained in this Book of Prophecies, and Power to carry on
things as they are predicted. For thou wast slain and have redeemed us to God
by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation: This is
but a just reward of thy endearing sufferings upon the Cross for the salvation
of Mankind.

10. And have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign upon
Earth. In this blessed Millennium which thou have long ago shown to thy Church
in that admirable Book of Prophecies: which by the Ministry of an Angel thou
communicatest to thy beloved Disciple John.

11. And to show further how holy, heavenly, and Angelical those Times will be,
and what an Union and Agreement betwixt the Church of Christ and the Angelical
Hosts, it is further added: And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many Angels
round about the Throne, and the Beasts and the Elders; which Beasts and Elders
signify the Church of Christ consisting of men upon the Earth. And the number
of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands.

12. These innumerable companies of Angels join themselves to the Quire of the
Church, saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive
power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and
blessing, as by whom the State of the Church is brought to such a blessed
condition upon Earth, according to the predictions of this Book of Prophecies.
Let all therefore be ascribed to him.

13. Nay, the completion of this Book of Prophecies in those Times will be such
an Universal conviction of the Divinity and Sonship of Christ, that he was
really and in truth the foretold Messiah, the Beginner and Finisher of the
Works of God to his Church, that that will come to pass that follows. And every
Creature which is in Heaven and on the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as
are in the Sea, and all that are in them heard I saying, Blessing, Honor,
Glory and Power be unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for
ever and ever. All intelligent Beings and Spirits, whether belonging to Heaven,
Earth or Sea, even the Infernal Spirits themselves shall in the inward powers
of their minds and consciences be forced to break out and confess upon the
completion of this Book of Prophecies, That all Blessing, and Honor, and
Glory, and Power is due unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for
ever and ever.

14. And the four Beasts said Amen. Unto this the four Beasts, that is, the
Church of Christ here upon Earth, we may be sure will say Amen, that is,
consent to such a doxologie: And the four and twenty Elders fell down and
worshipped him that lives for ever and ever; that is, All the Kings and
Princes of this truly Catholic and Apostolic Church will fall down and
worship him that was dead but is now alive, and behold he lives for evermore;
that is, they will devotionally adhere to him, serve him and obey him, who
according to the promise made to his Church, has brought things at last to such
an Admirable, Heavenly, Holy, Righteous and Peaceful Constitution: So Glorious
an Effect will there be of the completion of the Prophecies of this Book, both
as to Christ, and also as to his Church: Which shows how detestable the
ingratitude is of such either shallow and frivolous, or profane Spirits, or
cunning obdurate Politicians, that phancying it not to suit with their worldly
Interest, vilify and decry it; when as indeed this Book of Prophecies will
prove the most effectual instrument in the hand of Providence that may be, for
the rooting all Atheism and Infidelity out of the world, and Converting all the
Kingdoms of the Earth to the Faith and Profession of our Lord Jesus Christ.

CHAPTER VI.
1. HItherto the Introduction to the Prophecies of the Sealed Book, we come now
to the Prophecies themselves: And I saw, says John, when the Lamb opened one of
the Seals, that is the first Seal: And I heard as it were the noise of thunder,
one of the four Beasts; that is, the first of the four Beasts, the Lion, whose
place is toward the East, saying, Come and see. Where we may observe how some
parts of the Introductory Representation are made use of in this following
Vision, as some parts of the description of him that was seen amongst the
golden Candlesticks are made use of in the Prefaces of the Epistles to the
Churches.

2. And I saw and behold a white Horse, and he that sat on him had a Bow.
Which Heroes on horseback, and on a white Horse signifies a great Commander or
Emperor, Righteous, Prosperous and Glorious in his undertaking. And in that he
is said to appear upon the first Beast (the Lion placed on the East side) his
saying, Come and see, it is a sign that he is an Emperor from the East part of
the World, and in a word, it is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, that Captain of
our Salvation Jesus Christ, who being ascended into Glory was yet present with
his Church, affording them all succors to carry on their Spiritual Warfare.
And these Gospel-soldiers came from Judea in the East. And in that he is said
to have a Bow, it denotes, that he aimed at something of no mean importance.
And this Heroes on Horseback with his Bow answers to the Ephesine succession of
the Church, whose name imports earnest purpose or desire, but the thing aimed
at or designed is specified in the following words: And a Crown was given unto
him; to wit, the right of it, even the Roman Imperial Crown, and this Bow-man
hat the mark when the Emperor Constantine turned Christian. This is also the
Crown promised to the Church in the Smyrnean succession: Be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee the Crown of Life; the Crown of security from Pagan
persecution. And he went forth conquering and to conquer. This Heroes on the
white Horse went forth conquering and to conquer till he obtained this Crown
under the sixth Seal.

3. And when he had opened the second Seal, I heard the second Beast; that is,
the Calf or Ox, say, Come and see.

4. And there went out another Horse that was red, a color significant enough
of the effusion of blood, as the Ox also of the great slaughter, that was to
be under this Seal, and what follows, plainly implies so much: And power was
given to him that sat thereon to take peace from the Earth, and that they
should kill one another, and there was given to him a great Sword, as a token
of exceeding much bloodshed on the Earth under the second Seal. This Seal
therefore begins with Trajan a Spaniard, and therefore an Emperor from the
West. In his Reign, and Adrian's his successor, there were so great commotions
in the Empire, that there were slain in those. Tumults and Rebellions at least
fifteen hundred thousand men.

5. And when he had opened the third Seal, I heard the third Beast, that had a
face like a man, and was placed on the South, say, Come and see: And I beheld,
and lo a black Horse, and he that sat on him had a pair of balances in his
hand. The black color betokens Gravity, Severity, Justice, which Justice also
is intimated by the face of a Man this third Beast is said to have, Prudence
and Justice being the proper characters of a Man: Which suits well with the
last part of the description, the pair of Balances in the Riders hand; which
argues him Severe, Just, Frugal and Provident.

6. Which accordingly is expressed by that voice in the midst of the four Beasts:
And I heard a voice in the midst of the four Beasts say, A measure of wheat for
a penny, and three measures of barley for a penny, and see thou hurt not the
oil and wine; that is, the Rider of the black Horse will take special care: 1.
That if one Choenix of wheat be sold for a penny, that three of barley shall be
sold for a penny. 2. That men shall live by their honest labors, not by theft
or rapine: For Choenix signifies (...), the food for a day, and Denarius the
wages for a days labor. 3. There shall be no stealing nor robbing but buying
by measure, though it should prove so hard a time that their days labor will
but find them food. 4. He will provide that they shall have a Choenix for a
penny; ( viz.) that the price of bread-corn and necessary victuals shall not
exceed a days wages. And so of Wine and Oil, he will take care that there be
no (...), no fraud in buying and selling there neither, nor spoil and wast by
unruly Soldiers. Which prediction was egregiously fulfilled in Septimius
Severus an African, and therefore an Emperor from the South, and in Alexander
the Son of Mammea, both of them notorious lovers of Justice, and severe
punishers of Thieves and Robbers: To the latter the sight of an unjust Judge
was so nauseous, that he was ready to vomit at him; and he was famous for that
Christian Motto, Do as you would be done to: Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne
feceris, which he caused to be set up in his Palace, and other public places.
They are both taken notice of for their care and provision in Bread-corn, and
other necessaries of life.

7. And when he had opened the fourth Seal, I heard the fourth Beast, that was
like a flying Eagle, and was placed on the North, say, Come and see.

8. And I looked and behold a pale Horse: which color of the Horse is very
suitable to the Name of the Rider. For it follows; And his name that sat on him
was Death: And Hell followed him, that is the Grave, which is made a person
here as Death is, and as it were his Lackey to follow him. And Power was given
unto them over the fourth part of the Earth, that is over almost all the Roman
Empire, which upon due compute was then a third part of the Earth; as if this
Power reached three fourths of the Empire. To kill with the Sword, and with
Hunger and with Death, that is, with Famine and Pestilence, and with the Beasts
of the Earth: Which ordinarily invade the Land in those Eastern and Southern
parts in extreme Famines and Pestilences to increase the mortality. The
beginning of this Seal is from Maximinus the Thracian, and consequently an
Emperor from the North, as the place of the flying Eagle denotes, that notable
bird of prey, and feeder on dead carcasses, and therefore significant of the
condition of this Seal under which concur so various modes of vast Mortality,
the Sword, Famine, Pestilence and wild Beasts. Which Pestilence raging and
overrunning in a manner the whole Empire for the space of fifteen years, and
ending Anno CCLXIII, from Maximinus to this year is the extent of this Seal.
And now for the Sword in the Interval of this Seal, besides that in the Reign
of Gallus and Volusianus Emperors, the whole Empire in a manner was exhausted
with rapine and slaughters by the Barbarians, and consequently Tillage did fail
and Famine ensue; there were not two more bloody Beasts in the world than
Maximinus and Gallienus, the former for his cruelty being called Cyclops,
Busiris, Phalaris, and what not, who without accusers or defense, caused to be
killed and spoiled of their goods no less than four thousand men; and the
latter his cruelty was such that he killed all the Male Sex of whole Cities,
and made nothing of slaying three or four thousand of his Soldiers in a day.
And there are many more examples of horrid cruelty by the Sword under this Seal
according to the prediction thereof: So admirably fully was accomplished what
was predicted by these four Seals, of which it is to be noted, that not only
parts of the Introductory Vision are made use of, namely, the four Beasts which
usher in each Seal, (I mean the Visions thereof) as parts of the description of
him that appeared in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks in the
salutation of each Epistle are again made use of; but as those parts of his
description were suitable to the things signified concerning the Church the
Epistle was wrote to, so each Beast is suitable to the things predicted in each
Seal in these four first Seals; which strengthens the certainty of the Epistles
being a Prophecy reaching from the beginning of the Church to the end of the
World, as well as this of the Sealed Book.

9. And when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Altar the souls of
them that were slain for the Word of God, and for the Testimony which they
held: that is, he saw them lie at the foot of the Altar as Sacrifices that are
slain use to do, slaughtered or martyred for their courageously professing
Christianity: For by Faith, and an invincible Firmness of mind, and unspeakable
Patience, they had made themselves an Oblation or Sacrifice for the carrying on
the Affairs of the Kingdom of Christ. Here is predicted the bloody ten years
persecution begun by Dioclesian, and continued by his successor, which was the
most terrible that befell the Church of God. This is the dregs of bitterness in
the Smyrnean succession of the Church, where by the ten days of Tribulation,
this persecution may be more particularly glanced at, as well as all the Ten
Persecutions usually so called.

10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true,
do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth? that
is, the Persecution of the Church under this Seal was so exceeding grievous
that they called aloud for Divine Vengeance on this persecuting Empire.

11. And white Robes were given to every one of them, and they were adopted
into the Society of the Blessed: which white Robes allude to the custom under
the Jewish Temple. Where after a due search into their Pedigree, and the
unblemishedness of their body, by giving them, or putting on them a white
Vesture they were admitted into the Court of Priests, as these to serve God in
Heaven. And it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little
season, until their fellow servants also, and their brethren that should be
killed as they were, should be fulfilled: that is, till their Fellow Christians
under Licinius, Julian, and under the Arians should be slain, after which due
vengeance should be taken of the bloody Empire under the time of the Trumpets.

12. And I beheld when he had opened the sixth Seal, and lo! there was a great
Earthquake. The Greek word is (...), and may have a more general signification,
and denote a concussion, shaking and commotion of the frame of things: which
things are here the constitution of the Pagan Hierarchy, as I may so call it,
or Gentilism, the Religion of the Roman Empire as Pagan. And the Sun became
black as sackcloth of hair, and the Moon became as blood: that is, they were
both eclipsed, both the Dragon himself, the Sun, as Head of that Religion, and
the Office of their Pontifex Maximus, which is next to the Draconick Majesty,
and there intimated by the Moon. These plainly suffered an Eclipse, when the
Roman Emperors by professing Christianity renounced Satan with all the wicked
crew of evil Spirits under him, and would serve him no more, nor exercise the
Office of his Pontifex Maximus, as is recorded of Constantine, Constantius,
Valentinianus, and Valens, and Gratian would not so much as retain the name of
Pontifex Maximus.

13. And the stars of Heaven fell unto the Earth even as a Fig Tree casts her
untimely figs when she is shaken with a mighty wind: that is, all the false
gods of this Diabolical Polity, the frame of the Pagan Religion, they fell from
that Religious Honor and Worship which was given them, and were trampled
under-foot by the prevailing Christians, as also their Priests that served them.

14. And the Heaven departed as a scrowl when it is rolled together: that is,
this Pagan Hierarchy shrivelled up with all the false Deities and Priests
therein, as a scrowl of parchment that hides the letters therein contained as
it is rolled up. And every Mountain and Island were removed out of their
places: that is, their high places where they sacrificed, and their Temples
divided from other houses for their supposed sacredness, were demolished at
last by Theodosius.

15. And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the
chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every freeman hid
themselves in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains: that is, all sorts of
men from the highest to the lowest were sorely affrighted and dismayed at this
terrible storm that came upon the Pagan Hierarchy, nor were able to resist the
force thereof, not Maximianus Galerius, not Maxentius, not Maximinus with
Martinianus Caesar, not Licinius, nor Julian the Apostate, who all felt the
irresistible Power and Wrath of the Lamb; and some of them, (viz.) Galerius,
Maximinus and Licinius, their miserable conditions even whether they would or
no, forced them by open confession to give Glory to God.

16. And said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us and hide us from the face
of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb: like that of
Esaias 2.20. And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves of
the earth, for the fear of the Lord, and for the Glory of his Majesty, when he
arises to shake terribly the Earth; as he did in this shaking of the Pagan
Religion of the Empire, and abolishing their Idols.

17. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?
Not Galerius, not Maxentius, not Licinius, nor Julian, nor the Tyrants
Eugenius, and Argobastus, with all the Power the Pagan party were able to make,
could stand against this storm of the wrath of the Lamb. So that the Church
upon the Conversion of Constantine to the Faith entered into the state of the
Pergamenian succession being exalted out of the dust: And O that she had not
been thereupon exalted so much in her own mind, and become the Pergamenian
succession in the worst sense, that is, proud and cruel, as well as exalted in
Power.

CHAPTER VII.
HItherto the first six Seals which are contemporary with the Ephesine and
Smyrnean succession, and with the forepart of the Pergamenian; while the Church
was only exalted out of her Smyrnean affliction, (in which she had been so trod
to the ground) not yet grown haughty and Antichristian, and persecutive of the
true members of Christ, nor apostatized into gross Superstition and Idolatry as
she was after in the far greatest part of the Pergamenian Interval, and in all
the Thyatirian, in both which the eating things offered unto Idols is
mentioned: which tract of time is equal to the first six Trumpets, which
together with the seven Thunders fill up the whole space of the seventh Seal:
Which seven Thunders are put in the place of the seventh Trumpet on purpose,
that the six first Trumpets may be noted as a more peculiar space of time,
wherein as vengeance was taken on the Roman Empire by the Incursion of the
Barbarous Nations for the persecution of the Primitive Christians, so in the
mean time a kind of Paganochristianism and Antichristian Power sprung up in the
Church, and grew to the height: I say, this being the condition of things under
the first six Trumpets, the artifice of the following transition from the first
six Seals to them is admirable, and of grand consideration. The hundred forty
four thousand sealed, and so taken special notice of by Divine Providence,
intimating, that the true Apostolic Church should be still preserved all this
time, notwithstanding all the incursions and devastations of the Barbarians,
and all the gross Apostasy, Idolatry and Antichristian cruelty from a wickedly
degenerated Church, against Christ's true members, that held to the pure
Apostolic faith and practice.

1. And after these things, (viz.) after the opening the six Seals, I saw four
Angels standing on the four corners of the Earth, holding the four winds of the
Earth: that is, He saw the Ministers of Gods Power in making War and Peace, and
blusters in the world, and that at that time they held all in peace as for any
Incursions of the Barbarians into the Empire. That the wind should not blow on
the Earth, nor on the Sea, nor on any Tree: should not blow down buildings, nor
cause shipwracks on the sea, nor break off branches of trees, or tear them up
by the root. Houses, Ships and Trees in analogy, signifying Political Fabrics
and Constitutions. And the Babylonian Kingdom in Daniel is expressly represented
by a Tree.

2. And I saw another Angel ascending from the East: that is, from Christ, *
one of whose Titles is the East, having the Seal of the Living God, having a
Commission from Christ to protect such certain men from the imminent
destruction now coming upon the Empire. And he therefore cried with a loud
voice to the four Angels to whom it was given to hurt the Earth and the Sea;
that is, to raise tempests of War and Invasion on the Empire.

3. Saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the sea nor the trees; that is, forbear
to bring in those tempests of the Barbarians upon the Empire; Till we have
sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads: That is, marked them out for
deliverance and protection: Which insinuates the assured Providence of Christ
over his True Church, and living Members of his Body, in all that confusion and
corruption that would be under the first six Trumpets.

4. And I heard the number of them that were sealed: which is not numerally to
be understood but symbolically, noting the condition of the sealed, And there
were sealed an hundred forty four thousand: Which Chiliads or Thousands are
Cubical numbers, and signify therefore Stability or Constancy: But it is said
there were an hundred forty four thousands, it being the square number of these
Chiliads or Companies, of which the Root is Twelve, which is the Apostolical
number: Of all the Tribes of the children of Israel; namely, the twelve
Patriarchs typically or figuratively, being put for the twelve Apostles, and
the children of Israel for the Church of Christ, of which the Israelites are
here a Type, as they are in the Epistle to the Church in Pergamus, in which
Pergamenian Interval this sealing begins: Wherefore briefly by the hundred
forty four thousands, are meant the faithful, constant Apostolic Christians
that submitted not to the Tyranny and Idolatry of the Apostatized Church, but
were preserved pure and safe by Divine Providence during the sounding of the
first six Trumpets, under which notwithstanding the Empire was broken in
pieces, and the Tyranny and Idolatry of Antichrist rising, and increasing, and
growing to the height. So great was the Providence of God in his preservation
and protection of his truly Apostolic Church for all this.

5. Of the Tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand: Of the Tribe of Reuben
were sealed twelve thousand: Of the Tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand.
The order is much inverted and confounded in this numbering of the twelve
Tribes, besides that Dan is left out and Ephraims name is suppressed; because
those two Tribes were the ringleaders to Idolatry, ( Judges chap. 17.18.) But
Judah is here put before Reuben, because Christ was of the Tribe of Judah; but
Reuben keeps the second place, as by birthright, it being fit he should yield
to no other, especially his courage having been so notable in battles for the
Lord, Numb. 33. and Ios. 4. Gads valor also has purchased him the next place;
besides, that Elias and Iehu the destroyers of Baal and his worship were of the
Tribe of Gad.

6. And of the Tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand: This Tribe also is
notable for the woman of Sarepta that entertained Elias that great Champion
against the Baalitish Idolatry, and for Anna the Prophetess that gave testimony
to Christ when he was presented in the Temple. And these are the first four
Sons of Leah. Of the Tribe of Nephthali were sealed twelve thousand. Of the
Tribe of Manasses were sealed twelve thousand. Nephthali is here placed, and
Manasses before their Seniours, Simeon, Levi, Issachar and Zabulon; the former,
because that Tribe is so much ennobled by the story of Barac the Conqueror of
Sisera, and for Capernaum that See as it were of that great Bishop of Souls
Jesus Christ, whose residence was so much at Capernaum a City of Galilee, that
belongs to Nephthali, insomuch that he was called a Galilean: And the later for
the feats of Gideon the destroyer of the Altar of Baal, who was of the Tribe of
Manasses, as was also Elisha, upon whom the Spirit of Elias rested, and who was
sent to anoint Iehu King, that sore executioner of Iezebel.

7. Of the Tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of Levi
were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of Issachar were sealed twelve
thousand.

8. Of the Tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand. These four last Sons
of Leah were ranked according to their birth, there being nothing eximious in
them, or if there was, it being blotted again by some contrary miscarriages, so
that there was no extraordinary merit to break the order of their birth. Of the
Tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand. Of the Tribe of Benjamin were
sealed twelve thousand. Which two Tribes nominated from the other two Sons of
Rachel, as the Tribe of Nephthali and Manasses before from her other two, are
thrust down into this lowest place, and the Tribe of Joseph here put for the
Tribe of Ephraim, whose name is here suppressed, because of the foul faults of
that Tribe of Ephraim in Micha, Jeroboam and Ahab all Ephraimites: And Benjamin
juniour of all is rightly placed last: But upon the account of the whole we see
the ranking and ordering of the names of the Tribes is so fitted as to
represent a company zealous for Christ, and as zealous against Antichrist, (as
being that very Virgin Company with the Lamb on Mount Sion, Chap. 14.) and
against Spiritual Whoredom which is Idolatry. This pure Apostolic Church did
Christ seal and keep safe even during all that dangerous time under the
sounding of the first six Trumpets.

9. After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no man could number of
all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues stood before the Throne, and
before the Lamb: Namely, before that Throne above described in Heaven. For John
is supposed to see all these Visions in Heaven, though they concern things here
on Earth: Clothed in white robes and palms in their hands. This part of the
Vision therefore shoots beyond the Pergamenian and Thyatirian Interval of the
Church, and begins with the Sardian. Which enjoyes that promise to him that
overcomes, that he shall have power over the Nations; that is, whole Nations,
Tongues and People are now become open professors of the pure Apostolic Faith:
this is the effect of their victory, and the sign thereof, the Palm-branches in
their hands. They are the same with them that have got the victory over the
Beast, his Image and his Mark, and the number of his Name, and sing the Song of
Moses and of the Lamb, Chap. 15. Which is the commencement also of the Sardian
succession, which signifies a Song of Joy.

10. And it is here said: And they cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation
unto our God which sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb: Namely, because
he has thus delivered his Israel from the Antichristian bondage and persecution
they were under in the Pergamenian and Thyatirian successions.

11. And all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the Elders and
four Beasts, and fell before the Throne with their fates, and worshipped God:
This may seem to strike further into those Ages of the Church that come near
to, or are in the Blessed Millennium, to those of the Philadelphian Interval,
which are as it were the Succession and Offspring of the Apostolic Church
that held out in the most persecuting times of Antichrist, and are all held as
one continued Church, but growing and spreading further. In which Angelical
Times the consent and harmony of Heaven and Earth will be more full and more
perfectly united and accorded: So that it is no wonder it is said that the
Angels jointly with the Elders and four Beasts did fall before the Throne on
their faces and worship God.

12. Saying, Amen. Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and
honor, and power, and might: by which these happy and heavenly Times are
brought upon Earth; be unto God for ever and ever. Amen.

13. And one of the Elders answered, saying unto me, What are these that are
arrayed in white Robes? and whence came they? that is to say, how come the true
Apostolic Church in these days that are here foreseen, to be so prosperous,
and successful, and victorious? For to be clothed in white, signifies so in
the Prophetic style.

14. And I said unto him, Sir, thou know: And he said to me, These are they
which come out of great tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb: that is, these times of the Church that are
thus prosperous, as well as holy, it is in virtue of the great tribulation and
affliction, their predecessors endured under the cruel and bloody persecutions
of Antichrist: So that they have washed their Robes as it were, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb: that is, the sufferings of Christ in his true
and living members under Antichrist were the Instrumental Cause of the splendid
and prosperous condition of the blessed Times that are here prefigured, in or
near the Millennium, as the blood of the Lamb in the usual sense is justly
deemed the meritorious cause thereof.

15. Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night
in his Temple, ever thankfully mindful of the Evil they are delivered from,
and the great good they enjoy. In virtue of the former sufferings of the true
Apostolic Church under the Antichristian Tyranny, shall the Church in these
days here described enjoy peaceably their Religion, and make their addresses
to God continually in safety in his Holy Church, which is his Temple. And he
that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them. For these are the times of
Jehovah Shammah. Of the Tabernacle of God amongst Men, the times of the New
Jerusalem.

16. They shall hunger no more, nor thirst any more: They shall not be
false-fed nor hunger-starved by deceitful Teachers, that cannot impart to them
the bread of Life, nor raise the Spirit of Life in them by their Ministry (as
being devoid of it themselves) whereby their thirst may be satisfied. Neither
wall any Sun light on them, nor any heat. There shall no Political Power
whatsoever tyrannize over their consciences, and by their persecution force
them, as was usual under Antichrist, to a sapless, senseless, heartless, nay
grossly Superstitious and Idolatrous Religion against their own judgment and
inward sense of things.

17. For the Lamb that is in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall
lead them unto living fountains of waters: that is, Christ himself, by his
Spirit, and by true Spiritual Guides and Governors, to whom he has
communicated his Spirit, shall feed them; that is, guide and govern them, and
shall lead them unto Living Fountains of waters, shall conduct them into, and
guide them in the Dispensation of Life, the renovation of their inward Man into
the Living Image of God. And God shall wipe all tears from their eyes. They
shall be no more calamitous by the wrongs and persecutions of bloody Tyrants,
whether Spiritual or Temporal. For the true Apostolic Church shall then be an
impregnable City or Polity of it self, the New Jerusalem as it is described in
the 21 Chapter of the Apocalypse. This is the sense of this transition from the
six first Seals to the opening of the last, and reaches from the beginning of
the corrupt part of the Pergamenian Interval to the end of the Laodicean.

NOTES. CHAPTER VII. Verse. 2.
One of whose Titles is the East. This is Dr Hammonds sense upon the place, and
it is I think not only ingenious but true. For (...), that is (...), the East,
is with the Cabbalists the Eternal Wisdom of God, that is, the Eternal Word
which is Christ. And (...) is the very word in the Text, the same that occurrs
Luke 1. verse. 78. whereby (...), the Dayspring from on high has visited us,
which is there understood of Christ, as also, Zachar. 3.8. (...), and chap.
6.12. (...), Ecce vir, Oriens nomen ejus. And Jerem. 23.5. he is called (...),
as also chap. 33.14. All which places not only the Christians, but the Jews
understood of the Messiah: So plain is it, that (...), which is, Oriens, the
East or Dayspring is a Name or Title of Christ. And though in those places of
the Old Testament it is translated Germen, a Branch, as (...) most ordinarily
signifies, yet being it may also signify light or shining, and that (...) in
what sense soever is a Title of Christ, and yet does usually signify the East,
that the word here may be allusively used to signify Christ, is to me
abundantly rational: See Doctor Hammond upon Luke 1. v. 78.

CHAPTER VIII.
1. ANd when he had opened the seventh Seal, there was silence in Heaven about
the space of half an hour. This is spoken in allusion to the custom in the
service of the Temple, where though in the former part of their Service, while
the Sacrifices were offered the Temple rang again with their loud Music, yet
in the time of Incense, all were silent and in their tacit devotions.

2. And I saw seven Angels which stood before God, and to them were given seven
Trumpets. This he saw during this silence, or at the beginning thereof.

3. And another Angel came and stood at the Altar having a golden Censer, and
there was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers
of the Saints upon the golden Altar, which was before the Throne. Things thus
represented in Heaven prefigure things here on Earth, and these Ceremonies of
the Temple, the Devotions of the Christians, whose prayers are here represented
as coming up in remembrance before God: Which is expressed in this Judaical way
or Ceremony of the Temple by the giving to this Angel as to a Priest much
Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the golden
Altar, which was before the Throne, answering to the Altar of Incense overlaid
with Gold, that stood before the Sanctum Sanctorum.

4. And the smoke of the Incense which came with the prayers of the Saints
ascended up before God out of the Angels hand: that is, the desire of the true
Church, who are of one mind with God, ascended up before God, as Incense out of
a Priests hand, and was known and accepted with him. Their prayers in all
likelihood were in general for the preservation of the Church, and suppression
of both the old and new growing abominations of the Empire.

5. And to the end that you may know what the will of God was in order
hereunto, it is further added; And the Angel took the Censer and filled it with
the fire of the Altar, and cast it into the Earth: and there were voices, and
thundrings, and lightnings, and an earthquake. Which things betoken the wrath
of God to be poured upon the bloody persecuting Roman Empire, against whom the
souls of the slain under the Altar had called for vengeance, chap. 6.10. The
great tempests and commotions that should befall it are thus expressed in the
general, and as an effect of the foregoing groans and cries of his aggrieved
people.

6. And the seven Angels that had the seven Trumpets prepared themselves to
sound. And therefore those Tempests and Calamities will now more particularly
be described in the several soundings of those Angels that have the seven
Trumpets.

7. So the first Angel sounded, and there followed hail, and fire mingled with
blood: that is, a thundering hail-storm with fire, whereby is signified the
furious Invasion of the Barbarians into the Empire. And the mention of blood
seems on purpose to be added, that there may be no mistake, as if this storm
was to be upon trees and grass, and not upon men, though it follows: And they
were cast upon the earth, and the third part of trees was burnt up, and all
green grass was burnt up: Which the mention of blood shows not to be understood
of earth, trees and grass that bleed not, but of the men of the Roman Empire
great and small: Trees signifying the Great Ones, and the Grass the Common
People. And that it is understood of the Roman Empire is plainly intimated from
hence, that the third part is said to be burnt up: Which third part does not
signify the third part of the Roman Empire, but simply the Roman Empire, the
Empire being the third part of the known world in St John's time: So that here,
as in other places hereafter, Third part, is not to be taken numerally or
proportionally but symbolically, * as a character of the Roman Empire. The
Impletion of this Trumpet began about the year 395, when Alaricus invaded the
Empire with an infinite number of Goths, and other Barbarians, especially the
Eastern part thereof, harassing it for five years together. And in the year 401
the same Alaricus, with Goths, Alans, Hunnes broke into Italy also, and
besieged Honorius the Emperor at Hasta, and so terrified the Inhabitants of
Italy, that they were in a manner all ready to leave their dwellings: But with
much ado, partly by the valor of Stilico Honorius his General, partly by the
fair treaty of Honorius, he was content to recede into Illyricum, a Province of
the Eastern Empire. But Alaricus being quiet for a while, there was Anno 404 a
notorious irruption of the Barbarians into Italy to the number of two hundred
thousand under their General Radagaisus a Scythian, who yet was slain by
Stilico. And yet there was a third, and that the most grievous irruption of
all, An. 406 into the west, an innumerous multitude of Vandals, Alans,
Marcomans, Herules, Suedes, Alemans, Burgundians, and other Barbarians, with
which France, Spain, and lastly Africa were filled and miserably afflicted: So
punctually is this prediction of the hail-storm under the first Trumpet here
fulfilled.

8. And the second Angel sounded, and as it were a great mountain burning with
fire was cast into the sea, and the third part of the sea became blood: that is
to say, a great City, namely, Rome it self, (for so Mountain signifies in the
Prophetic style, and Sea the extent of Jurisdiction or Dominion) by its being
taken by Alaricus King of the Goths, who after the death of Stilico, Anno 410,
made a new and more fatal expedition into Italy: This case, I say, of this City
being taken by Alaricus was as if a burning Mountain had been cast into the
Sea, the earthiness and fieriness thereof being so contrary and mischievous to
water. And so was this condition of the City of Rome to the Territories and
Jurisdiction thereof: Which Sea signifies, the number Three or Third being the
character of the Roman Empire: For upon this taking of the City did presently
ensue the dilaceration or tearing in pieces of the Roman Jurisdiction into many
Kingdoms: So that the entireness of the Roman Dominion was plainly destroyed.
Whence the Sea is said to become blood, that is, to be dead, and to be dead is
to cease to be what a thing was before, namely, the Romanum Imperium, properly
so called, and as to the former sense thereof failing, when it was now divided
into so many Kingdoms: Which division Honorius was forced to begin by his
Covenant which he made with Alaricus for the regaining the City of Rome again,
and the Empire to himself; as he was likewise forced to make such like
Covenants with others: and so the Roman Empire was still more and more divided,
till about the year 455, when Rome was again sacked by Gensericus the Vandal,
or a little after, it was plainly divided into ten Kingdoms.

9. And the third part of the Creatures which were in the Sea and had life
died, and the third part of the ships were destroyed: that is, the Roman both
Men and profitable constitutions of things were altered, and ceased to be what
they were: Which here in Analogy to Sea are intimated to be Fishes, they being
the living Creatures proper to the Sea, and plainly said to be Ships. These now
had lost their former propriety, and they are no longer the entire Roman
Empire's but each respective Kingdom's to which they belong, to say nothing of
the real destruction of many. And this I think is a fair Impletion of the
second Trumpets prediction.

10. And the third Angel sounded, and there fell a great Star from Heaven
burning as it were a Lamp: As if it were a fair Comet called Lampadias, which
betokens the greatness of the Prince it denotes, and also the shortness of his
Reign. And it fell upon the third part of the Rivers, and upon the Fountains of
waters. The burning of it denotes the mischief to the Rivers and Fountains it
is said to fall into. Which Rivers are Provincial Magistrates or Armies, and
the Fountains of Waters Provincial Cities. And here is mention again made of
the Third part, that you may know the prediction belongs to the Roman Empire.
And it is no wonder this falling Star or Comet should be looked upon as so
mischievous to Rivers and Waters, when Natural History speaks of falling Comets
that have drunk up whole Rivers; so decorous is the representation.

11. And the name of the Star is called Wormwood; and the third part of the
waters became Wormwood, and many men died of the waters because they were made
bitter: that is, the condition of this Princes Reign was such, that the Roman
Territories were so full of affliction and calamity, that their life was bitter
to them, besides the slaughter of many in wars. Now this Prince was the Western
Caesar, who from the time that Gensericus sacked and pillaged Rome, which was
Anno 455, struggling with Death for a while in the succession of those
inconsiderable and unfortunate Caesar's, Avitus, Majoranus, Severus, Anthemius,
Olybrius, Glycerius, Nepos, at last expired in Augustulus, into which Name the
Western Caesar had dwindled, and under which that Caesareat was quite
extinguished by Odoacer King of Herules, to the bitter misery of the Fountains
and Rivers, the Cities and Magistrates Provincial. Thus did the third Trumpet
sound the sad final fate of the Western Caesareat, under the figure of a great
falling Star, called Wormwood; which Odoacer cast down and extinguished, and
reigned himself King of Italy sixteen years, who restored to Rome her Consulate
which he had taken away before. And King Theodoricus that vanquished him and
succeeded him, so rebuilt Rome, and restored to it all the Ancient
Magistracies, Honors and Privileges belonging to it, that bating the memory
of her misery and infamy, she seemed perfectly restored to her former Glory and
Felicity; and thus she continued through the Reign of several successors of
Theodoricus.

12. But the fourth Angel sounded, and the third part of the Sun was smitten,
and the third part of the Moon, and the third part of the Stars, so as the
third part of them was darkened, and the day shone not for a third part of it,
and the night likewise: that is, there is nothing of the Roman luster of the
lower or higher degree left. For that this belongs to Rome, the wonted
character [ Third] plainly shows: Therefore under this Trumpet there is no
longer at last any King of Rome, denoted by the Sun, nor Consular Power, nor
Senatorian, nor the Power of other known Ancient Magistrates of Rome, denoted
by the Moon and Stars; but the City at last, namely, after that from the year
542, in the Ostrogothick War by Belisarius and Narsus, Iustinian's Generals, it
was deprived of the Consular Power, and after taken twice by Totilas, and
burnt, and retaken by Narses, and a little after struck to the ground by
thunder, and lightning, and tempest, being despoiled of all Ancient Ranks of
Roman Magistracy, sunk to that ignoble and obscure Title of the Duchy of Rome,
and after was forced to pay Tribute to Ravenna (under the Exarchate) a City
that before had been subject to her. In which inglorious state she continued
till the year 750: Which year is the Epoch of that notable Interval of the
Kingdom of the Saracens from the beginning of the Caliphate of the Abasidae
(who first made Bagdad their Imperial Seat) to the taking of the said Bagdad by
Togrulbeck King of the Turks, which was in the year 1055. And this is the easy
and natural sense of the fourth Trumpet, and perfectly fills up the scope
thereof.

13. And I beheld, and heard an Angel flying through the midst of Heaven,
saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe to the Inhabiters of the Earth, by reason
of the other voices of the Trumpet of the three Angels which are yet to sound.
These Woes are denounced against the Roman Empire, who by this time, besides
the guilt of the blood of the Primitive Martyrs, had in a gross manner lapsed
into a kind of Paganochristian Idolatry, which they would be found in under
these following Trumpets, and in cruel persecutions of the Apostolic Members
of the Church that would not submit to their Idolatrous Paganochristianisme:
Wherefore vengeance proportionable to their redoubled wickedness shall be
poured down upon them under the voices of the Trumpet of the three Angels that
are to come.

NOTES. CHAPTER VIII. Verse. 7.
As a character of the Roman Empire, etc. That the third part, or subtriple
proportion is a character of the Roman Empire, will appear from Chap. 12. verse.
4. where the Dragon with seven Heads and ten Horns, which is undoubtedly the
Roman Empire Pagan, is said with his tail to have drawn the third part of the
Stars of Heaven, and cast them to the Earth: Which in the Prophetic style is
as much as to say, that he had brought down a third part of the Princes or
Rulers of the known world in that time, and subjected them to himself; that is,
that the Roman Power had subdued a third part of the Powers and Principalities
of the World to her self. For Heaven and Earth are the parts of a Political
World as well as of a Natural: And the Stars of the Political World are the
several Princes or Rulers thereof. But when they are subjected to some other
great Potentate, then they cease to be fixed Stars, but fall to the Earth, that
is, to the low estate of subjection, or are utterly extinct. And in that they
are said to be cast down by the tail of the Dragon; by his tail is understood
his Retinue, his Train, Military especially, his Armies and Forces whether by
Land or by Sea. This is a most assured sense of the Prophetic style, and that
therefore the amplitude of the Roman Dominion is hinted by the third part of
Stars cast down to the Earth by the Dragons Tail, as if it were about the
third part of the known world in St John's time. And that consequently this
subtriple proportion is an intended character of the Roman Empire, whereby we
may know, that such or such a Vision belongs to it. And thus to give characters
from Numbers and Proportions is according to the Cabbalistical mode, and the
very Genius of this Book which is Cabbalistical. And it is absurd to think
there should be so repeated a mention of a third part so perpetually of things
(as if Divine Providence had a peculiar pique against the third part of things
or persons more than any other part, as it may seem in at beast a dozen places
in the Apocalypse) were it not there were this mystery under it.

CHAPTER IX.
1. ANd the filth Angel sounded, and I saw a Star * fallen from Heaven to
Earth, that is, a lapsed Spirit or Angel, a Devil if you will. For as a Star
signifies an Angel, so a fallen Star a lapsed Angel. And to him was given the
Key of the bottomless pit: That is, he had great Power in the Kingdom of
darkness, of which a Key is a Symbol.

2. And he opened the bottomless Pit, and there rose a smoke out of the Pit, as
the smoke of a great furnace: That is, there arose a hot and hellish zeal
conjoined with dark Ignorance for the Imposturous Religion of Mahomet. And the
Sun and the Air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the Pit: That is, the
Gospel of the Sun of Righteousness was endeavored to be clouded and eclipsed
by the overrunning force and false pretenses of Monotheisme, and of a more
pure worship in Mahometisme.

2. And there came out of the smoke Locusts upon the Earth: That is, under this
dark, ignorant, and false pretense, the Saracens professors of the Mohammedan
Religion spread themselves over the Earth. And unto them was given power as the
scorpions of the Earth have power; to have their sting and poison in their
tail; which deadly sting and poison in the Saracens was the falseness of their
Religion, which they transfused at the end of their conquests. That was the
poisonous sting to all conscientious Christians; and to others it was at least
poison if not a sting.

4. And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grass of the Earth,
neither any green thing, neither any tree: Which here in Analogy stand for
several orders of Men, as the Locusts for the Saracens. But only those men,
that have not the seal of God in their foreheads; which intimates, that
notwithstanding the grassations of these Impostors, the truly Apostolic Church
would be kept safe. And there is mention made of Men, to insinuate, that these
Locusts were also men, not mere insects: For Locusts do not fall upon Men, but
upon Grass and Trees.

5. And to them it was given that they should not kill them: That is, that
these Saracens should indeed infest the Roman Empire sore, but not destroy it
quite, as after happened by the Euphratean Horsemen: But that they should be
tormented five months; that is, during their time of lying upon it, called here
five months in allusion to the time of Locusts who live about that space of
time, as Naturalists relate: But their continuance in vexing Italy was not much
above five months of years, if that may be particularly glanced at. And their
torment was as the torment of a Scorpion when he strikes a man: (viz.) lesser
at first, but increasing upon him: and the stroke being by the Serpentine tail
of the Locusts, it shows the poison and sting to be Diabolical, and to cause
such vexations of mind as that poison is apt to breed. And as the torment of a
Scorpion when he strikes a man is from a white poison transfused in the stroke,
as Apollodorus relates in Pliny, lib. 11. So it is that perversely pretended
Monotheisme of these Saracens, that looks so fairly and innocently on it, with
which they might perplex and torment the minds of the unsealed, and sorely
disquiet their consciences, besides the general fear of their lives in them
that would not turn Mahometans, the Saracens Wars being carried on upon a
Religious account, as is to be noted in their Alchoran and Zuna, and they great
Zelots, and diligent promoters of their Religion, as being the most Early
Professors of it; and as it is signified by their Type, these Scorpion Locusts,
it being * the nature of the Scorpion perpetually to attempt to sting and
transfuse her poison, as of these Saracens to proselyte the world to their
Religion.

6. Wherefore the fear of death, and horror of conscience did so vex men, and
fill them with anxiety, that it was worse than death it self, to be in such
perpetual danger, and unsettledness of things worse than the Christians are now
in under the Turks, which were a desirable condition to them, rather than these
perpetual renewed vexations of the Saracens; but this did not fall to their lot
in the Saracens days, though it were the more desirable condition of the two;
which may be glanced at in these words: And in those days shall men seek death
and shall not find it, and shall desire to dye, and death shall flee from them:
That is, those parts of the Empire shall not be settled in the Saracens hands
where they Invaded, as afterward it came to pass in the Turks Invasion, who
seized on the Eastern part of the Empire, and settled there; so that the Empire
there was not only vexed but killed, extinguished, or put an end to, and the
minds of the conquered at quiet.

7. And the shapes of the Locusts were like unto Horses prepared to battle:
That is, ready harnessed, as it is said afterward, that they have
Breast-plates of Iron, which shows the courage of these Saracens, and their
well-appointedness for War; and their success was accordingly, as is expressed
by what follows: And on their heads were as it were crowns of Gold. Which shows
their victory over so many Nations and Kingdoms: For in the space of eight
years, or a little more, they acquired to that Satanical Kingdom of Mahomet,
Palestine, Syria, both the Armenia's, all Asia minor, in a manner; Persia,
India, Egypt, Numidia, all Barbary to the River Niger, Lusitania and
Hispania; nor were they stinted here, but won also a great part of Italy, even
to the Gates of Rome. To which you may add Sicily, Candia, Cyprus, and the rest
of the Mediterranean Islands. Wherefore there is great reason that they should
be represented with golden Crowns on their heads, they having acquired so many
Rich Kingdoms by War. And their faces were as the faces of men: The better to
assure the Reader that Men indeed are meant and not Infects or mere Locusts.

8. And they had hair as the hair of women, to show what Contrymen they
were, not for any effeminacy or cowardice in them; namely, that they are
derived from the Arabians, whose custom it was to wear long hair on their head
unshorn, and an head-tire like women. This therefore shows they are Saracens
from Arabia; and in that it is said, And their teeth were as the teeth of
Lions: that shows, that they were very dispatchfull of their prey, who could
devour so many Kingdoms in so little time, as was above noted.

9. And they had breast-plates, as it were breast-plates of Iron: That is, they
were well armed to fight, and had an Iron courage. And the sound of their wings
was as the sound of Chariots of many horses running to battle. Here is mention
of wings, in allusion to the figure of Locusts, who also make a noise with
their wings when they fly; but the sound of Chariots of many horses running to
battle, emplyes that they are indeed Men, and great Warriors, that with great
swiftness, noise and terror run down all before them, witness the
abovementioned conquests which were so large and so many.

10. And they had tails like unto Scorpions, and there were stings in their
tails: That is, they are of the Serpentine kind, of the Ancient Serpent that
was always an Enemy to the Son of God and his Kingdom; and it denotes, that
with their conquests they would bring in a Religion contrary to that of Christ,
and destroy the worship of the Son of God under an ignorant pretense of
Monotheisme, as if the Christian Religion were inconsistent with the worship of
one God, whereas the more distinct knowledge of that one God does not make us
less Monotheists than they. This is the up-shot of their victories, and the
very sting and poison their achievements end in. And their power was to hurt
men five months: That is, to hurt and vex the Empire particularly, but not
quite to destroy it, as the Turks did afterward. Nor is it said here, to hurt
the third part of Men, as in the former Trumpets, because their Invasions were
not restrained to the Empire, but ran over other vast Tracts of the habitable
world also. But they are said to hurt men five months, in allusion to the life
of Locusts, as I noted above. And if mention be made of five months twice to
remind us to double the number; that is another character, whereby we may
discern, that the Saracens are here meant by these Locusts; twice five months
of years, ( viz.) three hundred years (saving that there is the difference of
five single years, which is nothing in the numbering by months of years) being
that most notable Interval in the Saracenical Kingdom, namely from the
beginning of the Caliphate of the Abasidae, who first made Bagdad their
Imperial seat, to the taking of the said Bagdad by Togrulbec King of the Turks;
that is, from the year of Christ 750, to the year 1055. But otherwise I
conceive that five months do not signify Arithmetically but Symbolically with
an allusion to the time of the Locusts, and only stand for the time that the
Saracens had to hurt men, not defining how long it was to be.

11. And they had a King over them, which is the Angel of the bottomless Pit.
The same that the fallen Star, to whom was given the Key of the bottomless pit,
it being an Ensign of his Power in the Kingdom of darkness, as I noted above.
This was the Supreme Captain of these Troops of Locusts, that is Saracens, and
his name denotes his nature as follows. Whose name in the Hebrew tongue is
Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue has his name Apollyon; both which words
signify a Destroyer, which is a fit title, he being a Captain of such numerous
Troops, that destroyed so many men's bodies by war, and their souls by bringing
a false Religion along with him contrary to Christianity, reproaching it, as if
it maintained the worship of more Gods than One: Which malicious pretense seems
also to be glanced at in both the name of Abaddon, and also of Apollyon;
Abaddon alluding to Adad, as if it were Ab-Addon, and Apollyon, to (...)
Apollo, both which names according to this allusion signify ONE. As if this
Angel of the Abyss and his Locusts stood up for the worship of one God, and
that the Christians worshipped many, because they worship the holy Trinity,
which nothing but their ignorance of the Mystery, and their malice could make
them conclude to be inconsistent with the Unity of the Deity. Which passage
therefore of the Vision is no small countenance to the Doctrine of the Trinity
of the Godhead.

12. One woe is past, and behold there come two woes more hereafter; namely,
under the sounding of the next two Trumpets, which therefore as the former may
well be called Wo-Trumpets.

13. And the sixth Angel sounded, and I heard voice from the four horns of the
golden Altar which is before God. For John rapt thus into Heaven, the Temple
and the Throne of God was as it were continually represented to him, and so the
golden Altar, which is the Altar of Incense. And Incense is the Symbol of the
prayers and breathing of the pure Apostolic Church oppressed and afflicted
under that Antichristian or Pseudochristian and Idolatrous Constitution of
things established by the second Nicene Council.

14. Saying unto the sixth Angel that had the Trumpet, Loose the four Angels
which are bound in the great river Euphrates: That is, let loose the Turks upon
the Idolatrous Empire. For that Angels signify Men under their conduct, is a
frequent Apocalyptical Figure. And that the Turks are here meant is plain from
those more notable four * Turkish Sultanies or Tetrarchies on that and this
side of Euphrates, that of Bagdad, that of Caesarea Cappadocie or Iconii, that
of Aleppo, and that of Damascus.

15. And the four Angels were loosed which were prepared for an hour, and a
day, and a month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men. Which term of
time is another indication, that the Turks are meant here. For Togrulbec Prince
of the Turks, the City Bagdad being taken by him, had his Imperial Robes put
upon him and was inaugurated Emperor of the Turks by the Caliph Chaiim
Biamrilla in the year 1057. From this time was the Turk invested in the
Saracenical Empire. And from this year to the year 1453, when Constantinople
was taken, and the remainder of the Roman Empire in the East utterly lost, is a
Prophetical day, and a month, and a year; that is, 396 years: So notable an
Indication is this, that the Turks are here meant; and the sense is this, That
these Turks were prepared (...) against a determined appointed time, even to
the expiration of 396 years, for to slay the third part of men, that is, that
about that time they might not vex only as the Saracens did, but put an end to
the Eastern Roman Empire. For [ third] is a character of the Roman Empire, as I
have already noted. Which accordingly came to pass at the taking of
Constantinople, and swallowing thereupon the whole Roman Empire in the East.

16. And the number of the army of the horsemen were two hundred thousand
thousand, and I heard the number of them: whereby I understood how exceeding
numerous they were; which is another note of their being Turks, it being well
known what vast Armies they bring into the field. And this number does not
signify Arithmetically, that is, precisely that number, but figuratively is
put for a vast number in general, and so vast, that it could not be discovered
by the eye, so well as signified by speech. And that there is no mention of
Foot may be an allusion to their known name in Greek Historians, who usually
call them Persians, which name signifies Horsemen: which is another note of
their being Turks.

17. And thus I saw the Horses in vision, and them that sat on them having
breast-plates of fire and Iacinth; of Iacinth, that is, of a blue color; and
of Brimstone, by reason that when they shot off, the air betwixt them and the
sight of the beholder seemed fiery at the flashing of the powder, and then
colored with a blue smoke, and after filled his nostrils with the scent of
sulphur; which shows, that this Vision * belongs to the times since the
Invention of Gunpowder. And the heads of the horses were as the heads of Lions;
not for their shapes, but for the roaring noise that seems to come from them at
the riders discharging their Carbines or Pistols, as what follows plainly
intimates. And out of their mouths issued fire, smoke and brimstone.

18. By these three was the third part of men killed; that is, the Roman Empire
in the East was not only vexed and annoied, but utterly subdued, vanquished and
destroyed by these Centaures, as I may so call them, the Turks, who are called
Persae in the Greek Historians from the Hebrew word (...) Paras, which
signifies a man on horseback, including both the shapes in one Appellation, as
if that Country bred such Monsters which are usually called Centaures: Which
Centaures here are set out still more monstrously, as killing men by the fire,
and by the smoke, and by the brimstone which issued out of their mouths; as it
may seem at a distance when they let off their Fireguns and Pistols.

19. For their power is in their mouth and in their tails: As in the
Scorpio-Locusts before, a monster made up of a Locust, and of a Scorpion, to
signify the Saracens: so here is a Monster made up of a Horse and a Man, a
Centaure, as it were to signify the Turks, and have tails whereby they are
said to hurt men, signifying the same venom or mischief of Mahometism. The
power of these Centaures is in their mouths and in their tails, the Turks
playing two parts, ( viz.) of a Warrior in the field discharging fire and shot
against the Enemy, and of a Religionist after the victory, all their War
according to their Alchoran, being a kind of Holy War to propagate Mahometisme,
and Paradise is promised to them that dye in the Cause; and therefore it is
said, For their tails were like unto Serpents, and had heads, and mouths too, I
warrant you, to speak and tempt the vanquished (as the Old Serpent did Eve)
from their obedience to God and his Christ; ( and so with them they do hurt)
not only upon that false pretense, as if we Christians were guilty of
Polytheisme, or of worshipping more gods than one, because we profess the
Trinity of the Godhead, but also upon a pretense then too lamentably true,
because they had so wretchedly corrupted the Ancient Apostolic Christianity,
with many intolerable Superstitions and gross Idolatries; adding the
persecution of all those that would not submit to them and their wicked
Inventions. For which gross degeneracy of the Church, this scourge of the Turks
especially was sent in upon them, as is plainly employed in what follows.

20. And the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues: that is,
of the Scorpio-Locusts, and Euphratean Centaures, as I may so speak, but were
only vexed with them; by which is plainly meant the Western part of the Roman
Empire, which the Turk could never possess himself of yet as he has of the
Eastern: Yet for all this sad Example of Gods severity for the like crimes this
Western part of the Empire repented not of the works of their hands, their
wicked and impious Inventions, whereby they corrupted the Ancient Apostolic
Christianity, That they should not worship Devils, * (...), the Original has
it, that is, Demons, or middle invisible Powers betwixt God and Men, whether
Angels or Souls of men departed. And in reference to these Idols of gold, and
silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor
walk; and yet they lift up their eyes and hands to them, and pray before them,
as if they could see their posture, hear what they said, and were able to go
and bestir themselves to accomplish their requests: But in that the mode of
their Idolatry here is by Statues not by Pictures, this is another insinuation
that the Western Church is here understood.

21. Neither repented they of their murders: that is, of their murtherous
persecution of innocent Souls for not submitting to their Idolatrous Rites and
Customs; nor of their sorceries, their imposturous exorcismes and enchantments
of several things to holy pretended uses; nor of their fornication, their
unnatural uncleanness of all sorts upon an Hypocritical profession of a
single life; nor of their thefts, their cunning tricks of cheating the people
of their money, by setting up Images for them to bring Oblations to, their
merchandises of hallowed Crosses, Beads, Medals, and the like trumperies and
deceits. For such like wickednesses as these was the wrath of God poured down
upon the Eastern part of the Empire, by letting loose the Euphratean Horsemen
upon them, so as to quite overrun them and vanquish them; and yet the Western
Church, the more the pity, did not lay it at all to heart, while those
Judgments were thundering against the Eastern, and these Euphratean Horsemen
were let loose upon them. Which happened a little before the year 1300, after
the Caliphate of Bagdad, with which the first Woe expired, had in the year 1258
been abolished by the Tartars, and the Remainder of the Turks who had Reigned
in Persia on the other side of Euphrates were cast out, as out of a sling into
the parts of the Roman Empire on this side Euphrates by the said Tartars;
namely, in the year 1289, who winning Syria and Palestine, and dividing amongst
themselves the greater part of Asia minor, at last joining in one Othoman
Empire broke also into Europe, nor ceased till they took Constantinople, and
quite abolished the Constantinopolitan Empire, and made themselves fully
Masters thereof.

But as for the close of this second Wo-trumpet, the most natural extent I
discern thereof, is the Universal Impenitency of the Western parts of the Roman
Empire, till some Country or Kingdom appeared converted from such Crimes as the
Eastern Empire was destroyed for by these Euphratean Horsemen. And so we shall
clearly observe with what succession of the Churches this sixth Trumpet, or
second Wo-Trumpet expires; namely, it ends with the Thyatirian succession. The
six Trumpets added to the six Seals reach just so far and no further. So that
the seventh Trumpet must be contemporary with the Sardian, Philadelphian and
Laodicean successions, and equalize the succession of them all; which is worth
the remembering for the better understanding what follows.

NOTES. CHAPTER IX. Verse. 1.
Fallen from Heaven to the Earth, etc. The Original has it, (...), which though
our English Translation renders, I saw a Star fall from Heaven; as if it were
(...), then falling; yet I have made bold to translate it according to
Grammatical truth, fallen from Heaven. But I understand it of a fallen Angel,
according to the warrantable sense of the Cabbalists. See my Synopsis
Prophetica, Book 1. chapter 8. sect. 14.

Verse. 5. The nature of the Scorpion perpetually to attempt to sting, etc.
Semper cauda in ictu est, nulloque momento meditari cessat, ne quando desit
occasioni, Plin. Histor. Nature. lib. 11. c. 25. Her tail is always a
striking, nor ceases she any one moment to endeavor to sting, that she may be
sure to miss no opportunity.

Verse. 14. Four Turkish Sultanies or Tetrarchies, etc. These four Sultanies,
their number is learnedly and ingeniously made out by Mr J. Mede on this Text:
But besides this, if they were not just four, (and the business is not their
Number but their Office, what they are to do and when) yet by a Prophetic
Diorisme they might be called four, Four standing for a note of Universality in
the Cabbalistick Mysteries. And Dr Hammond on this place would have Four not to
signify just four, but indefinitely to be put for the number of the Angels
concerned in this affair: Which he might the better have adventured on, if he
had been acquainted with the Cabbalistick style.

Verse. 17. Belongs to the times since the Invention of Gunpowder, and the use
of Guns in War; Which Berchtoldus Niger a Franciscan Monk and Alchymist is said
first to have divulged to the world about the year 1380, which was after the
plague of the Saracens upon the Empire: And shows also, how vain the attempts
of those are who would draw back these Visions to the times of Titus, and the
besieging of Jerusalem by the Roman Armies.

Verse. 20. (...), the Original has it, etc. And this (...) has the same
signification that (...), which signifies Spirits, whether the Souls of Men or
Angels, and that either good or bad. This is certainly the sense of the word in
the Greek Language: And therefore it is not so justifiably and fitly translated
here Devils; which none amongst the Pagans themselves are said to worship,
unless Witches and Magicians: and therefore it had been more safe to have
retained the Greek word, which also the Latins use, and called them Demons,
which signifies as well goods Angels, and the souls of good men departed this
life, as bad Angels or bad Souls, or if you will, Devils; which in all
Idolatrous worship are in all likelihood busy Assistants, and several times
make a show of Miracles, and so attract the worship of Idolaters to themselves,
they worshipping them that do these miraculous feats when any are done; so that
the sense is easy enough either way. Not to add, that by a just reproach to
their worshipping of Saints and Angels, they are said to worship Devils: For
who but a Devil would receive Religious Worship? or at least to worship false
Objects, according to that of Psalm 98. v. 5. All the Gods of the Heathen are
(...), which is the very word here in this verse: And the Hebrew word is (...)
which is as much as (...) no gods, but vain objects of worship, called in
Hebrew (...) in Greek (...), there being no true objects of worship, but he
that made the Heavens: See my Synopsis Prophetica, Book 2. cap. 10. And Mr
Mede's Apostasy of the latter Times, chapter 3, and 4

CHAPTER X.
THe Euphratean Horsemen having overrun and destroyed, and fully seized on the
Eastern part of the Roman Empire, natural method will prompt us to expect that
what follows in this Prophecy of the sealed Book, should refer to the Western
parts of the Empire, and concern the highest Dominion there, to wit, the
Bloody, Idolatrous, Papal Hierarchy, that Antichrist that exalts himself above
all that is called God or worshipped; the Prophet Balaam Lord of the People,
and who had made the Secular Power a Balak, an empty cipher or an Ahab, that is
wholly guided or directed by the Prophetess Iezebel: So that this Papal
Hierarchy in the West, being in reality the Highest Power by Usurpation; and
the Antichrist exalting himself against Christ, and above him; we may
rationally expect, that the last Wo-trumpet which contains the residue of the
Sealed-Book-Prophecy, carries in it such things or alterations as tend to the
downfall of Antichrist, and restoring and enlarging the Kingdom of Christ in
these parts of the Roman Empire, and over the whole Earth. And therefore
accordingly it is said: 1. And I saw another mighty Angel come down from
Heaven, one distinct from the seven Trumpet-Angels, clothed with a cloud; that
is, clouds and darkness were round about him, a thick cloud charged with
thunder. And a Rainbow was on his head; which betokens he came in the Glory of
the Divinity, even in the Glory of God the Father, for the Rainbow in the
Vision of Ezechiel so signifies. And therefore this mighty and victorious Angel
must be Christ; and a further intimation hereof is from what follows; And his
face was as it were the Sun: For so he appeared to Saul, when he cried out to
him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me; and such was his description when he
appeared in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks. And his feet as Pillars
of fire, as it were coming out of the cloud and reaching to the Earth; which
are tokens of the great wrath of the Son of God, or Christ, and his coming to
judge and take vengeance of his Enemies: His feet was as fine Brass in the
Thyatirian Interval, here they are like a Pillar of fire. 2. And he had in his
hand a little book open; which contains all the Visions of the Prophecy of the
opened Book, as we at first noted: And he set his right foot on the sea, and
his left foot on the earth, standing in that Majestic manner, and laying claim
to, or seizing himself, as it were, on his right by Sea and Land: See chapter 12.9.
chapter 13.11. 3. And cried with a loud voice, as when a Lion roareth: which is
another intimation, that it is Christ the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. And who
in this majestic posture, and terrible roaring could so well be said to set
himself against Antichrist, or the Papal Hierarchy as Christ? The Roman Empire
Eastern and Western too was sorely vexed and scourged by the Scorpio-Locusts the
Saracens, and Eastern quite destroyed after by those Euphratean Centaures the
Turks: But the Papal Empire or Hierarchy here in the West, Christ himself with
his Apostolical Legions of Reformed Christians will utterly demolish and
destroy, as it is elsewhere said of the Ten Horns or Kings, that at last they
shall hate the Whore, make her desolate, eat her flesh, and burn her with fire.
This loud roaring therefore of this Lion of the Tribe of Judah sets off, in
general, the anger and victorious terror of Christ in assaulting and
overcoming the Kingdom of Antichrist, or the Papal Hierarchy, and glorious
Erection of his own Kingdom. These in general are the affairs of this last
space of the Sealed-Book-Prophecy. And whereas it is said, when he cried, or
while he cried, seven thunders uttered their voices; This is a distribution of
the aforesaid space into seven parts, which will be very serviceable for the
orderly disposing of the Visions of the Opened-Book-Prophecy. These seven
Thunders may be seven Bath-Cols, that is, seven Oracles or Voices delivered in
the midst of a Thunder; and the last Thunder, which betokens the turning of the
Earth into a Lake of Fire by thundering and Lightning might happily send out
some such voice as this: Go ye accursed into everlasting fire. This is the doom
of them that adhere to the bloody, imposturous and Idolatrous Papal Hierarchy.
4. And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write,
namely what they said: And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Seal up
those things that the seven thunders uttered; with an allusion to this Sealed
Book of Prophecies, as if he should say, Though the seventh Seal be opened, yet
as to this part thereof, let it be as sealed again, for it is needless here so
particularly to declare things touching the destruction of the Papal Hierarchy:
which agrees very well with what follows, according to the reading of the
Biblia Regia, Andreas and others. And thou shall write them hereafter (not, And
write them not) namely in the Opened-Book-Prophecies, where these affairs of
the destruction of Antichrist, and of the advancement of Christ's Kingdom shall
be more fully and particularly delivered; which is a mavelous manner of
transition from the Sealed-Book-Prophecy to the Opened-Book-Prophecy, and
suitable to the usual majestickness of this Book of the Apocalypse. 5. And the
Angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth lifted up his hand to
heaven, as using that usual Ceremony of posture in swearing. 6. And swear by
him that lives for ever and ever, who created heaven and the things that
therein are, and the earth and the things that therein are, and the sea and the
things that are therein. This is a mighty and vehement asseveration, but it is
concerning a thing that sunk flesh and blood are too too incredulous of, which
makes Christ in his Epistle to the Church of the Laodicean Interval, which
includes his coming to judgment, and his putting an end to the Scene of things
here on Earth, use as vehement asseveration as might be, by calling himself the
Amen, the faithful and true Witness, and the beginning of the Creation of God;
and therefore he who could also put an end to it. And so here, there is the
like vehement asseveration, that the stage of the Earth must have an end at the
last Thunder, which will bring upon it the Conflagration. For so he says, That
there should be time no longer, that is, That there shall be here no more time
upon Earth. 7. Saving in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel when he
shall sound, and the mystery of God be finished, as he has declared to his
servants the Prophets: that is, Those predictions be fulfilled which in such a
mystical and symbolical style God has foretold by his Prophets Isaiah, Daniel
and Ezechiel, and others, which reach to the very end of the world, or of the
stage of things on this Earth. And this is the first part of this mavelous
Transition from the Prophecy of the Sealed Book, to that of the Opened Book. 8.
And the voice which I heard from Heaven, namely, at the beginning of the
Sealed-Book-Prophecy spoke unto me again in the tone of a Trumpet, suppose as
it did before: And said, Go and take the little Book which is open in the hand
of the Angel, which stands upon the Sea and upon the Earth: Namely, in the
hand of Christ, now in the form of an Angel, as before in the form of a Lamb,
but the same person still under another form, as it is the same Book, though
opened now when sealed before: But this new change in both denotes a new series
of Prophecies from the beginning of the Church to the end of the world, as
those of the Sealed Book were. 9. And I went unto the Angel and said unto him,
Give me the little Book: And he said unto me, Take it and eat it up, and it
shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth sweet as honey: that
is, Though the knowledge of future things may be pleasant and tempting to the
curious Reader of this Book, yet when he shall thoroughly digest it or
understand it, it will be bitter by reason of the several sad and bitter things
contained in it. As the sad persecution of the Primitive Christians in the
Smyrnean succession of the Church, and the foul Apostasy of the Church into
gross Idolatry under the Reign of Antichrist, or the Whore of Babylon, and the
most barbarous persecutions of them that will not submit to her wicked and
Idolatrous Tyranny. And there is bitterness enough for her too at the last,
which makes her paramours so loath to understand this Book of Prophecies aright.
10. And I took the little Book out of the Angels hand and ate it up, and it was
in my mouth sweet as honey; and as soon as I had eaten it, my belly was bitter:
that is, my stomach was bitter: which is a prefiguration of the condition of
those that shall read this Book and rightly digest it, that is truly understand
it: Though there be pleasure in the understanding it, yet when these sad things
touching the Church were to come, it could not but be bitterness to them; that
is, the Book is of that nature that it would so affect a Christian. 11. And he
said unto me, Thou must prophecy again: that is, Thou must run over again from
the same Epoch of time, this race of prophesying, that is, foretell, (as
before the fate or state of the Empire, so now) the fate or state of the
Christian Church from the beginning thereof to the end of the world. Before
many Peoples, and Nations, and Tongues, and Kings; that is, to their faces: so
that they may all understand how they are concerned in this Prophecy of the
opened Book. And thus is the Transition from the Sealed-Book-Prophecy to the
Opened-Book-Prophecy in both the parts thereof, fully finished. Now follow the
Visions themselves of the Opened-Book-Prophecy, and that in a sufficiently
natural and rational order, those Visions that reach from the beginning of the
Church being placed first.


NOTES. Chapter X. Verse. 7.
Saving in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel when he shall sound,
etc. Instead of, But in the days, I have rendered it, Saving in the days, the
sense of this verse in the Original, being exceeding imperfect and
ungrammatical, unless (...) be supposed to be put for (...) or (...) saving or
except. And that (...) signifies so sometimes, is abundantly plain out of
several instances in the New Testament, Mat. 20.22. But to sit on my right hand
and on my left is not mine to give, (...), except to those for whom it is
prepared of my Father. And Mat. 7.8. compared with Mark 9.8. where the former
has it: And when they lift up their eyes, they saw no man (...), save Jesus
only, the latter has it (...). Where (...) is plainly put for (...), and our
English Translation renders it, save Jesus only. These and other such like
places has Grotius himself noted to our hand, which makes it manifest that
(...) sometimes signifies as much as (...), or (...), except or saving. And
being the sense is maimed in this place of the Apocalypse, unless (...) be so
rendered, it is plain that it is the sense of this particle here. And (...), I
have rendered, when he shall sound, not when he shall begin to sound, as if it
were restrained to the beginning of the sounding, because (...) implies no such
thing. See my Ratio Synchronistica, cap. 2. sect. 3. Wherefore it is plain,
that the Angel swears there shall be no more Time on Earth, saving in the space
of the seventh Trumpet, and that therefore there will be an end of this
terrestrial Scene of things contrary to the confident conceit of those scoffing
Atheists, 2 Peter 3.3. And moreover, that since we are at the end of all in
this seventh Verse, that there is a beginning of a new series of Prophecies,
from the first Epoch, afterward.

CHAPTER XI.
1. ANd there was given to me a reed like unto a Rod, and the Angel stood
saying, Rise and measure the Temple of God and the Altar, and those that
worship therein: That is, all that space that is contained within the inward
Court. In the first part whereof is the Temple which consists of the Sanctum,
and Sanctum Sanctorum, and in the latter part thereof stands the Altar of
Holocausts, which whole space therefore is Thysiasterion, or the place of
sacrificing, and was not to be rendered Altar, but the place where the Altar
stands. For the Priests did not worship in the Altar, but in the place where
the Altar was erected: Which place the Greek Text calls Thysiasterion. And in
that it is said Measure them that worship therein, it is plain, that the
measuring belongs to the men not to the place. This space therefore of ground
answers to that space of time which is comprehended in the Ephesine and
Smyrnean succession of the Church. And the correspondence is admirable betwixt
the Smyrnean succession and the Thysiasterion, when so many Martyrs as so many
Holocausts were sacrificed in testimony of the Truth of the Christian Religion,
the space where the Altar of Holocausts stands, falling in with the space of
Time of the Smyrnean persecutions.

2. But the Court which is without the Temple leave out and measure it not. For
it is not commensurable to the Rule of Gods Word, and the Apostolic Faith and
Practice, but contrary or repugnant; namely, that time of the Church which is
comprised in far the greatest part of the Pergamenian succession, and all the
Thyatirian, in which they are said to offer things sacrificed to Idols, and
were in some kind or other become Idolatrous, never go about therefore to
measure them, for they are incommensurate to the Rule, and point blank contrary
thereto: such is the outward Court. For it is given unto the Gentiles, and the
holy City shall they tread under foot forty and two months: that is, a kind of
Paganochristianity instead of pure Christianity shall visibly domineer for
forty and two months of years, that is 1260 years; which is the same proportion
of Time to the commensurate Time of the Church under the Ephesine and Smyrnean
succession, and a little further, that the proportion of the outward Court has
to the inward Court, which proportion is as 1260 to 360; that is, the outward
Court contained the inward three times and an half in quantity.

3. And I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth. The works of
darkness were numbered by months, the Moon being Ruler of the night, but the
works of Righteousness by days, of which the Sun is moderator. But by days
are understood Prophetic days here, that is, years, a thing known and usual
in Prophecies. By these Two Witnesses are understood all that bore witness
against the Idolatries and disorders of this time of Apostasy, and they are
said to be clothed in sackcloth, to denote both the sadness of heart they are
in, to see such times, and also to signify the low and mean condition of such
Holy and Apostolic men in this wicked time of Apostasy. But all these
mournful Witnesses are said to be two, though never so many, partly by reason
of the Types in the Old Testament to which they allude, Moses and Aaron, Elias
and Elisha, Zorobabel and Ieshuah who showed their Zeal for the purity of Gods
Worship against the Idolatry in the Wilderness, in the Baalitish Idolatry, and
in the Captivity of Babylon. There may be also an allusion to things in this
Division into two, ( viz.) to Magistracy and Ministry, to the Old Testament and
the New, or else to the People of the Jews, such as are kept out from our
Religion by the gross Adulterations of it, and to the Virgin Company of
Christians.

4. Those are the two Olive Trees and the two Candlesticks standing before the
God of the Earth. A description of the two Witnesses in the sense above
declared, with a particular allusion to that in Zachary chap. 4.11. where by
the two Olive Trees upon the right side of the Candlestick and the left is
understood Zorobabel and Ieshuah, those faithful Servants in the Babylonish
Captivity, and the time of the mournful Witnesses is the very time of the
Whore of Babylon.

5. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and
devoureth their Enemies: The allusion is to Moses and Elias, who did really
bring down fire upon their Enemies; but here it is to be understood Mystically
of the fire of the Spirit: Not by might nor by power, but by my Spirit says
the Lord of Hosts: It was the Word of the Lord to Zorobabel, who was a Type of
these Witnesses, and an helper of Gods People in the Babylonish Captivity: And
it is said of the Man in Esdras coming out of the Sea, 2 Esdr. 13.38.
And he shall destroy them without labor, by the Law which is like unto fire.
In which sense I would understand that which follows: And if any man will hurt
them, he must in this manner be killed by the power of the Spirit in conviction
and prayer; these are the weapons of their warfare.

6. These have power to shut heaven that it rain not in the days of their
Prophecies: namely, in the days of their mournful Prophecy, their prophesying
in sackcloth. This is figuratively spoken by a Prophetical Metalepsis or
Zoopoeia of the second kind, attributing that to their activity, or it may be
oral denunciation, which is only a consequence of their condition, they being
put out of power and place in Church and State. The allusion is to Elias his
hindering it from raining three years and six months in Ahab's time, which time
exactly answers to 1260 days the time of these mournful Witnesses. But the
rain that is here hindered is the sound Apostolic Doctrine, and Heavenly
influence thereof, which hinderance is a consequence of these mournful
Witnesses being put out of power and place. And have power over waters to turn
them to blood; because their Apostolic preaching of the Gospel of meekness and
peace does not take place. And to smite the earth with all plagues as often as
they will; that is, as often as occasions offer themselves: * For particular
occasions answer in analogy to particular acts of will in this Prophetic
Zoopoeia; and indeed all the ten plagues of Egypt came upon the Roman Empire,
because these Witnesses to the Apostolic Truth are not heard, it having become
a Land of Egypt to the true Israelites, the pure and Apostolic Christians.
See Synops. Prophetic. Book 2. c. 12. sect. 3.
How the plague of Frogs, of Lice, of swarms of Gnats and Flies, murrain of
Beasts, Boyles and Ulcers, Hail and Locusts, in a mystical sense interpreted
fell upon this mystical Egypt, as it is called in this Book of Prophecies, as
a necessary consequence of these Witnesses disgrace, affliction and deprivation
of power and office, were easy here to show, if it were not too long for this
short Explication we are upon.

7. And when they shall be * a finishing their Testimony; that is, performing
their witnessing to the Truth against all the Impostures and Idolatries of this
Spiritual Egypt. The Beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit: that is,
either out of a pit of the Earth or the abyss of the Sea, and so it will
signify either the two-horned or the ten-horned Beast: shall make war against
them, and shall overcome them, and kill them; shall oppose them and overcome,
as to the power of this world, and kill them; so that they shall be politically
dead all of them, and some, as it happened to the Waldenses and Albigenses and
others, be slain in a natural sense: So that the meaning in short is this, That
no sooner shall they begin to perform their office of witnessing to the Truth,
but they shall be assaulted, suppressed, kept out of power, and politically
killed, as their Resurrection also is Political, as you shall hear anon.

8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified: that
is to say, These Witnesses as to any Political power and life being dead
karcasses (as it is said of the people of the Jews in a political sense, shall
these dry bones live!) shall be in being still (though in this Political death)
in the large Jurisdiction of that great City, which is spiritually or
mystically called Sodom and Egypt, and the City where our Lord was crucified,
that is, Jerusalem that kills the Prophets, that far extended Idolatrous
Church, that for their uncleanness upon their pretense of vowed Celibate is
here called Sodom: Egypt for the slavery they keep the people of God in, which
agrees well with the plagues of Egypt abovementioned, and the Old Jerusalem
for persecuting the true Prophets and Servants of God, that is, the true
professors of the Apostolic Christianity.

9. And they of the People, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and Nations shall see
their dead bodies, thus devoid of all Political life and power, three days and
an half; that is, for three Times and an half, Day signifying the same that
Time in some cases, and here it is said. Three days and an half, for decorum
sake, that in the outside of the letter they may not seem to prophecy and be
dead at the same time, nor lie too long unburied or unrevived. But these three
times and an half, or a time and times and half a time, is the same that three
years and an half prophetically understood, or 1260 years, which is the time of
the Political death of these Witnesses, and of their prophesying in sackcloth.
And whereas it is said, And shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in
graves; that implies that they are kept safe in being, though kept out of all
Power, and so politically dead.

10. And they that dwell on the Earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry:
that is, they whose hearts and minds dwell upon earthly things, these will
rejoice when the two Witnesses are slain, their free rebukes out of the Word of
God being very disquieting and tormenting to these worldly and carnally minded
men. And they shall send gifts one to another, and more jollily and freely
congratulate one another the enjoyment of their Honors and Church-preferments
shared amongst them, because these two Prophets tormented them that dwell on
the earth: but could now do so no more, they being put out of place and power.
These two true and faithful Prophets are slain in this sense, who tormented
them whose minds were set upon the Earth, that is, savoured nothing but earthly
things.

11. And after three days and an half; that is, after a time and times and
half a time was now current; that is, in the last Semitime, the spirit of life
from God entered into them; that is, Divine Providence so brought it about,
that they began to have some Political Power, and Favor, and Interest with the
Great Ones. And they stood upon their feet; they stood on their own legs, and
they were countenanced and supported even for the very profession sake of the
pure and Apostolic Faith, in opposition to that Paganochristianity and
new-coined Idolatry that had got into the Church; and great fear fell upon them
which saw them, suspecting what might be the issue thereof.

12. And they heard a great voice from Heaven saying unto them, Come up hither:
There was a powerful command from the Political Heaven, in which Political
Suns and Moons, and Stars, Kings, Princes and Governors shine; there was, I
say, an express and effectual Command from these Higher Powers, that the more
pure and Apostolic Religion should be established, and that Idolatrous and
Paganochristian superstition, that so long domineering and persecutive Papal
Hierarchy should be abolished, and the long persecuted profession of the
Apostolic Faith and Practice be advanced to the highest degrees and dignities
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil. For it is said, And they ascended up to Heaven
in a cloud: Their riding thus in a cloud is an emblem of rising into Honor and
Power, and that they were to be employed in the highest offices and places
whether in Church or State. And their enemies beheld them; and you may be sure
with a malicious and envious eye.

13. And the same hour was there a great earthquake: A mighty change and
commotion in affairs: And the tenth part, (...), of the City fell: that is,
Tithes, the holy Revenue of the City, that Papal Hierarchy, or Idolatrous Roman
Clergy fell, was shaken off from them; and as to their any longer enjoying of
them lost. And in this earthquake were slain seven thousand names of men: that
is, Politically slain, as the Witnesses resurrection to life is Political. But
neither seven nor thousand signify here Arithmetically but Symbolically: And
they are called Names of men rather than Men, denoting that they are Titles,
Dignities, Offices or Orders of Men belonging to the State of Christendom
under the seventh head of the Beast: which Apoc. cap. 17. is an Idolatrous
Head, and Antichristian; and therefore shows their Nature to be Idolatrous and
Antichristian: And they are said to be slain as ceasing to be in that Power
they were before. But this seven is multiplied into a thousand to show what a
solid overthrow this Hierarchy had, and for adorning the outside of the Vision.
And the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of Heaven. When so
great a part of the Roman Hierarchy had fallen in the late blessed Reformation,
it is no wonder if the rest of that party were affrighted and surprised, they
sitting before as a Queen in the Thyatirian Interval, which thought she should
find no sorrow. But now they could not but acknowledge the hand of God was upon
them, and understand that the God of Heaven, or the most high God rules in the
Kingdoms of men.

14. The second Woe is past: (viz.) In the resurrection of the Witnesses, or the
late blessed Reformation. And that general Impenitency in this Western part of
the Empire is now expired with this second Woe, so many parts thereof ceasing to
worship Demons and Idols of Gold and Silver, etc. And here likewise the
Thyatirian succession expires, and Iezebel the false Prophetess, the Roman
Hierarchy is no longer permitted to seduce the people to commit fornication,
and eat things sacrificed to Idols, and that promise to the Church in Thyatira
is fulfilled. He that overcomes and keeps my works to the end, to him will I
give Power over the Nations or Gentiles, those that had trod down the outward
Court to the latter part of the last semitime of the seven, which are equal to
the forty two months, wherein they are said to have trod it down: So that the
residue of this Vision runs up into the Sardian succession of the Church, into
the time of the seven Vials. And already I think it is manifest in this
Opened-Book-Prophecy, that this Lion of the Tribe of Judah did not roar in
vain, he having rescued so considerable a prey out of the jaws of Antichrist in
the last notable Reformation. And behold the third Woe comes quickly, which is
the pouring forth of the Vials. The first whereof is that intoxicating cup of
envy, rage and exulceration of spirit against the risen Witnesses, by which
their enemies being dementated, it would make them impotently attempt such
things as would render them execrable, odious or despicable to all the world.
Which wrath of theirs, and malice so naturally flowing from the prosperity of
the Witnesses, it is no wonder it is said, That the third Woe comes quickly.

15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in Heaven,
namely where St John was wrapped up in Spirit, Saying, The Kingdoms of this world
are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ; that is, several Kingdoms
and Principalities, as pledges of the rest, are recovered already by Christ out
of the hands of the Tyrannical Antichrist by the late blessed Reformation. And
he shall reign for ever and ever; that is, whatever chastisements may come upon
the Church of Sardis for her neglects and imperfections, this Kingdom of Christ
which has begun shall for certain take place, and he shall reign to the end of
the world through the Sardian, Philadelphian and Laodicean successions.

16. And the four and twenty Elders which sat before God on their seats, fell
upon their faces and worshipped God. These Princes in Heaven are said thus to
do, betokening what those Princes and Potentates on Earth, that were our Noble
Reformers, would do, or how devoutly they would be affected for so blessed a
Reformation, which God by his gracious Providence had brought to pass, for they
were in a manner slaves to the Pope before.

17. Saying, We give the thanks O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and
art to come; because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and have reigned:
that is, given so glorious a specimen of thy power, and that thou rulest in the
Kingdoms of men, and have thus happily begun the reign of thy Christ for the
subduing utterly at last the Kingdom of Antichrist. The beginning of the
seventh Trumpet is the beginning of the Sardian succession of the Church, and
of the seven Vials; and the commencement of them all are with praises and
acclamations for this first auspicious victory of Christ over the Papal
Hierarchy or Antichrist. For the word Sardis signifies a Song of Joy, and here
is the thanksgiving of the Elders, and at the beginning of the Vials there is
sung the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb. What follows here are some scatterings
and obscure hints of the affairs under the seven Vials, and plainly ends with
the seventh.

18. And the Nations were angry; that is, the Gentiles that had trodden down
the outward Court, and defiled it by a new kind of Idolatrous Gentilism; the
minds of these were exasperated and exulcerated with wrath and envy at this
sudden resurrection of the Witnesses, which is a short glance at the first
Vial. And thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead; that is, of those that
this Tyrannical Roman Hierarchy had so often and in such multitudes so
barbarously murdered for their witnessing to the Truth, the time is now come
that Christ is to judge and revenge their Cause, which seems to allude to the
third Vial, where it is said, Thou art righteous O Lord, which art, and wast,
and shall be, because thou have judged thus: For they have shed the blood of
Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink, for they are
worthy, which is an easy comment upon what follows. That they should be
judged, and that thou should give reward unto thy Servants the Prophets, and
to thy Saints, and them that fear thy Name small and great. The meanest that
have died Martyrs and been murdered for the profession of the Truth, that thou
should judge their Cause, though they were despised by this Proud, Imperious
Iezebel: And should destroy them that destroy the Earth: that is, the men
upon the Earth, for of this Iezebel or Whore of Babylon it is said, And in her
was found the blood of Prophets and of Saints, and of all that were slain upon
the Earth; into such an Akeldama has that lofty Prelate the Pope ever and anon
turned Christendom by his restless ambition and tyranny.

19. And the Temple of God was opened in Heaven: Out of which the seven Angels
having the seven last plagues are seen to come, Chap. 15. And there was seen in
his Temple the Ark of the Testament: Which answers to the great voice out of
the Temple of Heaven from the Throne, Chap. 16.17. under the seventh Vial: So
that this time reaches to the very Sanctum sanctorum, or Holy of holies,
betokening a most powerful, pure and Apostolic State of the Church, as if we
were come into the first Apostolic Times again in the beginning of the Church,
as the outward Court is an emblem of the latter Apostated Times thereof. By
which is notified the beginning of the Philadelphian succession, which
commences with the seventh Vial. To which what follows seems to allude. And
there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an earthquake, and
great hail: which is plainly a description of the seventh Vial. So that this
whole Vision in this Chapter begins with the first Epoch of the Church, and
ends with the seventh Vial or first Thunder. Which is also the very space of
the Set of Visions comprised in the three following Chapters; which are a more
ample description of the same state of things in the same time, and we shall
note what parts answer each other.

NOTES. Chapter XI. Verse. 6.
By a Prophetical Metalepsis or Zoopoeia, etc. Metalepsis is a Figure, whereby
an effect or event is translated or communicated to some Person or Thing,
because the Place and Time is coincident with them. That there is such a
Figure, and that it is made use of in the Apocalypse I have proved in my
Synopsis Prophetica, lib. 1. cap. 4. sect. 10. But a Zoopoeia of the second
kind is, when free Actions are attributed to free Agents, of which
notwithstanding they may be no more the cause than if they were inanimate
Beings, or not in Being at all. This figure also I have proved to be made use
of in the Apocalypse, as well as in other Authors, lib. 1. cap. 3. sect. 10.
See my Synopsis in the places cited.

For particular occasions answer in Analogy to particular acts of will, etc.
And the Analogy is very exact, the Figure being but once admitted which I have
demonstrated in my Synopsis Prophetica. Nor can any man wonder that the
Apocalypse affects such high figures as these are, if he consider that this is
one part of the artifice of Concealment, which is so studiously intended in it.
But if we understand this power given to these Witnesses of the oral
denunciation of these Egyptian plagues, that also is very plausible from Jer.
1.10. where God speaks thus to Jeremiah: See, I have this day set thee over the
Nations and over the Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy,
and to throw down, and to build, and to plant: Which is not to do these things,
but to denounce them.

CHAPTER XII.
1. ANd there appeared a great wonder in Heaven, a Woman clothed with the Sun,
and the Moon under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars. This is
the primitive Apostolic Church before the Apostasy. Where being clothed with
the Sun signifies her being environed with the pure Light of the Gospel, or the
Sun of Righteousness communicated to her. And her being crowned with twelve
Stars denotes, that it was her Glory, and her Crown, that she was not yet
degenerated from the True Apostolic Faith and practice, nor did as yet either
Iudaize or Paganize, but trod under-foot both the Carnality of the Judaical
Rites, (whose Feasts, and Legal Observances were appointed according to the
course of the Moon) and also the gross Superstitions and Idolatries of the
Pagans, which are rightly deemed the works of darkness, or of the night, of
which the Moon is Governess.

2. And she being with Child cried travailing in birth, and pained to be
delivered. These sharp throes signify the cruel cutting persecutions the
Primitive Church was under, and the many martyrdoms they did suffer before that
promise of Christ was made good to them, Fear not little stock, for it is my
Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. This state therefore of the
Church is contemporary with that of the earnest Ephesine and bitter Smyrnean
succession, and with the inward Court, where also stood the Altar of
Holocausts, betokening the Primitive Christians frequent sacrificing their
lives in Testimony to the Truth.

3. And there appeared another wonder in Heaven; namely, while this Woman was
thus in travail; And behold a great red Dragon, that is, bloody and cruel,
having seven Heads and ten Horns; on his seventh head suppose, but without
Crowns, to intimate they are not yet in being, though the heads be said to be
crowned as well the five past, and that one to come, as the present sixth head,
the better to understand thereby, that they are Men or Magistrates, not Hills
that are intimated in this place, that is the reason it is said, And seven
Crowns upon his heads.

4. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of Heaven, and did cast them
to the Earth; that is, his Military Train or Armies had subdued in St John's
time, the third part of the Kingdoms and Principalities of the then known
world. And the Dragon stood before the Woman which was ready to be delivered to
devour the Child as soon as it was born. The Dragon, that is, the Roman Empire
Pagan, known by its seven Heads, which allude also to the seven Hills, Chap.
17. as well as to the sevenfold succession of Government in it, but Pagan in
that it is in the shape of a Dragon, as being under the Dominion not of Christ
but Satan, and also because seven Heads are only named, and the Horns of the
seventh Head yet uncrowned: Wherefore this Vision belongs to the Empire while
it was yet purely Pagan, and the sense of that last clause is briefly this,
That the Roman Pagan Emperors and their Ministers, the Devil assisting,
watched as close as they could, that the Church of Christ never should come to
such Power as to have an Emperor of their own Religion, and so the Roman
Empire come into their hands; but so soon as any such thing appeared, they
endeavored to quash it and defeat it.

5. And she brought forth a Man-child who was to rule all Nations with a rod of
Iron. But notwithstanding all their envious and malicious watchfulness the
Woman brought forth a Man-child, a Mystical Christ, or Christian People, that
at last would make themselves Masters of the Empire, and Rule the wicked
persecutive Pagans with such severity as they deserved, which is intimated by
what follows: And her Child was caught up unto God and to his Throne. He was
advanced to the Imperial Dignity, which is called here the Throne of God, in
such a sense as Supreme Magistrates are called Elohim, Gods, in the Hebrew
Idiom, because they are Gods Vicegerents and Representatives here on Earth,
whence their Majesty is also called Sacred. And this was plainly fulfilled when
Constantine turned Christian. The watchfulness therefore of this (...), this
quick-sighted vigilant Dragon seems to be contemporary with the Travail of the
Woman till she had brought forth a Man-child that might rule all Nations with a
Rod of Iron.

6. And the Woman fled into the Wilderness: But a little after this external
prosperity of the Church, and deliverance from the present Pagan persecution,
she was yet fain to take shelter in the wilderness, the outward Catholic
Church becoming little better in a short time: For which reason she is said to
fly into the Wilderness, being more safe in this Christiano-gentilism, than in
that open furious oppression of the Pagan red Dragon, thought in propriety of
speech the desert or Christiano-paganism came swiftly upon her rather than she
by any will of her own fled into it, but it is a Prophetical Hypallage: Where
she has a place prepared of God that they should feed her there: The
Apostolic Church should be preserved by Gods Providence all the time of this
her abode in the Wilderness or Christiano-gentilism, namely about the time of a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, Prophetical, that is years: Or the
time and times and half a time, as they are afterward called, and sometimes
resolved into Days, sometimes into Months, for * particular symbolical
meanings, and for the embellishing of the Cortex of the Apocalypse, but to be
understood always seven Semitimes in whatever other disguise expressed,
whether of Days or Months: These 1260 days therefore is the same time with
forty two months, of the treading down the outward Court by the Gentiles.

7. And there was war in Heaven; which betokens the like affair to come upon
Earth: Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought
and his Angels: which implies the invisible assistances and oppositions of
Angels good and bad, the one on the Primitive Christians side, the other on the
Pagan Empires side, during that strong conflict betwixt the Church and the
Pagans their persecutors in the Ephesine and Smyrnean succession, with which
the pangs of the Woman in travail also is contemporary.

8. And the Dragon and his Angels prevailed not; that is, they were quite
vanquished, neither was their place found any more in Heaven.

9. And the great Dragon was cast out, that old Serpent, with whom Christ had
had no small combating long before, called the Devil and Satan; the reproacher
and opposer of the Kingdom of Christ in all places and ages; which deceives
the whole world, and seduceth them into false and idolatrous worship. He was
cast out into the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him: This appearance
thus in Heaven signified the destruction of the Empire as Draconick and
Idolatrous, that none of that foul stamp should be in high places of the
Empire, but such as were professed Christians.

10. And I heard a loud voice saying in Heaven, Now is come salvation, and
strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ. This is
contemporary to the affairs of the sixth Seal, or rather with the close
thereof, and the commencement of the Pergamenian Interval. For the accuser of
our brethren is cast down, which accused them before God day and night. What
the Devil is said to do concerning Job, accuse him before God, the Pagans are
here understood to do before the Emperor and other Magistrates of the Empire,
to raise most wicked calumnies concerning the Christians, objecting against
them Thyaestean Suppers, Incests, Adultery, promiscuous Lusts, Murders,
Conspiracies against Princes, Plagues, Famine, Mischiefs by Fire, or what other
calamity happened in the Empire.

11. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, through the merits of
Christ crucified on the Cross, and by the word of their Testimony, and spending
their own blood also in way of Martyrdom, For it is said, And they loved not
their lives unto the death. This Verse makes it plain, that the Battle that is
said to be in Heaven, denotes a Battle here on Earth betwixt the Christians and
their Persecutors.

12. Therefore rejoice ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Ye Angels and
Holy Martyrs, not without an intimation also to the Political Heaven, in the
Roman Empire to those in high Places and Offices under the Christian Emperor.
Woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth and of the Sea, that is, to the lower
multitude: For the Devil is come down unto you having great wrath, and will
stickle to do as much mischief as he can amongst you, while he may, because he
knows that he has but a short time: For though the Great Ones of the Empire
were turned Christians, yet many of the Common People were still Pagans,
wherefore the Devil will find out a fetch to strengthen those in their
Paganism, and dissettle the other in their Christian Profession.

13. And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the Earth, and reduced to
such a low, base condition: He persecuted the Woman which brought forth the
Man-child: An envious, revengefull, persecuting temper rose in him against her.

14. And to the Woman were given two wings of a great Eagle: that is, by reason
of the Roman Empire becoming Christian (and now divided into two parts, Eastern
and Western (and that the Eagle is the Ensign of the Roman Empire is notorious
enough) which these wings might represent) she was in such a state, that by a
Prophetic Hypallage it might be said of her, That she might fly into the
Wilderness into her place: that is, the wilderness condition of the Church
would come shortly upon her, wherein she should by Divine Providence be ever
safe from the red Pagan, persecuting, Dragon, as it follows, where she is
nourished for a time and times and half a time from the face of the Serpent:
That is, for three Prophetic years and an half, which is seven Prophetical
half years, or semitimes, which are the measures intended, as seems to be
insinuated, by expressing the one thousand two hundred and sixty days, verse. 6.
by a Time and Times and half a Time.

15. But before the commencement of the Time, as if he had a mind to overwhelm
her before she could reach the appointed place, it is said, And the Serpent
cast out of his mouth water as a stood after the Woman: that is, the water of
Heresy and Contention, that sore division of the Church by reason of that
Heresy of Arianisme, That he might cause her to be carried a way of the Flood:
That the Church which stood out the hottest persecutions with invincible valor
against the red Dragon may now perish by the over-speading of Heresy and
Intestine Division, this furious controversy hardening the hearts of the
unconverted people, and staggering the converted in their Faith and Profession.

16. And the Earth helped the Woman, and the Earth opened her mouth and
swallowed up the flood which the Dragon cast out of his mouth: that is, the
Church was delivered from this overflowing Heresy and Dissension by the Decree
of an Ecumenical Council, ( viz.) the first Nicene Council; their opening
their mouth in a Decree against Arianisme, and condemning it for an Heresy,
was like the opening of the mouth of the Earth to a flood that presently sinks
and never is seen any more. Partly this real Analogy is alluded to, and partly
there may be an allusion to the title Ecumenical, which is from (...), which
implies in it (...), the Earth. For such gentle touches and glances at the
signification of words are not unusual in the Prophetic style.

17. And the Dragon was wroth with the Woman, and went to make war with the
remnant of her Seed which keep the Commandments of God. The former wicked
project failing, the wrath of the Dragon was again incensed against the Woman,
( viz.) the Woman with the Crown of twelve Stars on her head, and the Moon
under her feet, the pure Apostolic Church, and went to make war with the
remnant of her Seed, those namely that she was to bring forth, while she abides
in the Wilderness, which will approve themselves her genuine Offspring by
keeping the Commandments of God, who forbids us making any graven Image to bow
down to it or worship it, and bids us worship, serve, and pray to himself
alone. And have the Testimony of Jesus Christ. For the Testimony of Jesus is
the spirit of Prophecy, in which sense the two Witnesses are said to prophecy
as well as to witness. The Testimony therefore of Jesus is to witness to the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, not from mere custom or education, because
others have told us it is true; but because we are assured of the truth thereof
from the spirit of God, and in virtue of the spirit of life in the new birth.
From this living Principle do these faithful Servants of Christ bear witness of
the truth of his Word revealed in the Gospel, and witness against the wicked
inventions of an Apostatized Church, and loath them and detest them. For they
are not dead vessels that will receive wholesome liquor and poison alike, but
the Living Creation of God: and therefore have an antipathy against all the
works of the Devil, gross Superstition, Imposture, Idolatry, Cuelty, lying
Impossibilities, instead of true Miracles or Mysteries, and what other
Inventions of the Old Serpent that seduceth the whole world. Against such
Witnesses therefore you may be sure this Dragon will make war, who in this
Chapter is described under one single Figure of a Red Dragon, the Roman Pagan
Emperors being Pontifices Maximi, as well as Caesar's. In the following Chapter
this Draconical power is divided into two, there being now such a state in the
Roman Empire, as that there may be said to be Imperium in Imperio, the Papal or
Sacerdotal Hierarchy distinct from the Caesarean Majesty and Power.

NOTES. CHAPTER XII. Verse. 6.
For particular symbolical meanings, and for the embelishing of the Cortex of
the Apocalypse, etc. This symbolical meaning, as I remember Mr Mede takes
notice of. That the Time and Times and half a Time is expressed by one thousand
two hundred and sixty days, when the time or continuance of the Children of
Light, or of the Day is notified; but by forty two months, when the Children of
Darkness or of the Night their continuance is signified. Thus the continuance
of the Ten-horned Beast, Chap. 13. is numbered by months; as also the treading
down the Outward Court by the Gentiles, Chap. 11. But the Woman's stay in the
Wilderness is expressed by Days, as also the time of the two Witnesses
prophesying in sackcloth. And it is manifest that the outward letter or cortex
of the Apocalypse is better adorned this way, than if where ever we find forty
two months, or one thousand two hundred and sixty days, a Time and Times and
half a Time had been repeated. But these reasons of varying the phrase thus
being so apparent (to say nothing of the use of turning Daniel's Time and Times
and half a Time into forty two months, or one thousand two hundred and sixty
days, for the more certainly understanding that three Prophetic years and an
half is meant thereby) we may be the better assured, that no greater
accurateness of Time is intended by them, than if the phrase of a Time and
Times and half a Time had been always used. The not understanding of which has
made sundry in vain attempt to predict events foretold in the Apocalypse to the
accurateness of a Prophetical Day, whenas indeed there is no use of either
Prophetical Day or Month, unless in saying, such a thing was to fall out, or
did fall out in such a Day, or such a Month, or such a day of such a Month of,
suppose, the seventh or last Semitime or Prophetical half year, which consists
of one hundred and eighty days or six months. And the nature of the things
foretold are such, that they are not to terminate on a year, but rather require
that grosser numbering by Semitimes. But the several particulars of the
completion of a Prophecy, suppose of the rising of the Witnesses, might be more
distinctly declared by saying this part was, suppose, in such a month of the
last semitime, and such in such, in the fourth month suppose of the seventh or
last semitime, or Prophetical half year, and such a day of that month, etc.

CHAPTER XIII.
1. ANd I stood upon the sand of the Sea, that is, me thought I stood by the
Sea side; or rather as the vulgar Latin reads it, (which not only Mr Mede, but
Cornelius a Lapide and Alcazar, and, as they say, the generality of
Interpreters follow) And he stood upon the sand of the Sea, that is, The Dragon
stood, etc. And I saw a Beast rise up out of the Sea, having seven heads and
ten Horns; which betoken the Roman Empire, and upon his Horns ten Crowns. In
the former Vision there were no Crowns upon his Horns, but here there are, to
denote that this is the Roman Empire divided into many Kingdoms, ( viz.) that
the Vision reaches unto these times, or belongs to the times of this state of
the Empire, which Division of the Empire happened betwixt four and five hundred
years after Christ. And upon his heads the name of Blasphemy, that is, of
Idolatry; which signifies to us, that this Figure represents the Empire only
under that succession of Time, that it was more or less Idolatrous.

2. And the Beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard; that is, it was like a
Kingdom divided into many parts, as the Greek Kingdom was. And his feet, that
is, his forepart, which are as the Arms and Hands of the Bear, which are his
strength and instrument of action to raven and prey with; these were as the
feet of a Bear: Which denotes the likeness of it with the Persian Kingdom, who
as they were governed by their Magi in their affairs, so these by the Papal
Hierarchy, by the Power and Counsel of the Pope and his Clergy. And his mouth
as the mouth of a Lion; that is, It is like the Babylonish Kingdom in its cruel
Decrees against such as will not obey their Idolatrous Edicts, nor worship the
Golden Image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up. Their stubbornness must be
punished by an hot fiery furnace, Fire and Faggot must be prepared for them that
will not submit to this New Roman Idolatry. And the Dragon gave him his Power,
his Seat and great Authority. His power here according to the Original should
be his Forces or Armies: And what are the Forces and Armies of the Dragon, but
his Evil Angels or wicked Spirits, and their Weapons and Artillery the external
pomp of Images or Idols, and such gross furniture of their worship, whereby
they overcome and captivate the feeble phancies of the people? But his Seat and
great Authority is the Imperial Crown and Authority: Which shows, that this
Imperial Power as Idolatrous, is the genuine successor to the Pagan Imperial
Power.

3. And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death: namely, in the
fight of the Dragon with Michael and the Holy Martyrs who were conquerours at
last, and converted the Roman Pagan Empire to Christianity. And his deadly
wound was healed; that is, the Roman Empire for that succession of Time it was
represented to me under, was recovered unto its former Pagan-like and
Idolatrous plight and condition. This Panther-like Beast, who by reason of the
beauty of his skin, and sweetness of his scent allures other Beasts to him, and
whom the Dragon is said most chiefly to fly from, under this fair show, and yet
with the assistances of the Dragon was easily reduced to the former Pagan-like
state, under pretense of Christianity they imposing the old Paganick Idolatries
upon the People. And all the world wondered after the Beast: that is, they were
all mightily taken with the Beast, he both gratifying them with his outward
specious show of Christianity, that seemed so contrary to the Dragon, and from
which he so much abhorrs, and also having the assistance of the Dragon, (viz.)
the Dragon-like Idolatries, and carnal sense-striking Rites of worship, and the
tricks and delusions of his wicked Spirits at their Images or Altars to deceive
the people.

4. And they worshipped the Dragon which gave Power to the Beast: namely, which
had given him his Armies, his Throne, and his great Authority, that is to say,
though he appears in the shape now not of the Dragon but of the Leopard or
Panther, a Beast the Dragon is said so much to abhor, that is, in the grateful
show of Christianity, yet so far forth as they gave obedience to the Paganical
and Idolatrous part joined with it, they indeed worshipped or obeyed the
Dragon, whose Fiends or Goblins might please themselves to receive that worship
at their Altars and Images that they had by their juggling tricks and false
Miracles reintroduced into the Church, and flear amongst themselves at the
Imposture, that they made the Church in so gross a sense become the worshippers
of Devils, as it is said in the sixth Trumpet: And they worshipped the Beast:
that is, they yielded obedience to the Beast, to the Imperial Power in such a
state as it was, saying, Who is like unto the Beast, who is able to make war
with him? Things are so well settled and strongly this way, and so accommodately
to all men's liking, that neither Jew nor Pagan can be able to dissettle the
Peace of the Empire in this point, or make war and raise stirs against it.

5. And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies;
that is, great and enormous blasphemies: which are injunctions for Idolatry of
several sorts; for Blasphemy in Scripture often signifies Idolatry. And Power
was given unto him to continue forty and two months, the same time the outward
Court is trodden down by the Gentiles; that is, the entireness of his Dominion
shall continue till the seventh Semitime, till about the fourth month thereof.

6. And he opened his mouth in Blasphemy against God to blaspheme his Name, by
giving his incommunicable Name to Idols or Images; or Name may signify his
person, and so his person is blasphemed by Idolatry committed against him by
worshipping any other person besides God or Christ. And his Tabernacle, namely,
the Body of Christ, which is the Living Tabernacle of God, it is blasphemed
more ways than one, both in that they Idolatrously worship a mere Wafer
instead thereof, and make it also so vile a thing, that it shall be at the
command of every Priest for whatever uses he will please to fetch it down by
his transubstantiating charm, to be devoured into the foul stomachs of the
People, and as it may happen, to be eaten by base Vermin, such as Rats and
Mice. And them that dwell in Heaven; that is, the Saints and Angels they most
wickedly blaspheme, in that they set up Idols by the instigation of Evil
Spirits, the Forces or Armies the old Dragon delivered to the Beast, who no
doubt are busy enough to assist there and play tricks, and do call these Idols
by the names of the Saints or Angels, and impute these tricks there played in
the behalf of Idolatry by them to the Saints, when they are the mere delusions
of these Goblins or Devils: Besides, it it a gross reproach to the Saints and
Angels, to suppose they will accept of Religious Worship, and so prove Rebels
to God: Wherefore that Power that established and decreed such enormous things
as these, Image Worship, Saint-worship and Transubstantiation, may well be said
to open their mouth in blasphemy for publishing such Edicts, etc.

7. And it was given him to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them;
that is, to oppose them and subdue them, and keep them under all along, that
they shall have no power in the Empire, as it was said before of the mournful
Witnesses, that they were Politically dead all the three Times and an half in a
manner. But in some part of this time the war and slaughter or killing is not
mystical but proper: For of the Waldenses and Albigenses in France alone there
is said to have been slain no less than ten hundred thousand. And in the
Inquisition within thirty years space no less than an hundred fifty thousand
persons were consumed with all manner of grievances and miseries, besides
infinite numbers more. And Sanderus the Jesuit reports, that an infinite
number of Lothards, as he calls them, and Sacramentarians through Europe were
burnt with fire and faggot, but excuses it as not done by the Pope and Bishops,
but the secular Magistrate: which is the thing this Prophecy foretells, that it
is the Beast with ten horns, the Secular Power of the Empire, not the Beast
with two horns, that is the executioner of the cruelty, or that dooms to death.
Iezebel excites, but Ahab, the Secular Powers execute, or command to be
executed, her bloody suggestions against Naboth, that is, against those that
have the Witnesses of Jesus, the Spirit of Prophecy as is elsewhere explained.
And power was given him over all Kindreds, Tongues and Nations: namely, that he
might persecute and force men to Idolatrous worship in all the parts of the
Empire.

8. And all that dwell upon the Earth; that is, whose minds are fixed on
earthly things, shall worship him, that is, obey his Idolatrous Edicts and
Commands: whose names are not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world; that is, are not of the number of the Called
and Chosen, as they are termed, Chap. 17. nor of those that are redeemed from
the Earth, as they are described Chap. 14. For those will ever stand out till
they get the victory over the Beast.

9. If any man have an ear let him hear: For this was a remarkable intimation,
and worth the observing, as also that which follows.

10. He that leads into Captivity shall go into Captivity: He that kills
with the sword must be killed with the sword: that is, That Power which now in
this forty-two months of years of the Beast, domineers so, and forces men to
their Idolatrous worship shall at last be led captive into the Truth, and they
that kill now with the sword of persecution shall be slain by the sword of the
spirit, which is the Word of God, answerably to the witnesses slaying their
enemies by the fire that came out of their mouth: Which victory was obtained in
the resurrection of the Witnesses in a degree in the third or fourth month of
the seventh or last Semitime, (viz.) in the late blessed Reformation as I have
above noted. Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints, that they may
stand to it with these spiritual weapons till it shall please God to give them
success, as he did in the time even now mentioned.

11. And I beheld another Beast coming out of the Earth: Why there is two
Beasts here since the Empire became Christian in profession, I above intimated,
namely because there is as it were Imperium in Imperio, a Secular Empire and
Sacerdotal, which pretends to an Universal Rule in ordine ad spiritualia,
whenas the Pagan Emperors were Pontifices maximi, as well as Caesar's. But that
this other Beast is said to come out of the Earth and not out of the Sea
implies its more still and quiet growth, as of Plants out of the ground, or its
baser extraction, the chiefest in the Sacerdotal Hierarchy being more usually
of meaner Parentage. Or lastly, Earth may signify here as it does Chap. 12.
verse. 16. where Ecumenical Councils are glanced at, which though laudable in
themselves, yet this two-horned Beast grew out of them by the abuse of that
power of determining Controversies of Religion when once they had got the
custom not to mind what was true and Christian, but what was for the Interest
of Holy Church, though never so Worldly and Secular. And he had two horns like
a Lamb: That Apostate Sacerdotal Hierarchy or Prelacy pretend their Power from
the Lamb Christ, of binding and loosing. It may allude also to the Bishops
two-horned Mitre, which the two-horned Beast wears, though it so ill beseems
him; as also signify the distribution of the Apostatized Church then into two
parts as the Empire was Eastern and Western, and betoken the two chief
summities of this Sacerdotal Hierarchy, the two Patriarchates of Rome and
Constantinople. And he spoke as the Dragon; namely, in that he made Decrees for
Idolatrous practices, and for the persecuting of such as would not submit to
them. This was the voice of the Old Dragon.

12. And he exercises all the power of the first Beast before him; that is,
his whole power he has in Religion: For the power of approving things in
Religion, and passing it into a Law is in the Secular Supreme Magistrate, not
in the Clergy: But this Sacerdotal Hierarchy claimed all this Power, and
exercised it accordingly in the behalf of the former Beast, as he succeeded the
Dragon in his Dragon-like power and properties. And under pretense of this
power, in sacris, in matters of Religion, he causes the Earth and them that
dwell therein to worship the first Beast whose deadly wound was healed; that
is, represented so as to have been healed or recovered into its former
Paganical or Dragon-like condition, but by the Authority of this Sacerdotal
Hierarchy, which was so prevalent with the people as to effect it; and how he
effected it now follows:

13. And he does great wonders, so that he makes fire come down from Heaven on
the Earth: which is a proverbial expression of the notoriousness of a wonder,
alluding to Elias his bringing fire from Heaven upon those fifties. But it is
as childish to understand this literally here, as it would have been to
understand the fire proceeding out of the mouth of the Witnesses, and their
turning the waters into blood, and the like, literally. Fire from Heaven
therefore here is the thundering excommunications of this Sacerdotal Hierarchy,
whereby those that did not obey the voice of this Beast, though it was the
voice of the Dragon appointing Idolatrous worship, * were rent off from the
Church, and made obnoxious to eternal fire. What is a greater
wonder-working-power than this? And yet this great wonder, this two-horned
Beast does. In the sight of men; that is, they are such fools as to believe he
does it; especially when a Pope thunders against a Prince and his Nation for
their Heresy, ( viz.) the relinquishing the Superstition, Idolatry and Tyranny
of the Roman Church. And Gregory the seventh when he had excommunicated the
Emperor Henry the fourth, said, he was fulmine afflatus, thunderstruck by
him. These things, I confess, are rather a show of Miracles than Miracles; but
Antichrist was to come with Lying and feigned Miracles. And if there might be
any thing extraordinary, it is imputable to the forces of the Dragon, the Evil
Spirits that were bequeathed by the Dragon to the Apostatizing Empire.

14. And deceives them that dwell on the earth by the means of those Miracles
which he had power to do in the sight of the Beast: that is, In the sight of
the Lay or Secular Empire, before whom he made a show as if he did these
Miracles: And whatever was in truth extraordinary, they are to be imputed to
the two-horned Beast: For he claiming and accepting the Power of ordering the
Empire in matters of Religion, the Forces of the Dragon bequeathed to the
ten-horned Beast fell naturally to his share. And by these assistances are done
whatever looks really like something extraordinary or miraculous for the
promoting Idolatry and Superstition, miraculous Cures and Visions, exorcising
Spirits, and a deal of such stuff, whether feigned or true, these are justly
imputed to the two-horned Beast, as they conferr to the bringing the Empire
again into a more perfect Pagan-like or Dragon-like condition: For by reason of
these he was listened to when he made his harangue to the people: Saying to
them that dwell on the Earth, that they should make an Image to the Beast which
had the wound by the sword; namely, in the fight with Michael and the Martyrs,
who overcame this Beast, ( viz.) the Dragon, and his pure Paganism. But this
two-horned Beast revives his Image again by the means abovesaid, by the
obtruding of the belief of such Miracles on the people. And he lived; that is,
the Old Dragon, or Pagan Superstition and Idolatry was very lively reintroduced
in this Image the two-horned Beast made, by making the Empire thus Idolatrous.

15. And this Image was no spiritless Image, sluggish and harmless like an
inanimate Statue: For the two-horned Beast had a way to transfuse Spirit and
Life into it, as it follows: And he had power to give Life unto the Image of
the Beast, that the Image of the Beast should both speak, and cause that as
many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, that is, would not obey
himself, the Secular Idolatrous Power of the Empire, should be killed: Which
Power of so commanding to kill, which is the Spirit of the Image of the Beast,
is derived from the two-horned Beast, or Sacerdotal Hierarchy; the Image of the
Beast having no Power to kill any one for matters of Religion, but whom the
Sacerdotal Hierarchy has declared Heretic; then is he delivered up to the
Secular Power, the Ten-horned Beast: For the two-horned Beast kills none
himself, but delivers up to the Secular Magistrate according to this very
Prophecy.

16. And he, this Image of the Beast, causes all both small and great, rich
and poor, free and bond, that is, all sorts and degrees of men, to receive a
mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads, as Soldiers or Servants do the
name of their General or Master, that is, they must make open and express
profession to whom they belong.

17. And that no man may buy or sell, save he that had the mark or name of the
Beast, or the number of his Name: (viz.) of the two-horned Beast, the very
Antichrist, who will have his marked Soldiers as well as Christ has his; that
is, no man not marked with the name of this Beast, or the number of his name,
that has not either his name in letters plainly writ or in figures, that
contain the number that the letters of his name make according to their numeral
value (for every Greek letter has such a numeral value) those that are not thus
marked, that is, profess not themselves of the Faith of this Sacerdotal
Hierarchy signified by the two-horned Beast, may neither buy nor sell, but are
excommunicated for Heretics, with whom by the very Sentence of their Synods
there is to be no Negotiation. Now who this Beast, this two-horned Beast, or
Sacerdotal Hierarchy more particularly is, is enigmatically expressed in the
following Verse.

18. Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count the number of the
Beast. Here is a dark riddle, let him that has skill that way number the number
of the Beast. For it is the number of a Man; that is, not so strange a number,
but that it may be numbered by the Art of man. And his number is six hundred
threescore and six; which is to be numbered no otherwise than by the extraction
of the square Root which is 25, * which is marvellously applicable to the City
and Church of Rome, as 12 the root of 144 to the New Jerusalem. And that you
may be sure this Sacerdotal Hierarchy of Rome is more specially aimed at in
this Vision, take another easy sense of [ It is the number of a Man] that is,
of a man's name. For above there is mention of the number of his name. And his
name will prove (...) (Lateinos) for those letters in their numeral value make
just 666. And it is notoriously known, that the Fathers of this Western Church,
of which Old Rome was the Head, were styled in subscriptions at Councils, the
Latin Fathers, and the Eastern Fathers, Roman, from New Rome and the Eastern
Roman Empire in those parts: So that (...) is that name of a Man, of that Man
of Sin, or Antichrist, and 666 the number of this Man, that is of his name,
which is a Cabbalistical device, and by the Cabbalists called Gematria. From
whence we see that the pinch of this Prophetic Vision at last lights more
particularly on the Pope of Rome and his Clergy.

NOTES. CHAPTER XIII. Verse. 13.
Were rent off from the Church and made obnoxious to eternal fire, etc. That
thunder is fire from Heaven is plain, as also that the Popes Excommunications
are compared to Thunder, and that Heaven in the Prophetic style are the high
places in any Polity. Wherefore his Thundering Excommunications against Princes
is very fitly set out by that phrase, That he causes fire to come down from
Heaven, as if he thundered against them: Which Analogy is still more accurate,
if we consider what Artemidorus says of Thunder, (...). For thunder and
lightning does not unite but disjoyns things that are united: So does
Excommunication, that rives off a member from the Church. And there is still a
further congruity that Excommunication should be called Thundering and
Lightning, or fire from Heaven, in that it is the Commination of Hell fire, of
which the destruction of Sodom was a Type, which was burnt by fire from Heaven,
as Mr J. Mede has judiciously observed: See my Synopsis Prophetica, lib. 1.
cap. 6. sect. 14.

Verse. 18. Which is marvellously applicable to the City and Church of Rome,
etc. Concerning this applicableness of this number 25, by way of
counter-correspondency, if I may so speak, to the number 12. see my Mystery of
Godliness, lib. 5. cap. 16. sect. 8. For it were too long and tedious to
transcribe those things into these brief Notes.

CHAPTER XIV.
1. THere was mention in the foregoing Chapter of the Wars of the Beast, and
his marked Soldiers, and of his continuance ( viz. in his entire state) to the
seventh Semitime of forty two months of years (which is one manner of
expressing Daniel's time and times and half a time.) Now in
counter-correspondency to those Soldiers and that War, in this very first Verse
there is exhibited the Lamb and his Soldiers: And I looked, and Lo! a Lamb
stood on Mount Sion; which is Christ against Antichrist: And with him an
hundred forty four thousands: that is to say, an hundred forty four Chiliads or
Regiments, consisting of a thousand a piece: Having his Fathers Name written in
their foreheads: that is, making open profession of Christ and of God his
Father against the pretended Holy Father of Rome, the Pope, as the word
signifies. Instead of receiving the mark of the two-horned Beast in their right
hand, or on their foreheads, they have the name of God the Father and of his
Son Christ marked on their foreheads, that you may see whose Soldiers they are.
And in that they are said to be 144 Regiments, it denotes that they are pure
Apostolic Christians, the square root of 144 being 12. Here therefore the
number 144 from its root 12 denotes the Apostolic Church, as the number 666
from its root 25, the Church Apostatizing.

2. And I heard a voice from Heaven as the voice of many waters, and as the
voice of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of Harpers harping with their
harps. This is a description of the Angelical Music in Heaven, where
multitudes of Angels praise God and the Lamb, the voice of many waters and
thunder, being symbols of a multitude speaking or singing together: But it is
further said of this Angelical Quire.

3. And they sung as it were a new song before the Throne, and before the four
Beasts, and the Elders, and no man could learn that song but the hundred forty
four thousand which were redeemed from the Earth. This Song of the Angelical
Quire, which is the Joy that arises from the New Nature, or the Divine Nature
superadded to the Animal Nature, and is the same in Men and Angels, I mean
regenerate men, who thereby are made partakers of the Divine Nature, as well as
the Angels; None could learn this Song, that is, none could know what belongs
to the Joys of the New Birth, or Divine Life raised in us, that state of
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, but the hundred forty four
thousand redeemed from the Earth, that is, from the earthy sense and wisdom,
that savours only the things of this world, and of the flesh.

4. These are they which were not defiled with women; namely, with the
Daughters of Babylon, that famous strumpet the Mother of Harlots and
Abominations of the Earth: These would not submit themselves to the lewd
debaucheries of that Idolatrous Church. For they are Uirgins: For they have so
holy and chaste a sense in the duties of Divine Worship, that they abhor from
every thing that has any show of violating that loyalty and fidelity they owe
to God or Christ, to whom alone they are betrothed. These are they which follow
the Lamb whithersoever he goes. These are they who are only led by his Word
and Spirit, not by a blind and implicit Faith in a Church not only fallible
but fallacious or deceitful, most of their corruptions both in Doctrine and
Worship being upheld for their own worldly interest. These were redeemed from
among men, were rescued from being carried away with the stream of the rest of
the Superstitious and Idolatrous Rabble, hood-winked and captivated by the
false shows and subtle enticements of the most cunning Polity in the world,
Being the first fruits unto God and to the Lamb: namely, the first pure
Apostolic Christians after the Apostasy, and but an handful in comparison of
those multitudes that will appear after the dissolution of the Papal Tyranny.

5. And in their mouth was found no guile; that is, there was no hypocrisy nor
dissembling in them, but they professed the Truth from their hearts, and
concealed it not: For they are without fault before the Throne of God; that is,
in the judgment of God they are holy and upright men, though at the Tribunal of
Antichrist they are condemned for Heretics, and deemed men not worthy to live,
or dye an ordinary death. Nay, besides what they call Heresy in them, (though
according to that they do worship in purity the God of their Fathers, as St
Paul speaks, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ) they add a multitude of
abominable lies to make them odious to the people, but the God of Heaven knows
they are guiltless, whence it is said, They are without fault before the Throne
of God.

6. And I saw another Angel distinct from that Quire of Angels taken notice of
before, fly in the midst of Heaven, that he may be seen and heard over all the
Christian world, as well the Western as Eastern Empire, as is intimated in what
follows: Having the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the
Earth, and to every Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People: that is, to
preach the Everlasting Righteousness, Law, or Religion, that Christ according
to Daniel was to bring in: Dan. 9.24.
Which is the pure and Apostolic Doctrine unsophisticated with the
Superstitions and Idolatries of either Greek or Roman Church, which hay and
stubble is to be burnt up, but that Apostolic Gospel to be Eternal, never to
fail, and to spread over all.

7. Saying with a loud voice, Fear God and give Glory to him, for the hour of
his judgment is come: And worship him that made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea,
and the fountains of waters: And therefore none but God the Father and the Son,
with the Spirit, who Created all things, is to be worshipped: The Gods that
have not made the Heavens and the Earth, Jer. 10.11.
they shall perish from the Earth, and from under the Heavens, as the Prophet
Jeremiah foretells: This is a plain declaration against giving any Religious
Worship to any but God alone: And therefore a commination against all
Saint-worshippers and Image-worshippers, or whatever other Idolatry in the
Greek or Roman Church. That this voice of the Angel respects the Edicts and
Degrees of those Greek Emperors that protested so zealously against
Saint-worship and Image Worship, namely the Decrees of Leo Isaurus,
Constantinus Iconomaches, Leo Armenius, Michael Balbus and Theophilus, I do not
deny, but this Angelical Monition was the most loudly and earnestly urged upon
the Christian World at the dreadful siege and storming of Constantinople, and
the subduing the whole Eastern Church and Empire to the Turk. This was a plain
manifestation that the hour of his judgment was come against such gross
Idolaters. And yet though his judgments flew so high, and sounded so loud as
to give notice to all Christendom, yet the Western Church would take no notice
thereof, as it is predicted Chap. 9. verse. 20. And the rest of the men which
were not killed by these plagues from the Euphratean Horsemen, which are the
Turks, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not
worship Demons and Idols of Gold and Silver, etc. And therefore if we hear news
of the hand of God upon the Western Church also, I mean upon the Idolatrous
Hierarchy thereof, which is more particularly styled Babylon, we need not be
much surprised: And thus we read in the next verse.

8. And there followed another Angel saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that
great City, or Polity, because she made all Nations, the Eastern as well as the
Western Church (as may be observed in the Popes activity at the second Nicene
Council, and in excommunicating the Iconoclast Emperors) drink of the wine of
the wrath of her fornication, of the Philter she had mingled for them, the
Love-poison, or Love-potion of her fornication, by which is plainly understood
Idolatry. To the voice of this Angel belongs the Reformation, when so many
Provinces and Principalities fell off from the Church of Rome, and was a pledge
of her further ruin: Here therefore ends the Thyatirian Interval, and that of
Sardis begins, in which is contained the effusion of the Vials, all but the
last.

9. And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, If any man
worship the Beast and his Image; that is, give obedience to the Secular and
Spiritual Power in such things as are Idolatrous, and are the very strokes and
lineament of the Image of the Beast, and receive his, the Beasts, mark in his
forehead, or in his hand; that is, make profession of, or promote and
countenance the Romish Idolatrous Religion:

10. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out
without mixture into the cup of his indignation. He shall drink of the cup of
bitterness and malediction from the Lord. And he shall be tormented with fire
and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the
Lamb.

11. And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever; that is,
all they shall be condemned to those infernal and eternal flames, who under the
voice of this third Angel shall persist in the gross Idolatries, and other foul
corruptions of the Church of Rome: For under the voice of this Angel, the
abominations of that Church will be so fully discovered, and convincingly, that
the adherers thereto will be generally deemed incapable of salvation, with any
that have any remainders of judgment and conscience in them. And they have no
rest day nor night who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives
the mark of his Name. Truth against the Church of Rome will be then so dear,
that no man that has any Conscience can be of that Religion and Profession, but
it will lie exceeding unevenly in his mind, it will put him in restless and
unsatisfied condition, it appearing so manifestly against all sense, all
reason, all honesty and loyalty, and against all those sound and sacred
Principles that God has implanted in the nature of man: Wherefore in those
days no honest-hearted man can endure to submit to the Church of Rome. From
whence it follows,

12. Here is the patience of the Saints. This is the time wherein the patience
of the Saints will be tried, the external carnal power of the enemy
endeavoring to force them against so great Light, to submit to their
Idolatrous and Antichristian usages by cruel and barbarous persecutions:
Wherefore this answers to that passage in the Epistle to the Church of Sardis,
which contains a commination for their more general deadness and degeneracy,
whereby the better sort amongst them are brought to this jeopardy and distress.
Here are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus: that
is, Here are they that will say unto their persecutors, Whether it be right in
the sight of God, Acts 4.19.
to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge you? Here are they that keep to
the pure Faith and Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, and will not submit to
any new-coined forms, invented for worldly Interest, and contrary to the Faith
and Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. And surely God will give at last to
the sufferings of such holy and sincere souls suitable victory and success, as
is intimated in the following Verse:

13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed are the
dead that dye in the Lord: That dye as Martyrs in witness to his Truth against
the abominable corruptions of that Idolatrous Church. From henceforth, are they
blessed, that is, from this time of the Sardian Interval that here is
intimated, a time when the Scales begin to turn, and nearer approach is made to
the Philadelphian State, which commenceth with the Reign of the Spirit, as the
Cabbalists call it; and therefore it follows, Yea, says the Spirit. The Spirit
that is to bring on these days, sets his Seal thereto: That they may rest from
their labors: For their martyrdom puts an end to their pains and toils in
this world: And their works do follow them; that is, the effect and success of
their works and labor here, which are the hoped consequences thereof: Which
expected effect and success is the restoring of the Kingdom of Christ upon the
overthrow of the salvage and barbarous tyranny of a bloody Idolatrous Church,
which murders and massacres men, and does all imaginable despite to them,
because they will not sin against the manifest Laws of Christ to serve the lewd
worldly ends, and interest of Antichrist.

14. And I looked and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like
unto the Son of Man, having on his head a golden Crown. This is Christ that Son
of Man in Daniel, Dan. 7.14.
who is said to come with the Clouds of Heaven, as if they were his Chariot,
and Dominion, and Glory, and a Kingdom, as here a Crown is said to be given
unto him; And in his hand a sharp sickle. That Christ himself here appears with
his sickle in his hand ready to reap, is very agreeable to what was intimated
before of the Reign of the Spirit, and the approaching thereof: For what he is
said to do by himself is by the Ministry of his Spirit in counterdistinction to
humane and carnal means. This is about the time of the sixth Vial.

15. And another Angel came out of the Temple, representing the holy Church,
and her earnest and sincere Devotions for the enlargement of the Kingdom of
Christ: And therefore it is added, Crying with a loud voice to him that sat on
the Cloud, Thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the time is come for thee to
reap, for the harvest of the Earth is ripe: Like that of our blessed Savior
himself; Lift up your eyes and look on the fields, Joh. 4.35.
for they are white already to harvest.

16. And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his sickle on the Earth, and the
Earth was reaped: namely, that crop that belonged to that season, which as I
said, is about the sixth Vial, which contemporizeth with the Vision of the
Lambs Bride: And therefore by this Harvest happily may be prefigured the
gathering of the Jews to the Faith of Christ, which will prove a further
enlargement of his Kingdom: But the most universal conquest of all follows in
the next Vision, which contemporizeth with the seventh or last Vial.

17. And another Angel came out of the Temple which is in Heaven, [ which is in
Heaven] is omitted, verse. 15. as needless, because the Reaper there is Christ
himself, which implies his immediate assistance in that work. But this Angel
being himself to be Vintager, there is mention made of Heaven, to intimate his
heavenly mission, that he is sent from God, and immediately assisted by his
Spirit. The appearance of which Reign of the Spirit will be eminent under this
seventh Vial, which contemporizeth with the Vision of the Rider of the White
Horse, with a sharp two-edged sword coming out of his mouth, this Angel also
having a sharp sickle; which fitly answers to the sharp two-edged sword coming
out of the mouth of the Rider of the white Horse: Both of them signify the
cutting convictiveness of the Word and Spirit in the powerful Ministers of
Christ in those days.

18. And another Angel came out from the Altar, which had power over fire: The
Altar, as elsewhere in the Apocalypse, is a symbol of the sacrifice of
Martyrdom. And here is mention of Fire, because that kind of Martyrdom was so
frequently inflicted by that Murderous and Idolatrous Church of Rome upon the
Faithful Witnesses of Christ, who bore Testimony against the abominations of
that bloody Synagogue. And cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp
sickle; namely, for vengeance against this den of cruel Murderers and
Idolaters; saying, Thrust in thy sharp sickle and gather the clusters of the
Uine of the Earth, for the Grapes are fully ripe; that is, some are in full
ripeness and readiness for Conversion, and for others their sins are fully ripe
for utter destruction and confusion. But I conceive this Vision respects more
especially the former, which yet involves the destruction and confusion of the
latter.

19. And the Angel thrust in his sickle into the Earth, and gathered the Uine
of the Earth, and cast it into the great Wine Press of the wrath of God; that
is, men were pressed in conscience upon the sharp convictions of the powerful
Ministers of Christ with sorrow for their sins; and the wrath of God against
themselves was kindled in them: As the Apostle writes to the Corinthians
concerning the like conviction. 2 Corinthians. 7.11.
What carefulness it wrought in you, what indignation, what vehement desire,
what revenge. Here Christ, who is said to tread the wine press of Gods wrath
alone, treads and squeezes out the corrupt blood of Edom. And in the Vision
which is parallel to this Chap. 19. his Vesture is said to be dipped in blood,
and that he treads the wine press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty
God: which plainly shows, that these two Visions tend to one and the same thing.

20. And the Wine Press was trodden without the City: that is, this powerful
conviction neither began in, nor reached to the City of Babylon, the Roman
Hierarchy or Polity; (for wood and stone is not here meant, but a Polity or
Society of men) as is observable in the seventh Vial; that though the Cities of
the Nations fell by those powerful Boanerges's yet this Babylon the great,
though hailstones of a Talent weight fell upon them, were not converted or
convinced in their consciences, but blasphemed God, because of the plague of
the hail, it was so exceeding great. And in the Vision of the Rider of the
White Horse, the false Prophet and his adherents were taken, and their power
abolished, as to that Tyranny and Idolatry they exercised before; but it was
the rest only that were slain with the Sword that proceeded out of the mouth of
him that sat on the white Horse, it was they only that were converted and
convinced by the powerful preaching of the Everlasting Gospel, the pure Gospel
of Christ cleansed from all the filth and trumperies, all the Idolatries and
Superstitions of Antichrist. And they are the same that are pressed here by
Christ's Vintagers or Grape-pressers, but the City of Babylon proves obdurate
and incapable of any such pressure of conscience, or true contrition for her
Abominations, so strongly is she hardened in her pretense of Infallibility. And
blood came out of the Wine Press even to the Horses bridles. This again shows
plainly that the Vision of the Rider of the white Horse and his Company, and
this of the Wine Press is all one: But this signifies a full conviction in the
convicted and a perfect victory over the contumacious, which is further
illustrated by what follows: By the space of a thousand and six hundred
furlongs, which signifies the exceeding largeness and universality, as it were,
of the victory, if we read as we may, sixteen Hecatontads or Centuries of
furlongs. And then as in the number 666, and as in the 144 Chiliads, by
extracting the square root we find the symbolical meaning of them; so by the
extracting the square root of sixteen which is four, we find the symbolical
meaning of this: * For four is the symbol of Universality with the Pythagoreans
and Cabbalists: Which construction suits wonderfully well with the Visions this
is a parallel to, namely, that of the seventh Vial, and the Battle of the Rider
of the White Horse: Which is the Battle of that Great Day of God Almighty, to
which the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole world are gathered together; and
the defeat is proportionable: For upon this defeat all the Kingdoms of the
World will become the Kingdoms of God, and of his Christ.

NOTES. CHAPTER XIV. Verse. 20.
For four is the symbol of Universality with the Pythagoreans and Cabbalists,
etc. That the Ancient true Cabbalists held the number Four to be a symbol of
Universality is plain from the fourth days Creation: Which is indeed the
Creation of the whole world in general according to the Philosophic Cabbala.
And as for the Pythagoreans it is frequent with them to call their Tetractys,
that is, the number four, (...), All Number, as Photius observes; because all
number is made up in Ten, and the putting together of every number in Four,
(viz.) 1, 2, 3, 4. makes up Ten, (...), says he, (...). For this reason the
Pythagoreans called the number [four] All number, or the whole number. And
Suidas reports the same almost in the very same words concerning the
Pythagoreans. For the abovesaid reason, says he, (...), they called the number
[Four] All number, as universally comprehending all Number in it. And Philo
Judaeus, (...). The number [Four] is called All number, or the whole Number,
because it comprehends what reaches to [Ten] and the Number [Ten] it self.
Which again he asserts, but with that distinction, that, [Ten] is, (...), All
number, or the whole entire Number (...), actually, but [Four] (...),
potentially* which Hierocles expresses thus, (...). Whereby he would
insinuate, that before we make up explicitly [Ten] by the Numbers contained in
[Four;] (viz.) 1, 2, 3, 4. there is notwithstanding an implicit or complicate
entireness of [Ten] in the Number [Four.] Which is sufficient to make it a
symbol of Universality. See Meursius his Denarius Pythagoricus. This therefore
being the symbolical significancy of [Four] the root of Sixteen, I do not doubt
but that I have hit upon the genuine sense of the sixteen hundred furlongs. But
before I was aware of this Mystery I was fain to take up with Mr Mede's
conceit, that they relate to Stato della Chiesa, and to the Holy Land, but so
as I understood it mystically: For the literal sense of sixteen hundred
furlongs overflown with blood, so that it reached to the horse-bridles, never
seemed to me either credible or tolerable.

CHAPTER XV.
IN two several setts of Visions, the one contained in the eleventh Chapter,
the other in the twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth Chapters, and each of them
beginning from the first Epoch of the Christian Church, and ending with the
last Vial, or first thunder, have the Prophecies of the Opened Book hitherto
been contained, as being most general and comprehensive, taking in all the five
intervals of the Ephesine, Smyrnean, Pergamenian, Thyatirian and Sardian
Churches, together with the beginning of the Philadelphian. Now according to
right method, some particulars are more copiously or clearly explained: As for
example, the transition out of the Thyatirian condition into the Sardian; the
Joy and Triumph thereof is competently set out, Chap. 11. verse. 15, 16, 17. and
more sparingly, Chap. 14. verse. 8. but most clearly and illustriously in this
15th Chapter verse. 2, 3, 4. Which plainly demonstrates, that before the
effusion of the Vials, there is a considerable victory over the Beast. For that
Doxologie, Chap. 11. is after the rising of the Witnesses. And that triumphant
acclamation, Chap. 14. verse. 8. not before the fall of Babylon. And here most
expressly of all in this Chapter, there is thanks for a notable lately gotten
victory over the Beast, and over his Image, etc. before we come to the effusion
of the Vials, so that these things notably confirm one another. To say nothing
how the very name Sardis signifies Canticum laetitiae, a Song of Joy.

1. And I saw another sign in Heaven great and mavelous, seven Angels having
the seven last plagues, for in them is filled up the wrath of God. Namely,
against the Beast or Roman Hierarchy, that was punished considerably by the
Reformation; but before there Vials be over, In the cup that she has filled, it
will be filled to her double: The seven last plagues, which therefore in all
reason are to be in the last Wo-trumpet, and the second Wo-trumpet was past at
the rising of the Witnesses: And therefore the effusion of the Vials must be
after the rising of the Witnesses, and the rising of the Witnesses the
Protestant Reformation, when so many Provinces and Principalities had cast off
the Yoke, and freed themselves from the sad bondage of that Roman Pharaoh, the
Papal Hierarchy, as the Israelites of old were delivered from the slavery of
Egypt: And therefore it follows,

2. And I saw as it were a Sea of glass mingled with fire: This seems to have a
double allusion, either to the Sea of Glass, like unto Crystal, before the
Throne, Chap. 4. verse. 5. which the light of the seven Lamps there shined upon,
or else to the Red Sea congealed, as it were, into two walls of Glass or Ice,
on which the Angel in a pillar of Fire going before the Israelites shined also
and the redness of the sand of the Sea made the mixture more like fire. And
them that had gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his Image, such as
had got free from both the Sacerdotal and Secular Idolatrous Power, that they
could not longer persecute them for not submitting to their Pagan-like
Abominations: And over his mark, and over the number of his Name; that is, That
now could neither be forced to swear into the forms of that false Church by a
slavish implicit faith, nor to profess himself a Latin or Roman Catholic, but
a free Apostolic Christian: Stand on the sea of Glass, on the shore of that
Sea that was converted into Glass or Ice when they passed through it, as newly
escaped the persecution of that Roman Pharaoh, who was overthrown Horse and Man
in the Red Sea, that is, by the Protestants profession, that they were only
justified by the blood of Christ, and the sanctification of his Spirit, which
is resembled by fire: Having the Harps of God, that is, Holy or large Harp.

3. And they sing the Song of Moses the Servant of God, and the song of the
Lamb; that is, They sing the Song of the Lamb, of which the Song of Moses was
but a Type, but the occasions so like one another, that the Song may
indifferently serve both: But in the mean time, it is plain here, that Rome is
that Spiritual Egypt, wherein the Witnesses were slain, and the Bishop of Rome
the Pharaoh thereof: Saying, Great and mavelous are thy works Lord God
Almighty, just and true are thy ways, O King of Saints.

4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name, for thou only art
holy, for all Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments are
manifest: Shall come and worship before thee, which implies, that this first
victory is but the first fruits of that elargement God intends for the Kingdom
of his Son Christ.

5. And after that I looked, namely after this Triumphal Song of the Harpers,
that had gotten the victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over his
Mark, and over the number of his Name: For it is absurd to conceive a triumphal
Song before the victory, or this victory to be of the Primitive Christians over
the Pagans, because of the Image of the Beast, and his Mark, and the number of
his Name: And therefore it must be the victory of the Protestants over the
Paganochristians. Whence it is impossible, that the first Vial, and the first
Trumpet should contemporize. And behold the Temple of the Tabernacle of the
Testimony in Heaven was opened: Which answers to that, Chap. 11. verse. 19. And
the Temple of God was opened in Heaven; which again assures us, that the
effusion of the Vial is after the rising of the Witnesses; namely out of what
follows.

6. And the seven Angels came out of the Temple, having the seven plagues; that
is, designed to that Office: Clothed in pure and white linen, and having
their Breasts girded with golden girdles; that is, being clothed in priestly
attire, as being heavenly Priests belonging to that Heavenly Temple, that is to
say, as being so represented.

7. And one of the four Beasts; the Lion happily, it being the most military
Beast, and a Beast of anger and courage: Gave unto the seven Angels seven
golden Uials full of the wrath of God who lives for ever and ever: Whence it
is intimated, that these Ministers were to be actuated, not by any private
spleen, but by the just wrath of God, which burns only against obstinate
Hypocrites and Sinners.

8. And the Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his
power* that is to say, from the glorious power of God in taking vengeance of
the Beast, or false Prophet, in reference to whom chiefly is the pouring out of
the Vials, till he be taken and cast out into the lake of fire and brimstone,
and so all Idolatrous and Tyrannical power be abolished: No settlement till
then, but all filled ever and anon with confusion, dust and smoke. And no man
was able to enter into the Temple till the seven plagues of the seven Angels
were fulfilled; that is, there is no recovery of the Church into that state
thereof, which is decyphered by (...), the Temple of God, Chap. 11. verse. 1.
till the seven plagues of the seven Angels be fulfilled, accordingly as has
been signified. Then will the Temple become symmetral again and commensurable,
not only to the Reed of a Man but of an Angel, nor to a Reed any way
combustible, but to a Golden Reed. This is to be under the second Thunder that
immediately follows the last Vial, at the descent of the New Jerusalem from
Heaven, of which state it is said, Lo! the Tabernacle of God is with men, and
they will become his Living Temple pure and undefiled; otherwise, There is no
Temple there but God Almighty, and the Lamb is the Temple thereof. This settled
state of the Church, which is the Temple of God, will not appear till after the
effusion of the Vials.

CHAPTER XVI.
SOme strictures there were, and glances at the things that appertain to the
Vials after the Rising of the Witnesses, Chap. 11. and after the fall of
Babylon, Chap. 14. but hinted very maimedly, obscurely, and interruptedly. But
the Vials in this Chapter are more fully and orderly set down; as we shall see
by perusing the Chapter.

1. And I heard a great voice out of the Temple, (out of which the Angels had
come forth, Chap. 15. verse. 6.) saying to the seven Angels, Go your ways and
pour out the Uials of the wrath of God (which ye received from one of the four
Beasts) upon the Earth; that is, upon this Terrestrial or Terraqueous Globe.

2. And the first went and poured out his Uial upon the Earth: (viz.) in that
sense of Earth that was intimated before; for it means no more than on this
Terraqueous Globe, unless there be an allusion to the ashes of the furnace from
which the Egyptian blains and boiles did arise, as certainly there is an
allusion to those Egyptian plagues both in this and in other Vials; whereby we
may be assured, that these plagues belong to that City or Society, that is
spiritually called Egypt, namely to the Papal or Antichristian Hierarchy, that
has so long kept the Children of God in bondage, and in which the Witnesses
have been so often slain. Earth therefore here is chiefly repeated to bear a
correspondence in the outward Cortex, with Sea, Rivers and Air, as if God would
stir up all the Elements or Nature to fight against the Beast, and the
Antichristian Powers. And there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men
which had the mark of the Beast, and upon them which worshipped his Image; that
is, the minds of the Pontifician party were extremely enraged and exulcerated
with fury and envy against the risen Witnesses (as an Evil Spirit from the Lord
troubled Saul) when they beheld them [ Chap. 11. verse. 12.] ascending to
Heaven, 1 Samuel 16.14.
that is, called up to high places and dignities in Church and State, and that
the Papal Idolatrous Power and Tyranny was abolished. This Cup of Bitterness,
Wrath, Envy and intoxicating Zeal for so foul a Cause, was the effusion of the
first Vial upon them, which did so work upon them, and dementate them, that
they made themselves still more execrable and odious by their impotent and
unsuccessful attempts against them, that God had thus exalted above their
reach. In the mean time we see how naturally (besides the letting loose Evil
Spirits upon them) the first Vial follows the rising of the Witnesses
accordingly as it is glanced at Chap. 11. verse. 18. immediately after their
rising, and those Triumphant Doxologies for the same, (those Songs of Joy from
whence the Sardian Church has her Name, which here commenceth.) And the
Nations, (...), the Heathen were angry, etc. by which are understood the
Antichristian party, as by Jews, the truly Christian ( chap. 2.9.) in the style
of the Apocalypse.

3. And the second Angel poured out his Uial upon the Sea; that is, upon some
parts of the Sea: And Sea in the Prophetic style signifying the gathering
together of the People into one Polity or Kingdom, it must signify some parts
of this Kingdom or Polity; which is here the Jurisdiction or Dominion of the
Papacy. Of some parts therefore of this Sea it is said, And it became as the
blood of a dead man* and every living soul died in the Sea: (viz.) in these
parts of this Sea which were turned into blood there were no live fishes to be
caught there any more: and fishes dead in the Sea signify disappointment of
hope, and that what we expect will not come to pass. In such a state was the
Papal Hierarchy after the settlement of the Reformation in so many Provinces,
Principalities and Kingdoms; which deadness and hopelesness of his affairs
there, brought to pass by the good Providence of God, was the pouring out the
second Vial upon these parts of this Sea or Jurisdiction, and turning them into
blood, and the quite spoiling any further fishing there.

4. And the third Angel poured out his Uial upon the Rivers and Fountains of
waters, and they became blood: As Sea signified above Politically, so Rivers
and Fountains of Waters or Springs must, that are the Heads of Rivers, and both
come from the Sea and return thither again, ( viz.) the water of them. A Sea
therefore here being a Kingdom or Polity, the Rivers must be Emissary Powers of
the said Kingdom, whether Armies, or other Agents, with those that Head them or
Govern them, who may be deemed the Spring-heads of them, they taking their
directions and motions from them, and depending on them as Rivers do on their
Springs: And this plague of turning Rivers into blood being manifestly one of
the plagues of Egypt, these Emissaries must be the Emissaries of that City or
Polity which is spiritually called Egypt, which is the Papal Hierarchy: And
the turning these Rivers into blood, is the putting to death such Emissaries
for their treasonable attempts against Kings or Princes, and the settled
Religion and Government of the place.

5. And I heard the Angel of the Waters say, (viz.) the Prefect of the
multitudes of people, Thou art Righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and
shall be; that is, thou art just, O Jehovah, thou great Judge and King, because
thou have judged thus:

6. For they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets; namely, in the
Pergamenial Interval, in which thy faithful Martyr Antipas was slain with the
sword, besides many other bloody butcheries and massacres of the people of God.
And thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy, as having shed so
much innocent blood.

7. And I heard another out of the Altar, say, that is, out of that place of
the Temple where the Altar stood, and where so many Burnt-offerings were made:
Even so Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments: For I can
witness what a number of Innocent Souls were burnt with fire and faggot in the
Thyatirian Interval of the Church, because they would not submit to the gross
Superstitions and Idolatries, and incredible, nay, impossible figments of the
Roman Hierarchy, and so were made Burnt-offerings or Sacrifices to their
intolerable Avarice, Ambition, and Tyrannical Cruelty.

8. And the fourth Angel poured out his Uial upon the Sun: Sun here may have
either a Political sense or a Mystical: Mystically understood, it may be the
Word of God, which is a Lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our paths; as the
great Lamp of the Universe is naturally understood to be: The Vial therefore
poured upon the Sun, are clear convictive explications of the Word of God, the
Prophetical parts thereof especially whereby manifestly are discovered the
unrighteous Mysteries of the Kingdom of Antichrist, that men may see in what a
foul condition they are, how apostatized from God and Christ, and how plainly,
and reproachfully their abominable doings are characterized by the finger of
God in Scripture, and how lively their most direful and diabolical Image is
there described: Whence it is no wonder, that it immediately is said, And power
was given unto him to scorch men with fire.

9. And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the Name of God which
has power over these plagues, and they repented not to give him Glory. They
are so vexed, that they blaspheme the Name of God, and rather vilify the
Scriptures, and the Spirit that wrote them, than repent them of their sins, and
give Glory to God by acknowledging the Truth; as certainly the true sense of
the Prophecies of Daniel and the Apocalypse where they are known and
acknowledged, tend exceeding much to the Glory of God, and the illustration of
the constancy of his Providence. And this may go for the mystical sense of the
effusion of the Vial upon the Sun: But there may be also a Political one; and
then Sun is to be understood of the greatest Secular Power within the Papal
Jurisdiction; which therefore is the German Empire. Wherefore if any German
Emperor, or any Potentate as considerable as the German Emperor, should be so
illuminated with the true knowledge of the Gospel, as cordially to resent the
cause thereof, the general Reformation that he would introduce into his Empire,
through the light and zeal he has conceived for the Truth, will scorch and
burn, and vex the vassals of the two-horned Beast at the very heart, and so
will prove the completion of the pouring out the Vial on the Sun in the most
proper Political sense.

10. And the fifth Angel poured out his Uial upon the seat of the Beast, namely
of the two-horned Beast, or false-Prophet against whom chiefly these Vials are
meant. In a mystical sense therefore correspondent to the former, the Greek
word (...) here may be the same that Cathedra, the pretended Infallible Chair
of that Pseudo-prophet. To the detection of whose frauds the Vial poured out on
the Sun mystically understood may prepare the way: For though the sworn Vassals
of the two-horned Beast blaspheme the Name of God, by reason of that more than
ordinary light of the Word under the fourth Vial; yet Providence may so manage
things, that by virtue of those clear explications of Prophecies under the
fourth Vial, the people may be generally convinced of the false pretense of the
Papal Hierarchy's Infallibility under the fifth. The false light of which vain
pretense being once removed, they must needs find themselves much in the dark,
their Religion being such as neither Scripture, Reason, common Sense, nor any
thing else, that has any authority with it, can afford any light to: Nay, it
will be found repugnant to all these. Wherefore it rightly follows: And his
Kingdom was full of darkness: Which is again one of the plagues of Egypt. And
they gnawed their tongues for pain: For this cheat of Infallibility being
discovered by the clear demonstration of the Apostasy of the Church out of the
Prophecies, they are quite left in the dark, hopeless and helpless, and know
not now what hank to have over the people, who before were made to believe any
thing, which made for the Churches power and gain, upon this pretense, of the
Infallibility of their Church.

11. And blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their pains and of their
sores: The event of so great manifestations of Truth was so vexatious to them,
that they reproached the Author of it, the Spirit of God, and the holy
Scriptures. And they repented not of their deeds: The heart of this Pharaoh,
the King of this Mystical or Spiritual Egypt, it seems, is so hardened under
these plagues, that he will not let the Israelites, the true Apostolic
Christians, go and serve God as he has commanded, but forcibly keeps them under
to serve his own worldly designs against the Will of God. This may be the
Mystical meaning of this fifth Vial; but there may be also a Political sense:
And then the Throne or Seat of this two-horned Beast is the same with the Seat
of the Whore, who is seated on seven-hilled Rome. And in this sense it bodes
ill to that City, as if there would be a sacking of Rome, and banishing the
Pope from thence; or at least, as if from the effects of the former Vial
politically understood, there would be a great deadness of Trade to that
greatest Merchant of the great Men of the Earth; and so great unfrequentedness,
obscurity and darkness would seize his Principal Seat.

12. And the sixth Angel poured cut his Uial upon the great River Euphrates,
and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the Kings of the East might
be prepared. That the Euphratean Horsemen are the Turks, we have noted in the
sixth Trumpet. This Vial therefore seems to intimate such a mutation of affairs
in the Turkish Empire as will make for the joining of the Jews, and it may be
some other Eastern People with their Princes or Persons of Note, with the
Church of Christ, as being either converted, or in a near preparation to
conversion to his Gospel, as may appear from Chap. 19. verse. 7, 8. For the
Marriage of the Lambs Wife there immediately precedes the battle of the Rider
of the White Horse, which undoubtedly is the same Vision in effect with the
seventh Vial: And so much of the six first Vials. The Scene of the seventh now
begins, which contains the Victory of the True Apostolic Church of Christ over
the Antichristian Church, and the rest of the world that are Infidels, Atheists
and Unbelievers, who are here all gathered together against the Lord, and
against his Christ, but dividable into two parts, Antichristian properly so
called, which contains the Beast and the False Prophet, and the Infidel party
that believe not in Christ at all: And the third party of this conflux, are the
Pure Evangelical Christians.

13. And I saw three unclean spirits like Frogs come out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false
Prophet: These are the Emissaries, Orators, Negotiators or Solicitors of the
Affairs of the Dragon, and of the Beast and false Prophet (the two parties I
even now intimated opposite to the Evangelical Party) though these Negotiators
are called the spirits of Devils in the following Verse, according to the usual
genius and style of the Apocalypse, putting Angels and Spirits for that company
of men that be conceived to be under their guidance: But they have the shape of
Frogs for their earthliness and slimy uncleanness, to betoken that the wisdom
they act from is earthly, sensual and devilish.

14. For they are the Spirits of Devils working Miracles. And the Onirocriticks
tell us, that Frogs, in whose shape these Spirits are, signify (...),
Enchanters or Iuglers, prestigious deceivers of the People by false Miracles,
feigned Visions, or the like, which happily may be more peculiar to the
Antichristian party, the Beast and false Prophet: But the Frog out of the
Dragons mouth, his Miracles may be, besides those of unlawful Magic,
prestigious demonstrations, whereby he would pretend to demonstrate the
frivolousness of all revealed Religion, at least, the better to animate, or
rather harden the hearts of the Kings of the Earth against the Pure and
Apostolic Christian. Which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the
whole world to gather them to the battle: For as that wisdom which is from
above is pure and peaceable, so this earthly and devilish wisdom delights in
confusion and blood. Of that great day of God Almighty, under whose conduct are
the Evangelical party, or the pure and Apostolic Christians.

15. Behold I come as a thief. This defeat of false and ineffectual Religions
will be a surprising Providence to all those that hypocritically shroud
themselves under them instead of being clothed with the Everlasting
Righteousness of the Gospel of Christ, to those that cover with a covering, but
not of Gods Spirit, that they may add sin to sin: But all such coverings shall
be accounted as nakedness before God, or they will be stripped of it and made
naked: Whence it follows; Blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments,
lest he walk naked, and they see his shame; that is, who is so watchful over
his ways, and intent on the work of real Regeneration, which will appear also
in his outward Conversation, that he becomes clothed in such a garment as
shall not be taken from him in this time when God will pluck off the covering
from all Nations, and the veil of Hypocrisy from off the People, Esai. 25.7.
as Esaias somewhere foretells: Which is a plain intimation, that this Battle is
not Carnal but Spiritual.

16. And he gathered them together into one place, called in the Hebrew tongue
Armageddon; that is, by the overruling Providence of God they were brought
into this place, which in the Hebrew tongue signifies the destruction of their
Armies; but there is nothing yet done toward their discomfiture, for the
seventh Vial is not yet poured out: * And therefore by a Commutation of
Iconismes, the event of this Congress is set out in another form, this huge
Camp of all the Armies of both sides, being turned into one mighty City, which
is called the Great City, consisting of the Universality of Cities considered
as one, as it follows in the Prophecy.

17. And the seventh Angel poured out his Uial into the Air, namely over this
great Company; and there came a great voice out of the Temple of Heaven from
the Throne, saying, It is done: This is a firm Decree from him that sits on the
Throne, and a full assurance by his Spirit universally in the hearts of his
Servants, the Evangelical Party, that their Ministry shall succeed; And as to
the utter overthrow of Antichrist, and the enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ
by the conversion of the Gentiles, the mystery of God shall be consummate under
this seventh Vial: The thing is as sure as it were done already.

18. And there were voices, and thunders, and lightenings, and there was a
great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon Earth, so mighty an
earthquake, and so great; that is, there was such a strange Commutation of
Affairs in the world as was never known or recorded in any History of former
Times: Of such mighty efficacy was the preaching of the Gospel in the power of
the Spirit, by the speaking party of the Army of Christ, against the Forces of
the Infidels and Antichrist: For this is the meaning of those Voices, and
Thunders, and Lightenings, that it was the promulgation (by these Boanergers's)
of the Law of the Son of God, 2 Esdr. 13.38.
which is like unto fire, as is related in Esdras.

19. And the great City was divided into three parts; as there were three parts
in the great Camp before: The Antichristian party, the Infidel or purely
Heathen party, and the pure Evangelical party: But this Tripartition is named
immediately after this great Earthquake, as if it were the effect of it, for
the more handsome embellishing the outward Cortex of the Prophecy. * And the
Cities of the Nations fell, that is, the Heathenish or Infidel party were
thunderstruck by these Boanerges's, and converted to the Faith of the Gospel of
Christ in the simplicity and purity thereof: And great Babylon came in
remembrance before God; that is, the Antichristian Hierarchy with her
adherents, the Whore of Babylon, as she is called in the following Chapter: To
give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath, (viz.) of the
wrath of God, that is, to be arraigned and judged, that condign punishment and
vengeance may be taken of her.

20. And every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found: Their
Temples, and other consecrated places were taken from them, and they were
deprived of their Dignities, or of the Assistances of the great Ones of the
Earth.

21. And there fell upon men a great hail out of Heaven, every stone about the
weight of a Talent, namely upon Babylon, or the Antichristian party: So that
all her goodly trees were spoiled and stripped of their both leaves and fruit,
their boughs broke down, and their stocks beaten bare even to the inmost bark.
And men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail, for the plague
thereof was exceeding great; that is, the hearts of this Antichristian party
were still hardened even in this last Egyptian plague inflicted on them, and
their rage and impatience under their calamity made them speak evil of the ways
of God which yet are altogether righteousness and truth: Or if in these
miseries they took themselves to their devotions, * their very prayers were
blasphemy in the style of the Apocalypse, they being so mingled with various
sorts of Idolatry.

NOTES. CHAPTER XVI. Verse. 16.
And therefore by a Commutation of Iconismes, etc. This is called Iconismorum
Metallaxis in my Synopsis Prophetica: And it is a Prophetic Figure, whereby
the Image or Representation that is begun with, is not continued but changed,
and yet the same matter still pursued: See Synops. Prophet. lib. 1. cap. 4.
sect. 15. But in the mean time, the letting go the first Iconisme in this
place, which is of a Camp, and not persuing it to the event of the Battle, is
here done with great consideration and prospection, because this Battle is
fully afterward described, and the Commander also or General, which is here
omitted, in the 19th Chapter verse. 11. Which is one of the main pieces of the
artifice of concealment, intended in this admirable Book of Prophecies.

Verse. 19. And the Cities of the Nations fell, etc. There is mention at first
but of one great City, and yet here besides Babylon, there is mention of many
Cities, (viz.) of the Nations: Which seems to be a destined Key whereby we
might understand, that by that great City is meant the Universality of a number
of Cities considered as one, in which Babylon it self was also comprised,
according as we have expounded it.

Verse. 21. Their very prayers were blasphemy, etc. This is the sense which that
Learned and Pious Author Peganius gives in this place, which I thought worth
the taking notice of, if it may effectually force any one to make a more
serious reflection on the hainousness and horridness of the Romish Religion.

CHAPTER XVII.
IN the nineteenth Verse of the foregoing Chapter, there was a short glance at
the Arraignment, Accusation and Condemnation of the Whore of Babylon. But the
destruction of this Babylon being the main scope of all the Vials, this
Argument may well seem to deserve a more full and copious prosecution, I mean
the Arraignment, Accusation and Condemnation of the great Whore contained in
these two next Chapters, namely the 17th and 18th. And therefore it follows:

1. And there came one of the seven Angels which had the seven Uials and talked
with me, saying unto me, Come hither, I will show unto thee the judgment of the
great Whore; that is, the Arraignment, Accusation and Condemnation of the
Antichristian and Idolatrous Hierarchy; for so whoredom signifies in the
Prophetic style: That sits upon many waters: who is seated amongst many
People, and whose Jurisdiction spreads far and wide, and who pretends to be the
Church Universal.

2. With whom the Kings of the Earth, the ten Kings, suppose, verse. 12. have
committed Fornication, have joined with in Idolatrous worship: And the
Inhabiters of the Earth have been made drunk with the wine of her Fornication:
so inflamed, so intoxicated and dementated with the unwholesome heat of
Idolatrous zeal, that it has made them very boisterously quarrelsome against
all opposers or despisers of their fair Diana, and so sottish, secure, and
heedless, that they have lien exposed to all the deceits and injuries that this
cunning Circe could put upon them.

3. So he carried me away in the Spirit into the Wilderness, and I saw a Woman
sit upon a scarlet-colored Beast: whose color denotes Tyrannical Cruelty as
well as Imperial Majesty. By this is understood the Roman Empire. Full of names
of blasphemy, that is, full of titles or kinds of Idolatry, full of gods, so
Grotius interprets it, understanding it of the Pagan Empire: And we may safely
render it, full of Demons in Mr Medes sense, that is, full of superstitious
and idolatrous worship of the souls of the Saints departed (besides other
Idolatries in the manner of worshipping the due object of our Religion God and
Christ) since the Empire has become Paganochristian: Having seven heads and ten
horns, which the Angel interprets verse. 9.12.

4. And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with gold
and precious stone and pearls; that is to say, this Idolatrous Hierarchy, the
Patriarchs or Popes especially and Cardinals, etc. have this Imperial color
and richness, very gorgeously apparelled upon occasions in their rich Copes and
costly Miters, to say nothing of the furniture of their Altars: Having a golden
cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her fornication: An
enchanted Cup or Philter, an intoxicating Love-potion to inflame the Empire
again with a whorish desire after Idols. And it is further observable, that the
very metal of the Cup has a natural Magic with it to draw and allure men to
her, and at a distance to intoxicate the brains of their Clergy with the fumes
of ambition and covetousness, who are not enriched with the golden gifts of
their Church, but upon the condition of assisting and abetting the Idolatry
thereof.

5. And upon her forehead was a name written: By way of allusion to some
impudent Harlots, who had their names written upon their foreheads: Mystery
Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the Earth. The
first word is a Key to the rest, and is to be understood in such a sense as
that, Chap. 11. verse. 8. The great City which is spiritually called Sodom and
Egypt. For in neither place is it a mere ordinary Synecdoche putting one
Heathenish City for another. For what Mysteriousness or Spiritualness could
there be in that? But it is a Christian Polity or Hierarchy so degenerated into
unchristian Tyranny and Idolatry, that it is mystically or spiritually set out
by the name Egypt in that Chapter, and here by the name of Babylon the great:
Babylon, as holding the Children of God in such an hard Captivity, and also
propagating, as they, the worship of Baalim, of Demons, or false gods; so this
Hierarchy of Saints, and Angels, and Images, and other Idolatries: Great, as
pretending to be the Church Catholic or Universal, and having indeed a large
extent of Jurisdiction in the Christian world: Mother of Harlots, by way of
reproach to her affectation of being accounted and called Holy Mother the
Church, when she is yet so unholy as to be the Author of the Abominations of
the Earth, that is, of Idols or Image worship: For so (...) is translated by
the seventy Interpreters: But to understand here, by Babylon, Rome Heathen, one
Pagan City for another, certainly would be but a dry Synecdoche, no mystery at
all. This Whore of Babylon therefore is the same with the two-horned Beast,
that had the horns of a Lamb, that is, pretended to be a Christian Hierarchy,
but spoke as a Dragon, that is, Decreed gross Idolatries, and cruel
persecutions: As here one part of the Charge laid against this Whore of Babylon
is Idolatry, and the other part follows in the next Verse: Her bloody
persecutions.

6. And I saw the woman drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood
of the Martyrs of Jesus. To be drunk with the blood of the Saints shows her
excessive and unsatiable cruelty in persecuting them, not only burning them
with fire and faggot, but destroying them with repeated massacres, insomuch that
those that have made a careful compute of their murders and cruelties have
found them to exceed the bloodiness and cruelty of the Pagans against the
Primitive Christians under the Red Dragon: And when I saw her, I wondered with
great admiration: To see a Woman so nobly and splendidly attired, drunken and
defiling her garments with blood, and that God should permit so great impiety
and wickedness, and so great prosperity, to consort together: But that John
might the better understand the comprehension of Gods ways and Providence
touching his Church, the Angel unfolds the riddle to him.

7. And the Angel said unto me, Wherefore did thou marvel? I will tell thee
the mystery of the Woman and of the Beast that carries her, which has the
seven heads and ten horns; namely, on his seventh head, that thou may be
satisfied touching the ways of the Providence of God.

8. The Beast which thou saw, * his name is (and the occasion of it taken
from the intercessation of Paganism, when the Empire becomes Christian, which
to your comfort will come to pass) his name is, was and is not, and shall
ascend out of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition; that is to say, the
Roman Empire, which is understood by the Beast with seven heads and ten horns,
is represented here under such a state or condition, that at some time it might
be said truly of it in its prefiguration, that it is the Beast, that was and is
not; which was only true in the time of pure Christianity obtaining in the
Empire, that is, from Constantines time, suppose, to the Apostasy of the
Church into Antichristianism or Idolatry. For the Beast is the Empire
Idolatrizing, which Idolatrizing Empire ceased to be in the reign of the pure
Christian Caesar's: but being there would be an Apostasy again into a kind of
Paganochristian Idolatry in the Empire, and so the Empire become a Beast again;
it is therefore called the Beast, that was, namely, under the Paganical
Idolatry, but is not, namely in that time, that pure Christianity is the
Religion of the Empire, but should be afterward, which is expressed by, And
shall ascend out of the bottomless pit. The word in the Greek is (...), which
may signify both the bottomless pit, and the sea, the latter denoting
multitudes of people, of which this Beast would consist, the other the original
of this horrid Apostasy into Idolatry again, as coming from the pit of hell it
self, and the deceits of the Devil. But to mitigate St John's wonderment, there
is at last added, And go into perdition. This Apostasy shall not continue
always, but the Empire as to its Idolatry shall perish quite, and so cease to
be any longer a Beast, the Idolatry and Tyranny therein against the Saints of
God being utterly abolished: Whence it is plain, that not the Pagan Empire, but
the Empire Paganochristian is here to be understood by the Beast, and that the
Times of the Apostasy of the Church are here prefigured. And they that dwell
on the Earth shall wonder: As Chap. 13. verse. 3. And all the world wondered
after the Beast, which is the same Beast with this in this Chapter, that is,
were so wonderfully taken with the Beast, that they were in love with him and
enslaved to him, and to the Paganochristian Idolatry, which he countenanced; (
whose names were not written in the Book of Life from the foundation of the
world) that is, all are seduced, unless the elect of God, such as are
afterward termed, the called, chosen and faithful. When they behold the Beast
that was and is not, and yet is: Which is the very same Beast that is called
the Image of the Beast, Chap. 13. verse. 14. For the Empire becoming
Paganochristian, and exercising their Idolatry upon other objects than the old
Pagans did, could not be properly said to be the same Pagan Empire revived
again, but rather the Image thereof, that is, an Idolatrous Empire, bearing an
analogy or similitude to the old Pagan Idolatrous Empire in a manner in all
their strokes of Idolatry: From whence it is rightly termed that was, as being
Idolatrous, as the Pagan Empire was; and is not, that is to say, is not that
very Pagan Empire, their Idolatry now having new objects; and yet is, (viz.)
because the Idolatry is the same though disguised under new titles and objects.
This is the easy and natural sense of this description of the Beast, and which
necessarily imports that the Roman Empire is here understood in that succession
of Time, wherein it had apostatized from the pure Christian worship into
Idolatry: And that therefore the Woman that rides this Beast can be no Pagan
Polity, but the Paganochristian Hierarchy.

9. And here is the mind which has wisdom; that is, here lies a meaning of a
great Arcanum or secret: For so the Greek word (...) seems to insinuate. For
wisdom is according to her name, and is not manifest to the vulgar,
Ecclesiastic. 6.22. The seven Heads are the seven Mountains on which the Woman
sits: Which happily has a glance at Constantinople, as well as Rome, both
these Cities having seven Mountains, and the Greek Clergy having defiled the
Eastern Church with Idolatry, as well as the Latin Church the Western: And the
horns of the two-horned Beast we did above interpret of these two
Patriarchates, Rome and Constantinople.

10. And there are seven Kings, (viz.) seven forms of Sovereignty or Supreme
Magistracy in the Roman Commonwealth or Empire: the division of the succession
of which is naturally made thus: The Sovereignty is either in many or in one;
in many, as Consuls, Tribuni militum, Triumviri; in one, as Kings, Dictators
and Emperors: Which Emperors may be again divided into Pagan, Christian,
Paganochristian: So that according to this distribution, the Beast will have
just seven Heads of Blasphemy, as he is described, Chap. 13. verse. 1. Kings,
Consuls, Tribunes, Decemviri, Dictators, Pagan Caesar's or Emperors, and
Emperors Paganochristian: Five are fallen, (viz.) Kings, Consuls, Tribunes,
Decemviri, Dictators, these Sovereign Magistrates had past away in St John's
time: And one is, (viz.) the Pagan Caesar's or Emperors, these were in being in
his time: And the other is not yet come, (viz.) the other King, for the
enumeration now is of Kings in the largest sense: Therefore this other King is
the Christian Caesar or Emperor who had not appeared upon the stage yet. And
when he comes he must continue a short space: The succession of the pure
Christian Emperors will last but a while, the Apostasy not long after being
to come in.

11. And the Beast that was and is not, which above was called the Beast that
was, and is not, and yet is; the Head, suppose of this Beast, he is the eighth
King or Sovereign, which are the Paganochristian Caesar's, at least till the
Pope make himself Caesar, or Supreme Paganochristian; for Paganochristian
Supremacy constitutes the eighth King or seventh Head of Blasphemy: As it
follows, And is of the seven, that is, and is of the seven Kings, that are the
seven Heads of the Beast, and consequently Idolatrous: For though there be
eight Kings, yet there are but seven Heads of the Beast, the Beast ceasing to
be under the Christian Caesar's, who therefore could be no head of the Beast, as
being not Idolatrous themselves, and the Idolatrous Empire then ceasing. And
goes into perdition: The Beast that was, and is not, and yet is, or the Image
of the Beast, though it reign to the last Semitime of the forty two months, yet
his Jurisdiction about that time was to be cut shorter, (which happened in the
Reformation, when so many Provinces, Principalities, and Kingdoms fell off from
him) and at last his Idolatrous Power and Tyranny shall be quite abolished: As
is supposed in several passages in the lamentation over Babylon in the
following Chapter.

12. And the ten Horns which thou saw are ten Kings, which have received no
Kingdom as yet; namely in St John's time, who lived in the reign of the sixth
Head, under which the Beast fought, and was slain by Michael: In which battle
he is also represented with seven Heads and ten Horns, but no Crowns upon the
Horns, their actual Coronation being not till the seventh Head: But Chap. 13.
verse. 1. there are Crowns on his Horns, because the Beast there in that Vision
is the healed or revived Beast, the same that the Beast that was, is not, and
yet is: And yet no mention of any Crowns in this Chapter, because it had been a
repugnancy to this passage [which have received no Kingdom as yet] and there
are other infallible arguments of this Beast, being the Beast under the seventh
Head without that, so that that indication was needless, though fit and
requisite in the Vision of this Beast in the thirteenth Chapter: But here that
which follows supplies the omission of the Crowns on the Horns: But receive
power as Kings one hour with the Beast; that is, about the same time that the
Church degenerates into paganish superstitions and Idolatries, will the Empire
be divided into many Kingdoms, the entireness of the Empire being a let to the
appearing of Antichrist, according to the Opinion even of the Ancient Fathers.
As the Empire was healing into the Image of old Paganism again, and became a
Beast, it grew actually divided into several Kingdoms, which therefore is as
much, if not more express, than the Crowns upon the ten horns of the healed
Beast, Chap. 13. verse. 1. And therefore the more needless to mention the Crowns
here.

13. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the
Beast; that is, shall be of one Paganochristian Religion, whereby the Empire
had again become a Beast; and shall give their power and strength unto the
Beast, being ready by force of Arms, if need be, or by what other Power or
Authority they have to maintain this Beast in its beastly, that is, in its
Idolatrous condition, and Pagan-like Superstitions.

14. These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them;
namely at the last, by that patience and truth that is found in his followers:
For he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings: So already by right, and his Father
has decreed, that at last he shall have full and quiet possession, that all the
Kingdoms of the Earth shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ.
And they that are with him are called, and chosen, and faithful. The great
stress lies upon chosen and faithful: For many are called but few are chosen.
But those choice ones that are said to be with him are stout Soldiers, that
will follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, never leave him for any persecution
whatsoever, but be firm and faithful unto him, be their patience never so much
exercised by sufferings.

15. And he says unto me, The Waters which thou saw where the Whore
sits, are Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues: Even all the
Nations and People in the Roman Empire.

16. And the ten Horns which thou saw upon the Beast; (viz.) under the
seventh head, that is, the Paganochristian head, be it Pope or Emperor, for
the Supreme Power Paganochristian be it lodged where it will, is the head of
the healed Beast, or of the Beast that was and is not, and yet is: These, some
of them at least, shall hate the Whore, that is, the Idolatrous Hierarchy and
Church of Rome particularly: And shall make her desolate and naked, and shall
eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. The making of her desolate and naked is
the stripping her of her wealth and revenues, and bestowing of them upon better
uses. And the eating of her flesh may partly have the same signification; Flesh
signifying wealth with the Onirocritical Interpreters: But it may also signify
carnal Ordinances and Institutes Superstitious and Idolatrous, which are the
fulsome flesh of this Whore: And the eating this flesh of hers, and burning her
with fire is the abolishing of these grossly Superstitious and Idolatrous Rites
through the spirit of Truth and Zeal which is likened to fire. This has been
done in its measure in the Reformation, when so many Kingdoms and
Principalities forsook the Church of Rome, but may be further, that is more
extendedly, fulfilled under the fourth and fifth Vials Politically understood.

17. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will: It is easy enough
to conceive, that by Gods connivence at these times of ignorance, as the
Apostle speaks of the Gentiles, it might be permitted to the Pseudoprophetick
Beast, through the officious assistance of the Powers of darkness, to do such
Miracles, and use such ways of imposing upon the ten Kings, as would certainly
enough determine them to the Idolatrous Religion of the Empire: But that they
were thus certain to be deceived is the fault of their own lapse, and of the
after-consequences of it, not any injustice in God, who no otherwise here is
said to put in their hearts to fulfill his will, etc. than in Exodus he is said
to harden Pharaoh's heart from letting the people of Israel go. And to agree,
and give their Kingdom to the Beast: the same that was hinted, verse. 13. and so
to be understood: Until the words of God shall be fulfilled: For Dan. chap. 7.
it is plainly said of the little Horn, which there takes upon him to change
Times and Laws, that they shall be given into his hands for a Time and Times
and half a Time, which therefore is a Time determinate by God: But then it
presently follows, But the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his
Dominion to consume and destroy it to the end. And that little Horn is the
Whore of Babylon, as I have proved, Synops. Prophet. lib. 2. cap. 14. sect. 12.

18. And the Woman which thou saw is that great City which reigns over the
Kings of the Earth; that is, which reigned in St John's time over the Kings of
the Earth, whereby it is manifest that Old Rome is understood, not New Rome, or
Constantinople. For no Polity seated upon seven Hills, but what was there,
reigned over the Kings of the Earth in St John's time. The sense therefore of
the Verse may be clearly delivered in this short Paraphrase: The Woman which
thou saw riding on the Beast, whose name is, Was, is not, and yet is; is
that great City that now rules over the Kings of the Earth, namely Rome; whose
Inhabitants though flowing successively are accounted one and the same City,
because included within the same reputed walls and buildings, as that is
accounted one and the same River that flows betwixt the same banks, though the
same water does not continue for a day together: Therefore the Ruling Power
Ecclesiastic or Hierarchy of seven-hilled Rome in Italy, (as the two-horned
Beasts name is Latinus, in the other Vision, chap. 13.) is this Woman that
rides the Beast, that was and is not and yet is, and most principally concerned
in this Vision; which contains as it were the Arraignment of her person
described from her Quality or Dignity, being Queen or Empress, as it were, of
the whole Empire signified by the Beast she rides on; and from her Gorgeous
Apparel, and from her Palace or Chief Place of her Residence seven-hilled Rome:
But the Crime or Charge against her, is, the corrupting of the whole Empire
with Idolatry and Cruelty, murdering the Saints of God, and Martyrs of Jesus.
Her doom or condemnation is very copiously and pompously set out in the Chapter
following.

And this I think is a very easy, natural and coherent Exposition of this
Seventeenth Chapter of the Apocalypse, and such as cannot but abundantly
satisfy any unprejudiced Reader: But whoever will take the pains carefully to
peruse, and thoroughly to understand the eight last Chapters of the first Book
of my Synopsis Prophetica, amongst which is my Ioynt-Exposition of this
Seventeenth and Thirteenth Chapters of this Book of the Apocalypse, I hope, be
he never so much prejudiced, if he will speak his own conscience, he will
confess, that I have made out with evidence even mathematical and undeniable
demonstration, that the sense I have given of this Chapter here is true, and
that the Roman Hierarchy is that Great Whore riding the Beast, that was, and is
not, and yet is; (viz.) The Empire since it was corrupted from pure
Christianity, and relapsed again to a kind of Idolatrous Paganochristianism:
For what Roman Polity can rule this Empire but what is contemporary to it?
Wherefore the Woman that rides the Beast is not Pagan but Paganochristian, that
Paganochristian Hierarchy of Rome.

NOTES. CHAPTER XVII. Verse. 8.
His Name is, etc. This I intersert because it is a Prophetical Ellipsis; which
is one of the Figures that make up the artifice of Concealment in this Book of
Prophecies: But such an Ellipsis is so natural, that it is used where there is
no such design, as Exodus chap. 3. verse. 13, 14. And Moses said unto God, Behold
when I come to the Children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your
Fathers has sent me unto you, and they shall say unto me what is his Name?
What shall I say unto them? And God said unto Moses, I am that I am. Where
there is plainly an Ellipsis, instead of, My Name is, I am that I am, as is
obvious at first sight. But in this place of the Apocalypse, such an Ellipsis
is made use of, but purposely in such a way as that it is not obvious to
discern there is an Ellipsis, the sense seeming so perfect and running so
glibly without one; which therefore is the artifice of concealment in this
place, and without which it had not been a Prophetical Ellipsis, but a common
one: See Synops. Prophet. chap. 4. sect. 6. and chap. 13. verse. 8. sect. 13.
Whence you may more fully understand how certain it is, that such an Ellipsis
is to be acknowledged in this place, and that there is to be interserted, His
name is, etc.

CHAPTER XVIII.
1. THe Arraignment and Accusation of the Great Whore was in the preceding
Chapter, now follows her doom or Condemnation. And after these things I saw
another Angel come down from Heaven, having great power: which intimates, that
those Agents that are prefigured by him, and are to effect what he predicts,
are Persons of high place. And the Earth was lightened with his glory; that is,
the Earth was enlightened with his brightness, which signifies that these great
persons being themselves fully illuminated through the Spirit by the light of
the Gospel, did most effectually enlighten others of the meaner sort by their
example and godly profession of the pure Apostolic Faith.

2. And he cried mightily with a strong voice: He predicts the doom, or
pronounces the sentence against the great Whore with a strong and strenuous
voice, in token of the assuredness and certainty of the execution thereof;
saying, Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen: which words, though they be the
same with those, Chap. 14. verse. 8. yet they are not to be restrained to that
time, which was but the partial fall of Babylon in the first Reformation, at
the Rising of the Witnesses, but to be extended further to the final
destruction of the Whore and the Beast under the seventh Vial, when the Beast
is to go into utter perdition; which time of his final overthrow is not limited
in Chap. 17. as it is in the Vision ( Chap. 13.) of his partial overthrow,
(viz.) to the seventh Semitime of the forty two Prophetical months: And
therefore this doom of Babylon contains both her partial and final destruction:
And is become the habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and
the cage of every unclean and hateful bird. The desolation and destruction of
Babylon, which is the Roman Idolatrous Hierarchy or Polity, not a City of
Stones or Brick (a thing childish to be conceived) is set out by the
description of ruined and desolate Cities, and particularly of Babylon
literally understood, Isai. 13.2. And their houses shall be filled with
doleful Creatures, and Owls shall dwell there, and Satyrs, that is,
shaggie-haired Devils shall dance there, etc. But the mystical meaning of this
place, as I conceive, is, that when the power of this Hierarchy is utterly
destroyed, yet in the ruins thereof there will be lurking assemblies of such
kind of persons as are deciphered by Devils or foul Spirits (in that sense that
unclean Spirits are said to come out of the mouth of the Dragon, Beast and
false Prophet) and by hateful and unclean Birds. The character of whom, and who
are said to be without the Holy City, which appears after the destruction of
this Babylon, is set down, chap. 22. verse. 15. For without are Dogs, and
Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves
or makes a lie. This is the Cage of unclean Birds or impure Spirits, that the
ruins of Babylon are the habitation of; who having now no power over others,
will exercise a power amongst themselves: And one Ethiopian or Leopard will
wash and absolve another.

3. For all Nations have drunk of the Wine of the wrath of her fornication;
that is of her poisoned Philter or Love-Cup, whereby they have been
intoxicated: And the Kings of the Earth have committed fornication with her:
She has corrupted the Ten Kings of the Empire with the Abominations of her
Idolatry: And the Merchants of the Earth; that is, the Ecclesiastical
Merchants, that prog'd for great Dignities and Preferments under her, which she
chaffered for the maintaining or advancing her own interest and greatness; who
are here called Merchants of the Earth in reproach to their false pretense of
spirituality, and of acting still in behalf of Holy Church, when their designs
are really sensual, worldly and earthly; Are waxed rich through the abundance
of her delicacies, that is, from the luxuriancy of her wealth, and from their
accustomed luxury, the later an incitement to get wealth, that they may be in
the mode, and the other a supply to their desire.

4. And I heard another voice from Heaven, saying, which therefore is a
commission, nay; a command from Heaven to the first Reformers, and all others
after to forsake the Communion of the Church of Rome; Come out of her my people
that you be not partakers of her sins; by being at her Masses, and other
Idolatrous worship: And that you receive not of her plagues: Whether in this
world, or in the world to come.

5. For her sins have reached unto Heaven, and called for vengeance there in
the ears of God: And God has remembered her Iniquities, and will repay her in
part at the Rising of the Witnesses, but pay her home under the seventh Vial,
when her power shall be utterly abolished, as it follows.

6. Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double according
to her works; in the cup which she has filled, fill to her double: that is,
spare her not but punish her severely for all her abominations and
wickednesses; which is a prediction of what will come to pass notoriously under
the seventh Vial.

7. How much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously; that is,
magnified her self, or boasted of her self, and lived pompously and
luxuriously, so much torment and sorrow give her: Fill to her a cup as full of
vexation and grief: For she says in her heart, I sit as a Queen. Thus she
might say in the Thyatirian Interval before the Reformation, or Rising of the
Witnesses, but whether she will be in that case to say so again, that will
happen according as the Reformed Churches shall behave themselves: And am no
Widow: But the Bride of the Lamb, the Spouse of Christ, the only Holy Catholic
Church, the rest that call themselves Christians, a company of Schismatics and
Heretics, nor worthy to breath on Gods Earth, but to be massacred and burnt
with fire and faggot: And shall see no sorrow: Thus I say might she boast in the
Thyatirian Interval: And if by the demerits of the Reformed Churches she ever
recover unto that plight again, yet the great doom will certainly at last be
executed upon her, as it is set down in the next verse.

8. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day unexpectedly, and contrary to
her boastful presages, Death, and Mourning, and Famine: This Roman Hierarchy
shall be Politically killed, divested of all Power and Authority: From whence
will naturally flow Mourning and Famine, grief of heart, with scarcity and
poverty to requite their luxury before. The word Famine is used in allusion to
scarcity of provision in besieged Cities: And she shall be utterly burnt with
fire: The Roman Idolatrous Hierarchy shall be quite destroyed and abolished:
Then shall that in the highest degree be fulfilled, which is written, Chap. 17.
verse. 16. They shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire: For strong is the Lord God that judges her: And there is
neither wisdom, strength nor counsel against the Almighty.

9. And the Kings of the Earth who have committed Fornication and have lived
deliciously with her, that is, have been of the same Idolatrous profession with
her, and have lived luxuriously with her, it being with them, like Priest like
people, even to the highest Priest and highest of the people: Shall bewail her,
and lament for her when they shall see the smoke of her burning: This
Idolatrous Church having accommodated their Religion to the gusto of great men,
it is no wonder, that some of the Kings of Princes of the Earth bewail her
burning.

10. Standing afar off for fear of her torment, saying, Alas! alas! that great
City Babylon, that mighty City, for in one hour is thy judgment come. But
though her judgment be come in one hour, yet the execution of it may take up a
considerable time. And this description belongs as well to the time of the
Rising of the Witnesses, as to the latter Vials, and especially the last of all.

11. And the Merchants of the Earth shall weep and mourn over her: As if the
Merchants of the Earth were so much concerned for Rome literally understood,
and could not as conveniently traffic elsewhere, and buy the following
commodities as well if not better in other places. Wherefore the Merchants of
the Earth, as I noted above, are Ecclesiastic or Spiritual Persons, which in
reproach to their worldliness in their pretended Holy and Spiritual Functions
are here called the Merchants of the Earth: For no man buyeth her Merchandise
any more. The usual traffic in the Roman Church, where all is supposed to
pass, or to be disposed of for money or Earthly Interest, now cease, since she
her self cease, and is divested of all her Power and Wealth: Therefore no man
buyeth her Merchandise any more.

12. No Merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls,
and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet; the rich attire of those
higher parts of the Whore (as you may see in the foregoing Chapter) fit for
Popes, Cardinals, and other great Personages of that Babylonish Body, and their
Officers. No Thyine wood for the roof of their Temples, or for carved Idols, to
whom sacrifice is done; (for I suspect some such allusion in (...)) no Incense
for Burnt-offerings, for their adored Images. * No Images, or other utensils of
Ivory, precious Wood, Brass, Iron, or Marble, which in the Text are called, all
manner vessels of Ivory, and all manner vessels of most precious wood, and of
brass, and iron, and marble.

13. No Cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and
oil, and fine flower, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and
chariots, and slaves, and the souls of men. No traffic any longer in Aromatic
Odours, Oiles or Ointments for sacred Unctions. No man will participate any
longer of her Panis benedictus, nor taste of her Idol Wafer made of the finest
flower, nor sip of the Wine of her chalice, though she would offer it to the
lips of the Laity: For their Idolatrous Mass shall cease, and the besprinkling
of Sheep, and other Cattle with holy Water by the Friars of St Antony, and all
other profits issuing from them shall cease also, and the redemption of Souls
out of purgatory for money. And lastly, the merchandise of Chariots, Horses and
Slaves, [(...), which alone being in the genitive case, they go together as one
commodity] that is the Merchandise of such dignities in their Church, as whose
Equipage it is to go with their Coach and Horses, and Lacqueyes to run by them;
this amongst the rest will fail in the ruin and desolation of Babylon.

14. And the fruits that thy soul lusts after are departed from thee, and all
things that were dainty and goodly are departed from thee, and thou shall find
them no more at all. These great and opime preferments and dignities, which thy
ambitious and worldly mind so longingly hanker'd after; (...), those fat and
fair objects that make their mouths run a water so in this full Babylonish
market, where every thing is to be had for money, and nothing without it, all
these are vanished never to appear again.

15. The Merchants of these things, whether buyers or sellers, which were made
rich by her, shall stand afar off, for fear of her torment, being solicitous
for themselves, nor able to help her, weeping and wailing.

16. And saying, Alas! alas! that great City, that great. Hierarchical Polity,
that was clothed in fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with
gold, and precious stones, and pearls: the very habit of the Whore above
described, [ Chap. 17.] and not a City of Stone and Brick.

17. For in one hour so great riches are come to naught: The sense is such as
in Verse 10. And every ship-master, and all the company in ships, and sailors,
and as many as trade by Sea stood afar off. If we consider what Sea signifies
in the Prophetic style, the multitudes of men upon Earth, we shall not much be
at a loss to understand * what is intimated by Ships, namely consecrated houses
disjoined from the rest, as ships are usually separate in the Sea. And one part
of a (...) in that Architecture is called the Nave thereof. It seems therefore
to give a glance at the Babylonish Churches abused to gainful Idolatries and
Superstitions: Where they sell the use, the sight, or possession of several
consecrated things, exchange Souls out of Purgatory for money, and do (...),
turn the very word of God into an adulterate piece of Ware or Merchandise.

18. And cried when they saw the smoke of her burning, saying, What City is
like to this great City? Like that of the Mariners lamentation over Tyrus, that
great City for Merchandising (which I know not that Rome was ever so famous
for) What City is like Tyrus?

19. And they cast dust on their heads and cried weeping and wailing, and said,
Alas! alas! that great City! that great Sacerdotal Polity! wherein were made
rich all that had ships in the Sea, so to be understood as above: By reason of
her costliness, (...), so the Greek has it, out of that treasure of Honors,
Dignities, Preferments and Offices, wherewith she was able to enrich these
Merchants: For in one hour is she made desolate; that is, surprizedly and
unexpectedly. These last three Verses are borrowed out of Ezechiel's
lamentation over Tyrus, which was a City notorious for Merchandises, literally
understood, but that Rome was ever so I do not remember I have expressly read;
that she should be so well replenished with all the abovesaid wares to sell to
Merchants of other Nations: And therefore I conceive it is to be understood of
this mystical Merchandise, as has been above declared.

20. Rejoice over her thou Heaven and ye Apostles and Prophets, for God has
avenged you on her: that is, Rejoice ye heavenly minded over these Merchants of
the Earth, and ye that are the Teachers of the pure Apostolic Doctrine, and
declare the naked Truth of things to the world, be ye glad that the Lord has
avenged the blood of your predecessors upon her, the blood of the Waldenses and
Albigenses, and the rest of the Holy Martyrs of Jesus.

21. And a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone and cast it into
the Sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown
down, and shall be found no more at all: The sense is, That at last there will
be an utter ruin and dissipation of this Idolatrous City or Polity, namely at
the pouring out of the seventh Vial. And the mighty Angel signifies the mighty
Agents under him that shall effect it.

22. And the voice of Harpers, and Musicians, and of Pipers, and Trumpeters
shall be heard no more at all in thee; and no Crafts-man of whatever craft he
be, shall be found any more at all in thee: And the sound of a millstone shall
be heard no more at all in thee.

23. And the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee: And the
voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride shall be heard no more at all in thee.
All this may be nothing else but a Prophetic Hylasmus, setting out one single
thing, namely the destruction, silence, and vast solitude of this Idolatrous
Hierarchy, by the privation or absence of such gross and palpable objects as
occur in a City inhabited, as the noise of Musicians, the hammering and
knocking of Artificers, the grinding of Mills, the light of Candles in the
night, and the singing and dancing at weddings, and the like: or else it may
have a more mystical sense; as if by a Diorismus, we should understand rather
the Music at their Idolatrous worship, and by these (...), Artificers, such as
do technas consuere Sophisticas and Politicas, (viz.) in Theology and Church
Administration for the interest of their Hierarchy, these Artifices Imperii in
Imperio, and those also that work curious work in the Scholastic Divinity; by
the sound of the Milstones their fraudulent profit, and by the light of a
Candle, Honor and Prosperity, as both those Symbols are interpreted in
Achmetes: Or Candle may signify Consecrated Candles, or Candles burning on
their Altars, or before Images. And lastly, by Bridegroom and Bride their voice
being no more heard, may be signified, that there shall be no more propagating
of their Pseudocatholick Religion, the end of Marriage being propagation: For
thy Merchants were the great Men of the Earth: For by thy Sorcery were all
Nations deceived. Hitherto has been described the destruction of Babylon, the
reasons whereof now follow, which are three: The two first are couched in the
words even now rehearsed, the former of them, the Riot and Lordliness of these
Mystical Merchants, they were (...), Great Men of the world, and greatly
worldly, ambitious, covetous and sensual, which is the very essence of an
earthly mind: which how much it has been amongst the Popes, Cardinals, Abbots,
and other (...), or Magnates of the Roman Church, History, and the mouths of
all men are full of it. The other is the debauching of the world with Idolatry,
accompanied and countenanced with a pretense of a power plainly magical of
changing the Elements in such a sort as all the Magicians of Pharaoh could
never do, nor had the face to attempt the like; besides other Magical feats of
an inferior rank, and Necromantick stories of the apparitions of dead Saints,
as they pretend them: Whence Idolatry is indigitated here by (...), Sorcery or
Witchcraft, as that whereby it is introduced. As also that Cup in the hand of
the Whore is looked upon as a Philtrum, a poisonous intoxicating Love-potion
made with Magic Charms, and horrid Ingredients: And likewise their being said
to be deceived by these Sorceries, implies their being seduced to Idolatry
whither they tend; as appears plainly from what is written of the Miracles of
the two-horned Beast, Chap. 13. verse. 13, 14. and the Whore, and the two-horned
Beast are all one. And thus much of the two first Reasons; the third and last
follows in this last Verse.

24. And in her was found the blood of Prophets and of Saints, and of all that
were slain upon the Earth. Here is described the bloody Cruelty of the Roman
Hierarchy: And there is laid to their charge not only the blood of Prophets and
of Saints, that is, of faithful Preachers, and Expounders of the Gospel, and of
other pious men, such as out of conscience of their obedience due to the Law of
God and Christ, could not submit to the Idolatrous profession and practice
required of them by Antichrist, but the blood of all that have been slain upon
Earth: So great Incendiaries have the Pope and his Emissaries been, and
disturbers of the Peace of Christendom.

NOTES. CHAPTER XVIII. Verse. 12.
No Images, or other Utensils, etc. The Greek word is (...), which is of so
large a sense, that Vessel, as our English translates it, does not reach the
latitude thereof: For in the Byzantine History, Images of Silver and Gold are
called (...), Holy Utensils, Instruments or Furniture, which made me render the
place Images, or other Vtensils.

Verse. 13. Lacqueyes to run by them: For by Dr Hammonds own acknowledgement,
(...), which is the Greek word here, does not signify Slaves but Servants. I
render it Lacqueyes, that attend the Coaches of Great Men, in querpo; which
suits not unhandsomly with the word (...), bodies: For they that run can do it
most conveniently in querpo, without the cumber of unnecessary clothing,
suppose of a cloak, or the like.

Verse. 17. What is intimated by ships, etc. That Ships are not rashly
assimulated to Churches or Temples, besides what is produced on this place
already, that in Achmetes, out of the Indian Onirocriticks, may further
confirm, (...) If any man see in his sleep that he has built a Merchants-ship,
he shall have a Congregation of Men, or erect a Synagogue for the celebrating
of Religious Mysteries: Which shows plainly, that there is a fitness in a ship
to represent a Church or Temple in the judgment of others that have had
nothing to do with the Apocalypse that we know; which yet is nothing at all to
the derogation of the sacredness of those places themselves, they being no
Merchants-ships to any that make use of them out of a good conscience, and a
desire to gain souls to God, not merely out of the love of money: But even the
best things may be the most abominably perverted, as our Savior complains of
the profanation of the Temple in his days. It is written, Mat. 21.13.
My house shall be called a house of Prayer, but ye have made it a den of
thieves.

CHAPTER XIX.
1. AND after these things I heard a great voice of much people in Heaven: But
a resemblance of what in those Times belong to the True Church on Earth,
saying, Allelujah, Salvation and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our
God.

2. For true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the great
Whore which did corrupt the Earth, the Roman Empire, with her Fornication,
debauching them with Idolatry, which therefore cannot be understood of Rome
Pagan: For the parts of the Empire then were Idolatrous of themselves. And has
avenged the blood of his servants at her hand; the causes of the destruction of
the Roman Hierarchy was their Idolatry and Cruelty against the Professors of
pure Christianity, as it was observed at the end of the foregoing Chapter.

3. And again they said Allelujah: And her smoke rose up for ever and ever. In
such a sense as is said of the destruction of Idumaea, Isai. 34. verse. 10. It
shall not be quenched night nor day, the smoke thereof shall go up for ever,
from generation to generation it shall lie wast, none shall pass through it for
ever and ever.

4. And the four and twenty Elders, and the four Beasts fell down and
worshipped God; that is, the whole truly Catholic and Apostolic Church
praised and glorified him that sat upon the Throne, saying, Amen, Allelujah;
And this is the triumphal Song, and Doxology of the True Church upon the utter
destruction of the Whore, the Roman Hierarchy, in opposition to the Lamentation
of her Paramours, or Antichristian party.

And this reaches to the end of all the Vials, as the Eleventh, Fourteenth and
Sixteenth Chapters do: But the following verse might very well have been the
beginning of this Nineteenth Chapter, and the four first Verses been adjoined
to the end of the foregoing Chapter. For, for the better understanding of
things, here is plainly a going back to the sixth and seventh Vials, which, (as
also the Visions of the Harvest and Wine Press) are marvellously illustrated,
and have their meaning certainly discovered hereby, as shall appear by the
Explication; so that this will be found no vain repetition.

5. And a voice came out of the Throne, or from the place where the Throne was,
namely the voice of Christ. This answers to the Son of Man who puts in his
sickle, and reaps the Harvest, Chap. 14. verse. 14, 16. which immediately
precedes the treading of the Wine Press, which contemporizeth with the
following Vision of the Rider of the White Horse, as that with the seventh
Vial: Saying, * Praise our God all ye his Servants, and ye that fear him, both
small and great.

6. And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of
many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings; which are the symbols of
multitudes of people, saying, Allelujah, For the Lord God Omnipotent reigns;
that is, his Kingdom begins to appear now most gloriously, the waters of
Euphrates being dried up to make way for the Kings of the East, to join in one
Communion with the pure Church of God. This therefore synchronizeth with the
sixth Vial.

7. Let us be glad and rejoice and give honor to him, for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready; that is to say, the people
of the Jews are now in a readiness to join in Communion with the truly
Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ, and that is a ground of the greatest
joy indeed: Romans 11.15.
For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what shall
the receiving of them be but life from the dead? as the Apostle speaks.

8. And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and
white: And so shall not be of the number of those that at the seventh Vial
shall be found naked to their great shame; For the fine linen is the
righteousness of the Saints, namely, of those that now are to be partakers of
the Kingdom of Christ and of God, which consists not in meats and drinks, or
such like superficial and hypocritical cloaking or clothing with Rites and
Ceremonies, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, the
Everlasting Righteousness of the Gospel of Christ.

9. And he says unto me, Write; as being a thing of great moment, and never to
be forgotten: Blessed are they that are called to the Marriage Supper of the
Lamb; that is, O thrice happy they that shall see those Times, and partake of
them, and shall celebrate the Espousals of the People of the Jews with Christ
their Bridegroom, and true Messiah, as he will then be acknowledged: And he
says unto me, These are the true sayings of God; as unlikely as it may seem to
men, that these dry bones shall live again, (as the Jews are represented in
that Vision of Ezechiel) yet the thing will certainly come to pass.

10. And I fell at his feet, and worshipped him: This he did being so full of
joy and transport at so transcendent good news touching his Contrymen the
Jews; for whom Paul also had such a zeal, that he could wish himself accursed
from Christ, that they might be implanted into him, Romans 9. Wherefore it is no
wonder St John did so profound Reverence to the messenger of News so
unspeakably grateful, acceptable and enravishing: And he said unto me, See thou
do it not: For it should seem the mien of his face conjoined with the posture
of his body betrayed such a pitch of veneration and worship, as might seem more
than Civil, and not due nor warrantable from one Fellow Creature to another; I
am thy fellow servants, and the fellow servants of thy brethren that have the
testimony of Jesus, worship God. Reserve such high pitches of affection and
veneration for God alone, whom thou art to love with all thy heart, and all thy
soul, but thy Neighbor only as thy self. And if John's worshipping this Angel
visible and present be thus reprovable, what is the worshipping of Saints and
Angels invisible in Temples, and at Altars, and Images consecrated to them, but
the dregs of Idolatry? For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy:
He was not to be taken with so profound admiration and veneration of the Angel,
for that he was such a Prophet, for he was yet but his fellow servants, as also
of others that had the Testimony of Jesus, 1 Corinthians. 12.3.
For no man can say Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. They cannot be
true and faithful Witnesses of Jesus out of love and loyalty to him, but they
must be inspired by his spirit; and so their witnessing of him is an effect of
the spirit of Prophecy, the spirit enabling them firmly to believe and declare
beyond what flesh and blood can attain to: Such a spirit of Prophecy was in the
two Witnesses, Chap. 11. whose faith was so strong, that they could suffer the
utmost for the Truth.

11. And I saw Heaven opened. Now follows the Vision that contemporizes with
the treading of the Wine Press, and with the seventh Vial, which will give
admirable light to both. And behold a white Horse: An Horse with his Rider does
signify Rule and Command, and the color white, Prosperity and Success: And he
that sat upon him was called faithful and true, and in righteousness does he
judge and make war. In the seventh Vial there was mention of the battle of that
great day of God Almighty, but no mention there of any Armies, or any Captain
of the Forces. Lo! here is the Commander of the Army, Christ himself, the
Eternal Logos, joined with the Humane Nature, who in Righteousness does judge
and make war.

12. His eyes were as a flame of fire. Fire is a symbol of Intellectuality,
especially a flaming fire that implies light. Thus we read of (...), the fiery
Intellect in the Magic Oracles, and of (...), shining fire attributed to the
Soul, as being a certain Divine and Intellectual Essence, as Plethon speaks:
wherefore the Logos here is rightly said to have eyes like a flaming fire,
because he is not only Intellectual, but that great and Eternal Intellect, from
whence all Intellectual Beings are, as also their Operations, exercised by
virtue of the more pure etherial and igneous spirits: And on his head were many
Crowns: For the Kings of the East by this time had submitted to him, besides
what might be done under the fourth Vial. And he had a name written, that no
man knew but himself. This in brief signifies the incomprehensibleness and
imperscrutableness of the Divinity of our Savior; he alone that is it, being
able to comprize it.

13. And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: This partly relates to
his Humane Nature and Passion, and partly to the Vision of the treading of the
Wine Press where blood is said to ascend up to the horse-bridles, whence his
garments would be dipped in blood: And is a sign that these two Visions, this and
that of the Wine Press, tend to the same thing. And his name is called the Word
of God: which may include not only the Eternal Logos that was made flesh, but
even the written Word of God also. The false Prophet, or Idolatrous Hierarchy
of Rome, upon their pretense of Infallibility, had silenced not only the
express Law of the written Word of God, but most coarsly and barbarously had
trodden down those innate Principles of Morality and Reason, that the Eternal
Word had implanted in the souls of men, and by terror and cruel force did what
she could to smother, stifle and extinguish them. But here the scene of things
is changed, and the pure Word of God like a valiant Heroes triumphs over the
corrupt, superstitious, idolatrous and contradictious Doctrines and Institutes
of a company of deceitful and deceivable men, which in this Vision is called
the false Prophet.

14. And the Armies which were in Heaven followed him: Here be the Armies (as
before we noted the Commander) which belong to the battle of the great Day of
God Almighty under the seventh Vial; Upon white Horses clothed in fine linen
white and clean. A strange kind of Armature, if it were to be understood
literally of such a battle as Soldiers ordinarily fight in the Field: But white
horses, and fine linen white and clean, signify the Righteousness and good
success of these Evangelical Warriors that shall bestir themselves in those
days.

15. And out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the
Nations: This again shows, that this is no Carnal Warfare, but as it is said
in the Epistle to the Hebrews; The Word of God is quick and powerful, sharper
than any two-edged sword: And he shall rule them with a rod of iron; in
allusion to the second Psalm, which is a Prophecy of these Times of the
Messiah: Thou shall Rule them with a Rod of Iron, and break them in pieces like
a potters vessel: which is a Prophetic symbol of that wonderful contrition of
heart, that the word of God makes when it is sincerely, seasonably and
powerfully evibrated against the Enemies of his Kingdom: And he treads the
Wine Press of the fierceness and wrath of God Almighty. This referrs to the
Vision of the Wine Press, Chap. 14. whereby it is again manifest, that those
two Visions belong to one and the same thing. But the treading of the
Wine Press is there explained, and the Explanation ratified by this of the
sword coming out of the mouth of the Rider of the White Horse.

16. And he has on his vesture, and on his thigh a name written, King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords: which shows the Royal descent of Christ, even
according to the flesh; as if he had laid claim to this Sovereignty by descent
from David the King, accordingly as it is said, Chap. 22. I am the Root and
Offspring of David, and the bright Morning Star; the Root of David, as to his
Divinity, and the Offspring of David as to his Humanity.

17. And I saw an Angel standing in the Sun; that is, those signified by this
Angel stood in the most bright and glorious Light of the Gospel, or Word of
God, as Sun elsewhere is expounded; by the illumination whereof they were able
to play the part of such auspicious Heralds touching the victory of the
Evangelical Party, that it would go on their side: And he cried with a loud
voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst of Heaven, Come and
gather your selves to the Supper of the Great God.

18. That ye may eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captains, and the
flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them;
that is, the flesh of Horsemen by an (...), and the flesh of all men both free
and bond, both small and great: These are the slain by the sword of him that
sat upon the Horse; for the Beast and the false Prophet are cast into a Lake
of Fire and Brimstone, so that the Fowls of the Air could not feed on them.
Wherefore it is plain, that those slain with the Sword are those that are
converted by the powerful Preaching of the Word, which is sharper than any
two-edged sword: And then this great Feast of the Fowls is the Joy of Angels,
who if they rejoice so much at the Conversion of one single sinner, what a
feast of Joy is it with them, when whole Countries and Kingdoms are converted
to the True Faith in Christ, and are made part of his Church or Kingdom. * And
that Fowls signify Spirits, and good Spirits here, or Angels, is plain from
the Cabbalistical signification of that Word, and the tenor of this Vision.

19. And I saw the Beast, either the two-horned Beast or the ten-horned Beast
(namely the remainders of him) or else both; which is one part of the
Adversaries of the Evangelici, or of the Armies of this illustrious Heroes on
the white Horse: And the Kings of the Earth and their armies; that is, the
Infidel party, the other adversaries of the abovesaid Heroes, who with his
Armies make up the Tripartition I observed in the treading of the Wine Press,
and in the seventh Vial: Which is another argument of the coincidency of these
Visions; Gathered together to make war against him that sat on the Horse, and
against his army; which exactly answers to, and makes a supplement of what is
wanting Chap. 16. v. 16. This therefore is the Army that was gathered together
in Armageddon.

20. And the Beast was taken, the ten-horned Beast, namely the remainders that
was left of him at this time: And with him the false Prophet, who is mentioned
also in the seventh Vial, (viz.) The Roman Idolatrous Hierarchy, That wrought
Miracles before him, with which he deceived them which had received the mark of
the Beast, namely, of the two-horned Beast, (see Chap. 13. verse. 13, 16, 17.)
which is the same with this false Prophet: And them that worshipped his Image,
(viz.) the Image which the two-horned Beast made, who debauching the Christian
Empire by the introduction of the old Idolatry under new names, made it the
lively Image of the Pagan. These both were cast alive, ( viz. the Beast and
false Prophet) not slain by the Sword that comes out of the mouth of the Rider
of the white Horse, that is, not converted from their Antichristianity to the
pure Apostolic Faith, into a Lake of fire burning with brimstone, whereby
their Idolatrous Power and Tyranny was abolished and consumed.

21. And the remnant, (...), the rest, that is, the other of the two parties,
that opposed the Evangelical Armies, namely the Infidel party, were slain with
the sword of him that sat upon the Horse, which sword proceeded out of his
mouth, and all the Fowls were filled with their flesh; that is, all the Holy
Angels were feasted and filled with the Joy of their Conversion. For this Sword
is the cutting conviction of the Word of God, and of the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus preached effectually in the power of the Spirit, whereby they were
converted. It is here compared to a sword, as Chap. 14. verse. 19. to a sharp
sickle, whereby the Vine of the Earth was gathered and cast into the great
Wine Press: Which Vision, as I said, is the same with this, as also that of the
seventh Vial.

In all which Visions, three parties of men are plainly distinguished. In the
Vision of the Wine Press, the Vintagers or Treaders of the Grapes, are the
Evangelical, or the pure Christian party. In the seventh Vial, the said party,
are those that are the Armies of God Almighty at the battle in Armageddon, or
those Boanerges's with the third part of the City, which they thundered over so
divided, (viz.) into three parts. In this Vision the Heroes on the White Horse
with his Armies: This is the pure Christian party in all these three Visions.
But the obdurate Antichristian party in the Vision of the Wine Press, is the
City without which (as being a company incapable of conviction and contrition)
the Wine Press is trodden. In the seventh Vial the Beast and false Prophet, or
Babylon the Great, who pelted with Hailstones of a talent weight, blasphemes
but does not repent. And in this Vision of the Rider of the White Horse, the
Beast and the false Prophet: This is the Antichristian party in all the three
Visions. But the Heathen or Infidel party is denoted in the Vision of the
Wine Press by the Grapes there gathered and pressed, and having their Edomitish
blood squeezed out of them, ( who is this that comes from Edom, with his died
garments from Bozrah, Isai. 63.1.
which Bozrah the very name signifies Vintage) In the seventh Vial by those
under the Dragon, (for all Pagans or Infidels are so, he being the Old Opposer
of the Kingdom of the Messiah) and by the Cities of the Nations or Heathens,
who are said to fall, as being thunderstruck at the powerful voice of those
Evangelical Boanerges's over the great City divided into three parts. And in
this Vision, by those that are slain by the sword of the Rider of the White
Horse. For these being a distinct Party from the Christian Party, the Armies of
that Divine Heroes, and from the party Antichristian, the Beast, and the false
Prophet, what can they be but Infidels? Which three Visions therefore thus
dispersed and so maimedly and obscurely described single, but so fully and
certainly to be understood compared together, is one special instance of that
admirable artifice in this Book of close Concealment, and certain Revealment of
the Truth in these Prophecies.

NOTES. CHAPTER XIX. Verse. 5.
Praise our God all ye his Servants, etc. That is no bar to Christ his being
the Precentor here, because he says [Our God] as if it were below his Divinity
to use that phrase. For his Humane Nature is a Creature: Besides he says
expressly to Mary, John 20.17. Go to my Brethren and say unto them, I ascend to
my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God: See also Apoc. 3.12.

Verse. 18. And that Fowls signify Spirits, etc. That Fowls or Birds signify
Spirits or Angels with the Cabbalists, that saying of R. Moses Corduero will
evince; Quando Neschamah exit in hunc mundum duas Aves, id est, duos Angelos
custodes ex arbore volitare cum ea. And Tertullian himself briefly and smartly,
Omnis Spiritus ales est, hoc Angeli and Daemones; Every Spirit is a Foul or
Bird, whether they be Angels or Devils.

CHAPTER XX.
HItherto none of the Visions of the Opened Book have reached any further than
to the last Vial, which takes up the forepart of the Philadelphian Interval. To
which Church it is said, (...), Thou have a little Army, so Grotius: Which Army
is that which is under the Command of that victorious Heroes on the White Horse:
And the effect of his victory will make good what Christ promises to the
Philadelphian Church. Behold I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, which
say they are Jews; that is, Christians, and are not, but the slaves of
Antichrist, Behold I will make them come and worship before thy feet. The
residue of the Visions of the Opened Book take up the following part of the
Philadelphian Interval, and the whole Laodicean, and so reaches to the end of
all: Or for more distinctness, it takes up the space of the six last Thunders,
as the effusion of the Vials did the first.

1. And I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, whose Commission therefore must
be from God, having the key of the bottomless pit; the supposed habitation or
prison rather of Evil Spirits: And the having the Key thereof signifies the
having Power and Authority to do things there: For the very Kingdom of the
Devil is subject to the Power of God: And a great chain in his hand, which is
the Power of Legislation or making Laws, (as some, as to the sense well, though
not so critically, derive Lex a ligando) which are bonds and iron chains to tie
up the wicked from doing mischief. By this Angel therefore, according to the
Apocalyptick style, after the abolishing the Antichristian and Infidel Power,
are those persons understood that are empowered from God to make Laws for the
more sure support of the recovered Kingdom of Christ.

2. And he said hold on the Dragon that Old Serpent, which is the Devil and
Satan; that is, the surviving wicked Ones of the Earth, for whom the Dragon,
the Old Serpent, and the Devil is here put, as the Angel before for those
Evangelical Legislators. And the Dragon is here explained by the Devil and Old
Serpent, that the sense might not be restrained to the remainder of Pagans, but
reach also to those of the Antichristian Party now subdued, which were the
two-horned and ten-horned Beast to whom the Dragon yet gave his power: By these
express severe Laws touching the indispensable duties of a Christian, not
insignificant trifles and superstitions, is the Dragon, that is, the wicked
ones of what denomination soever, to be laid hold on. This is the constitution
of the New Polity after the abolishing of the Antichristian Tyranny, where it
was more safe to serve the Devil and Antichrist, than to approve a man's self
the faithful Servant of Christ. This Constitution of things being settled, which
is dispatched within the space of the second Thunder; then it follows, And
bound him a thousand years: which is the Time of the third Thunder, and of the
blessed Millennium, properly so called: Which reaches to the end of the
Philadelphian Interval.

3. And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up and set a seal upon
him, that he deceive the Nations no more till the thousand years should be
fulfilled: Therefore during the happy Millennium of the Reign of Christ, he is
as close a prisoner as can be imagined or expressed. Which is a demonstration,
this Millennium is not yet come. The Parable is of the Devil, but so as to be
understood of his Children here on Earth, that they shall be kept under with
iron or adamantine chains of rigid, severe and inviolable Laws, nor be
permitted to do any thing that is really Profane, Wicked, or Antichristian, nor
to tempt or seduce others to do it. They shall have no public permission or
connivance for such things: And after that he must be loosed a little season,
namely in the Laodicean Interval, the Evangelical Party growing more cool and
remiss, and the Church degenerating in many from the state of Philadelphia to
that of Laodicea, of whom Christ complains in his Epistle to her. This loosing
of Satan is conceived for order and distinctness sake to happen under the
fourth Thunder.

4. And I saw Thrones, and they sat upon them, and Judgment was given unto
them: This Vision runs back (as it was usual in the former to do) and
commenceth with the second Thunder: Then were there Judges sitting upon
Thrones, and they gave judgment touching the Christian Confessors and Martyrs,
whether under Antichrist or the Red Dragon, as follows; And I saw the souls of
them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God. *
And I saw also those which had not worshipped the Beast nor his Image, neither
had received his Mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands. Of these two
distinct sorts it is said in common, (...), and they lived, as being true of
them both: and reigned with Christ, (...), not a thousand years; but the
thousand year, (viz.) of the blessed Millennium; but it is not said where, and
therefore it is to be understood the Martyrs in Heaven, where Christ is
personally and visibly present; the other with their Successors on Earth,
where Christ is also present, but by his Spirit; these in bodies Terrestrial,
those Revivificated into their bodies Celestial and Glorified; an early
privilege peculiar to the Martyrs: And therefore it follows,

5. But the rest of the dead, (...), lived not again, much less were thus
revivificated as the Martyrs were, till the thousand years were finished: Where
(...), being made use of, and it being unproper to be said of the Confessors
with those that succeed them, they being considered as alive on Earth, must
needs respect those that are said to have been beheaded, to insinuate their
privilege or different condition from all others, and that though (...) might
be truly said of them, as being they that were to be revived into their
glorified bodies at the beginning of the Millennium, yet it was not to be said
of any other men, it not being to be fulfilled of them until the (...), till
the thousand years of the Millennium be expired, nay, till the end of the
Laodicean Interval under the sixth Thunder; This is the first Resurrection:
This namely of the Martyrs according to the Opinion of the Primitive Fathers,
and that intimation to the Church of Smyrna, Chap. 2. verse. 11. when so many
Christian Martyrs suffered: He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second
death, as to whom belongs the first Resurrection accordingly as here
follows.

6. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first Resurrection, on such
the second death has no power: Namely, the Lake of Fire ( verse. 14.) into
which Hades, or the whole Region of Mortality is cast the Earth being all on
fire. But they that have obtained their glorified body, as the Martyrs do in
the first Resurrection, they are sped already, and are safe from this fate: But
they shall be Priests of God and of Christ; that is, Holy and Divine Souls
clothed in glorified bodies, serving God in his Heavenly Temple. And shall
reign with him, (viz.) with Christ in the Kingdom of his Father, not (...), the
thousand years of the Millennium; but (...), a thousand years, symbolically
understood; which being the Cube of Ten, which comprehends all number,
signifies a steady permanent Reign even to all Eternity.

7. But when the (...), the thousand years of the Millennium are expired, that
is at the expiration of the Philadelphian Interval, and the beginning of the
Laodicean, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, that is to say, the ancient
zeal of the Philadelphian Church, and strictness of Discipline will be much
relaxated, and wickedness will get head again, namely under the fourth Thunder.

8. And he shall go out to deceive the Nations, which are in the four quarters
of the Earth, Gog and Magog; that is, the whole rabble of men that are disposed
to wickedness, and have an enmity against the Holy and Just, which are the true
Israelites indeed, in whom there is no guile. And Gog and Magog are those
notorious enemies of the People of Israel, ( Ezech. Cap. 38. and 39.) who
therefore here typifie the enemies of the Holy, Christian and Apostolic
Church, of which Israel was a type. To gather them together to battle, to fight
against Israel, the true Church of Christ; The number of whom is as the sand of
the sea: So much had wickedness increased by the not still endeavoring with
that wonted vigor, the amplification of Christ's Kingdom, and by relaxation of
Discipline in the Laodicean State of the Church, though purity of external
worship was still retained among them, neither had they contaminated themselves
with course Superstitions and Idolatries.

9. And they went up on the breadth of the Earth, which indicates the swarming
and the spreading of their Forces, and compassed the Camp of the Saints about:
The Camp wherein there were many Saints, and right Philadelphian Spirits, but
all Saints, as to the purity of external worship. And the beloved City: The
mystical Jerusalem, or pure Church of Christ, and beloved of him, for the
reasons even now intimated. Here is an attempt of bringing again the Righteous
under the Power and Tyranny of the wicked; which attempts are made toward the
latter end of the Laodicean Interval under the fifth Thunder: But before they
could effect their wicked enterprise, the Day of judgment overtakes them: And
fire came down from God out of Heaven and devoured them.

10. And the Devil that deceived them was cast together with them into the lake
of fire and brimstone, even that Lake which is afterward called the second
death, where the Beast and the false Prophet, the whole Antichristian Rabble,
shall be, and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever.

11. For I saw a great white Throne (for (...), And, does ordinarily signify
for, as the sense may require) and him that sat on it, namely Christ coming to
judgment at the end of the Laodicean Interval (in the sixth Thunder) from
whence the Church of Laodicea also has its name: From whose face the Earth and
the Heaven fled away, and there was found no place for them; that is, the Glory
of his Majesty was so great, that Heaven and Earth seemed to vanish before him,
the eyes of the spectators at first being so wholly filled with the brightness
of the presence of his Glory.

12. And I saw the dead small and great, good and bad, stand before God: This
is the General Resurrection, which is not till the thousand years of the
Millennium be expired, but a good while after it, though but a little time
compared with the thousand years in the latitude of the sense thereof. And the
Books were opened, the Rolls and Records of their actions; this is spoken in
allusion to Law-proceedings in Courts of Judicature amongst men. And another
Book was opened which is the Book of Life. An auspicious Title, signifying that
they whose names were found there, should be sentenced worthy of Eternal Life,
and escape the second death: And the dead were judged out of those things which
were written in the Books according to their Works: As is done in Righteous
Courts of Judicature, where the Judge gives Sentence according to what is
alleged and proved: And so it is in this General Assizes; none shall be
condemned for what he is not guilty of, but be judged according to his works.

13. And the Sea gave up the dead which were in it: The Souls here appear of
them that were drowned in the Sea (as being not extinct thereby, as some fondly
imagine) and actuate their bodies. And death or pestilence (all manner of death
by diseases is intimated by it) and briefly Hell, that is Hades, the whole
Region of deceased Souls, or this sphere of Mortality into which they are
congregated at this General Assizes, delivered up the dead that were in them,
that is, exhibited them to the view of all: And they were judged every man
according to their works. The Divine Nemesis proportioned punishments or
rewards to every one according to their doings. Hitherto are the transactions
of this General Assizes, and the passing of judgment on those that were called
to the Bar, which takes up the sixth Thunder: But in the seventh there is
Thundering and Lightening, properly so called, as is intimated, verse. 9. And
fire came down from God out of Heaven and devoured them: So here.

14. And Death and Hell were cast into the lake of fire; that is, this whole
Region of Mortality above which the Spirits of Devils and damned Souls cannot
emerge, but are chained and confined to this caliginous Atmosphere, will be set
on fire at the last Thunder, which together with eruptions from beneath will
cause a dreadful Conflagration, and turn the Earth as it were into one great
lake of fire. This is the sense of these words, And Death and Hell were cast
into the lake of fire. Which is a very figurative expression; First by a
Prosopopoeia making Death and Hell as it were two persons, as in Chap. 6. verse.
8. and then by an Hypallage, casting them into the fire, when as the fire is
rather cast into them, it occupying all this Region of Mortality, and putting
an end to dying, by consuming all the species of mortal Creatures, and giving a
stop to their propagation. This is the second Death: As the first death is the
death of this body. Wherefore it is here a seasonable monition: Fear not them
which kill the body, Matt. 10.28.
but rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell: which
is the second death infinitely worse than the former.

15. And whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, that is, in the
Book of Life of the Lamb, as a faithful Soldier, and true Member of his
Kingdom, was cast into the lake of fire, and underwent the same doom with the
Apostate Spirits; which implies, that those which were found in that Book of
Life were adjudged to the enjoyment of Eternal Life, to reign with Christ for
ever in Heaven in the Kingdom of his Father, as he promises in his Epistle to
the Church of Laodicea.

NOTES. CHAPTER XX. Verse. 4.
And I saw also those that had not worshipped the Beast, etc. That the beheaded
and these are two distinct sorts of persons, methinks is plainly enough
insinuated in the Original; (...) etc. He saw the souls of them that were
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God, (...), and those
who had not worshipped, etc. David Pareus supposes an Ellipsis, which he would
supply thus, (...), so secure is he, that two several sorts are meant. If this
be not the sense, why is (...) interposed? (...), had been sufficient without
(...) before it; (...), or (...). So the Text should have run: And besides, why
is it said (...), and they lived; and not (...), and they lived again, if both
the Beheaded and the Not-worshippers of the Beast were of the same kind? But
indeed Interpreters do generally understand them to be of two sorts, (though
otherwise they cannot hit it among themselves about the sense of this place)
the one sort Martyrs, the other Confessors. And I add surviving Confessors,
who with their Successors survive the Cruelty of the Beast and his Image: See
my Mystery of Godliness, lib. 5. cap. 15. sect. 6.

CHAPTER XXI.
1. ANd I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth: One would think upon the
Conflagration of this Earth immediately mentioned before: But this is but the
artificial embellishing of the outward Cortex of this Book of Prophecies in
this place * by a Lemmatosynechia, as it is called in my Synopsis Prophetica:
For the first Heaven and the first Earth were passed away: namely the former
Heaven and Earth or World, in the sense of the Prophetical style, according to
which they denote a Polity; which therefore intimates here, that the Tyrannical
and Idolatrous Polity of the Beast and the false Prophet, which is the great
Whore, or great City of Babylon was now abolished, as appears by Chap. 19.
verse. 20. And there was no more Sea; no unquiet multitudes of the wicked who
are like the raging waves of the Sea foaming out their own shame; Jude 13.
Tumults, War and Bloodshed was under that Polity, that is cast into the Lake
of Fire, Chap. 19. verse. 20 which was the Reign of Antichrist. But now the
Reign of Christ is at hand, who is the true Melchizedec King of Salem or
Jerusalem, King of Righteousness and Prince of Peace: This Vision therefore
goes back to the second Thunder.

2. And I John saw the Holy City New Jerusalem: The truly Holy City, not
pretended Holy Church, and the New Jerusalem, not that Old Prophet-killing
Jerusalem, which is also spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, the Roman
Hierarchy, where Christ in his Faithful Witnesses were persecuted to death.
This sight therefore of the City Jerusalem is exhibited, as a Polity succeeding
the great City of Babylon, and in opposition thereto, Coming down from God out
of Heaven, which shows it is a Polity here upon Earth, and of Divine
Institution, and to be settled after the utter destruction of the Whore of
Babylon, by a Council truly Holy, and truly Ecumenical, being persons of pure
and upright Spirits, and without all worldly interest, and moreover inspired
extraordinarily by the Spirit of God. This is the meaning of this descent of
Jerusalem from God out of Heaven, all things then being to be ordered by that
Wisdom which is from above, when as the Constitution of the City of Babylon was
from that Wisdom which is from beneath, and is earthly, sensual and devilish:
Prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband: Not as a Whore to commit
Fornication with the Kings of the Earth as Babylon did. This Constitution of
things is settled under the second Thunder, after which immediately follows the
Millennial Reign of Christ, and is described in the following Verses.

3. And I heard a great voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of
God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people; And
God himself shall be with them; namely, by his Spirit, whose presence shall
sensibly and feelingly be acknowledged by all the Inhabiters of this New
Jerusalem: For this is the Reign of the Spirit, or the Reign of Christ in the
Spirit, of which the Apostles of old witnessed, Know ye not that your bodies
are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? 1 Corinthians. 6.19.
But in the City of Babylon, instead of being taught and guided by the Holy
Ghost, they were forced to follow their blind Guides that led them into all
manner of Superstition and Idolatry, and gross Disobedience to the Laws of God
and Christ, unless they would be persecuted, and barbarously murdered: And be
their God, that is, their Protector and Defender from all manner of Evil: As it
follows.

4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: This Reign of Christ in
the Millennium will be with that equity, goodness and sweetness, that no man's
heart that is good shall need to be oppressed with grief, or express his grief
by his tears: And there shall be no more death; no more bloody massacrings of
the Faithful Witnesses of Christ, or burning them at the stake with fire and
faggot, as was done under the Tyranny of the Great Whore: neither sorrow for the
loss of Friends thus barbarously and inhumanely murdered: nor crying, no
clamours against gross injustice and cruelty, or crying out for the tortures
that are inflicted on poor innocent men for keeping a good conscience toward
God: Neither shall there be any more pain, by noisome and wearisom
imprisonments, or what other hardships they are put to for the testimony of a
good conscience; For the former things are passed away: The bloody Whore or
false Prophet with the Beast are now in the Lake of fire burning with
brimstone: And Babylon the Great, like a millstone, sunk into the bottom of the
Sea never to rise again: Such is the state of the blessed Millennium when it
comes; nor shall Gog and Magog prevail against the Holy City in the Laodicean
Interval.

5. And he that sat on the Throne, said, Behold I make all things new: A New
Heaven and a New Earth wherein dwells Righteousness: And he said unto me,
Write, For these words are true and faithful; that is, what I have told you
will certainly come to pass. There will be such a blessed Millennium as here
has been hinted at.

6. And he said unto me, It is done. The thing is as sure as if it were done
already. This is a farther confirmation to him of the truth of the things
affirmed. And this earnest and repeated assertion of this Truth is no more than
needs, it being foreseen how incredulous not only those would be, whose
interest it is that it were false, (the Idolatrous Hierarchy I mean of the
Antichristian party) but even those, that were it not for the carnal
sluggishness of their Natures, might easily conceive it were their Interest
that it should be true. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End. I
comprehend all within the compass of my Providence and Power: Therefore never
distrust but that what I have told will come to pass. These things reach into
the Laodicean Interval: In the Epistle to which Church Christ calls himself the
Amen, the Faithful and True Witness, and the beginning of the Creation of God.
And what follows belongs to the last Judgment of all, the Eternal Reward of
the Good, and the punishment of the Wicked. I will give unto him that is
athirst, of the Fountain of the water of Life freely: He that does seriously
desire and endeavor to obtain Everlasting Life, according to the ways
prescribed in my Gospel, I will give it him freely: He need not buy it by large
sums of money, or what other gainful conditions imposed upon him by that
Merchandising City of Babylon; touching whose Merchandising it is said, --
Coelum venale Deusque: They set Heaven, and God himself to sale for money.

7. He that overcomes the flesh, the world, and the Devil, shall inherit all
things: He shall be an Heir of God, and joynt-heir with Christ in the glorious
Kingdom of his Father, and this certainly comprizeth all that heart can wish.
And I will be his God, and he shall be my Son. And if Sons then Heirs, Romans
8.17.
as I said before: Heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ, if so be we
suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with him, that is, be made
partakers of his Heavenly Kingdom and Glory, according as he has promised to
the Church of Laodicea: To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in
my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his
Throne: Where Throne plainly implies a Kingdom.

8. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, such as the great
City of Babylon abounded withal, shall have their part in the Lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death: Which therefore
undoubtedly is the Conflagration under the last Thunder, which plainly shows,
that from the second Verse to the ninth, is a brief description of the affairs
of the Church from the second Thunder to the last, or to the end of the world.
Now as after a brief mention of the destruction of Babylon, chap. 16. verse. 19.
there is a large description of her, and her destruction in the two following
Chapters, (viz.) chap. 17 and 18. so here, after a brief intimation of the
emersion of the New Jerusalem into Being, there is a full and glorious
description thereof from this ninth Verse following of this Chapter to the
sixth of the next.

9. And there came unto me one of the seven Angels which had the seven Uials
full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will
show thee the Bride, the Lambs Wife. It is likely it was the same Angel that
before showed him the Judgment of the Great Whore: Whose destroying was in
order to the Lambs Wife taking place. And therefore the showing him the Lambs
Wife, was to show him the main end of the effusion of the Vials, and therefore
a fitting office for one of these Angels to do.

10. And he carried me away rapt in the Spirit to a great and high mountain:
The height of the Mountain denotes the height, and power, and dignity, the pure
Apostolic Church is then arrived to. And showed me that great City, as being
the Church Catholic spread far and wide, the holy Jerusalem, as being the
truly holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, not a City of Idolaters and
murderers, descending out of Heaven from God, as whose constitution and
institutes are not the carnal invention of men, but the pure Laws of the God of
Heaven, and the living Dictates of his Spirit.

11. Having the glory of God; not as the Pharisees in the old Jerusalem that
sought Glory one of another, Joh. 5.44.
but were strangers to that Glory that is of God, the Glory of true approved
Wisdom, and unspotted Righteousness: And her light was like unto a stone most
precious, even like a Iasperstone clear as Crystal. The Luminary of this City
which was instead of a Sun (for the word is (...), which signifies a Luminary,
or that from which the light proceeds, not the Lumen dispread from the
Luminary) is likened to a most precious stone, a Iasper-stone clear as Crystal:
By which, I conceive, is understood the Holy Ghost; whose Holiness, Purity and
Illumination is set out by this Iasper-stone clear as Crystal: (But the Natural
Sun it self is not without its scum and spots) wherefore this is the most
proper symbol thereof. And the Times of the New Jerusalem are Regnum Spiritus,
as the Cabbalists call them.

12. And had a wall great and high, namely for the security of the City: And
had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve Angels, and names written thereon,
which are the names of the twelve Tribes of the children of Israel. The number
Twelve is sacred in the Holy Scripture, for the twelve Patriarchs sake, and the
twelve Apostles: The former are mentioned here, the latter, verse. 14. and both
concur in this New City of Jerusalem, it being the time when Jew and Gentile
shall accord in one Faith and be one sheepfold. The twelve Angels may signify
either the safety of the City by the guard of Angels: For if God, by his Angels
keep not the City, the Watchmen wake but in vain; or else the Pastors under
these twelve Angels who have occasion to admit Converts into the Church from
all quarters of the world; as it follows in the next Verse.

13. On the East three Gates, on the North three Gates, on the South three
Gates, and on the West three Gates. Three toward every quarter, as Grotius and
others would have it, in token that the Converts are to be admitted to the
profession of their Faith in the Holy Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost at
their Baptism. Nor does this season, being Regnum Spiritus, superannuate this
Sacrament, but rather call for it; according to that saying of St Peter, Acts
10.47.
Can any one forbid water that these should not be baptized, which have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we? There may be also no mean nor useless
mystery in the Inscription of the names of the twelve Tribes of the Children of
Israel on the Gates of the City rather than elsewhere. For the Jews being a
Nation under the Law, and the dispensation of the Law being to live under an
external Rule, though we have not yet arrived to the Spirit of Life, it is
implied, that there is no entrance into this dispensation of the Spirit,
without endeavoring as well as we can, to live up to those external Rules
exhibited to us from the Word, whereby we break off from all external evil
courses, and imitate all good and laudable actions, as well as we can, with all
sincerity of heart, which is the sum of true Repentance.

14. And the wall of the City had twelve Foundations, and in them the names of
the twelve Apostles of the Lamb; which shows the pure Apostolicalness in this
constitution of the Church, and insinuates the safety of this Apostolicalness:
For walls are for safety, and these are the very Foundations of the walls.

15. And he, the Angel, that talked with me had a golden reed to measure the
City, and the Gates thereof, and the wall thereof. Apoc. chap. 11. there the
Church was measured by a Man, but this new state of things by an Angel. That
simply with a Reed, this with a golden Reed; which implies, that this new state
of things will as much surpass that state of the Church, though symmetral to
the Reed it was then measured with, as Angels do men, and a golden Reed, an
ordinary combustible one, as there indeed was in those first four hundred
years, (which are accounted the symmetral Ages of the Church) that which was
very combustible, and ought to be consumed. But the pure Word of God, and
Spirit of Love abide for ever. And this is the golden Reed that adequately
measures the New Jerusalem: For the Word of God abides for ever, and Charity
never cease.

16. And the City lies four square; which Figure, as well as the Number Four
are symbols of Righteousness: And the length is as large as the breadth; that is
but an explication of the squareness thereof: And he measured the City with the
Reed twelve thousand furlongs: the length, and the breadth, and the height of
it are all equal; that is, the City is in the form of a Cube, which plainly
shows it cannot be a City literally understood but a Polity, and signifies not
walls and houses but men. The solid Content therefore of the City is said to be
twelve thousand Furlongs, to signify how entirely Apostolical the constitution
of things then will be. And to show that this City is more peculiarly described
in opposition to the Roman Hierarchy, See Mr. Potters Interpretation of the
Number 666, cap. 21.
the Perimeter of the Cube twelve thousand Furlongs is the circuit of
Jerusalem, as the Perimeter of the Cube twenty five thousand Furlongs, (which
twenty five is the Root of the number of the Beast) is the circuit of Rome. But
this it may be is a curiosity that might as well have been omitted, as I do
also for brevity sake omit, See Mystery of Godliness, lib. 5. cap. 16. sect. 8.
That to the twelve Gates, Angels, Tribes, Foundations in the New Jerusalem, do
answer twenty five Gates, Pastors, Parishes, Cardinals, etc. in the City of
Rome.

17. And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred forty four Cubits, according
to the measure of a man, that is, of the Angel in the shape of a man, and whose
measuring is to be understood humano more, by extracting the square Root: Now
the Root of 144, is Twelve, which shows the height and thickness of the wall,
and being Twelve, it denotes again the pure Apostolicalness of the frame
thereof, and the strength of it from this Apostolical fabric thereof.

18. And the building of the wall of it was of Jasper, the Hebrew word, which
is rendered by the Septuagint (...), is (...), which is as much as Ictibus
resistens, as Grotius Notes; which is not to be subdued by the knocks of the
hammer, but rather so strong, that it breaks all that strikes against it: In
which sense the wall being of Jasper signifies how firm and inexpugnable it is
throughout, and is a symbol of invincible patience or fortitude, without which
all the rest of the virtues are in a manner useless, especially in the day of
trial. And the City was pure gold like unto clear glass: Whence it perfectly
resembles the Amber in Ezechiel's Vision, which is that Divine Element of
Regeneration, as I elsewhere more fully show: But the golden color is the
tincture of the Spirit of Love or Charity, which high perfection (and the
highest that is) of the Soul, I conceive to be here signified by Gold in this
Vision where ever it is mentioned. Gold being by far the most Noble of all
Metals, most pure, and most permanent, as the Apostle takes notice that Charity
is, which never fails, whatever becomes of other Gifts and Graces. And this
City is the Philadelphian Interval of the Church, whose proper character is
Divine Love.

19. And the Foundations of the Wall of the City were garnished with all manner
of precious stones; that is to say, the beauty of them was the garnishing, but
the substance of them the safety of the City, which is the end for which walls
are built. The first foundation was a Jasper: That by Jasper more peculiarly
was signified the holy Spirit, that is said to be the Luminary of this City, I
have noted above. But he is not only the Luminary of this City, but the first
foundation of the Wall thereof, that is, the principal ground of their safety,
Ephesians. 3.16. That he would grant you according to the riches of his Glory, to
be strengthened with might by his spirit, etc. And a little after, That ye
being rooted and grounded in Love, (...), having your foundation in Love, etc.
which is this Spirit of Love, the first foundation of the wall of this City:
And which is such a Spirit as will drive away all evil or foul Spirits, such as
have their haunts in the ruins of Babylon, chap. 18. verse. 2. as the
Iasper-stone is said in Dionysius Afer, to be an Amulet against all Empusa's,
and other specters: And others write of it, that it stops the tumults of
thoughts, and inconstancy of mind arising from the motions of the blood, which
in an higher sense in the proper office of the Holy Spirit, of which the Jasper
is a symbol. The second a Saphir: The Saphir is a stone of the color of the
Heavens, which therefore is a fit note of Heavenly-mindedness; and is said to
be an Amulet against Lust: This is another security of their City, that they
set their mind upon Heavenly things, whereby they escape the pollutions of the
earthly. The Saphir therefore is a fit means to keep the New Jerusalem in her
pure Philadelphian condition, that is to say, in the Holy and Divine Love,
which is counterdistinct to Lust and Wantonness, of which some Sects that have
pretended too early to this Philadelphian State, have been, I fear, over-justly
suspected. The third a Chalcedonie, which is a kind of Carbuncle, a glowing
Gemm like fire, which signifies Holy Zeal, which keeps the Philadelphians from
sinking into that nauseous state of lukewarmness, which is so severely
reprehended in the Church of Laodicea, and which brings Gog and Magog upon them
at last. The fourth an Emerald; Smaragdus, the Hebrew word is (...), which has
its name from casting forth lightening, as when it thunders, whence in
Cornelius a Lapide, it is called also Ceraunius. This denotes that safety which
the City has by those Boanerges's, those powerful Preachers of the Gospel
assisted by the Spirit, such as appeared under the seventh Vial, and battered
down the Cities of the Nations: who serve also for the preserving their own
City, better than Cannoneers playing from the walls thereof.

20. The fifth a Sardonyx: A stone of a threefold color, beneath black, in the
midst, white, and above, reddish: This I conceive may denote the due
frequenting of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as the Gates of the City,
with the Angels, that is, Pastors or Bishops to admit Converts, signified the
Sacrament of Baptism: The Black therefore at the bottom is the Death of our
Lord the foundation of the solemnity that celebrates his death till he come;
the White the Bread, and the Red the Wine, the Elements that are made use of in
the Celebration of his Supper. And this is a good hold to the Church from
relapsing into Heathenism again, as some Enthusiasts have seemed too prone to
do. The sixth a Sardius, in the Hebrew it is called (...), Odem, from the
color of Blood; which may signify these two things: The profession of our
readiness to lay down our Lives for the Faith of Christ, and also a due
remembrance of those horrible Cruelties, Butcheries and Massacres of both the
Pagan and Paganochristian Polity, the Whore that is said to be drunk with the
blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, and so retain
an eternal watchful aversation from so detestable a Religion. This is also one
part of the wall of safety about the New Jerusalem. The seventh a Chrysolith,
or the stone that has its denomination from Gold. Whether the Philosophers
Stone may be hereby prefigured, I leave to the Chemists to consider; but
because that Knowledge is vulgarly held the very top of all Natural Knowledge,
by this Stone it is likely is signified the flourishing of the most profound and
useful Natural Wisdom in this New Jerusalem, that Humane Nature is capable of.
And besides, it is written of the Chrysolith, That it does, confortare
intellectum, pusillanimitatem stultitiamque auferre, and sapientiam animique
constantiam promovere. So in this also it is plain, that there consists part of
the safety of the City. But this Chrysolith, besides Wisdom, may also signify
firmness of Love, whereby the Stones of this Living City of God are held fast
together, which is an egregious ground of safety indeed. The eighth a Beryl, a
Stone excellent to make Collyriums or Eye-salves of; the want of which is
upbraided to the Church of Laodicea; whereby as by other defects she was made
obnoxious to the Rabble of Gog and Magog, that at last besieged her: This Stone
therefore is a good prop from falling into the Laodicean State, and for the
keeping the Church safe in the Philadelphian, their eyes being cleared by this
Collyrium, and enabled by their quick-sightedness, to foresee afar off how they
are to order their affairs for their safety. The ninth a Topaze, which either
has its name from the Island Topazios, according to Pliny, which is so called
in the Troglodytick Language from (...) to seek, Mariners with much ado finding
it out by reason of being wholly covered with mists; whence this Stone may be a
fit symbol of a generous and noble desire of the Soul, to find out the dark
mysteries of the Nature of God and his Providence, whereby her affections are
drawn upward from the dregs of this Earth: Or else, as some would have it, the
word may be made of the Article (...) and (...), which is from (...) Aurum
solidum, solid Gold, or Gold well purified, for that makes it the more solid:
This is that Gold tried in the fire, which Christ counsels the Laodicean Church
to buy of him, for want of which she had become so poor and miserable. This
Topaze therefore may well be a Stone in the wall of the Philadelphian Church,
to keep her still in that condition, it signifying pure love firmly radicated
in the Divine Element of Regeneration. The tenth a Chrysoprasus, a Gemm of an
austere color, as Grotius and others have noted, but the Golden color being
mixed with it, it signifies Animum subtristem and benignum, the best temper of
mind in the world, and most like to our blessed Saviors. This is a great
conservation of that Reverence that is due to Holy Personages, when lightness
and mirth diminishes their estimation. And those whom by this artifice they
would win, ordinarily feed only on the sweet of their conversation, but let
the wholesome alone, like fishes that have a trick to nibble away the bait and
avoid the hook. The eleventh a Iacinth, which is a Stone of a bright, clear
skie-colour; which therefore signifies that inward cheerfulness, calmness and
serenity of mind in this state of the Regenerate, which the Apostle calls,
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, which they having once
tasted, they will be ever unwilling to be deprived of, and therefore never like
to relapse from the state of Philadelphia, or the New Jerusalem. The twelfth an
Amethyst: This Stone is an Amulet against drunkenness, as the Notation of the
word does plainly import, too frequent a vice in the Sardian Church, to be
drunk with Wine or strong Drink, as it was for the Whore of Babylon to be drunk
with the blood of Saints and Martyrs: But the Philadelphian keeps free from
this debauchery, which is her great security from error and danger. Of this
wretched sin is that complaint of the Prophet, ( Esaias 28.) The Priest, and the
people have erred through strong drink, they err in Vision, they stumble in
judgment: Wherefore if this Amethyst were not one of the stones of the wall in
the New Jerusalem, they would soon be exposed to the Armies of Gog and Magog,
that would invade the City -- somno vinoque sepultam, overwhelmed with sleep
and wine. Wine and strong Drink, and all other intemperance and gluttony
diminishes the understanding and judgment, especially in things of the
greatest importance, makes men careless, and remiss, and destroys all order
and discipline, weakens the health of the body, and makes the soul incapable of
the holy influences of the Spirit of God: So necessary a stone therefore for
the safety of the City is this Amethyst to be placed in the wall thereof.

21. And the twelve Gates were twelve pearls, every several Gate was of one
pearl; which shows plainly the thing cannot be literally understood, unless
there were Oisters, or other Conchae, bigger than one of these Gates or
Porches. But in that the Gates, (viz.) Inletts into the City are said to be
Pearls, that Gemm sets out the condition of them that are fitted to enter into
the City. For the color of the Pearl shows the mild, innocent, child-like
meekness of them that are fit to enter, as our Savior has declared: Unless you
be converted and become as one of these Children, you cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. The Notation of the word also intimates what is requisite to
Baptism, (viz.) Repentance: For (...), Vnio, from whence (...) is derived,
alludes to (...), the mixture of bitterness, which denotes the wholesome cup of
Repentance. But the whiteness of the Pearls may insinuate also the washing
away of the guilt and stain of Sin in the Sacrament of Baptism, which
Interpreters make these Gates to be a symbol of. And the street of the City was
pure gold, as it were transparent glass: The street, that is Forum Vrbis, as
Grotius notes, the public place where they meet and transact businesses: It is
said to be pure gold, like to transparent glass, because they converse one with
another bona fide, in pure love and sincerity, as if they were transparent to
one another, and could see one another hearts and thoughts.

22. And I saw no Temple there. No such Temple as was amongst the Jews; which
together with the Divine Residence supposed in it, as being deemed the house of
God, is properly called (...) Such a Temple as this there was none in the New
Jerusalem. For the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the Temple of it. The
eternal Deity is the object of their worship, and the Lamb, the body of Christ,
the Holy Catholic Church, is the house wherein he resides, the same with the
City it self, which from his presence there is called Jehovah Shammah, Ezech.
48.35. God therefore immediately residing by his Spirit in the hearts of his
people, the Citizens of this New Jerusalem, this is instead of the Temple of
the Ancient Jews: And according to the Prophetic style, Lamb, will more
naturally (though it does not so usually) signify the body of Christ his
Church, than Christ himself.

23. And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it:
This may allude to Isai. 60.19. The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, etc.
But the more peculiar sense of the place, I conceive, according to the
Prophetic style, (which makes the Sun the highest Power in any Polity, and the
Moon next to it, as an Emperor and an Emperess in an Empire, or an Universal
Patriarch and Emperor, as the Popish Interpreters expound the two great
Lights, the Sun and the Moon, the one of the Pope, the other of the Emperor,
the Ecclesiastic Power being the Sun, the Secular the Moon;) the sense, I say,
is this, That no man imagine any necessity in those days, when the Kingdoms of
the World shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, that there
should be any such Ecumenical Patriarch, Pope or Bishop over the Church of
Christ, or any Universal Monarch or Emperor over his whole Empire, it is
expressly said, that the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to
shine in it, no need of any one Universal Prelate, and Universal Monarch, as
some would fancy the Pope and the Emperor to have been. For the Glory of God
did lighten it; that is, the Spirit of God which is compared to the
Iasper-stone, verse. 11. which is said to be the Luminary thereof; this is the
Sun or Supreme Power thereof, which is to hold all together. And the Lamb is
the light thereof; namely by shedding the promised efficacy of his Spirit into
it. The Kings therefore of those many Kingdoms, that in those days become the
Kingdom of Christ, shall have no other Supreme Head over them but Christ
himself, but be as the four and twenty Crowned Elders before the Throne of the
Lamb, and have no other Superior, neither Patriarch nor Monarch but he. Of
those times is said that of Isai. chap. 24.23. Then the Moon shall be
confounded, and the Sun ashamed, (all that have born themselves as Universal
Monarchs in Church or State hitherto) when the Lord of Hosts shall reign in
Mount Sion and Jerusalem, namely in this New Jerusalem, and before his Ancients
gloriously; those Ancients described, Chap. 4. as clothed with white raiment,
and sitting upon Thrones with golden Crowns on their Heads; which signify the
Kings of those Times when Jew and Gentile shall make one Fold, and the Church
be reduced to her Apostolic purity in the blessed Millennium; over whom there
will be no Head but God and Christ, nor will they have need to be held together
in one Universal Kingdom of Christ by any other Tie than his Laws, and the
Union of his Holy Spirit, which will be so abundantly shed forth in their
hearts in those days, namely in the Philadelphian Succession.

24. And the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the light of it:
Extra Ecclesiam nulla est salus, is a maxim amongst the Pontificians,
confining Salvation to a blind implicit Faith in the Infallibility of their
Pope and Church: But the Iasper-stone, the influence of the Holy Spirit, which
is the Light of this City, is that by whose guidance the Nations now walk in
the ways of Salvation: And the Kings of the Earth do bring their Glory and
Honor into it; that is, turn Converts to this dispensation of the Spirit,
where the Word and the Spirit is the Rule, not the blind Decrees of both a
fallacious and fallible Polity of men, that adulterate Doctrine for their
worldly interest.

25. And the Gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: Their prosperity, and
great knowledge, and illumination will not make them proud, disdainful or
careless of others happiness and salvation, but they will be ever ready to
embrace and admit by Baptism all Converts from all quarters of the World upon
their sincere Repentance and Conversion. For there shall be no night there, no
Adversity nor Ignorance in this Philadelphian Interval, while the Eternal
Spirit of Love shines upon them: And therefore they will be always ready at
every one of their twelve Gates standing open to all the four quarters of the
world, to admit all single-hearted and sincere Proselytes.

26. And they shall bring the Glory and Honor of the Nations into it: The best
Spirits, and the most Noble and Considerable Persons of all Nations will flow
in to them, and be proselyted by them, be admitted Citizens of the New
Jerusalem, and Members of this truly Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of
Christ.

27. But (for so may (...) signify) there shall in no wise enter into it * any
thing, any person, that defiles, or is of a scandalous conversation, neither
whatsoever, whosoever works abomination, that is, commits Idolatry, though
the Whore of Babylon would admit none but such, or makes a lie. No
Legend-mongers, nor obtruders of absurd and impossible Doctrines, such as the
Artificers of Babylon forged for filthy lucre-sake, no such may be admitted to
come into this City, whose Gates are pure Pearl: But they only who are written
in the Lambs Book of Life, as breathing after a Life suitable to his: But the
description of this Glorious City is not yet finished, it reaches further into
the five first Verses of the following Chapter.

NOTES. CHAPTER XXI. Verse. 1.
By a Lemmatosynechia as it is called, etc. Lemmatosynechia is an Apocalyptick
Scheme or Figure, whereby, as the word signifies, the Cortex, or outward Letter
of the Text is held together, or continued in such sort, as if there were a
real connection and dependence of one part upon the other, when as in the inward
sense there is no such matter: An elegant instance of this is to be found,
Chap. 16. verse. 18, 19. where upon the mention of the great Earthquake it is
presently said: And the great City was divided in three parts; as if that
Division had been a diruption caused by that Earthquake, when as what is meant
by that great City, were three distinct parties before. A like example of this
figure is also, Chap. 11. verse. 7, 8, 9. where the two Witnesses are said to be
slain, as it were at the ending of their witnessing, and their dead bodies to
lie three days and an half unburied, where the three days and an half are set
at the end of the One thousand two hundred and sixty days, as if they were the
latter end of them, when as they in truth commence as high as the One thousand
two hundred and sixty days, and the same time with them. But the Parable runs
smooth in the outward Cortex, as if they were distinct, and the death of the
Witnesses for three days and an half together, occasioned by their One
thousand two hundred and sixty days prophesying: See also, Chap. 19. verse. 5.
But as eximious as any is this present example of a Lemmatosynechia, the
mention of a New Heaven and a New Earth being immediately made upon the burning
of this Natural Earth: Which therefore in the Cortex implies, that the
destroying of that gave occasion of making a New Heaven and a New Earth, when
as they are not Natural but Political, as both Grotius and Doctor Hammond
acknowledge, and the Text will extort it from any one that reads this twenty
first Chapter considerately.

Verse. 27. Any thing, any person, etc. It is usual with St John to put the
Neuter Gender for the Masculine, as Joh. 6. verse. 36, 38, 40. See Grotius upon
the place.

CHAPTER XXII.
1. AND he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as crystal,
proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb: What this River may
signify, that in Chap. 5. verse. 24.
Amos may be a Key to: Let Judgment run down as water, and Righteousness as a
mighty stream. Again, touching the uttering of Divine and Holy Doctrines, it is
said of God, Ecclesiastic. 24.25. He fills all things with his Wisdom, as
Phison and as Tigris in the time of the new fruits. He makes the Understanding
to abound like Euphrates, and as Jordan in the time of Harvest, etc. Wherefore
this River of water of Life from the Throne of God, is the faithful and
effectual Administration of Justice, and pouring forth Holy and Wholesome
Doctrines and Monitions in the demonstration of the Spirit, by them that are in
highest Authority, in this City of God, which Authority is understood by the
Throne of God, and of the Lamb, who in right of his Father is Supreme Governor
over all, and the immediate actuator of his Vicegerents.

2. In the midst of the street of it, that is, in the midst of the Forum of the
City, or broad open place where their meetings were to serve God, consult of
their Affairs, and administer Justice. And of either side of the River, which
ran from thence through the City, was there the tree of Life, that is, Trees of
Life, else how could they be in rows on this side and that side the River? By
which Trees, according to the Prophetic style, must be understood Men, and
that not of the meaner sort, but Grandees in Church and State. And being they
are called Trees of Life, it intimates a state quite contrary to that of the
wicked; ( Iud. 12.) Trees whose fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead,
etc. beside that it signifies, that the Life of the Lamb is in them: Which bare
twelve manner of fruits, and all worthy the profession of the pure Apostolic
Faith; and yielded her fruit every month of the year: So uncessant are they in
the bringing forth the fruits of true Faith, which are good Works. Here seems
to be an allusion to the description of the Righteous Man, Psalm 1. He shall be
as a Tree planted by the Rivers side, etc. And of these happy times of the
Messiah in the expected Millennium, is that, Psalm 72.7. understood: In his
days shall the Righteous flourish, like a Palm Tree, as it is elsewhere said;
or, like a Cedar in Lebanon. The sense therefore is, That by the free current
of Justice, and the countenancing pure Doctrine from the Higher Powers, which
the Throne of God intimates, Holy and Good Men both in Church and State will be
in Authority and Esteem to manage the Affairs of Christ's Kingdom, obliging all
unto them by their Christian Goodness and Equity, which is the constant Fruit
which they bear. And the leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the
Nations; that is, the People of those several Nations which are then brought
under the Empire of Christ: Which is an insinuation of the gentle but effectual
Healing Discipline, which will be in this Philadelphian Interval. Those are the
leaves of these Trees to heal the sores of the People, by gently drawing away
the corruption, whatever may be remaining in them.

3. And there shall be no more curse; no (...). No more furious Papal
Anathema's, or Excommunications to depose Kings and Princes, and to involve the
Christian World in blood. But the Throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it:
that is, Christ shall be in it. The meek Empire of the Lamb of God shall obtain
after the Tyranny of the bloody Antichrist, or two-horned Beast, who wore the
Horns of the Lamb, falsely pretending to be his Vicar, but spoke like the
Dragon, decreeing Idolatries, and barbarous persecutions: And his servants
shall serve him, they shall serve him with a willing and prompt mind in this
day of his power.

4. And they shall see his face; They will enjoy the full light of the Glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ. His Life and his Spirit will be most palpably
and sensibly revealed in them. And his name shall be in their foreheads. It
shall also be plain to all from their outward Conversation, whose they are, and
to whom they belong, (viz.) That they are the faithful Servants of Jesus.

5. And there shall be no night there: No ignorance, nor any persecution for
not being ignorant, and for not admitting of things blasphemous and impossible.
That ignorance is the Mother of Devotion will be out of date in those days,
which Principle sat like the darkness of midnight on the Church during the
time of the Idolatrous Hierarchy. And they need no candle, no factitious lights
or false Instructions of carnal men: Nor the light of the Sun, no pretended
Infallibility of the Pope, whom his flatterers make the Universal Sun of the
Christian World, and put the Emperor like the Moon under his feet. For the
Lord God gives them light; namely, by his Word and by his Spirit, and they
shall be no longer slaves to the cunningly contrived Opinions of men. And in
this freedom of the Light of the Word and Spirit they shall reign for ever and
ever, that is, this Kingdom of Christ shall never be subjected again to the
power of the wicked. Nor shall that numerous rabble of Gog and Magog, be able
to take this City, but it shall continue to the visible Coming of Christ to
judgment, and his sentencing all the Ungodly to the Lake burning with fire and
brimstone, which is the second Death.

6. And he said unto me, These things are faithful and true; namely, these
predictions of the Excellent state of the Church in the Philadelphian Interval,
described or set out by the New Jerusalem, and as stupendous as it may seem to
flesh and blood, yet is a most certain truth. And the Lord God of the holy
Prophets sent his Angel to show unto his Servants, both this great Mystery of
the New Jerusalem, and other things, the things which must shortly be done,
namely under the first six Seals.

7. Behold, I come quickly to support my Church in her Smyrnean condition under
the second, third, fourth and fifth Seals, and to deliver her from her
Persecutions under the sixth. Blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the
Prophecy of this Book: that is, That observes what is writ therein for his own
Direction and Comfort.

8. And I John saw these things and heard them, and when I had heard and seen I
fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel which showed me these things;
and amongst other things, the great Glory of the Catholic or Universal Church,
set out by the description of the New Jerusalem: Which did so overcome him with
joy, as that assurance of the Conversion of his own Contrymen the Jews, that
again he was carried away into the greatest Affection and Veneration for the
Messenger of such enravishing news.

9. Then says he unto me, See thou do it not: For I am thy fellow servants, and
the fellow servants of they Brethren the Prophets, (viz.) of those that truly
believe in, and bear witness of Jesus Christ by the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost. And of them which keep the sayings of this Book: That observe them,
understand them, and believe them, and have faith and courage to act
accordingly: which no man can do, but by the power of the Spirit of God:
Worship God: Accordingly as our Savior has prescribed, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

10. And he says unto me, Seal not the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book,
as if it concerned only Times afar off, or many ages to come: For the time is
at hand, that is, The time of exercising the Faith of the true Followers of
Christ in the Smyrnean Interval of the Church, and of discovering the barbarous
and brutish cruelty of Paganism against them: Which Tragedy will be acted over
again in the Pergamenian and Thyatirian Intervals of the Church by a
Pagano-christian Synagogue; whereby the Faith of the True Church will be
exercised, and more illustriously appear, and the wickedness of a false
hypocritical Hierarchy more notoriously manifested to the World, Divine
Providence administering occasion for the discovering both in their colors, not
forcing the Wills of either by his Absolute Omnipotency. Whence it follows in
the next Verse:

11. He that is unjust let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy let him
be filthy still: Let their unjust cruelty, and barbarous persecution, and
foulness of Life, and filthiness of Idolatry go on in the Pagan, and afterward
in the Pagano-christian Polity, till they are ripe for Judgment, I will not
stop them. And he that is righteous let him be righteous still, and he that is
holy let him be holy still; that is, increase more and more in honesty of
Conversation, unblameableness of Life, and purity in Religion, and in Zeal
against all Idolatry, not refusing the assistances of my Spirit and Grace.

12. And behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man
according as his work shall be. I will demolish or abolish the Pagan Religion,
and set up the Christian under the sixth Seal in the Reign of Constantine, and
judge the Whore, the Idolatrous Hierarchy under the sixth Trumpet, and utterly
destroy her under the seventh Vial, and he that is righteous growing still more
righteous, and he that is holy still more holy, introduce the glorious State of
the New Jerusalem under the second Thunder. These things are within the compass
of my Providence and Power, and therefore will certainly come to pass. For,

13. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End, the First and the Last.
My Kingdom shall out-last all Kingdoms, neither shall any Power upon Earth
survive my Reign in the Holy City Jerusalem: Whence follow the words of Saint
John, as relating to those Times.

14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that walk uprightly according
to the external Word or Law: That they may have right to the Tree of Life; that
is, be baptized at last into the dispensation of the Spirit of Life in the New
Birth, And may enter through the Gates into the City, that is, be baptized and
admitted Citizens, in order to the aforesaid attainment, to be true Members of
this Living Church of Christ, the New Jerusalem, and enjoy all the holy and
healing privileges thereof, which have been above described.

15. For without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and
Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie; that is, brutish, obscene and
Atheistical men, and juggling pretenders to Miracles, and Kainish Persecutors
had they but Power, and in the mean time gross Idolaters, and either lovers of
lying Legends, or Inventours of them: These unclean Birds are kept out of the
New Jerusalem, but have their dismal haunts in the rubbish and ruins of the
demolished Babylon, as has been observed above.

16. I Jesus have sent my Angel to testify unto you these things in the
Churches, alluding to the Churches in Asia; which signify the whole succession
of the truly Catholic and Apostolic Church to the end of the world. The
Churches therefore for whose use this Book was written, are the Churches in
Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea. The whole Book
of the Apocalypse is as it were an Epistle to them all, as they are concerned
in their several Successions. Which passage is a farther confirmation of the
Prophetical sense of the Epistles to the seven Churches in Asia. I am the Root,
and the Offspring of David. * Which may denote his Divinity and Humanity; as
also his being the Offspring or Son of David the true Messiah, his Right to
the Kingdoms of the Earth, as it is foretold in the second Psalm, Ask of me and
I will give thee the Nations for thine Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the
Earth for thy possession. And therefore because of the greatness and glory of
his Kingdom, it follows, And the bright Morning Star. In the Sardian Interval
he was only the Morning Star, (here the bright Morning Star) which is a sign
this saying glances at the Philadelphian Interval in the commencement thereof
under the last Vial; which suits with the saying of St John in the next Verse.

17. And the Spirit and the Bride say Come: The Spirit, because this is the
commencement of those Times that are properly called the Reign of the Spirit by
the Cabbalists: And the voice of the Bride is added as a Testimony of the
Churches desire of the settlement of things into the Glorious Condition of the
New Jerusalem, upon the destruction of the blood-drunken Idolatrous Babylon.
And let him that hears, say, Come; that is, Let him pray for the acceleration
of so glorious a settlement of things. And then our Savior speaks, (for this
latter part of the Chapter, from verse. 10. to the end, is a kind of Dialogue,
as both Peganius and Grotius have observed) And let him that is athirst come,
that is, He that sincerely hungers and thirsts after Righteousness. And
whosoever will, that is, whosoever has a Will and Desire, let him take the
waters of Life freely. Let him enjoy the happy privilege of this Living City
of God, and so grow up in all true Holiness and Godliness in Communion of the
Spirit. This privilege shall he enjoy, (...), gratis, or freely, without
money, as the Prophet speaks.

18. For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the Prophecy of
this Book, If any one shall add unto these things: Interpreters, and not
without reason, take this to be a commination to terrify men from being so
negligent as to let any Errata slip into the Copies of this Book of Prophecies,
where every word was so curiously weighed by the Penman thereof; or from being
so bold as on purpose to alter any thing therein, by adding or taking away: *
But I conceive also, there is besides this a (...) sense, and that it is a
prohibition from bringing in their carnal Inventions to add, inconsistently
with the pure Apostolic Doctrines and Institutes of this City: Whosoever would
do any such thing, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this
Book, whether they concern this Life, or that which is to come, the sulphurous
lake of fire, which is the second Death.

19. And if any man will take from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, and
be faint-hearted, or of little or no Faith, and contend there never will be
such an Excellent State of the Church upon Earth, God shall take away his part
out of the Book of Life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things that are
written in this Book. He shall never be able to enter into the blessed New
Jerusalem state, by reason of his unbelief.

20. He that testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly: that is,
for the fulfilling of the Visions of the first six Seals, and what
contemporizeth with them, to assist his Church, and support them in their
Smyrnean Affliction, and to defeat the Enemy under the sixth Seal. To which
Saint John answers, Amen: Even so, Come Lord Jesus. This was seasonable for
Saint John to say in his time, in reference to Christ's Coming to subvert the
Power of the old Dragon, and abolish Paganical Idolatry and Tyranny: As it was
also in the Pergamenian and Thyatirian Intervals for the oppressed and
afflicted Church to say in respect of his coming to judge the Great Whore, the
Pagano-christian Hierarchy, who had been drunk with the blood of the Saints,
and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: And in the Sardian, that he would
consummate the Judgment begun to be executed on the false Prophet, who is
perfectly to be consumed under the seventh Vial. And lastly, in the Laodicean
Interval, it will be again very seasonable, by reason of the inclining of
things again to worse, to pray, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, to that general
judgment, when Death shall be swallowed up into Victory, and all the Saints
shall be translated into the incorruptible state of heavenly Bliss and Glory.
And this whole Book of Prophecies, being as it were one entire Epistle Monitory
to the Church of God throughout all Ages of the world; as there is mention
Verse. 16. of witnessing these things to the Churches (in Asia no doubt) that
is, over the face of the whole Earth, and successively through all Ages or
Intervals, (from Saint John's time to the end of the world) Smyrnean,
Pergamenian, Thyatirian, Sardian, Philadelphian and Laodicean; This whole Book,
I say, being such a general Monitory Epistle, it is but suitable that he
conclude with that usual form of valediction in the Epistles of the Apostles.

21. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

NOTES. CHAPTER XXII. Verse. 16.
Which may denote his Divinity and Humanity, etc. This any one that firmly
believes the Divinity of Christ, and that he is the Eternal Logos, united with
the Humane Nature, will easily admit to be suggested here; though Grotius is
content to understand no more by Radix Davidis than Surculus Davidis, and I
must confess, that according to the use of the Hebrew word, Radix is sometimes
the same with Surculus: But being that Root ordinarily signifies that from
which another grows, not that which grows from another, and that this sense
here is both true, and more ample and sublime, and therefore more suitable to
the Genius of the Apocalypse, I thought it was more probable to be meant here;
as also in the fifth Chapter. And generally the Ancients go that way,
Ambrosius, Aretas, Andreas Caesareensis, and others. See Ribera on the place.

Verse. 18. But I conceive also, there is besides this a further sense; and the
truth is, that other sense does very hardly agree with the beginning of the
Verse, (...), For I testify: In so much that Ribera is fain to acknowledge,
that (...) here is only an expletive Particle, and signifies nothing at all.
And adds further, how several MSS. are without (...), and Grotius follows those
Copies. But if (...), and the force thereof be retained, and we read, For I
testify unto every man, it involves a reason, why every man should close with
this free Invitation made before, implying, that this excellent state of things
is really intended by Christ, a state so pure and so perfect, and that all
other things condemned in this Book are to be rejected. And therefore he that
would either admit or foist in any of those rejectaneous things, or
hypocritically diminish the Faith or Belief of so great perfection of the
Church, as there is set out by the description of the New Jerusalem, the
Commination is to him. And this threatened punishment is also an argument of
the truth and seriousness of Christ's proposal; which I would have them
seriously to consider, that make it their business to decry all hope of those
good Times, when Peace, and Truth, and Righteousness shall Reign upon Earth, to
lull themselves and others asleep in their sins. And farther to confirm this
sense of ours, Dr Hammond upon this and the following Verse; Whosoever, says
he, shall go about to infuse any other expectations into men than what are
agreeable to these Visions, God shall bring on him the Judgments that are
denounced against Gods greatest Enemies. And whosoever shall derogate any thing
from the Authority of this Prophecy, or occasion men's not receiving the
admonitions of Christ, (he might have added also, or their not believing his
promises) contained here in every part thereof, of which that of the State of
the New Jerusalem is one of the chief, God shall cast him off, and account him
incapable of all the blessings which are here promised to the faithful
Christians. Which Paraphrase of this Learned and Pious Doctor of our Church on
these two Verses, is not much unlike ours, which is no small Argument for the
naturalness of the Interpretation, in that, though we disagree in other things,
we both agree in this.

THE EPILOGUE.
I Have now, Of what Writers and in what way the Author has made use of in his
Exposition of the Apocalypse, with a Monition not rashly to attempt the
expounding of that Book, without consulting former Writers.
Reader, I hope made good the promise of my Title Page, and exhibited to thy
view and judgment, as well a plain and perspicuous as continued Exposition of
the Apocalypse from the beginning to the end. Which whole Exposition, though it
be entirely of one piece, yet that more be not attributed to my performance
than I deserve, the invention of every part thereof is not from one man, but
whatever I have drawn in from others, it is like well concocted food, made a
congruous and congenerous part of the whole body of my Exposition, I admitting
nothing but what I first carefully considered, and if need was rectified,
polished, illustrated, and amplified: And he that I am most of all beholden to,
is that incomparably Pious and Learned person Mr Joseph Mede, once one of the
Fellows of our College, in whose steps where he treads right, I thought I was
bound to insist, as also in any others so far as they are in a true path. For I
account it a juvenile piece of pride and wantonness in any one to innovate
where things seem right already, unless he bring that which is plainly truer.
For this affectation of bringing of something new in interpreting Scripture,
does but dissettle the minds of those that are to be informed, and makes the
Holy Writ to lose its scope and efficacy, and to seem more uncertain, and
obscure than indeed it is. And therefore Enthusiasts that attempt any
Expositions of this Book, without carefully consulting the most likely
Interpreters before them; it is no inspiration of the Spirit in them, but a
blind puff of pride and vanity of mind, a blast of self-conceitedness, that
drives them upon such rash and dangerous enterprises, out of a bold
presumption, that others have not attempted these things as much in the fear of
God, and with as good assistances of his Spirit, as they can pretend to. Such
men as these seek not the interest of the true Apostolic Church, but do
sacrifice to their own pride, and seek to be accounted somebody amongst men, or
to make a confusion of all.

The repeated Testimony of the Spirit of God, in the Apocalypse against the
Idolatry of the Church of Rome.
But for my own part I can call God and my own Conscience to witness (and I
think the circumstances of the times we are in may assure any one of my
integrity in this protestation) that nothing but the mere service of the truly
Catholic and Apostolic Church, has invited me to publish this my Exposition
of the Apocalypse; as being full persuaded of the truth, and manifold
usefulness thereof, which I have showed in my Preface to the Reader, and that
especially amongst the rest, that it does so plainly demonstrate both the
Protestants freeness from the guilt of Schism as to the Church of Rome, and the
Church of Rome's guiltiness of that heinous and intolerable crime of Idolatry,
which is a further confirmation of the Protestants freeness from the guilt of
Schism. I confess that our Writers by sound and irrefutable Reason, have proved
the Church of Rome guilty of this crime: But by reason of the hardness of the
hearts, or foreheads of our Adversaries, God himself has set his hand again and
again in the Apocalypse, to this Accusation, or rather as a truly infallible
Moderator, has decided the Controversy on the Protestants side expressly, and
repeatedly against the Church of Rome.

I will hint some few examples, as in the Prophecy of the Seven Churches, (my
Exposition whereof is so confirmed in the tenth Chapter of it, to omit other
arguments, that I think it is impossible for any man that is not prodigiously
laden with prejudice not to be convinced) there, in the Epistle to the Church
in Pergamus, and again in the Epistle to the Church in Thyatira, both which
successions of the Church succeed the Smyrnean, which are those ages of the
Church in which the Church suffered bitter Persecutions from the Pagans, does
the Spirit of God complain of their eating Idolothyta, which is turning the
Lords Supper, which is a Feast upon a Sacrifice, into an Idolatrous Solemnity,
like the eating of things Sacrificed unto Idols: In which the Idolatry of their
Mass is plainly perstringed. And this is evidently in the successions of the
Church, after she had got the victory over crude Paganism. Again in the
Sealed-Book-Prophecie where such an Exposition we have given out of Mr Mede of
the six first Seals, as against which neither Papist nor Protestant can justly
except, and whence the six Trumpets must needs shoot into the Pergamenian, and
Thyatiran Successions of the Church; it is manifest that Saracens and Turks
under the fifth and sixth Trumpets, invade the Empire as a Scourge for their
Idolatry, as plainly appears from Chapter 9. v. 20. where the rest of the men that
were not killed by these Plagues are said not to repent them of their
worshipping (...), Demons, and Idols of Silver, and Idols of Gold, etc. Where
Demons according to the Greek idiom, signify either Angels, or the Souls of
men, any Spirits out of Terrestrial bodies, the Souls of Saints and Spirits of
Angels. And lastly in the Opened-Book-Prophecy, Chap. II. what is the treading
under-foot the outward Court by the Gentiles for forty two months, but the
overrunning the Empire again with Idolatry and Persecution (of which
Gentilism, or Paganism consists) for so many months, or Semitimes of months of
years? And what the 7000. names of men, verse. 13. but Idolatrous Titles, or men
of those Titles that belong to the seventh head of the Beast which is an
Idolatrous head? And Chap. 13. verse. 1. the Beast there rising out of the Sea
with ten Crowned Horns, plainly shows it is the Empire after its division into
so many Kingdoms. Which therefore is under the seventh head. And all the seven
heads there are said to have names of Blasphemy upon them, that is of Idolatry.
Besides, this Beast is said to be the healed beast, and the image of the Dragon
that received the deadly wound in his fight with Michael and the Martyrs. Which
plainly shows that the Empire after Christanity was settled in it, became again
an Idolatrous persecuting Beast, as the old Pagan Empire was. And lastly, (not
to number up all we might) Chap. 17. the Whore of Babylon with her cup of
Fornication, that is of Idolatry, in her hand, as Grotius himself cannot but
interpret it, and sitting upon a Beast full of Names of Blasphemy, that is of
Idolatry, again, even according to Grotius, what can this be but the City of
Rome, and the Roman Empire become Idolatrous? But they put it off by saying, it
is the Pagan Empire, and Rome Pagan; which is a thing impossible. For the Woman
here sitting upon the Beast, that was, is not, and yet is, which was never true
of the Roman Empire, till after it had been Christian, it cannot be understood
of the Roman Empire Pagan. And that conceit of Domitian being this Beast, it is
such a childish trifle or slight whiffle, that it is a wonder to me that any
one that had any freeness of judgment, or soundness of reason, should ever
fancy such a thing: but having spoken of this in my Preface I will say no more
of it here. From these few places to omit several others, it is abundantly
evident that that truly infallible Moderator, even the Spirit of God himself,
has decided the controversy concerning the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, and
has declared them guilty of that crime, and the Protestants guiltless of any
crime of Schism, in leaving the Communion of that Church. Which is a thing
seriously to be considered by all the Potentates of Christendom, that they may
not listen to the voice of the blood-thirsty Iezabel, when she shall solicit
the Kings of the Earth, to the persecution of the Servants of God and Christ,
because they cannot bow down to stocks and stones with her, nor submit to any
other of her points of Idolatry.

Now for any invidious cavils against this firm Protestant Exposition of the
Apocalypse, The Authors Answer to certain invidious Cavils against the
Protestant Exposition of the seven Heads of the Beast.
I hope, Reader, thou will set as little by them as I do my self. For it may be
it will be thought by some, an high piece of Rudeness and Incivility, in that
this Protestant Exposition of the seven heads of the Beast, makes all the
Emperors since the Apostasy of the Church into Idolatry, to be part of the
seventh head, which is one of the heads of Blasphemy, though otherwise never so
noble and virtuous. And the like cavils may be raised touching the Popes of
Rome, though they be never so Learned and Pious, that they will make part of
the two Horned Beast, that has the Horns of a Lamb, but the voice of a Dragon.
And I must confess the same may be alleged against making those six forms of
Pagan Government, Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemviri, Triumviri, and
Emperors, six heads of Blasphemy. When amongst the Emperors it is well known,
what an excellent example of virtue Marcus Antoninus was, and that Tully, a
Roman Consul, for Wit, Virtue, and Eloquence, was the glory of the Roman
Empire. But I can briefly answer for my self, that I never, since I understood
Tully, and Marcus Antoninus to be part of those two heads of Blasphemy, had in
the least the more diminishing thoughts of their Virtues and Perfections I had
observed in them before. For I knew before, they were Pagan Idolaters, and that
it was the privilege of their nature, to bear up so stoutly against the
disadvantages of their Religion they were born under: And there is the same
reason of excellent Emperors and other Princes of the Pontifician Religion. The
profession of an Idolatrous Religion ought not to derogate from their natural,
or acquired perfections; only all good men will heartily and solicitously wish
that their souls were as safe as their personal reputation.

And I charitably judge of them of the Roman Church, who do not stick to call
all Protestant Kings and Princes, be they never so great or never so good,
Heretics; (and by the punishment they allot to those they call so, any one may
judge what wretches and vile persons they deem them,) that they intend
notwithstanding no derogation thereby to their personal worth or virtue. But
here is the great difference, that we call them nothing but what the Scripture
calls them; but they nickname others against all reason and Scripture, adding
to false and bitter words, unjust and barbarous persecutions: And what we have
said concerning Emperors and Kings, the same is to be said of the Popes of
Rome. No Popes personal perfections and virtues are touched, but the Idolatrous
and Antichristian constitution and frame of things, such as every Pope is to
succeed into, and which make a Pope a Pope.

But as for my interpreting the two Horns of the Beast of the Episcopal Mitre,
His Answer touching his interpreting the two Horns of the Beast of the
Episcopal Mitre, and his sharpness of style in his Exposition.
that no Protestant Bishop take exceptions, the interpretation is not mine, but
Josephus Acosta's, as Cornelius a Lapide cites him. De Tempor. Noviss. Lib. 2.
c. 17. Duo cornua, Episcopalis puta Mitrae sive Infulae (haec enim est
bicornis) insigne sunt. Videtur ergo quod hic Pseudopropheta erit Episcopus
quispiam Apostata, and simulator religionis, Ecclesiastici honoris proditor,
qui draconis venenum suis sermonibus populo propinabit. So near to the mark is
the Interpretation of this Romanist. But in the mean time, the making the two
Horns of the Mitre, the two Horns of the Lamb; ( Lamb always signifying in the
Apocalypse, either Christ himself, or his true Church) it is a manifest
commendation of the order of Episcopacy, rather than any reproach thereto, as
Cornelius a Lapide himself has observed upon the place.

And as for the sharpness of style in my Exposition against the Idolatry and
blood-thirstiness of the Roman Hierarchy; I am satisfied in my self, that I
have not the least ill will to the persons of any Romanists, though I utterly
abhor their Religion; and I had not been a faithful Interpreter of the
Apocalypse, which in a great part of it is a very keen, but just Satyr against
the gross wickednesses of the Roman Church, if my Exposition had not had also a
due keenness and sharpness with it to awaken them, if it were possible, out of
their errors, into the acknowledgment of the truth. And that a main body of
them will continue obdurate, even to the effusion of the last Vial; the
clearness of the Vision has driven me to acknowledge such a comminatory
prediction too likely to come to pass, unless a timely and sincere Repentance
open a way to them for the embracing of the truth.

These few things I thought not amiss to take notice of, Christian Reader, that
thou may take no offense at any thing, nor be entangled. Now according to my
promise at the end of my Preface, I will present to thy view my general Table
of Synchronisms, wherewith thou may refresh thy memory, as to the right order
of the Visions whose Interpretation thou have perused.

The Authors Table of Synchronisms proposed and explained.
In the Table therefore presented to thy sight, let there be noted that
principal Line of the whole Apocalyptick Scheme AD. divided into three parts
AB. BC. CD. and let the whole Semicircle AZD. contain the Prophecy of the
Sealed Book, but the Semicircle AND. the Prophecy of the Opened Book. But of
those two particular Semicircles ALB. and BRD. the former contains the first
six Seals, the latter the seventh, which comprehends the seven Trumpets. The
six first of which Trumpets the Semicircle BMC. includes, and the Semicircle
CND. the seventh, distributed into seven Thunders, orderly distinguished by
numbers I. II. III. IV, etc. as is done in the Seals and Trumpets. And to this
Line, or row of Seals, Trumpets, and Thunders all the rest of the Visions, not
only of the Opened Book, but of the Seven Churches may some way be annected and
applied by Synchronismes either proper and perfect, or by imperfect and
partial, as we shall advertise as we go through them.

We shall begin with the Antimedial Visions, where AEB. is the Woman in
travail, clothed with the Sun, and Crowned with twelve Stars, Rev. Chap. 12.
verse. 1. AFB. the Court of the Temple and Altar Commensurate, or Symmetral,
Chap. 11. verse. 1. AGB. the fight of Michael with the Dragon, about the Woman
in travail, Chap. 12. verse. 4, 7, 8. AIR. the Church of Ephesus, or the
Ephesine Interval contemporizing in part with the first Seal, Chap. 2. v. 1.
RHK. the Smyrnean Interval, which contemporizes with the latter part of the
first Seal, and with the second, third, fourth and fifth Seal, and with the
forepart of the sixth, Chap. 2. verse. 8.

The Medial Visions now follow, where BC. is the company of the 144000.
Servants of God, sealed with the Seal of the living God in their foreheads,
Chap. 7. verse. 3. BDC. the outward Court incommensurate, or asymmetral, trodden
down of the Gentiles for forty two months, Chap. 11. BEC. the two witnesses
clad in Sackcloth, and mournfully prophesying for 1260. days, Chap. 11. B e C.
the same witnesses slain, and lying in the street of the great City for three
days and an half. BFC. the Woman in the Wilderness there to be nourished for
1260. days, or for a time and times and half a time, Chap. 12. verse. 6, and 14.
BGC. the seven-headed Beasts with ten Horns, whose deadly wound is healed,
Chap. 13. verse. 3. BHC. the two-horned Beast, or false Prophet, the restorer or
healer of the Beast, Chap. 13. verse. 11. BIC. the Virgin Company of the 144000.
Sealed of the Lamb, Chap. 14. verse. 1. BKC. that great City, the Whore of
Babylon sitting upon the seven-headed Beast, with ten Horns, which was, and is
not, and yet is, Chap. 17. verse. 3.8. KPR. the Pergamenian Interval,
contemporizing with the latter part of the sixth Seal, and with the five first
Trumpets. RQC. the Thyatirian Interval, Synchronizing with some small part of
the fifth and with the whole sixth Trumpet. As for LNC and MC. in these
Visions, and CEH. and gH. in the following, they respecting the voices of the
three Angels, and Anapleroses of them, I shall take no notice of them here; nor
is their placing, nor Anaplerosis so sound as what I have intimated in this my
present Exposition of the Apocalypse, where these three Angels, Chap. 14. the
first is assigned to the times of the Turks taking Constantinople, the second
to the appearing of the Reformation, and the third to about the times of the
fourth Vial, which being a more simple way, to me seems more assured. But we
proceed to the Postmedial Visions.

Where CAH. HYP. PZQ. QqR. RrS. SpT. and ToD. are the seven Antisynchronals of
the seven Thunders. CAH. the Interval of the seven Vials, Chap. 16. CFH. the
compendium of the Vials, Chap. 11. verse. 16. to the end of the Chapter. CBO.
the Interval of the Sardian Church, contemporizing with the Interval of the six
first Vials, Chap. 3. verse. 1. GH. comprehends three Combinations of Synchronal
Visions, the Vision of the Harvest and the Winepress, Chap. 14. verse. 15, 18.
The Vision of the sixth and seventh Vial, Chap. 16. verse. 12. and the Vision of
the preparation of the Bride, and of the Battle of the Rider of the white
horse, Chap. 19. verse. 7, 11.

HYP. is the New Jerusalem descending from Heaven. VISIONVM APOCALYPTICARVM
TABVLA GENERALIS.
HiP. the laying hold of Satan. PZQ. the thousand years Reign of Christ upon
Earth. PLQ. the imprisoning of Satan in the bottomless Pit, and Sealing of him
up there, contemporizing with the Reign of Christ upon Earth, Rev. Chap. 20.
HMQ. the Palm-bearing Company, Chap. 7. verse. 9. OWQ. the Interval of the
Philadelphian Church, Chap. 3. verse. 7. beginning with the seventh Vial, and
ending at the Commencement of the fourth Antisynchronal. QqR. which is the
loosing of Satan, Chap. 20. verse. 3. RrS. the besieging of the Holy City by Gog
and Magog, Chap. 20. verse. 7. SpT. the coming of Christ to Judgment, Chap. 20.
verse. 11. PVT. a continuance of the New Jerusalem, or Holy City, contemporizing
with the third, fourth, fifth and sixth Antisynchronals. PNT. the wicked Rabble
(contemporizing with the same Antisynchronals) excluded out of the Holy City,
Chap. 22. verse. 15. QXT. the Interval of the Church of Laodicea, Chap. 3. verse.
14. ToD. the Conflagration of the Earth, Chap. 20. verse. 14. TeD. the
Consummate happiness of the Saints.

This is the description of all my Synchronisms belonging to the Apocalyptick
Visions, The main difference betwixt Mr Mede 's Table of Synchronisms and the
Authors.
which differ from the Synchronisms of Mr Mede only in this, that I place all
the Vials after the middle Synchronals under the first Thunder of the seventh
Trumpet, he six of them before the seventh Trumpet, and that he does not
distinguish the seventh Trumpet into seven Thunders in his Table as I have
done, and therefore makes the binding of Satan and Millennial Reign of Christ,
etc. to commence immediately (and consequently the Reign of the Beast quite to
expire) at the beginning of that Trumpet; when as in truth the Entireness of
his Kingdom only then expires. But being that else the main of the Synchronisms
of Mr Mede so far as he has gone (for he never meddled with the seven Churches,
nor was aware that the three days and an half the Witnesses lie slain, are the
same with 1260 days of their Prophesying) agree with this description I have
proposed; I will vindicate the truth of his Synchronisms so far as they agree
with the said description, against the cavils of a late writer R. H. of
Salisbury: Because some men fancy though his Interpretations of the
Apocalypse are so absurd, that as he boasts himself the sole Inventor of them,
so he is like to prove the sole Assertor to them; yet that he has said
something material against Mr Mede's Synchronisms, which how little it is we
shall now see, but with all possible briefness, alleging only the main stress
of Mr Medes Arguments, and taking notice only of the main stress of R. H. his
Answers unto them.

THE FIRST PART.
Synchronism I. The Authors Defense of Mr Mede' s Synchronisms against R.H. so
far as they agree with his own.

The Woman remaining in the Wilderness.

The seven-headed Beast restored.

The outward Court trodden underfoot by the Gentiles.

The two Witnesses in the mean time Prophesying in Sackcloth.


THat the two latter of these do Contemporize or Synchronize, he grants; but
denies, that the two first begin at the same time, the Woman in the Wilderness,
and the seven-headed Beast restored. For he says, 1. The Woman got into the
Wilderness before the Dragon cast the flood of water after her, to drive her
out from thence, Chap. 12. verse. 14, 15. And then, 2. That the Earth opens her
mouth and swallows up the flood of water, Verse. 16. And, 3. That the Dragon
seeing that, leaves the Woman in the Wilderness, and goes and makes war with
the remnant of her Seed which were not fled into the Wilderness, Verse. 17. This
he thinks is so true a sense and order of the Prophecy, that he wonders that
any man should set his wit against it: And I wonder on the contrary, that any
man should have so little wit, or so little to do as to bring such weak stuff
to obscure the clear reasoning of Mr Mede in this Synchronism. For if what is
alleged have any strength, it is this, That the Dragon and his activity
against the Church in his own person, was so long after the time of the Woman's
getting into the Wilderness, that the time of the restored Beast and the Woman's
entering into the Wilderness cannot commence together.

But the premises are said only, not proved at all: Nay the Scriptures alleged
for his conceit are plainly against him: For, Verse. 14. the sense of that verse
plainly is, That two wings of an Eagle were given unto her to fly into the
Wilderness, that she might there be nourished for a time and times and half a
time, etc. And the Copy that Grotius follows, has it (...), that she may be
nourished there. And though we retain the ordinary reading (...), yet the sense
of (...), it being a Prophecy, will be future: For it is nonsense to say Wings
were given her to fly into a place into which she had gotten already. And
therefore, Verse. 15. the Serpent casts out the flood of waters, whilst she was
in her flight, that she might be drowned before she got into the Wilderness,
where she was to be entertained and nourished: And Verse. 16. the Earth opened
her mouth and drunk up the flood, that she might pass safe into the Wilderness;
and consequently all this is before she gets into the Wilderness; and this
casting out the flood by the Serpent, is his personal persecution of her,
mentioned Verse. 13. But that the Dragon, Verse. 17. went to wage War with a
party of the Woman's Seed, that had not gone into the Wilderness, is a mere
figment of R. H. There is no such thing in the Text, and it is contrary to the
plain sense thereof: For no man can doubt, but that Woman is the whole
Catholic Church; whom to fancy not to have fled whole into the Wilderness,
is as absurd, as to fancy a Woman to fly into the Wilderness, but to leave
some limbs of her behind her; and the Seed of the Woman is part of the Woman
her self. The Woman, is Ecclesia tota, semen ejus singuli qui ad ecclesiam
pertinent, as Grotius notes upon the place. And therefore if the Woman be in
the Wilderness, her Seed must be in the Wilderness; and this Seed distinguished
from her Seed before she came into the Wilderness. Whence the sense is clear,
That as the Dragon persecuted the Woman's Seed before she got into the
Wilderness, so being he could not hinder her going into the Wilderness, by his
spuing out of that flood; he maliciously meditated some mischief and hostility
against her seed in the Wilderness: which he presently did, by raising the
Healed Beast against them in the Chapter immediately following. Thus solidly
has Mr Mede evinced, that the time of the healed Beast and of the Woman's
remaining in the Wilderness, do commence together; and it plainly appears, that
it is even nothing that R. H. has alleged against it.

Mr Mede's other proof of this Synchronism, namely from the ending of the times
of the Beast with the sixth Trumpet, Revel. 11.14, 15, 17. to this R. H. speaks
more materially than to the former. But for brevity sake, I will only note
this, That there is nothing of moment alleged that reaches any further, than
to prove that the Reign of the Beast does not end with the sixth Trumpet. Which
is a thing I do easily grant, but yet in the mean time I contend that the
fulfilling of his forty two months is at the exitus of the sixth Trumpet,
which respects the duration of his Kingdom in the Entireness thereof. Which
Entireness was broken at the Rising of the Witnesses, and therefore the
Entireness of his Kingdom is Synchronal to the two Witnesses Prophesying in
Sackcloth, they being both Isochronal, or of equal time, as all those four
Synchronals are expressly noted to be in the very Text* And hence by these two
Arguments of Mr Mede's demonstrated to be Synchronal, namely the Woman's abode
in the Wilderness, and the restored Beasts Reign for forty two months beginning
together, and being Isochronal are Synchronal: And the restored Beasts Reign
for forty two months, ending with the Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth, and
being Isochronal are also Synchronal. Therefore the Woman's being in the
Wilderness, and the Prophesying of the Witnesses in Sackcloth are Synchronal.
And R. H. himself cannot deny, but the treading under foot the outward Court,
and the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth are Synchronal: whence it is
manifest that they all four Synchronize one with another. His evasion by
asserting the Beast, Chap. 11. verse. 7. and the Beast, Chap. 13. verse. 1. not
to be the same, is very slight. For (...), is as much as (...), and if the
Translators had been pleased to translate it accordingly, rising out of the
Sea, there had been no doubt of his sameness, there being nothing repugnant in
him to the description of the other, and it is the genius of the Apocalypse to
give an obscurer hint at first, of what it speaks more fully and clearly
afterward.

Synchronism II.
The two-horned Beast or false Prophet.

The ten-horned healed Beast or image of the Beast.


Here R. H. acknowledges that the healed Beast Synchronizes with the two-horned
Beast, from the time of his healing, but that the healed Beast was first
raised, then wounded, and after healed. But that he was raised, and exhibited
to St John with a head that had been mortally wounded, but now healed when he
saw him, the Text plainly enough imports. For if the sense were that he saw him
while he was wounding, I mean his head, it would not be (...), (for (...) as
you may see, Chap. 5. verse. 6. has a preterpluperfect signification) but (...),
or (...), which would imply he saw it while it was a doing, and then there
would not follow (...), but (...), this had been the natural expression of the
thing, and therefore the natural sense of the words as they now run, is that
above intimated, which implies, That John saw one of his heads as if it had
been wounded but healed up again. For in that he is called the first Beast,
that is no more than the Beast first spoken of, and bears no weight with it,
and therefore we will pass to the third Synchronism, after we have briefly
intimated that the false Prophet and the two-horned Beast being the same by
Chap. 19.20. and the two-horned Beast, the Healer of the ten-horned Beast,
Chap. 13. verse. 14. and perishing together, Chap. 19.21. that they must needs
Synchronize.

Synchronism III.
The great Whore or Mystical Babylon.

The healded Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns.


This Synchronism, says R. H. if it were meant of the Beast Chap. 17. it were
true, but it being meant of the Beast Chap. 13. it is false; for the Beast
outlives the Whore, and wars against him that sat on the white Horse, after
the Whore is destroyed, Rev. Chap. 19.19, 20. And the Synchronism does suppose
these Beasts to be all one. To that last part of which his Answer I reply, That
what is supposed is plain enough to any one that will not nodum in scirpo
quaerere. But that the Whore, and the two-horned Beast are one; and that the
restored Beast, and the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is, are the same
Beast, I have in my Synopsis Prophetica so clearly demonstrated, that
Skepticism it self cannot doubt thereof. And therefore this Synchronism, the
Beasts, Chap. 13. and 17. being the same Beast, by R. H. his own confession,
must be true. And I add further, That it is a mistake in R. H. in that he says
the Beast out-lives the Whore: For the Whore and the two-horned Beast being
one, and the two-horned Beast, and false Prophet, one, which R. H. himself
cannot deny, the Whore and false Prophet are one, of whom mention is made with
the Beast, Chap. 19.19, 20. And so the Beast does not outlive the Whore.

Synchronism IV.
The hundred forty four thousand Sealed Virgins.

The Whore of Babylon and the Beast.


That these are Synchronal, Mr Mede's proof is from the (...), or Relative
opposition one to another; Virgins opposing the perpetual debauching attempts
of that Whore of Babylon, from the beginning to the end, and the Sealed
Soldiers of the Lamb opposing the marked Soldiers of the Beast that made war
with the Saints from the beginning to the end, in some measure or other. The
nature of the thing it self is a demonstration of the Synchronism. And now
let us hear what R. H. says to it. It is true, says he, if God had no more
Servants but these only, then would they be Antistoechal to the Beast
throughout from his first breathing to his last gasp, but there are the remnant
of the Woman's seed, etc. Which figment of his, how vain it is I have shown
above, and that they are no other than the Seed of the Woman in the Wilderness,
whom this healed Beast persecutes as being the faithful Soldiers of the Lamb:
The rest is so flat and impertinent that it is not worth the while to take
notice of it. Only I must observe how he contradicts himself, while he says,
we want a Prophecy to tell us when the Whore began: For himself acknowledges
the third Synchronism to be true, if it be understood of the Beast, Chap. 17.
Wherefore that Prophecy tells us, the Whore began with that Beast; which Beast
began not till he had ceased to be a Beast, and grew a Beast again.

Synchronism V.
The fifth Synchronism is nothing but a Consectary from the four Synchronisms
hitherto, inferring, that all Synchronize one with another, With the Woman in
the Wilderness, The treading under-foot the Holy City, The Witnesses in the
mean time mourning in Sackcloth, does the restored ten-horned Beast
Synchronize, Synch. I. With this ten-horned Beast the two-horned Beast, Synch.
II. With both these the Whore, Synch. III. With the Whore and the Beast, the
Sealed Virgin Company, Synch. IV. Whence they all Synchronize one with another.
To which R. H. has nothing to say but what he has said already, That none of
these are Synchronal, but the treading under-foot the Holy City, and the
Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth; which he avouches as a Consectary from his
allegations against the rest of the Synchronisms: But how weak they have been,
I hope, the Reader cannot but understand. So that all the Medial Synchronisms
of Mr Mede are safe, rightly understood; namely of the Entire state of the
ten-horned Beast, two-horned Beast, and the Whore. The Entireness of whose
Reign is only broken, not quite destroyed at the ending of the second Woe, or
sixth Trumpet.

Synchronism VI.
The Inner Court measured with a reed by St John.

The lying in wait and battle of the seven-headed Dragon with Michael about the
childbirth of the Woman in travail.


Mr Mede's demonstration of their Synchronizing is short and pithy. For they
are, says he, the immediate Antecedents of Synchronals. The fight of the
Dragon, and the Woman's travailing with child to be delivered, and her
difficulties in those circumstances, the immediate Antecedents of her
habitation in the Wilderness, and of the ten-horned Beast. And the Inner Court
the immediate Antecedent of the Outer. Here R. H. first in general denies the
first Synchronism, which I have maintained against him to be true, nor is it
needful to repeat what I have already said. Secondly, in particular he says,
though the Woman's travail, and the fight of the Dragon with Michael do
contemporate, and the flight of the Woman into the Wilderness immediately
succeed them: yet the restored Beast does not immediately succeed the overthrow
of the Dragon by Michael. For before he raises the Beast out of the Sea, he
persecutes the Woman. The Woman flies into the Wilderness. He sends a flood
after her to carry her away out of the Wilderness. The earth opens her mouth
and drinks up the flood, and when all this is done, he leaves the Wilderness,
etc. To which I have answered already upon the first Synchronism that all this
noise is nothing but this, That the Dragon persecuted the Woman in her flight
into the Wilderness, by sending a flood to carry her away before she got
thither, but that Stratagem not succeeding, he raised the restored Beast to
disturb her by that time she got thither. So that the Dragon is acting in his
own person till that time, and continues the fight as it were though upon the
ground. So immediate therefore is the raising of the restored Beast to war
against her Seed in the Wilderness, that nothing but the spuing out the water
to hinder her flight thither was done of the Dragons side, before his raising
of the said Beast. Which therefore de dispatched by that time she had got into
the Wilderness. This the Text plainly implies, even according to R. H. his
paraphrase, who with the vulgar Latin and generality of Interpreters, and with
Mr Mede himself reads Verse. 17. thus, And the Dragon was wroth with the Woman,
(namely, when he saw his spuing out that flood of water after her in her flight
toward the Wilderness did not succeed) and went to make war with the remnant
of her Seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of
Jesus Christ, and he stood upon the sand of the Sea. And then the next Chapter
begins, And I saw a Beast rise up, as it were conjured up by the Dragon that
stood upon the sand of the Sea, in a readiness to surrender his power or
forces, and his seat and great authority to him, Verse. 2. Whence it is plain
that the restored Beast immediately succeeds the Woman's flight into the
Wilderness, and therefore begins with her arrival thither. No action of the
Dragon besides that spue of his, which was in the flight of the Woman, coming
betwixt the beginning of her flight, and his raising the restored Beast. Which
therefore is naturally conceived to be dispatched by that time the Woman got
into the Wilderness.

Now as to the Inner Court or the measuring thereof, he grants it precedes the
conculcation of the outer Court, and that the forty two months of the Gentiles
begin when the measuring of the Inner Court is ended, but he denies that the
Inner Court Synchronizes with the Woman's travail, and the fight of Michael with
the Dragon. And why? because the conculcation of the Outer Court, and the Abode
of the Woman in the Wilderness do not Synchronize. This is all the reason,
which by what I have said upon the first Synchronism is no reason. For I have
made it good there that they do Synchronize: And it is needless here to repeat
the same over again.

He has also a slight fling at Mr Mede's mention of a repeated Prophecy, and
says that, oportet te iterum prophetare, Chap. 10.11. does not signify that he
must begin a new Prophecy ab ovo, but go on to Prophecy of other things, and
times. He says it, but does not prove it: But we shall prove the contrary in
its due place. In the mean time we proceed to the seventh Synchronism.

Synchronism VII.
The seven Vials.

The Beast and Babylon inclining to ruin.


Hitherto we have showed the Synchronisms of Mr Mede in the sense intimated
upon the fifth Synchronism to be as firm as Adamant, against all the little
cavils of R. H. The seventh (which is the only Synchronism of all seven, truly
obnoxious to exception, understood in Mr Mede's way, who in his Table places
six of the Vials under the sixth Trumpet) yet such is the noble good nature of
R. H. of Salisbury, that the seventh alone he allows of as a true Synchronism,
and hugs as it were with both arms. But that all the seven Vials are within the
seventh Trumpet I have plainly demonstrated, Synops. Prophet. lib. 2. c. 8. and
in Vision. Apoc. Synchron. c. 5. sect. 2, 3, 4. And this is the main difference
betwixt Mr Mede's Table of Synchronisms and mine. But in the rest of the Medial
and Antimedial Synchronals hitherto specifyed we agree. We come now to the
second part of his Synchronisms.

THE SECOND PART.
Synchronism I.
The seventh Seal as far as the first six Trumpets reach.

The ten-horned and two-horned Beast and the rest of their fellow Synchronals.


THat these contemporize Mr Mede briefly proves thus. The Beast and Virgin
Company sealed contemporize by Synch. 4. Part. 1. This company sealed quatenus
sealed commences with the seventh Seal, Rev. Chap. 7. namely it begins in that
small Interim betwixt the end of the sixth, and beginning of the seventh Seal.
For the nature of the Vision of sealing persons can imply no considerable time
to break any square, as touching the commencing of these Synchronals,
especially it being performed by the Ministry of Angels. Therefore says Mr
Mede, the ten-horned Beast and the rest of his fellow Synchronals begin with
the seventh Seal.

But in the second place, The end of the Beast, says he, contemporizeth with
the end of the sixth Trumpet, the Reign of the Beast being Synchronal to the
time of the mourning of the Witnesses, which ends at the exitus of the sixth
Trumpet, Chap. 11. verse. 14. And therefore the Reign of the Beast ( viz. as to
the Entireness of his Kingdom) ends with the sixth Trumpet. Which plainly
proves this Synchronism of the Beast with the seventh Seal, as far as the first
six Trumpets reach, which was the thing to be demonstrated.

R. H. in his answer to the first part of this demonstration, is plainly not so
much copious as loose and spungy, and not at all solid, offering eight
particulars, but so weak and impertinent, that I profess I am half ashamed to
recite them. The first of them supposes the events of the Visions to fall in
that order the Visions are rehearsed, which is to beg the question. The second,
That two opposites may be actually opposite the one to the other, though only
one of them be in being. The third, That the sealed Regiments of the Lamb, and
the marked slaves of the Beast, are only opposite in respect of their Religion,
and persecution for Religion, whenas they are opposite as the raised forces of
two hostile parties, that swear them and retain them in pay and readiness,
occasionally to assault one the other, till a conquest on one side or the other
be obtained. The fourth, That Revel. 15.2. which mentions the victory over the
Beast, implies the sealed Regiments fought not till the latter end of the Reign
of the Beast, which is a mavelous weak inference. For though they
occasionally fought against him from the beginning, yet they might not obtain
the expected victory before the last, or seventh semitime of his Reign. And
other such stuff there is which he brings, but I have answered it upon Synch.
1. Part 1. The fifth supposes, That the Beast has no being before the seventh
Trumpet, which is built upon the first fond supposition. The sixth, That the
fourth Synchronism of Part 1. is false, which I have maintained to be true. The
seventh, That this present Synchronism is to be understood of the Servants of
God simply; whenas it is understood of them quatenus sealed. The eighth and
last, That the companies are sealed, not to call them out against the Beast,
but to preserve them from the storms of the ensuing Trumpets (which plainly
implies, by the by, that their continuance is all along the Trumpets, till they
get a new denomination.) But I say they are sealed in both regards, both to
secure them from the ensuing storms, and to confirm them in a constant courage
against the debauching decrees of the Beast. And their being twelve Regiments,
and the order of the Tribes put according to the merits of their zeal against
Idolatry, plainly implies as much. This little is more than enough to his
pretended Arguments against the first part of Mr Mede's demonstration.

What he says against the second part is more pertinent and express to the
purpose. And I must confess he does prove, That the latter end of the Beasts
Reign does not Synchronize with the exit of the sixth Trumpet; but it is
sufficient for my design, that the end of his Reign as to the Entireness of his
Kingdom does Synchronize with it; and that Mr Mede has very firmly
demonstrated. Lastly, two of those four things which he says Mr Mede supposes,
he does not merely suppose, but prove by virtue of his Synchronisms, viz. That
the sealed Virgins, and the two Witnesses be all one Company, and That the 1260
days of the Witnesses be the same with the forty two months of the Beast. But
I confess one of the other two, viz. That the whole reign of the Beast is
contained within forty two months, is false: but the other, that the Beast
Chap. 11. is the same with the Beast Chap. 13. if he supposes it, it is an easy
and modest supposition. For the Beast Chap. 11. being the beast rising out of
the Sea, as I noted above, as well as the Beast Chap. 13. and the times of them
both being not only equal but Synchronal, and they both persecuting the
witnesses; for Chap. 12. verse. 17. those there whom the Beast is raised to
persecute and who are said to have the testimony or witness of Jesus Christ,
what can they be but the witnesses, Chap. 11? To all which you may add that
even without the use of these Synchronisms Interpreters generally, as you may
see in a Lapide and Ribera, understood the same thing by these two Beasts,
namely Antichrist, which is a sign they took the two Beasts to be one and the
same Beast; so easy and modest a supposition is this, or rather more than a
supposition, a truth demonstrable from his Synchronisms and other observations
from the Texts of Scripture. And R. H. himself making this Beast Chap. 11. the
same with the Scarlet Beast Chap. 17. this last Beast being the same with the
ten-horned Beast Chap. 13. as I have demonstrated in my Joint exposition, the
ten-horned Beast Chap. 13. must be the same with the Beast Chap. 11.

Synchronism II.
The Inner Court.

The fight of the Dragon and Michael about the Woman's childbirth.

The six first Seals.


That the last Synchronizes with the two former Mr Mede proves briefly and
solidly thus. Because all three are the immediate Antecedents to Synchronizing
subsequent Visions. The six first Seals to the seventh. The Inner Court and the
fight of Michael with the Dragon to the Beast and to the 144000 of the sealed
companies of the Lamb. And that the seventh Seal or six first Trumpets, the
sealed Companies and the Beast do Synchronize, is proved Synch. 1. Part 2.

To which R. H. says, but does not so much as offer to prove, 1. That the Inner
Court and the fight of Michael with the Dragon do not Synchronize. 2. Nor that
the Inner Court and fight of Michael with the Dragon are immediate Antecedents
of the Beast and sealed Virgins. 3. Nor the first six Trumpets, the sealed
Virgins, and Beast Synchronize one with another. Which since he says only and
proves nothing, and I have proved upon the foregoing Synchronisms against him,
that it is quite otherwise, I need add nothing further on this Synchronism.

Synchronism III.
Of the Vials with the sixth Trumpet.
This expressed in the general Synch. 7. Part 1. he swallowed down glib. But
being here so particularly explained, he rejects. Where some of his arguments
against it are passable, but others at random. But because here I utterly
dissent from Mr Mede, and place all the Vials in my Table under the seventh
Trumpet within the first Thunder, I hold it needless to say any thing more on
this Synchronism.

Synchronism IV.
The thousand years of the Dragon or Satan's being bound.

The seventh Trumpet or space from the destruction of the Beast.


This Synchronism in a more large and improper sense may be more passable. But
the binding of Satan properly so called together with his imprisonment
commences not till the second and third Thunder, before which is the effusion
of the seven Vials, and therefore this binding and imprisoning of Satan cannot
Synchronize totally with the seventh Trumpet. To say nothing of his being let
loose in the Laodicean Interval, which Mr Mede not taking notice of, makes me
conceive that though he still calls them Synchronisms, he did intend no more by
the Postmedial Synchronisms with the seventh Trumpet, than that those things
which he would prove to Synchronize with it, were to be placed in the seventh
Trumpet and not before it. R. H. here says true, that the binding and
imprisoning of Satan is shorter than the seventh Trumpet both a part ante, and
a part post, though all his arguments for it are not sound. But it is not
worth the while to canvase them, we being both already agreed in the conclusion.

Synchronism V.
The thousand years of the Reign of Christ.

The seventh Trumpet or space from the destruction of the Beast.


The same is to be said of this as of the former Synchronism. If you understand
it of his partial or inchoative Reign when some of the Kingdoms fall off from
Antichrist, it may begin with the seventh Trumpet, but the millennial Reign
properly so called, begins not till the third Thunder; as you may see in my
Table R. H. his answer to this Synchronism is, That the seventh Trumpet and the
space of time that succeeds the destruction of the Beast, are not all one.
Which is true, but the argument he brings for it precarious, which to confute
is nothing to my scope, and therefore I let it alone.

Synchronism VI.
The New Jerusalem or the Lambs Bride.

The seventh Trumpet or the space from the destruction of the Beast.


The New Jerusalem descends from heaven, immediately upon the utter destruction
of the Beast by the seventh Vial. But that all the Vials are within the seventh
Trumpet I have already noted, and that therefore the New Jerusalem cannot
totally Synchronize with the seventh Trumpet, but with part only of it. But
that which R. H. here answers is this in general, That the New Jerusalem does
not begin at the destruction of the Beast nor Synchronize with the thousand
years, but succeed them. Which how false it is three or Mr Mede's four
arguments will give us to understand. For the first of them though it be too
hard for R. H. to answer, yet I will decline as less firm. For the marriage of
the Lamb Chap. 19. verse. 7. preceeds the seventh Vial, but the marriage Chap.
21. verse. 2, 9. does follow the said Vial. But R. H. his answer is, That the
first marriage is with the Spouse in grace, the second is with the Spouse in
glory; which is pointblank contrary to the text, Chap. 21. verse. 2. where the
New Jerusalem is said to descend from God out of Heaven, and his Tabernacle is
said to be with men, etc.

Mr Mede's second argument is from [ Chap. 20. verse. 9.] Gog and Magog their
besieging the beloved City, at the end of the thousand years, etc. Here R. H.
answers, That this beloved City is not the New Jerusalem, but that the beloved
City is the Church in the state of grace, the New Jerusalem the Church in the
state of glory, whereby he intimates, were it not so, they would be one and the
same City. But it is impossible the New Jerusalem should be any other than a
state of the Church upon Earth, if you consider verse. 2, 10, 24. besides many
other considerations which would be too long to mention here.

The third argument is from Chap. 16. verse. 17. compared with Chap. 21. v. 5,
6. where, IT IS DONE, implies that the same time is indigitated, that is, the
certain bringing in the New Jerusalem, that holy City, upon the destruction of
the City of Babylon, that City of Murderers and Idolaters. But here R. H. harps
still upon the same string, that by the first IT IS DONE, is meant the
finishing of the last Vial, and the full state of grace, and by the latter IT
IS DONE, that the state of glory was to begin, which Answer how extravagant it
is I have already noted.

The fourth and last argument is from Chap. 21. verse. 10. where the Vial-Angel,
as we may so call him, that had showed S. John the condemnation and destruction
of the Whore the City of Babylon, shows him the New Jerusalem as a City that
should succeed in its place. To which R. H. returns this answer, That the New
Jerusalem does not succeed the destruction of the Beast and Babylon
immediately, but that there is first the thousand years, then the insurrection
and destruction of Gog and Magog, after that the last judgment and the lake of
fire for the cursed, and then the New Jerusalem for the blessed. For which he
has no reason but that they are writ in this order, which is so gross and
fallible that no Interpreters rely upon it alone. And these many Synchronisms
of Mr Mede so firm and solid are a demonstration against this dull Hypothesis,
and yet this is all the force of his answer. But let me ask him a question or
two: If this New Jerusalem be a state in Heaven, why is it said to come down
from God out of Heaven, Chap. 21. verse. 2, 10? And why are the Kings of the
earth said to bring their glory and honor into it, verse. 24? And how comes it
to pass that the trees on this side and that side of the River of this New
Jerusalem, that the leaves of them are said to be for the healing of the
Nations Chap. 22. verse. 2? shall there be any sores or maladies in Heaven?

Synchronism VII.
The Palm-bearing multitudes out of all Nations.

The seventh Trumpet, or space from the destruction of the Beast.


This Synchronism Mr Mede confirms by these two arguments. First because these
Palm-bearers immediately succeed the Sealed company that Synchronize with the
Beast, Synch. 4. Part 1. Therefore the Beast expiring they must succeed the
Beasts expiration; partial at the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, total at
the beginning of the second Thunder. The second argument is, that these
Palm-bearers are the Citizens of the New Jerusalem, by comparing Chap. 7. verse.
16, 17. with Chap. 21. verse. 3, 4. And the New Jerusalem Synchronizeth with the
seventh Trumpet.

To the first R.H. answers, That these Palm-bearers immediately succeed the
time of the sealing of the Virgin company, not the race of the sealed. Which is
a wonderful weak cavil if we consider the end of their sealing, viz. That they
should be kept safe in all the dangers and difficulties they were to grapple
withal, and preserve their Virginity still against all the force,
solicitations, and persecutions they should find under the six first Trumpets;
For these sealed ones are the Soldiers of the Lamb. Now compare this true and
undeniable Hypothesis, with verse. 14. which speaking of these Palm-bearers
says, These are they who came out of great tribulation, etc. Could these then
immediately succeed the sealing, and come off victoriously before the conflict?
What a shameful cavil was this?

To the second he answers. That these Palm-bearers are not any men upon Earth,
but the Souls of Martyrs in Heaven while these Companies were sealed on Earth.
And that the New Jerusalem is after the general Resurrection, and that
therefore the Palm-bearers cannot immediately succeed the sealed company by
their being Citizens of that City. But as for this latter supposition how
absurd it is I have shown already. And as for the former, he says it without
any ground and against the natural tenor of the Text, which compares the great
and innumerable companies of the Apostolic followers of Christ after the
expiration of the six first Trumpets, with that smaller and more definite
number of the sealed under them. Besides R. H. is to consider that the
Apocalypse is a Prophecy of things here upon earth, not a description of what
is in Heaven; and also how harsh a thing it is to make such a (...), and thus
abruptly to skip from Earth to Heaven in a moment. And how ill these things
cohere a man may observe from his Paraphrase Chap. 7. verse. 9. But lest any,
says he, should be discouraged from suffering for the cause of Christ, because
they be not sealed, and secured from suffering, etc. Which in brief is, Lest
any should be discouraged from suffering, by their not being secured from
suffering. Which implies that the encouragement they want to suffer is their
being secured from suffering, and consequently that they are to suffer and not
to suffer at once, which is very bad sense, nay I may say a gross
contradiction. Such an unfortunate Paraphrast does R. H. prove while he thus
profanely sets himself to abuse the holy Oracles of God.

And thus I have showed throughout how slight R. H. his allegations are against
Mr Mede's Synchronisms, those against the Antimedial and Medial Synchronisms,
being of no force at all but mere whisles, and for the Post-medial his
objections are not such, but those Visions which Mr Mede would have Synchronize
with the seventh Trumpet, are all within the seventh Trumpet, and commencing at
the final destruction of the Beast Synchronize one with another sufficiently.
Which is as much for the main scope and use of the Apocalypse, as if they had
adequately Synchronized with the seventh Trumpet. And yet R. H. thinks so
goodly well of his confutation of Mr Mede's Synchronisms, that for a conclusion
of all he professedly persists in that obdurate conceit of his own; That the
Prophecies succeed one another and shall come to pass in that order in which
they are written and were revealed. Which gross opinion of his, though it be
confuted over and over again by my maintaining Mr Mede's Synchronisms against
all his cavils, yet for a fuller conviction I will make good against him on Mr
Mede's behalf, that main point, That a new set of Prophecies begins at Chap.
11. whereof some commence from the same Epoch that the Prophecy of the Seals
does. The Authors Defense of Mr. Mede' s opinion, that a new set of Prophecies
begins Rev. 11. whereof some commence from the same Epoch the Prophecy of the
Seals does.


And to disarm my Antagonist of several arguments that he clicks up upon a
false Supposition, I shall grant, nay prove that the Book whose Seals the Lamb
opened, and the Opened Book which John took from the hand of the Angel, is one
and the same Book, first unsealed by the Lamb, by which is denoted Christ's
assistance in discovering the Prophecies of the Sealed Book, and then delivered
by the Angel (which is Christ again in another form as appears by his
description) to John to eat. Where again Christ's assistance is denoted, and
that this whole Book of Prophecies is from him, namely the Opened
Book-Prophecies as well as those of the Sealed Book. Which Opened Book is
called (...) as the Sealed one (...), both of them diminutives: so that the
Sealed Book might have been called a little Book as well as the Opened Book,
and the vulgar Latin translates (...) simply librum. But if (...) be a more
lessening Diminutive than (...), it is made use of in respect of the (...) of
the cortex, that it may be the more easily eaten up by St John, and also in
respect of the Prophecies themselves, that are signified by this Book: For when
all of them together was called (...), so many, namely those of the Seals being
already dispatched, the other that remain, being less than the whole (...) of
Prophecies, are duly and proportionately called (...), the former Libellus,
this latter Libellulus. But to conceive this Libellulus a Scrowle in which
nothing was written, is a very vain and empty conceit, and such as is
inconsistent with the drift of the Vision, which entitles Christ to the whole
Book of Prophecies, to those of the Sealed Book by his opening of the Seals, to
those of the Opened Book by giving John the Opened Book to eat it, which if it
contained nothing, nothing was given him to eat.

But now that the Sealed Book and Opened Book be one and the same Book, I
briefly prove by these two arguments. First from the intertexture of the
Visions or dependence one of another, so that one could not be well understood
without the other, which is a plain argument that they all belong to one
Volume. But that they cannot be well understood one without the other, is
admirably made out by Mr Mede's Synchronisms. And there is apertly mention made
of the sixth and seventh Trumpet which belong to the Prophecies of the Sealed
Book, in the Prophecies of the Opened Book Chap. 11. verse. 14, 15.

The other argument is, That whereas there are such high Encomiums of the
Sealed Book Chap. 5. unless the Sealed Book and the Opened Book be all one, the
Opened Book will have none of those Encomiums, though it contains the more
concerning Prophecies of the two.

But now lastly, That notwithstanding the Sealed Book Prophecies and the Opened
Book Prophecies make but one Volume, yet at Chap. 11. there begins a new set of
Prophecies commencing from the same Epoch that the Seals do, Mr Mede's
arguments to me seem sufficiently solid.

The first whereof is his Synchronisms, which if true as I have maintained they
are, plainly prove that the Prophecies of the Opened Book contemporize with the
Visions of the Sealed Book Prophecies.

The second, That there is a light touch Chap. 10. verse. 7. upon the seventh
Trumpet. And the seven Thunders immediately succeeding the sixth Trumpet are in
all reason to be conceived to fill the space of the seventh Trumpet, as the
seven Trumpets fill up the space of the seventh Seal. Wherefore unless we will
fancy the Prophecies of the Opened Book to run beyond the Goal of the
Apocalypse; after this they are to begin from the same lists of the race again,
that is to commence from the same Epoch that the Prophecy of the Seals did.

The third is taken from Chap. 10. verse. 11. where upon John's swallowing down
the Opened Book it is said to him, Thou must prophesy again before many peoples
and Nations and tongues and Kings, which seems to import that he was to run
over the same space of time again, and that his Visions would be of the like
large extent as before.

The fourth and last is taken from verse. 8. And the voice which I heard from
Heaven, viz. as of a Trumpet, spoke unto me again, which being an introduction
to the Prophecy of the Seven Churches Chap. 1. verse. 10. and to the Prophecy of
the Sealed Book Chap. 4. verse. 1. and being set here again before the Prophecy
of the Opened Book, it is a sign that the Prophecy of the Opened Book is a new
System of Prophecies beginning from the same Epoch with the former.

Now to the first, R. H. his answer is very obvious, That he has confuted Mr
Mede's Synchronisms. But what a nothing it is which he has alleged against
them, let any impartial Reader judge.

To the second I do not see what material answer he does direct, unless it be,
that the sixth Trumpet is continued to Chap. 11. verse. 14. where it is said,
The second woe is past. Which arguments is repeated again with a pretense of
five more, Disp. VII. Quaes. 1. but they being so lax and tautological I will
comprise the strength of them, that pretend to have any, in these two. The
first therefore is, That the close of the sixth Trumpet is not set down at the
end of the ninth Chapter nor at verse. 6, or 7. of the tenth, but at verse. 14.
of the eleventh. Nor are there in the other Trumpets any heterogeneous Visions
interserted besides the Visum belonging to each Trumpet. Therefore all from the
beginning of the sixth Trumpet Chap. 9. v. 13. to the close thereof Chap. 11.
verse. 14. is the Visum of the sixth Trumpet, it not being there said, the first
Vision of the little Book is past, but, the second woe is past. This is the very
strength and quintessence of his first, second, third and sixth argument. And
the fifth is but a toy fetched from a Supposition, that if they that divided
the Apocalypse into Chapters had begun the tenth Chapter at verse. 13. of the
ninth, and continued it to verse. 14. of the eleventh, none would have
questioned but all that were the Visum of the sixth Trumpet.

To all which I shall answer in order. And I. That there was no need of setting
down at the end of the ninth Chapter a note of the close of the sixth Trumpet,
it being to be observed in every one of the five foregoing Trumpets that each
have but one Visum belonging to them. Wherefore the description of the Vision
of the Euphratean Horsemen, which is the Visum of this sixth Trumpet, being
dispatched, it was obvious to any one that is not over oscitant to conclude,
the sixth Trumpet is past without its being said so. But again to awaken his
oscitancy, immediately after the Visum of this sixth Trumpet, which the
Interval of the seventh necessarily succeeds, is there the mention of seven
Thunders to fill the space of the seventh Trumpet as the seven Trumpets fill
the space of the seventh Seal. And he must be in a great dullness if not a dead
sleep whom these seven Thunders will not awake into a certain assurance that
the sixth Trumpet ended with the Vision of the Euphratean horsemen. And that he
may not think there are any Visions appertaining to any times beyond this
Interval, or that the space of the seventh Trumpet was not indigitated before;
the Angel swears there shall be no more time saving that wherein the seventh
Angel sounds, and in which the mystery of God is finished, v. 7. whence what
follows verse. 8. must needs be in order to a new System of Prophecies beginning
from the same Epoch with that of the Seals, the race of the Seals being
arrived at the utmost goal already. 2. There is no reason that the close of the
sixth Trumpet should be set at the sixth verse, the sense being there
imperfect, nor at the seventh, it being not to be understood of the time and
times and half a time expiring, but of the whole seventh Trumpet as the
grammatical sense requires, and therefore it had been absurd to put the close
of the sixth Trumpet after the seventh. 3. Nor does the note of the ending of
the second wo-Trumpet set Chap. 11. verse. 14. argue the Visum of that Trumpet
to reach thither, but only the Vision there, to end with the ending of the
second wo-Trumpets time. For the seven Trumpets are rather notes of the
Intervals of time than of the Visions of those Intervals, the Trumpets being
nothing like them, though figuratively they may denote either. But here where
it is said the second woe is past, the time of the second wo-Trumpet is
understood, to give notice that the Vision of the mournful Witnesses, etc. did
expire with the end of that time. Besides if it were to be understood of all
that occurrs from Chap. 9. verse. 13. to this Chapter verse. 14. there is more
woes than one, the woeful condition of the Witnesses as well as of those the
Euphratean horsemen vex and destroy. 4. And what follows methinks is an
argument against himself. For the things here that he would have all of them
the Visum of the sixth Trumpet, none of the other Trumpets being charged with
such heterogeneous stuff, do the better assure us that the Euphratean horsemen
are the only Visum of the sixth Trumpet. 5. And to have put Chap. 11. verse. 14.
The first Vision of the little Book is past instead of the second woe is past,
had been too bare and bald, contrary to the genius of this Book of the
Apocalypse which was not writ for either a profane or stupid Reader. And
besides it would not have served the end that the [second woe is past] does.
Which is to be of the main hinges upon which all the middle Synchronisms hang,
as shall be seen anon. 6. And lastly as to the toy I mentioned, though such a
division of Chapters might have the more firmly fixed Mr R.H. in his gross
conceit, yet it could never have imposed upon so pious and sagacious a person
as Mr I. Mede. But it is plain that they that did divide the Chapters as they
are, and begin the tenth immediately after the Vision of the Euphratean
Horsemen, took that to be the sole Visum belonging to the sixth Trumpet.

The other argument of R. H. which he calls his fourth, I will set down in his
own words. Of all the six Trumpets none have a remarkable close added to them
but the fifth and sixth Trumpets only: And wherefore were these closes added to
them, but that we might exactly know as well where they end as where they
begin? Now the fifth Trumpet ends where the close thereof is set, and that is
Rev. 9. verse. 12. And therefore also the sixth Trumpet ends where the close
thereof is set, and that is Rev. 11. verse. 14. and not before. This looks most
like an argument of any thing that he has brought yet. But I briefly answer,
that the fifth and sixth Trumpets have not that remarkable Close added to them
to know where they end, there being no need of adding them for that purpose,
forasmuch as the ending of them is so easily to be known without it. Are not
the endings of the four first Trumpets, well enough known without any such
remarkable close? For they are known to end where the next Trumpet begins. Now
it is evident that the fifth Trumpet needs no such remarkable close because the
sixth Trumpet immediately follows it, which shows the ending thereof. And yet
there is added as a close to the fifth Trumpet, The first woe is past. This is
undeniably true of the fifth Trumpet. And that the Visum of the sixth Trumpet,
that is, the Euphratean Horsemen have no need of any such remarkable close, I
have proved abundantly already in my answer to the first particular of his
first argument. From whence it is manifest that these remarkable closes of the
fifth and sixth Trumpets, must be for some other use. And to answer R. H. his
demand wherefore they were added, I shall tell him, not as Notes of the ending
of the Visions of those two Trumpets, but as Notes of the expiration of the
time of them, as I distinguished above. For the former I have demonstrated to
be needless, but this latter admirably useful. In brief therefore, though the
adding that Note Chap. 9. verse. 13. The first woe is past, in that place is
needless as to the determining the time of the fifth Trumpet, yet because the
spirit of Prophecy intended to make use of the like Note Chap. 11. verse. 14. to
denote the ending of the time or Interval of the sixth Trumpet, he prepared the
mind of the Reader for the taking notice of it by making use of it here as a
Note of the ending of the time of the first wo-Trumpet. Wherefore the sense is
Chap. 11. verse. 14. of [The second woe is past] Here ends the time of the second
wo-Trumpet or sixth Trumpet, namely with the Rising of the witnesses or
inchoative destruction of the Beast or expiration of his 42. Months. Whence
this Note is plainly intended for a Note Synchronistical to show that the end
of the forty two Months of the Beast, and the end of the sixth Trumpet do
Synchronize. Which therefore is a thing of admirable importance. For the Beast
and 144000 sealed Virgins Synchronizing Synch. 4. Part. 1. and the commencing
of the sealed ones being just at the beginning of the first Trumpet Chap. 7.
the Beast also begins and ends with the six first Trumpets, whence the time of
the sealing of these Virgins and this Note, The second woe is past, are as it
were the two hinges on which all the middle Synchronals hang, as Mr Mede has
very well observed. And this I think is a sufficient answer to R. H. his
question, wherefore were those remarkable closes added to the fifth and sixth
Trumpets. But the ends he would have them added for I have demonstrated cannot
be. Which is the greater confirmation they were added for this which is a most
worthy and admirable end and becoming the stupendous artifice of this Book.

To the third argument of Mr Mede he answers. Admit that passage, Thou must
prophecy again, etc. to emply two main Prophecies, one of the Sealed Book, the
other of the Opened Book, or that the Book maybe divided into two Tomes and the
second begin at Chap. 10. verse. 8. yet it does not follow that the second part
must begin ab ovo or from the same Epoch with the former. But I answer, the
Vision reaching to the very utmost Goal of the Apocalyptick race from such a
time before we come at the eighth verse, as I have clearly proved, there is all
the reason in the world S. John being bid to prophecy again, that his
prophesying should commence from the same Epoch. As if one should intend to
write two Tomes of the affairs of any Kingdom, the one Secular the other
Ecclesiastical, and that in his first Tome he had deduced his secular History
to the last year, it is impossible to imagine but in his next Tome he would
begin his Ecclesiastic story from the same Epoch that the secular began from.

To the fourth and last he answers not unappositely. We read not, says he,
that the voice Chap. 10. verse. 8. was as the sound of a Trumpet, and therefore
not likely to relate to the voice Chap. 4. verse. 1. but rather to the voice
Chap. 10. verse. 4. For that voice Chap. 4. verse. 1. is said to be as the sound
of a Trumpet, but this not. This is the first part of his answer, but he
proceeds. But to what purpose he would have the Reader, says he, to take
notice of this I cannot tell. Is this an Index that the Prophecy of the little
Book, as he calls it, does contemporate with the Prophecy of the Seals? No
more than the voice Chap. 4. verse. 1. is an Index that the Prophecy of the
Seals does contemporate with the Vision of the Seven Churches, etc.

But I briefly reply to the first, That seeing Ellipses are so usual in the
Apocalypse, that the sense may not lie over bare, Mr Mede has with judgment
made this supplement [as of a Trumpet] it being in all likelihood the same
voice that spoke to him at the beginning of the Vision of the seven Churches
and of the Prophecy of the Seals Chap. 4. v. 1. Nor is it said here not to be
as the sound of a Trumpet, but only that qualification is not mentioned for the
reason abovesaid. But that it should be the voice mentioned verse. 4. of this
tenth Chapter is not at all likely. First because then it would have been only,
(...), i. e. And the voice which I heard from Heaven said unto me, and (...)
would be superfluous. But then in the second place, it being added, there ought
to be understood something more or different in the word (...) than simply in
(...), and methinks it is very obvious to conceive what it is, if we recur to
Chap. 1. verse. 10. where John is said to hear behind him a great voice as the
sound of a Trumpet, that is a loud sonorous or canorous voice; And then to
Chap. 4. v. 1. where the voice he there hears from Heaven is said to be (...),
as of a Trumpet talking loudly or canorously with him. Here the word (...) to
speak aloud is put instead of the great voice Chap. 1. verse. 10. and that the
word (...) has sometimes this peculiar signification not to speak simply but to
speak aloud, is observable in that verse of the Poet, (...)
(...) etc.
where (...) is, loudly speak out thy letters, as the following words also
imply. And let the inscription on thy leaves be more than ordinary express. But
what is yet more to the purpose, (...) which besides the usual signification is
very often by the Seventy rendered by (...), as (...), He cried also in my ears
with a loud voice, Ezekiel. 9.1. so is it also in the same sense rendered by (...),
Proclaim in the ears of the people saying, Judge. 7.3. And so (...) which has no
other signification but of loud clamor or vociferation, yet by the Seventy
Esa. 58.9. it is rendered by (...), Clamabis and dicet, Thou shall cry and he
shall say Here am I. And to come nearer to the present Chapter verse. 3. The
voices of Thunder I think are loud and sonorous enough, and yet the word (...)
is used of them, (...), The seven Thunders uttered their voices. From whence we
see plainly that (...), verse. 8. is not there prefixed for naught, but that it
signifies a speaking to John with a loud and sonorous voice, such as was the
voice Chap. 1. verse. 10. and Chap. 4. ver. 1. expressed by a Trumpet. Now
therefore being it is said (...), which implies a speaking thus sonorously to
him again, and that voice verse. 4. of this Chapter is not said (...) but only
(...), it cannot be said (...), to speak in such a loud tone again, it having
not done so yet once; and therefore of necessity it must be referred to Chap.
4. verse. 1. From whence it is evident that that supplement of [as of a Trumpet]
made by Mr Mede is added with judgment and truth.

To the second part of his objection I answer briefly, and confess that this
canorous voice like a Trumpet in this Chapter verse. 8. is no more an index that
the Prophecy of the little Book does contemporate with the Prophecy of the
Seals, than the voice Chap. 4. verse. 1. is an Index that the Prophecy of the
Seals does contemporate with the vision of the seven Churches. But withal I
affirm, that the voice Chap. 4. verse. 1. is an Index that the Prophecy of the
Seals does contemporate with the Vision of the seven Churches, and that the
Vision of the seven Churches is a Prophecy commencing with the beginning of the
Church and reaching to the end of the world, as I have made good by no less
than twenty firm arguments in the last Chapter of my Exposition of the Vision
of the seven Churches. So fitly do all things fall in together Mr Mede's way.
But no sense to be made of them any other way.

Nor is that which R. H. takes notice of Disp. II. Ques. 5. that (...) is the
Preface to the Vision of the Seven Churches, (...), and (...), no arguments
that the Vision of the Seven Churches and the Prophecy of the Seven Seals do
not Synchronize.
Rev. 1. but (...), the Preface to the Prophecy of the Seven Seals, Chap. 4.
verse. 1. (as if the events of the Seals should be after the events of the
Vision of the Seven Churches and begin a good while after them) of any validity
against the contemporizing of the Vision of the Seven Churches with the
Prophecy of the Seven Seals. For this is but another notable example (of which
I have given several in my Notes) of that Apocalyptick figure which we call
Lemmatosynechia or the holding together of the external cortex of the
Apocalyptick narrations. But according to the sense of all Interpreters (...),
has no reference here to the things of the Seven Churches, but only signifies
things which shall be hereafter, which hinders not but that they may
contemporize with the future things of the Seven Churches. All take it in that
sense which Beza translates it in, Quae oportet fieri posthac, which must be
hereafter, as our English rightly renders it. Which had been good sense though
it had been said in the very beginning of the Apocalypse according to Ribera
his own interpretation, who without any reference to what belongs to the Seven
Churches understands by (...) (the things which must be hereafter) Decursum
Ecclesiae a tempore Iohannis ad finem seculi. Aperit, says he, argumentum
sequentis Prophetiae. To which I may add, that it is a mistake in R. H. that he
makes (...) a proper Preface to the Vision of the Seven Churches, whenas it is
rather a general Preface to all the three Prophecies of this Book, and true of
them all that they contained some things that were then to come to pass
quickly, as it is true of them all that they are the Revelation of Jesus Christ
which God gave unto him, etc.

No good sense to be made of the Apocalypse but Mr. Mede 's way. The
ridiculousness of R. H. his way whereby he would gratify the Church of Rome.
And what I was a going to say, That there can be no sense made of the
Apocalypse but Mr Mede's way, a notable pledge of the truth thereof is, in
that, that egregious learned writer Hugo Grotius, who so humanely, when he saw
the Romish Interpreters so foully stick in the mire and make such pitiful sense
of things, offered his helping hand in their behalf, but with so little success
that R. H. himself, to give him his due, has all along notably well confuted
the Grotian way though to enemy at all to the Romanists; but out of like
kindness to them that Grotius seems to have born, he to wipe off that charge
from the Church of Rome that she might not be taken for the Whore of Babylon,
by a mavelous invention makes her as innocent and clear of that fault as the
Child yet unborn, namely by laying the Scene of the affairs of the Apocalypse
not in Europe, no by no means, but in Asia, and by affirming that all the
Visions are to be fulfilled in their litteral sense, and that there is no
mystical meaning of them in any place but where they are explained and
acknowledged to be such in the very Book it self, and consequently that none of
these Visions are yet fulfilled, and he adds, not to be fulfilled but in such
order as they are set. And therefore no Whore of Babylon to appear upon the
stage, no not so much as in Asia it self, much less in Europe at Rome in Italy,
till there be a great shaking and concussion in the Heavens, and the Sun it
self become as black as Sackcloth made of Goats Hair, and the Moon as red as
blood, and the Stars fall from Heaven in clusters to the Earth, and that there
be such great Earthquakes that every Mountain in the Earth shall be moved out
of its place, and every Island in the Sea also, which be the events of the
sixth Seal, Rev. Chap. 6. verse. 12. And that there be just 12000. young men of
every Tribe of Israel sealed with the Seal of God in their foreheads, Chap. 7.

Moreover it must rain hail and fire and blood upon the land of Asia, and a
sulphurous mountain burning with fire must be cast into the Asiatick Sea, and
the third part of that Sea be turned into blood; And a great blazing Star fall
from Heaven burning and flaming like a torch, which shall break asunder and
fall into the third part of rivers and into the third part of the springs of
waters throughout the land of Asia. And the third part of the Sun shall be
smitten with darkness, and the third part of the Moon and the third part of the
Stars, Chap. 8. There shall be also a bottomless Pit opened, out of which such
a smoke shall arise that men shall not see the light of the Sun in the land of
Asia. And strange kind of Locusts with tayls of Scorpions, heads with crowns of
gold on them, faces like men and hair like women, and with wings that make such
a dreadful noise as if it were the noise of Chariots drawn with horses running
furiously to battle, these shall swarm in the land of Asia and sting and vex
men very sore. There will also appear in the said Land an innumerable number of
strange kind of Horses with their Riders upon them. The heads of the Horses in
shape like the heads of Lions, and out of the mouths of every one of them shall
come forth fire, smoke and brimston. Their tayls also shall be like Serpents
with heads and mouths, and by the fire, smoke and brimston coming out of their
mouths, and by the Serpents heads and mouths at the end of their tayls shall
the third part of men be slain in Asia about the river Euphrates. Paraph. R. H.
9.

Furthermore before the Whore of Babylon be in being, that Emperess of the
World and debaucher of the Kings of the Earth with her cup of Fornication, the
Temple will be rebuilt and the Inner Court at Jerusalem, and there will then
appear two inspired Witnesses doing such Miracles as Moses and Elias did, and
after three years and an half they will be slain by the Scarlet Beast, and
their dead bodies lie three days and a half in the open streets of Jerusalem,
and at the half days end they will be revived again, stand upon their feet, and
ascend visibly in a cloud to Heaven, their enemies beholding them, Chap. 11.
The Jews also before that time shall be converted to Christianity in despite
of the Devil, who will persecute them, so that part of them will fly into the
wilderness, and the Devil send a great flood of water after them, Chap. 12.
There will also appear before the time of the said Whore a two-horned beast
like a Lamb and that speaks like a Dragon, who besides that he will do strange
miracles as being a Magician or Witch, and make a molten Image to the tenhorned
Beast which shall breath and speak, he will cause also his subjects to be
marked in their right hands or in their foreheads with the capital or Acrostick
letters of his name, and the letters of that mark shall contain the value of
25. the root of 666. Chap. 13. And when this Queen of Babylon shall be in
being, that she may sit secure and at ease like a Queen and never dream of any
sorrow, she is not concerned in any one of the Vials but the seventh, which are
all literally to be understood, nor any of the Vials to be poured out till
there be such a slaughter of the people of the Beast in Iudaea without
Jerusalem, that the blood shall reach even to the horses bridles in height, for
the space of a thousand six hundred furlongs in length, Chap. 14. v. 20. and
Chap. 15. So tender and dear a friend does this R. H. approve himself to this
Whore of Babylon if she be already in being, to shelter her thus from all
suspicion, from all peril of both damage and disgrace. This it is to have a
friend in a corner to help at a dead lift. And when both her own proper
Champions and Grotius himself fails, to take up the buckler so dexterously for
her. But certainly you will say, It is either a piece of madness or a piece of
Drollery in him to comment in this sort on the Apocalypse. Whether it be a
piece of Drollery in him to jear and insult over the desperateness of the
Romish cause as to this point, that have no safer Sanctuary at last than this
to betake themselves to, to free themselves from that grand accusation of
Idolatry and Murder that is so plainly cast upon them by the true and genuine
meaning of the Apocalypse, he himself best knows. But if he be mad, he pretends
cum ratione insanire, he offering his reasons for all those extravagant
positions he goes upon.

The first whereof is, R. H. his extravagant Positions touching the
Interpretation of the Apocalypse, together with his Reasons of them, and their
Confutation.
That the scene of the affairs of the Apocalypse is not in Europe but in Asia.

The second, That the Visions are to be fulfilled not in a Mystical but in a
bare Litteral sense.

The third, That the Visions are to be fulfilled in such order as they lie in
the Apocalypse.

The fourth and last is, That none of the Visions of the Sealed Book nor Opened
Book are yet fulfilled. Which is a necessary Consectary from the second and
third position. We shall now examine the reasons he builds these Positions
upon, so many and so far as is requisite.

I. The reasons that he alleges for his first Position occurr Disp. 1. Quest.
3. And the chief of them are these two.

1. The Prophecies, says he, were written unto Asia and not unto Europe, Rev.
1. verse. 4. John to the seven Churches in Asia, and verse. 11. What thou see
write in a Book and send it to the Seven Churches in Asia. 2. His second
argument is taken from Chap. 22. verse. 16. I Jesus have sent mine Angel to
testify unto you these things, (...) concerning the Churches, says he, and
Grotius himself expounds it, ecclesiarum bono, in the behalf or for the good of
the Churches. And says R. H. what is meant by the Chuches, but the Churches of
Asia, Rev. 1. verse. 4. And therefore Asia is the scene of the Visions of the
Apocalypse.
I confess comparing the citations of the first Chapter with that of the last,
and which to me is highly probable, allowing that the same Churches are meant
in both Chapters, these two arguments of his make a fair show. But those that
expound the Vision of the Seven Churches literally, will deny that the same
Churches are understood in the last Chapter, but that that passage signifies
indefinitely all or any of the Christian Churches for whose use this Book of
Prophecies was writ. But I will easily allow R. H. this liberty to expound it
of the same Churches in my Prophetical sense, and of the same Churches of Asia
too in the Cabbalistical sense of that word, which signifies this lower region
of the world or terrestrial Globe containing not only Asia but Europe and
Africa and America too if need were. Which spoils the conceit of his making
Asia only, in the usual sense, the scene of the Apocalyptick Visions, though
his conceit in the mean time gives countenance to my understanding the Churches
Chap. 22. to be the very Churches in Asia in my sense, and to my making the
Epistles to the Seven Churches to be a Prophecy.

II. The reasons for his second Position the principal of them are these.

1. A Revelation cannot be a Mystery nor a Mystery a Revelation. They are as
contrary each to other, says he, as light is to darkness. Wherefore the whole
Book of the Apocalypse being a Revelation, it cannot be a Mystery or be
expounded in a Mystical sense but only in a litteral, unless where the Spirit
of God himself tells us it is a Mystery, and renders to us the mystical sense
of the Letter. To this effect is his first argument Disp. 1. Quest. 4. and
Disp. 11. Quest. 2. 2. The second, Where things are mystically to be understod
they are afterward interpreted in the Apocalypse, or in other Texts of
Scripture which speak of the same or the like matter. As Rev. Chap. 1. verse.
20. Rev. Chap. 17. verse. 7, 8, 9. etc. Dan. Chap. 7. verse. 17, 23, 24.
Wherefore when there is no such interpretation, the Text is literally to be
understood. Ibid. 3. His third is, No Scripture is mystically to be understood
without evident necessity; but there is no necessity, much less any evident
necessity of understanding those things in a mystical sense which himself has
interpreted in a litteral. Wherefore the things above mentioned and all the
rest where the Spirit or Angel does not interpret them to a mystical sense,
ought to be understood in a litteral. Ibid. 4. The fourth and last, This
mystical way of interpreting makes the Scripture a nose of wax, which a man may
turn which way he will, subjecteth it to our vain lusts and humors, and leaves
us partially to apply the good things to ourselves and our own party, and the
bad things to our enemies, Disp. 11. Quest. 2. These be the main arguments for
his second Paradox.
1. But to the first I answer, That a Revelation may be a Mystery, that is,
mystically or hiddenly conveyed, but yet plainly to be known by them that have
the Key. As it is in Steganography by which Secrets are certainly conveyed or
revealed, but in such a mysterious way that none but they that know the clavis
or Key shall be ever the wiser. Wherefore it is not at all repugnant that the
Apocalypse may be a Revelation and yet a Mystery, that is, a Revelation
Mystically conveyed. But where is that clavis will you say, that will so
certainly unlock the Mystery? To that I shall answer after I have answered his
three following arguments for this present Paradox.

2. And therefore I proceed to the second, which I say does not prove that
where the Holy Ghost does not interpret, the Text is literally to be
understood, but that the Interpretation of those Texts that are interpreted are
made with that skill and judgment that they give sufficient light to the rest
of the Prophecies, suppose of the Seven Churches or of the Sealed and Opened
Book Prophecies. And of this kind is that clavis offered Rev. 1. verse. 20. and
Rev. 17. verse. 7, 8, 9.

3. And concerning the third I demand, when he will allow that there is evident
necessity of interpreting a Text mystically? when the letter it self is simply
impossible? But this then argues his ignorance of the Apocalyptick style and of
the artifice of the external Cortex of the Prophecies, in which so carefully is
observed the (...) or the (...) in speech (which figure you may call
Pithanologia or Logoprepia if you will) that no representation be over
extravagantly incredible in the very Letter, much less impossible. But if he
mean by an evident necessity, a moral incredibility or impossibility in the
litteral sense, I say there is such an evident necessity, the litteral sense
putting him upon such an extravagant Hypothesis, as that none of the Prophecies
are yet fulfilled nor will be God knows when. Which is little less than
blasphemy against the Divine Providence, as if he had neglected his Church in
this point for sixteen hundred years together. Besides that the Synchronisms
demonstrable out of the intrinsecal characters in the Prophecies themselves, do
necessarily imply that most of the Visions are fulfilled already, but not in a
litteral sense, wherefore there is evident necessity they be interpreted in a
sense Mystical. To all which you may add that the Holy Ghost his interpreting
some parts mystically may justly be an intimation and animation to us to follow
his example in the rest.

4. To the fourth and last I answer, This is but the old Popish allegation
against all the Scripture, unless it be fixed by the sense of the Infallible
Chair, as R. H. would have the Apocalypse by the litteral sense, that so it may
not be a nose of wax but a brazen nose, or the same mettle that their foreheads
are that can plead for such absurd Hypotheses. But I say this mystical way of
interpreting the Apocalypse will not make it a nose of wax, if men will but
make use of those helps that the intrinsecal characters of the Visions do
afford to cast them into orderly Synchronisms, so as Mr Mede has done. And
those that have neglected this necessary help, what pitiful Interpretations
they have made R. H. himself can witness. Nay certainly, To the skilful the
Mystical sense of the Apocalypse is as certainly determinable one way, as any
Scripture is in the Litteral sense thereof. And if R. H. thinks it such a nose
of wax, I challenge him or any one else whosoever to make a nose of wax if he
can of my Joint Exposition of the thirteenth and sevententh Chapters of the
Apocalypse in my Synopsis Prophetica, and to show that the sense which I have
given is not the determinate sense of them. And that R. H. himself has so
shroudly confuted the Grotian way of interpreting the Apocalypse, it may be an
argument to him if he please, that it is not such a nose of wax that will stand
any way, but that all false Interpretations, like a frozen Muscovian nose
before the fire, will drop off. But there is one certain true way as firm as
Adamant, which the fiery subtilty of no man's wit will be able to melt or
dissolve. And those that go this Synchronistical way, to them the Prophecies
are not left to interpret according to their own humor in favor to their own
party and to the disgrace or disadvantage of their adversaries, but the time of
the Prophetical Vision being known and the acknowledged meaning of the
Prophetical Iconisms observed in the application of History belonging to that
time the Synchronism makes the Vision point to, they are necessitated whether
it be for or against their own party or others, to render the certain, clear
and determinate sense thereof, so little fear is there that this mystical way
will make the Prophecies a nose of wax, or leave men to the wantonness of their
own humors to interpret as they please. But in pretense of taking away this
abuse, to allow none but a litteral sense of the Apocalypse, is indeed to take
away all the use thereof, which those that favor the Church of Rome full
willingly would do.

III. As for his third Position, he pretends Disp. 6. Ques. 2. by many
arguments to make it good, but I shall take notice only of the chiefest, by
which you may judge of the rest.

1. The first is, That things revealed at once and not at several distant
times, must come to pass in order as they are revealed; but the Apocalyptick
Visions were revealed at once or at one continued time to John without ceasing
or intermission of his Ecstasy, and therefore they must come to pass in order
as they were seen.

2. The Prophecies of the Revelation were all of them written in one Book, and
therefore they are to be fulfilled in that continued order they are written, as
Histories written in order as they come to pass.

3. First, second, third, fourth, etc. are Ordinal numbers not Cardinal, and
show not only the number of things spoken of but their order also. Now the
Prophecies of the Revelation do all of them consist of these numbers, Seven
Seals, Seven Trumpets, Seven Vials (and he might have prefixed Seven Churches
too) and therefore they being set in order and called, first, second, third
Seal, Trumpet, and Vial, shows plainly they are to be fulfilled in the order
they are mentioned.

4. The fourth and last arguments is: where no instance can be given to the
contrary, there things shall come to pass in order as they are revealed, and
such are the Prophecies of the Revelation says he, no instance can be given of
any Prophecy that comes to pass before or after the order of its Revelation.
And therefore they shall come to pass Prophecy after Prophecy as they were
revealed and presented unto John in Vision.

1. But to the first I answer. The argument will not hold good there, if at
all, where there are special Notes given of a new beginning of prophesying. For
that is as much if not more than if the Visions had been exhibited to John at
several distant times or days. And that there are such Notes it is plain,
namely of a new beginning of prophesying. For as the Prophecy of the Seven
Churches was ushered in with a sound of a Trumpet, so is the Prophecy of the
Sealed Book, betwixt which two Prophecies there was an intermission of John's
Ecstasy, as you may see Chap. 4. verse. 2. And then before the Prophecy of the
Opened Book, besides other certain indications of the beginning of a new
Prophecy as I have above showed, there is again that voice like a Trumpet that
talked with him at the beginning of the Sealed Book-Prophecy, which is a
greater assurance that there are three distinct Prophecies than if they had
been revealed to him at three distinct times or days.

2. To the second I answer, That there is no harshness at all to conceive two
Prophecies beginning at the same Epoch to be writ in the same Book one after
another, it being impossible according to the usual writing of Books, that they
should be written together, no more harshness I say than to conceive that an
Historian in one Volume may write the lives of all the Secular Governors and
Bishops of a City from the first times thereof to his own times. Is it any
thing harsh or rather not necessary when he has gone through all the times of
the Governors, that he begin at the first Epoch to write the lives of the
Bishops of the said City?

3. To the third I answer, That the argument proves only that the Seals and
Trumpets are to be fulfilled in that order they are mentioned, and the Trumpets
after the six first Seals, they being the parts of the seventh Seal. But this
does not at all hinder but that the Seven Churches in that order they are set,
may commence with the Seven Seals, as also the measuring the Inner Court and
the fight of Michael and the Dragon, as is plain to any one that attends to
what is said.

4. And lastly to the fourth and last I answer, That it is demonstrable by
virtue of Mr Mede's Synchronisms, that there are many instances of things
coming to pass not in the order they are revealed, but before and after. This
is most evidently true if Mr Mede's Synchronisms be true, as most certainly
they are, and I have mentioned them to be so against all the pretended cavils
of R. H.

IV. As for his last Position, all the proof it has is from the arguments of
the three former, which being so false and weak and this last Paradox but a
Consectary of them, it is manifest it falls to the ground with them, if they be
sufficiently confuted, as they will all without question be deemed to be, after
I have perfected my answer to the first argument for the second paradox, and
shown what is the Clavis to the Apocalyptical Steganography, which is such a
mystical or occult way of Revelation.

I briefly therefore here answer, The Key of the Prophecy of the Seven Churches.
Those two places R. H. himself notes, viz. Rev. 1. verse. 20. and Rev. 17.
verse. 8, 9, etc. are the two keys the one of the Prophecy of the Seven
Churches, the other of the Prophecies of the Sealed Book and Opened Book, in
virtue whereof we may come to a clear and certain knowledge of this
Steganographical Revelation called the Apocalypse. For as for the first, that
is, the Interpretation of the Mystery of the Seven Stars, and of the seven
Golden Candlesticks, it is a plain intimation to any one that is not stupid,
that there is something more meant by these Seven Churches in Asia, than seven
particular Churches in Asia minor at that time; and that indeed the Vision of
the Seven Churches represented by the seven Golden Candlesticks is a Prophecy
concerning the whole Succession of the Church to the end of the world, divided
into seven Intervals. For if it were not so, what needed all the pomp of this
Vision, and the explication of it, if concerning the seven particular Churches
in Asia, whenas Chap. 1. verse. 4. there was mention of the seven Churches in
Asia, and after seven Epistles writ to them by name? Wherefore he must be
exceeding stupid and slow-witted, or of a course perverse Spirit that cannot,
at least being advertised of it, discern the scope of the Spirit in this Vision
of the Seven Stars, and Seven Golden Candlesticks, and the Interpretation
thereof, that it is a Prophecy in so large a sense as I have shown in my
Exposition, and proved that it is such a Prophecy by twenty solid Arguments in
the tenth Chapter thereof. Such intimations suffice to the pious, free and
sagacious Reader: But for profane Drolls, carnal Politicians, or prejudiced
Superstitionists, if seeing they see not, and hearing they understand not, the
fault lies at their own doors.

The Key of the Sealed Book and Opened Book Prophecies, which is the Angels
Interpretation of the Beast and the Woman sitting on him, Revel. chap. 17.
Now for the Key of the other two Prophecies of the Sealed Book, and of the
Opened Book, let us briefly observe the use thereof, and how effectual it is
for the purpose intended, and what the clear result thereof will be. Revel.
Chap. 17. verse. 8. there begins the Interpretation of the Vision of the Whore
of Babylon, and the Beast with seven Heads and ten Horns ridden by her. The
Beast that thou saw, says the Angel, was and is not, and shall ascend out
of the bottomless pit, and go into perdition. And here it is remarkable, how
the Angel does not go about to explain what a Beast is, it being so well known
that according to the Prophetic style it is a Kingdom, State or Empire Cruel
and Idolatrous, such as they were that are described in Daniel, and called
there by the Septuagint (...) not (...), as this Beast is called (...), which
is as much as to say, a Cruel wild Beast: Wherefore the Angels Interpretation
plainly imports thus much; That the Beast which John saw denotes a Kingdom,
State or Empire Cruel and Idolatrous, and withal whose condition is such, that
at some time it might be said of it truly, that it was a Cruel Idolatrous
Kingdom, State or Empire, but is not, but will be again a Cruel Idolatrous
Kingdom, State or Empire, and then afterward quite perish, at least as to its
Cruelty and Idolatry, that is, the Bestiality of it shall perish.

This is the name or nature of this Beast in general. And though it may already
very well be understood of that time of the succession of this Beast which
followed after it had ceased to be, yet for sureness, that you may not mistake,
the Angel calls him at the latter end of this Verse, The Beast that was, and is
not, and yet is: Which therefore is necessarily understood of the latter part
of his time after he once ceased to be, (...), a Beast, that is, after this
Empire had ceased to be a Cruel Idolatrous Empire, but had become a Cruel
Idolatrous Empire again, though not perfectly the same Idolatrous Empire it was
before; which is the natural and necessary meaning of [is not and yet is.]

But yet we are never the wiser what Empire certainly to pitch upon if the
Angel stick here; and therefore he holds on, verse. 9. The seven Heads are seven
Mountains on which the Woman sits, who is also said to sit upon the Beast.
Now he comes up closer to the business, which plainly shows this Empire to be
the Roman Empire, whether you understand the seven Hills of Rome, or
Constantinople, or both, they both belonging to the Roman Empire. Wherefore it
is manifest the Roman Empire is here meant in that succession of Time, after it
had ceased to be an Idolatrous Empire; which it did for a Time while pure
Christianity prevailed, and till the Apostasy came in: After which it became
the Beast that was and is not, and yet is. It was of old, the Pagan Idolatrous
Empire, but is not so now, and yet it is in a very considerable sense, it being
a Pagan-like, or a Paganochristian Idolatrous Empire, and cruelly persecutive
of the pure Christians.

And that you may still be the better assured, that this latter part of the
succession of the Empire (namely after it had become Christian, and Apostatized
again into Idolatry) was aimed at; the Angel holds on, verse. 10. And there are
seven Kings, namely, which are the heads of the Beast, and must take up the
entire Times of the being of the Beast, both the former and latter part
thereof, unless we will admit of a living Beast without an head: Five are
fallen and one is. Now let any man living show five Heads, that is, five
Supreme Governors to be fallen or past in St John's time, unless they be those
five sorts of Governors of the Roman State or Empire, Kings, Consuls,
Decemviri, Consular Tribunes, and Dictators. No five single Emperors can fill
up that space of time; and therefore it must be understood of sorts of
Governors: whereof five had ceased in St John's time, and one is, that is, was
in his time, (viz.) the Pagan Caesar's or Emperors: What can be more plain and
assured? But the other is not yet come, namely, the Christian Caesar's or
Emperors: For the Emperors were Pagans in St John's time. And when he comes
he must continue a short space, that is, the pure Christian Caesar's Reign would
be short, the Apostasy into an Idolatrous Paganochristianism being so quickly
to prevail in the Empire.

And the Beast that was and is not, that is to say, the Paganochristian Head,
(be they Paganochristian Emperors or Popes that get the Sovereignty, it is all
one, they make still, or continue the Paganochristian Head) of that Beast: For
that Beast is the Empire, not the Head of the Empire; (...), He is both the
eighth and one of the seven; that is, he is both the eighth King and seventh
head of the Beast: For the Beast is the Empire, quatenus Idolatrous, and so has
but seven heads though there be eight Kings, the seventh of them being King
over the Empire while it ceased to be a Beast or Idolatrous, or while the
public Religion of the Empire was purely Christian.

And the ten horns which thou saw, namely, on the seventh head, are ten
Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet, (viz.) in St John's time, but
receive Power as Kings one hour with the Beast. This also plainly denotes the
time of the Beast commencing with the discerption of the Roman Empire into many
Kingdoms, which happened not while the Religion of the Empire was purely Pagan,
but when it was Apostatizing again into a kind of Paganochristian and
Idolatrous condition. The Empire therefore debauched again with Superstition,
and Paganlike Idolatry and Cruelty after the expiration of the pure Christian
Caesar's, or seventh King, who was to continue but a short space, is the Beast
upon which the Woman rides.

And who this Woman is, is plainly indigitated again, and more precisely than
in the ninth Verse, (viz.) verse. 18. And the Woman which thou saw is that
great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth. In the ninth Verse, the
seat of the Woman are Seven Hills, and here in this Verse, She is that great
City, that in Saint John's time is said to reign over the Kings of the Earth,
which no City on seven Hills then did besides Rome: But the Walls and Houses of
Rome did not then Reign over the Kings of the Earth; but the Roman Polity here
signified by (...), a City, did then Rule over the Kings of the Earth: And
therefore the Roman Polity it must be, that rides the Beast that was, is not,
and yet is, but not the Roman Polity Pagan. For that Beast which is here ridden
is after the expiration of Paganism properly so called, and therefore it must
be the Roman Polity Paganochristian, that is, the Roman Hierarchy which rides
this Beast: Which Roman Hierarchy the Spirit of God here calls the Whore of
Babylon. Quod oportebat demonstrare.

And what more assured demonstration of any thing can R. H. or any man living
else desire than of this so concerning a truth? And what a notable Key this is
to unlock the sense of the Prophecies of the Sealed Book and Opened Book I will
briefly show, after I have smoothed the flawes, and wiped off the rust that R.
H. seems to fancy to stick on it. I will produce his most material Cavils, that
by them you may judge of the rest.

1. The first is touching the Hills of Rome, R. H. his Objections against this
Key proposed and answered.
which though at first they were seven, three were after added while Rome was
Pagan, and that Papal Rome stands but upon two and no more.

2. That Kings, Dictators and Emperors, being but one kind of Governors, we
shall fall short in our account of making up seven Heads of the Beast.

3. That when it is said, Five are fallen, the meaning is not that Five are
fallen in St John's time, but that Five are fallen, that is, shall fall, before
the seventh Vial. Forasmuch as the Apostle writes a Prophecy not an History:
And therefore it must be understood of things to come.

4. And the like he objecteth concerning the 18th Verse. That it does not speak
of a City which reigned over the Kings of the Earth in John's time, but which
is to reign in the time of the seventh Vial, because the Apostle writes not an
History but a Prophecy.

5. And lastly, that this Babylon cannot be the City of Rome, he proves by an
heap of Arguments: 1. That Babylon, till the seventh Vial, is not to taste of
the Cup of Gods wrath, but Rome has tasted of that Cup many a time, but
especially in the time of the Goths and Vandals, by whom it was taken four
times and made so desolate, that not a Man, Woman nor Child could be seen
therein for forty days together. 2. Babylon is one of the greatest Cities in
the world, but Rome at this day, but a little City, but the tenth part of what
it was before. 3. Babylon, one of the strongest Cities in the world, Revel.
Chap. 18. verse. 8. but Rome, but a weak City, in comparison of other Cities,
and which was seldom besieged but taken. 4. Babylon one of the most prosperous
Cities in the world, Revel. Chap. 18. verse. 7. but Rome a doleful City many a
time. 5. Babylon the last City to be taken, insomuch that she thinks it will
never be, but Rome taken many a time by the Goths and Vandals, and She cannot
think but that she may be taken again. 6. And lastly, Babylon is a City with
which the Merchants of the Earth have great Trade and Traffic by Sea, but Rome
not so, nor can she be so, for since she became Pontifician, the mouth of the
River Tiber has been stopped up for fear of Invasion; so that no Ships of any
great magnitude can pass thither. These are the chief of his Arguments, to
which I shall answer briefly and in order.

1. To the first I answer, That those three Hills of less Note, added to the
first seven, never were so considerable as in History or Poetry to alter that
Title of Rome, Roma septicollis, or, (...), Seven-hilled Rome. And it is the
most clear and exquisite way to speak in the language of Historians, when we
would certainly define or describe things.

Again, as for Rome Pontifician standing upon two Hills and no more, which yet
is not absolutely true, it standing upon two Hills more besides, as I am
informed from a good hand, skillful and curious in these things; the Text of
the Prophecy does not require that exactness, that Rome Pontifician should
stand upon all the Seven Hills: For the words run thus, The seven Heads are
seven Mountains, (...), which only denotes the place of her abode, or where she
is seated. And the Woman, which is not the Houses and Walls of the City but the
Polity residing there, is possessed of the whole space of ground environed with
a Wall that takes in all the seven Hills, so that all the seven Hill may be
said to be the place of her abode. And if the being environed with a Wall be
essential to a City, I do not see but that the name of the City is to be
conceived to reach so far, and the Wall with all the space of ground contained
in it, all of it, to be called Rome. To all which you may add, that (...), may
be taken partitive, as when it is said of Iephtah Iud. 12. Chap. 7. that he was
buried in the Cities of Gilead, and of Josiah that he was buried in the
Sepulchers of his Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 35. verse. 24. that is, in some one of the
Cities, and some one of the Sepulchers. So (...) may signify upon some of the
Hills, as well as upon them all.

And the character is as certain whether Rome now stand but on four hills or
two, that Rome is meant, as if it stood still on all. As suppose (...), the
Seven-mouthed Nilus his stream so lessen that it did nothing near fill the
Chanel so much as of old, and that thence five of his Mouths being shallower
than the rest should grow dry, no man notwithstanding will deny that it is
Nilus still; and so this Rome is Rome still though contracted suppose to two
hills, and her walls stand at a great distance from the City, as the banks of
Nilus from his now more narrow and shallow stream. So sure a character
notwithstanding R.H. his exceptions, are the seven hills that Rome is here
glanced at.

2. To the second I answer briefly, as to the former, If Prophecy describe
things as they are described in History it self, the description is more
certain and exact, and Historians generally make Dictators, Kings and Emperors
three several sorts of Government. Which answer being abundantly full and
sufficient, for brevity sake I omit to prove they are three several sorts of
Government as well as so called.

3. To the third, That this is a distorted unnatural exposition in this place
to understand a preterperfect Tense in a sense future, all Commentators that I
have met with will testify. Who however otherwise they vary in their
Interpretations, yet take it for granted that, Five are fallen, signifies had
ceased to be in S. John's time. Which the varying of the Tense immediately in,
And one is, would force any one that is not obstinately humorsome and perverse
to acknowledge to be true, as that also which follows must needs still put it
further out of doubt, And another is not yet come. It is a mere madness to
imagine in these circumstances Five are fallen, not to signify time past, because
forsooth the preterperfect Tense sometimes is used of a thing future in
Prophecy as Rev. 14. verse. 8. where there are no such circumstances. But I add
further, that it is impossible but it should be so understood, the Roman State
or Kingdom as Idolatrous having but seven heads in all, and the Pagan Ceasars
or Emperors in S. John's time being the present head. Therefore of necessity
those other heads must be past, unsess you will have the Roman State or Kingdom
till the Caesar's time to have been an headless Animal, which would be a very
witless supposition. And lastly his grand argument is a gross mistake. For this
interpretation of the Angel is not properly a Prophecy but the interpretation
of a Prophecy, which naturally requires plainness and propriety of speech, and
therefore not to understand by, Five are fallen, Five shall fall, but requires us
to understand it of the time past according to the vulgar Grammatical sense
thereof.

4. To the fourth I answer as to this last, That the Objector forgets that this
eighteenth verse is part of the interpretation of a Prophecy, not the Prophecy
it self, and therefore is to be taken in the plain Grammatical sense, if there
be no indication to the contrary, as there is touching that saying verse. 17.
For God has put in their hearts. Where the preterperfect Tense is used for the
future, but safely and elegantly; safely, because the foregoing verse does
plainly determine the sense to a futurity; and elegantly, that which it
expresses being a cause antecedent to what is said before, and therefore
rightly intimated to have been first. And where the verb substantive [is] or
[are] occurr we are carefully to distinguish when they signify the nature of a
thing, and when existence. As when it is said, And there are Seven Kings, it
does not signify the present existence of them, for it were a contradiction to
what follows; but that there are seven several kinds of Governors that
appertain to the Roman State or Empire whereby its nature or condition is
illustrated as to this point, but nothing yet is defined touching their present
Existence or Nonexistence. But when it follows, Five are fallen and one is, [is]
here plainly signifies existence, and because it is in the present Tense,
present existence, namely at the time he was to whom it was spoken. And so it
is, verse. 18. And the Woman, which thou saw, (...), is that great City which
reigns. There (...) and (...) put together signify present existence in this
Interpretation of the Angel, there being no indication to the contrary, but
rather a forcible urging thereunto by that repeated demonstrative Article
(...), of which the full sense in English cannot be otherwise rendered than
thus, that great City, that City that reigns, etc. Which plainly denotes a
known City then existent and pointed to. But I cannot insist on these things, I
hasten to the last objection.

5. To which I briefly answer, That the more true those particulars are, the
more they confirm my Mystical Interpretation of the Whore of Babylon, which
Chap. 18. I interpret not of Rome, against which Interpretation all these
Particulars run, but of the Roman Hierarchy. Whom I understand also by Babylon
Chap. 17. So that all this hailshot flies quite over my head and touches not an
hair thereof.

The admirable usefulness of the abovesaid Key for the certain unlocking of the
Sealed and Opened Book- Prophecies.
We having thus brightened this Key and smoothed it as it were, and freed it
from all those flaws and rust that R. H. phansied to stick to it, we shall now
show what an excellent Key it is for the unlocking the meaning of the Sealed
and Opened Book-Prophecies. For as that Key of the Prophecy of the Seven
Churches by taking notice only of the obvious order of the Churches as they are
set down, and of the meaning of the Paronomastical allusions of the names of
them and of the persons concerned in them, and applying them to History, gives
the assured sense of that Prophecy: So by this present Key of the Prophecies of
the Opened and Sealed Book taking notice of the order into which the Visions of
these Prophecies are cast by virtue of the Synchronisms which I have maintained
to be true, we are enabled to apply every Vision to its proper time in History,
as there by Paronomastical allusions, so here by the knowledge of the
Prophetical Iconismes, And so with judgment to discern what events answer such
and such Visions. And now more fully and orderly to illustrate the admirable
use of this Key, that is, of the Interpretation of the Angel Chap. 17. verse. 8.

First, we may observe how it assuring us that the Beast that was and is not
and yet is, is the Roman Empire divided into many Kingdoms and tainted again
with new Paganlike Superstitions and Idolatries, which his very description
also makes good; And that the Paganochristian head of this Empire should
shortly succeed the Seventh King, the purely Christian Caesar's; how it is
manifest I say from hence, that this Beast with the Whore riding him began many
hundred years ago, even as soon as the Empire was dividing into many Kingdoms
and apostatizing into a Paganochristian kind of Idolatry, which was about four
hundred and odd years after Christ. Now let us see what further comes of this.

Secondly, By carefully comparing the ten-horned Beast Chap. 13. with the
ten-horned Beast Chap. 17. and the two-horned Beast with the Whore in this
Chapter, we shall find that the two Beasts be one and the same Beast, and that
the two-horned Beast and the Whore denote the same thing. This I have
demonstrated in my Synopsis Prophetica Book 1. Chap. 10. by no less than
eighteen agreements betwixt the two ten-horned Beasts, and by nine agreements
betwixt the two-horned Beast and the Whore. So that no man that is in his wits
can be so skeptical as not to be convinced of it. But

Thirdly, Of the ten-horned Beast Chap. 13. it is said verse. 5. That power was
given unto him to continue forty two months, I demand here of R. H. has the
Roman Empire since the time of its being divided into many Kingdoms continued
but forty two months or three years and an half? Is this a likely measure of
time for the continuance of an Empire? Nay is it not plain that this divided
Roman Empire thus apostatizing and apostatized more and more into a Paganlike
Idolatry had continued so, near forty two Prophetical Months, that is months of
years, viz. 1260. years, till in the last Semitime of these 1260. years, the
Reformation broke out, which was the expiration of the Entireness of the reign
of the Beast. But in the mean time by virtue of this Key of the Angel it is
exceeding evident that the forty two months are not to be understood literally
but of Prophetical Months, forty two whereof make 1260. years. And consequently
that all the Visions that Synchronize with this ten-horned Beast have the same
extent of duration: As the Two-horned Beast, The Whore, The Woman in the
wilderness, The Sealed company of Virgins, The Outer Court trodden down by the
Gentiles, The two Witnesses mourning in Sackcloath, and The dead bodies of the
witnesses lying three days and an half in the street of the great City. For I
conceive that as the Woman's abode in the wilderness is first denoted by 1260.
days, and after in the same Chapter by a Time and Times and half a Time, so the
continuance of the sad condition of the Witnesses is first set down by 1260.
days, but after by three days and an half, to answer to a Time and Times and
half a Time, which is three Times and an half. And that three Times and an half
are signified by three days and an half on purpose to teach us to reckon the
duration of all these Synchronals not by the curiosity of a Prophetical month
much less of a Prophetical day, but as it is originally in Daniel by semidays
or half-days: after the beginning of the expiration of the seventh of which
Half-days the Witnesses were to rise, as they did. But this by the bye but very
worthy the noting. All these Synchronals, I say, of the Prophecy of the Opened
Book are necessarily to be measured by Prophetical Semitimes, that is, the
duration of every one of them is to be about seven Semitimes, a Semitime
consisting of one hundred and eighty years. And so must also those two
Synchronals of the Sealed Book-Prophecy, The six first Trumpets, and the one
hundred forty four thousand sealed Servants of God, they being synchronal to
these.

Fourthly, from whence it will further follow, that neither the one hundred
forty four thousand sealed Ones are the same individual persons, continuing all
the space of time near one thousand two hundred and sixty years, nor the
Two-horned Beast some one particular Witch or Magician, nor the Two Witnesses
two particular persons, as R. H. with his litteral sense would have all these
expounded, but all of them successions of such and such Bodies or Companies of
Men for such a space of time together.

And before we go any further, The Cognation and Identity, or correspondent
Opposition of the Middle Synchronals.
let us observe of those Synchronals we have noted hitherto, what either
correspondent opposition, or else close cognation or identity they have one
with another, which is a further mavelous confirmation of their
Synchronizing. That the Two-horned Beast and the Whore signify one and the
same thing, and that the Ten-horned Beast Chap. 13. and the Ten-horned Beast
Chap. 17. are one and the same Beast I have noted already, and the cognation of
the one two with the other two is apparent, the former being the Ecclesiastical
part of the Roman Empire, (and more particularly the Roman Hierarchy, as
appears by the Name and Number of the Two-horned Beast, and the Seven Hills the
seat of the Whore, for which Rome is most remarkable; as also that it is the
City that ruled over the Kings of the Earth in St John's time, according to the
Interpretation of the Angel) and the latter, the Secular part of the Roman
Empire debauched chiefly by the Roman Hierarchy with gross Pagan-like
Superstition and Idolatry. And the Secular and Ecclesiastic part together thus
Paganizing in a new Mode, are the Gentiles that tread under foot the Holy City
or Outer Court of the Temple till the seventh Semitime of the forty two
Prophetical months, that is, till the Rising of the Witnesses. And these are
the Synchronals of the debauched part of the Roman Empire for this time: But
the Apostolic Church never failed notwithstanding in this Apostasy. This
sincere part therefore that run in correspondent opposition to the former are
set out by The Woman ( viz. crowned with twelve Stars, to denote her
Apostolicalness though now) in the Wilderness, The two Witnesses prophesying in
Sackcloth, The Servants of God sealed in their foreheads; The bodies of the
Witnesses lying dead three days and an half and unburied; which shows, that
the Apostolic Christians though in being could not be a Living Body Politic,
that is, invested with Open Power and Rule during the seven half-dayes or
semitimes of the Beast, till they were in the seventh Semitime expiring: As the
two mournful Witnesses could only protest and witness against the cruel
Idolatrous proceedings of the Beast, and denounce the judgments of God against
them, but proceed no further. For that the three days and an half of their
bodies lying unburied, is the same with the one thousand two hundred and sixty
days of their mournful Prophecy is plain from hence, that else no war was made
against them, nor they either Politically or Naturally slain, till the last
three years and an half of their prophesying, whenas they were Politically
slain all the while, and some hundred thousands of them in a Natural sense
slain at times, some by the sword, others by fire and faggot, etc. Which is a
demonstration, that the three days and an half must be understood in the same
sense that three times and an half, or one thousand two hundred and sixty
days. The Virgin Company also by their avowed and resolved Virginity was a
perpetual reproach to the Whore of Babylon; and the one hundred forty four
thousand marked with the Lambs Name, and the name of his Father in their
forehead are in an apparent opposition to the marked slaves of the two-horned
Beast. And this being the state of the Roman Empire for about something more
than four hundred years after Christ till the seventh Semitime was expiring, it
is no wonder that the Judgments of God thundered upon them under the sounding
of the six first Trumpets, and that at the beginning of their sounding, one
hundred forty four thousand Servants of God are marked to save them both from
these Judgments, and also from the debauchings of the Two-horned Beast, or
Whore of Babylon; which signifies that God would preserve to himself a pure
Apostolic Church, notwithstanding all the Calamities, Persecutions, and gross
Superstitions and Idolatries raging in the Empire. And conformable to the
account of this period of time are the Pergamenian and Thyatirian Intervals:
For during eight parts of nine of the Pergamenian Interval, and all the
Thyatirian, was this Pagan-like Superstitious and Idolatrous State of the
Church, and there is express mention of the Idolothyta in both those Intervals,
but in none else; and the persecuting the Pure Christians by the sword in one,
and by fire and faggot in the other, is plainly made out in our Exposition. So
admirably do the Visions correspond belonging to this Time and State of the
Roman Empire, which the Angels Interpretation has pitched upon: So that there
is all the assuredness of the truth of the thing hitherto that Humane Reason
can desire, and that the middle Synchronals are to be expounded in such a
sense, as I have expounded them in my Exposition of the Apocalypse.

The Antemedial Synchronals how well they suit with the Times they run into.
But let us now proceed, and see how the Antemedial Synchronals will suit with
the Times which they necessarily run into; (for that they all precede these
middle Synchronals, and so Synchronize one with another, has been plainly
proved in my Defense of Mr Mede) which Antemedial Synchronals, are, The six
first Seals immediately preceding the six first Trumpets: The Inner Court,
(which is the Court of the Temple and the Altar) symmetral or commensurate: The
Woman clothed with the Sun, and crowned with twelve Stars not yet gone into the
Wilderness, and The fight of Michael with the Dragon while this Woman is in
travail. These are the Antemedial Synchronals, and therefore all of them
necessarily run into the Primitive Times of the Church before its Apostasy,
and reach up to its very first beginning, as soon as the Church, assisted by
the promised aids of Christ after his ascending to his Father, began to
propagate his Kingdom.

There was the beginning of the parturient state of the Woman, whose throes
were great and sharp till Constantines Time, and the Dragon spued out a flood
after her while she was making into the Wilderness, that flood of Contention
about the Arrian Points. Here I will appeal to R. H. or any man else living,
what a fit resemblance the sharp throes of the Woman is of those fierce
resistances and cruel persecutions the Church of Christ found in preaching his
Gospel, and in their endeavoring to enlarge his Kingdom: And how naturally the
conflict betwixt Christianity and the Old Roman Paganism is expressed by the
Fight of Michael with the Seven-headed Dragon: And how significative the
Inner-Court, that is said to be measured and allowed (but the Outer rejected as
incommensurable) is of the first Ages of the Church not yet lapsed into those
gross Superstitions and Pagan-like Idolatries. And lastly, for the first six
Seals, (though the Sealed Book-Prophecy respects the Fate and Affairs of the
Empire rather than of the Church, yet) the first Vision, ( viz.) of the first
Seal, namely, the Heroes on the White Horse, I doubt not but it is Christ more
particularly guiding and assisting the Apostles and other Agents for the
enlarging of his Kingdom in those Times, by sending of the Holy Ghost, and
enabling them to do True Miracles, one of the greatest whereof is this
Apocalypse written by St John; and the mention of a Bow and a Crown, of which
the Right was given him, denotes him aiming at the possession of the Imperial
Crown, the making the whole Roman Empire his Church or Kingdom; which causing
such great mutations in the Empire, the fate of the Empire may very well be
conceived to be concerned therein.

The three next Seals how exquisitely they fit with those Times of the Riders
of the Red, Black and Pale Horses, the Exposition makes good, and they are in a
manner merely touching the Affairs of the Empire, though useful also to the
Church to know where or in what Times they were, and what to expect next: But
the fifth Seal exhibiting the Souls of the slain under the Altar martyred or
sacrificed for their bearing Witness to the Christian Truth, is hugely
congenerous with the sharp throes of the Woman's Childbearing; and the Affairs
of the Empire are here also concerned, great Calamities being to come upon it
for the effusion of this Innocent Blood. And lastly, that great Earthquake
under the sixth Seal, which brought the confusion and subversion of the Old
Pagan Religion; as the Fate of the Empire could not but be concerned therein,
so also it does fitly fall in with the Victory of Michael over the Dragon, and
his casting him down unto the Earth: So agreeable are the Primitive Times of
the Church to all these Antemedial Synchronals.

And what is still more admirable, we may further observe how exactly the
Ephesine and Smyrnean Interval of the Church agree with those Times, and with
the said Antemedial Synchronals of the Sealed and Opened Book. For as in the
first Seal, the Heroes on the White Horse is brought in earnestly aiming with
his Bow and Arrow at a Crown, the Right of which is given to him; so the first
Interval of the Church, (viz.) the Ephesine has its name from a Paronomastical
Allusion to (...), that signifies an earnest desire after a thing, and in the
Smyrnean Interval (which with the Ephesine equalizes the Time of the Fight of
Michael with the Dragon, till his Victory over him under the sixth Seal, and is
the Interval of the Ten noted Persecutions of the Church) it is said to the
Church in that Interval; Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee the
Crown of Life; that is, the Imperial Crown, Constantine turning Christian under
the sixth Seal at the expiration of the Smyrnean Interval so called from the
bitterness of Persecution in that succession of the Church. But the great
Encomiums of the Church in those two Intervalls answer handsomely to the Inner
Court of the Temple and Altar, which is said to be symmetral, and allowed; and
the Altar there to the many Martyrdoms of the Primitive Christians sacrificed
for the profession of the Christian Faith in the Smyrnean Interval of the
Church: So wonderful an harmony is there of these Antemedial Synchronals of all
sorts, with the History of those Primitive Times, and with one another: So that
it must be mere stupidity, or obstinate perverness that hinders any one from
assenting to the Truth in this point.

We have seen what a fit and effectual Key the Interpretation of the Angel has
been for the opening the true meaning of all the Antemedial and Medial Visions
of the Apocalypse: The Post-medial Visions, their Order, and the Congruity of
those that are made to Synchronize one with another.
Which since they concern things past, the sense of the Visions is the more
assured and certain to us: But the Postmedial Visions being all of them in a
manner to come, the sense cannot be so precise, fixed and certain. But thus much
is manifest out of the Interpretation of the Angel, that they are to succeed
the Rising of the Witnesses, or the expiring of the seventh Semitime of the
forty two Prophetical months of the Beast: which seventh Semitime, or seventh
Semiday or Half-day by the Interpretation of the Angel reaching to our Times,
or the Times of the Reformation, it is evident that the Reformation is the
Rising of the Witnesses. After which immediately succeeds the seventh Trumpet;
within which in gross or at large are contained, The Millennial Reign of
Christ, The Ligation and Incarceration of Satan, The Palm-bearing Company, The
time of the New Jerusalem, or of the Lambs Wife; And this is so firmly proved
by Mr Mede's Synchronisms, that there can be no doubt but that those glorious
and happy times of the Church upon Earth are yet to come, which is the main
scope of the Postmedial Visions. But in our Table of Synchronisms things are
delineated more distinctly and particularly, and it mainly differs from that
part of Mr Mede's Table, in that I have divided the Seventh Trumpet into Seven
Thunders, and placed the Seven Vials under the First Thunder. For in that they
are the Seven last Plagues, that they should belong to the last Wo-Trumpet
there is all the reason in the world. And that the Vials must of necessity
follow the Rising of the Witnesses, I have elsewhere sufficiently demonstrated.

It remains only that we briefly note the Reasonableness of the order of the
Postmedial Visions in my Table, and the Congruity of those that are set down as
Synchronizing one with another, all which I have referred to the order of the
Seven Thunders: And that we also observe how the expiration of the time of the
Beast and his destruction, and so likewise of the Whore at the Rising of the
Witnesses is to be understood only of the Entireness of their Kingdom or Rule.
And that according to that analogy all the rest of the Synchronals are to be
understood, namely as there is but a partial destruction of the Kingdom of the
Beast and the Whore, so there is but a partial and imperfect advance toward the
Millennial Reign of Christ, and the New Jerusalem, etc.

This being premised we will take notice of the order of the Seven Thunders and
what Visions Synchronize with them. As, with the first Thunder Synchronizeth
the effusion of the Seven Vials, as the Seven Thunders with the Seventh Trumpet
and the Seven Trumpets with the Seventh Seal. With the Sixth Vial synchronizeth
the Harvest, and also the Preparedness of the Spouse of the Lamb. Whereby the
conversion of the Jews is intimated to be under the Sixth Vial, as also in part
at least, by the Sixth Vial it self. And if this be not the time of their
conversion, there appears none in the Apocalypse for them. And R. H. himself is
very earnest for the conversion of the Jews, though he is utterly mistaken in
the application of the Apocalyptick Visions to that event. With the Seventh
Vial synchronizeth the Treading of the Wine Press and also the Battle of the
Rider of the White Horse; and how necessarily these three Visions are tied
together in one time my Exposition of the Apocalypse does clearly demonstrate,
and that the fulfilling of all these three Visions are an utter destruction of
Babylon the Roman Hierarchy, and as it were an universal conversion of the
heathenish Unbelievers to the Faith of the Gospel. Wherefore the City Babylon
being thus destroyed; with the Second Thunder naturally synchronizeth the
Descent of the New Jerusalem, that City or Polity coming down from Heaven, and
quite contrary to the carnal and tyrannical City or Polity of Babylon. Under
the Second Thunder therefore is the constitution of Laws for universal
Christendom by a truly holy and truly Ecumenical Council really inspired from
Heaven. With which time therefore naturally synchronizeth the Laying hold of
Satan. And this City or Polity the New Jerusalem thus constituted being the
Kingdom of Christ, the duration thereof does of necessity immediately follow
under the next, that is, the Third Thunder, and is that Millennial Reign of
Christ properly so called, wherein his Laws and Discipline are vigorously and
faithfully executed and observed. Whence, with this Millennial Reign the close
Imprisoning of Satan for a thousand years is rightly conceived to synchronize.
Which time of his Imprisonment his letting loose again immediately following,
it is evident that his letting loose synchronizeth with the Fourth Thunder. And
the besieging the Holy City by Gog and Magog as an effect of this, with the
Fifth; And the coming of Christ to judgment to defeat the Besiegers, with the
Sixth Thunder. From whence it follows that the New Jerusalem or Holy City
continues all the time of the Third, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Thunders, though
the Millennial Reign of Christ properly so called is contained within the space
of the Third Thunder; and the Palm-bearing Company within the space of the
Second and Third. For when the Devil has got loose again, their Palms may be
justly conceived to wither in their hands; and yet considering they are still
in their hands, you may phansy if you will that they reach from the Second
Thunder to the Seventh, as the Exclusion of the Wicked Rabble out of the Holy
City reaches through the Third, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Thunders. And lastly
with the Seventh Thunder synchronizeth the Conflagration of the Earth by
Thundering and Lightning properly so called, as also the consummate Salvation
of the Saints or their transvection into those eternal Mansions of glory.

These are the main Postmedial Visions of the Opened Book-Prophecy, and you see
how natural their order is thus disposed under the Seven Thunders which fill
the Seventh Trumpet of the Sealed Book, and what cognation there is betwixt
those Visions that are made to synchronize one with another; We will only add
how they correspond with the Intervals of the Churches. And it is observable
that as the Ephesine and Smyrnean Interval did totally symbolize with the
Antemedial Visions and eight of nine parts of the Pergamenian and the whole
Thyatirian Interval with the Medial; so the Sardian, Philadelphian and
Laodicean Intervals do most conspicuously symbolize will these Postmedial
Visions. For as the effusion of the Vials is ushered in with Music Chap. 15.
so the very name of Sardis is as much as Canticum laetitiae a Song of joy. And
as the state of the first Six Vials is but an unsettled imperfect state in
comparison of what is to come, so the Interval of the Church of Sardis, whose
Works are said not to be perfect before God, is terminated with the Sixth Vial.
But Philadelphia that excellent state of the Church, that Interval reaches
through the Seventh Vial and the Second and Third Thunder; it being the
Philadelphian Army which Christ so commends in his Epistle to that Church that
atchieves that notable victory under the Seventh Vial, and it being expressly
said to that Church, That the name of the City New Jerusalem should be writ
upon her, which comes down from Heaven, which comes to pass under the Second
Thunder. And lastly, The Interval of Laodicea synchronizing with the Fourth,
Fifth and Sixth Thunders, The First whereof is the loosing of Satan, The next
the Siege by Gog and Magog, and the last, The coming of Christ to Judgment, how
congenerous this is to the remisness of Laodicea who brought this Siege upon
her self, by her lukewarmness and laziness, is obvious to observe. And also how
well the name of Laodicea which signifies the Judging of the People, agrees
with Christ's coming to judge the people under the Sixth Thunder.

R. H. his groundless drolling against the Mystical sense of the Apocalypse,
with an Answer to some chief Objections of his against Mr. Medes Expositions.
Wherefore in virtue of the Angels Interpretation, Chap. 17. that Royal Key of
the Apocalypse, with the addition of irrefutable Synchronisms, there being
given such a coherent Mystical sense throughout all parts so wonderfully
harmonizing one with another; And according to the Angels Interpretation a
litteral sense being impossible in the middle Synchronals, whereby we are
assured also of the mystical sense of the Antemedial and Postmedial Visions, I
dare appeal even to R. H. himself if there be not more rhythme than Reason in
those drolling Verses of his made in imitation of Martials upon Sabidius, O
litteral sense I love thee not, the cause I cannot tell,
This only I can say of thee, I love thee not, farewell.
And whether it had not been more advisable for him to have abstained from
meddling with these holy and mysterious Oracles of God than to have rushed upon
them with so little reverence and fear, and to have bethought himself, that a
person so Learned and Pious as Mr Mede, and pursuing these studies with that
Care and Devotion could not easily be mistaken in the main. Nor has R. H.
produced any thing material against any part of Mr Medes Interpretations, no
more nor so much as against his Synchronisms. I will only give a taste of one
or two of his best Objections, that you may judge thereby of the rest. For my
Epilogue is swollen too big already.

Against the Rider of the White Horse, in the first Seal, his being Christ
miraculously assisting his Church in the Apostles Times, he objects, That it is
Christ, ( viz.) the Lamb that shows the Rider of the White Horse by opening
this Seal, and the Revealer and the Revealed cannot be the same. As if a man
could not show himself in person if he will, and so be both the Revealer and
the Revealed; much more in representation or Image: Not to add, that it is the
Angel that is the shower of the whole Scene of this Vision, and makes a double
representation of Christ here, the one as he is the chief Revealer of the
Vision, the other as a Principal Person beginning that Scene, that the Vision
of the Seals represents.

That Objection is more material touching the first Trumpet, where it is said,
And the third part of trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.
Where Trees signifying the great Ones, and the Grass the Plebeians, or Common
People, according to Mr Mede, it will follow, says he, that there will be no
Common People left for the ensuing Plagues to take hold of. But he that
understands the Prophetic style, and observes in what various senses [all] is
taken, will not in the least be scandalized. I remember somewhere in Drusius,
that he observes that (...), All, sometimes is simply taken for all, sometimes
for the greater part, sometimes for many and sometimes for a few. And this
latitude there is without any pretense that I can remember: But here it is a
notable elegancy, For having said, the third part of the Trees were burnt up
(where the third part does not signify Numerally but Symbolically denoting the
Roman Empire) by a Logoprepia in the Cortex of the Vision, it was to be said,
and all green Grass was burnt up: where notwithstanding All signifies no more
than a good deal, though for decorum sake in the Cortex of the Vision, it was
to be said [ All] none of the Grass in likelihood escaping when the third part
of Trees was burnt down to the root; for so (...) signifies.

Against the fifth Trumpet also he objects, That the Locusts cannot be the
Saracens, because the Locusts did only hurt the body, not kill it outright:
And that they were only to hurt the bad not the good. But I answer, the not
killing is not understood of particular men, but of the Eastern Empire, that
they should not make it cease to be the Roman Empire still, which the Turks did
effect. And it is not said they should hurt no good men, but that they should
only hurt those men that had not the Seal of God in their foreheads; whereby is
denoted the safety of a certain part of his Church, both from the violence and
impostures of the Saracens.

And lastly, against the sixth Trumpet he objects, That the Turks never came
into the field with an Army of two hundred thousand thousand, that they have
Foot as well as Horse, and that they kill men not by mere fire, smoke and
brimstone but by bullets. But I answer to the first, That it is an usual scheme
of speech to put a finite number for an indefinite, and a finite vast number is
here put for an indefinite numerous multitude, and it is well known the Armies
of the Turks are very numerous. To the second, That the Turkish Foot being not
so considerable as their Horse, and the name of the Turks in Greek History, as
Mr Mede observes, being usually Persae, which signifies Horsemen, to the end
that this amongst other things, may be a note that the Turks are meant, they
are all represented as Horsemen. And to the last, That the mention of bullets
is with admirable judgment and elegancy omitted, and consentaneously to an
intimation in the Vision it self, verse. 17. And thus I saw the Horses (...),
our English translates it, in the Vision, but it should be in Appearance, or to
look unto: And so (...), when nothing was perceived by a spectator of the
battle, but fire, smoke, and the scent of brimstone, and yet men at the firing
off, ever and anon to fall down dead, nothing being perceived but these; by
these three (...) in appearance, (viz.) by the fire, and by the smoke, and by
the sulphur was the third part of men, that is, the men of the Roman Empire
killed, no bullets being seen by the spectator that struck them down: So witty,
true and elegant is this description, setting the thing out just as it was
(...) to appearance. This is enough for a taste, to discover what a nothing it
is, that is to be alleged against Expositions, regulated by that
Interpretation of the Angel, and irrefutable Synchronisms, such as I have
maintained Mr Mede's to be for the main.

Wherefore there being that firmness and solidity Mr Medes way, What the
Motives were that drove R. H. to reject the Mystical way of Interpreting the
Apocalypse, and embrace the Litteral, and how insufficient.
and such wild extravagances, and indeed impossibilities in R. H. his way, who
makes Asia the only Place or Scene of the Apocalyptick Visions, and contends,
that all of them are to be fulfilled in a litteral sense, and that none of them
are yet fulfilled, nor will be God knows when; one would wonder that a man of
his Learning and Parts, which he shows so considerably in other points, should
become so marvellously delirant in this. But that I may not seem less ready to
take notice of his virtues, than I have been to expose his weaknesses, it is
nothing else so far as I can find, but an high strain of Civility to that Lady
City of Europe, Rome, the she may not be deemed the Whore of Babylon, And deep
pangs of kindness and charity to the Papists, that the Protestants may not
begin a War with them upon account of their Religion, Disp. 12. Quest. 5. and
lastly, no small measure of officiousness, and respect to our Church of
England, that she may not be deemed Antichristian by the Mystical
Interpretations of the Revelation, ( Praef. page 2.) that has thus necessitated
R. H. to adhere to the litteral sense of the Apocalypse, and for greater
safeness to remove the Scene out of Europe into Asia, and still to make more
sure, to affirm, that the Visions ar to be fulfilled in the order as they stand
in the Revelation: So that until there appear in the Land of Asia, two hundred
thousand thousand bob-tailed horses, whose bob-tailes are in the shape of
Serpents with heads and mouths in them, that have fire, smoke and brimstone
coming out of them, as his Paraphrase describes the very tails themselves, as
well as the horses heads like to Lions, with fire, smoke and brimstone issuing
out of them, till this strange sight appear in the Land of Asia, there is no
Conversion of the Jews to be expected, though he seems tooth and nail for that
Opinion, no two-horned Beast to be seen, much less any Whore of Babylon, which
comes five Chapters later than he; (and both which fond men, such as Mr Mede,
and other Mystical Interpreters that insist in his footsteps, interpret of the
Roman Hierarchy:) And I add further, no Resurrection first nor second, nor any
coming of Christ to Judgment, (for these come two or three Chapters later than
the Whore) till these two hundred thousand thousand bob-tailed Steeds with
Lions heads and Serpents tails spitting fire, smoke and brimstone at both ends
have appeared in the Land of Asia. How ridiculous and profane soever this may
seem to the Serious, or grateful to the Atheistical, R. H. notwithstanding is
so gravely and devoutly confident on the matter, that in his Preface, he
desires the Reader to give God the Glory, and not him, for this his solid
litteral Interpretation of the Apocalypse, and desires also, That the Lord who
is the Author of the Prophecy, and revealed it to John, would reveal the Truth
to him; as if the Reader was to find it in this his new and rare Litteral way.

But to examine now as briefly as we may the three grand causes or grounds of
his betaking himself to this new Invention, never yet met with in any other
Writer whatsoever, as he but truly and justly boasts of himself in the
beginning of his Preface.

Concerning the first therefore I answer, That I commend Civility and fair
Language so far as is consistent with Truth: But if by the Interpretation of
the Angel, the Whore of Babylon that rides the Beast, Chap. 17. is necessarily
and inevitably the Roman Hierarchy debauching the Empire with Idolatry, I will
ask R. H. whether he takes himself to be a more wise and just Nomenclator than
the Holy Ghost speaking by the voice of an Angel, and whether we have not
sufficient warrant to call Rome or the Roman Hierarchy, the Whore of Babylon,
we having the Example of such an infallible (...), or imposer of names: and
whether he himself is not to take the less offense at it, he expressly declaring
at the end of his Book, that God may permit the Turk for the punishment of
Idolatry to take the City of Rome and possess himself of it.

To the second I answer, That I dearly embrace that Christian good Nature in
him, and great abhorrence from War and Bloodshed, especially upon account of
Religion, but withal I affirm, that with this Christian temper my Exposition
of the Apocalypse, though I follow Mr Medes Synchronisms for the main, and
interpret it Mystically, better agrees than R. H. his Litteral Interpretation,
which seems framed in a tenderness to the worldly peace of the Church of Rome
only, but mine tends to a peace and cessation of Wars and Persecution in all
Christendom. Let R. H. read my Preface, Sect. 12. and then tell me whether his
Litteral sense, or my Mystical sense is more abhorrent from persecution, war
and bloodshed, and better consists with Christian peace and charity.

But he, while he seems so solicitous for the Church of Rome in his Litteral
Interpretation of the Apocalypse, cares not to disarm all the Reformed Churches
of that just defense which apparently they have out of the Apocalypse rightly
understood for their separation from Rome: whereby they can demonstrate
themselves neither Schismatics nor Heretics, nor ought to have been massacred
and burnt for such, to the exhausting of the lives of several hundred thousand
innocent Souls that could not stoop to their Idolatries: What a preposterous
piece of Charity therefore is it in R. H. that in a tenderness to the peace of
the Church of Rome, he will despoil his own Church, and all the Reformed
Churches of their just and most effectual defense against that blood-thirsty
Hierarchy, who have drunk the blood of so many hundred thousands of innocent
dissenters, and if their Interest require it, and opportunity give leave, are,
it is to be feared, ready to drink as much more? But for my own part I am
against all War upon account of Religion, and all bloody Persecutions of one
Party or other, nor does my Interpretation of the Apocalypse require any such
thing: But that they that are unjustly assaulted may defend themselves R. H.
himself allows against the Papists in the Conclusion of his Book in these
express words: And so stands the Case betwixt Us and Rome, if they assault us
we may assault them, if they begin with us we may defend our selves, and offend
our foes, until they be minded to be quiet and agree on peace upon safe terms,
and firm foundation. And the Mystical Interpretation of the Apocalypse implies
no more against the persons of the Romanists than thus. But that their Policy
quatenus Idolatrous and persecutive will be confounded, methinks R. H. should
conceive there is no inconvenience in that, unless he were a lover of Idolatry
and Persecution more than of the purity of Gods Worship, Goodness, Equity and
Truth. Therefore the second cause of his adhering to a Litteral Exposition of
the Apocalypse is thus quite blown away.

And for his third and last, though the Church of England cannot but take in
good part his kindness and well-meaning in her behalf against such phancyfull
Sectaries as would prove her Antichristian out of the Mystical Interpretation
of the Apocalypse, yet the most Orthodox, the most Pious, and the most Learned
Clergymen of the Church of England, to whom he dedicates his meaning of the
Revelation, will easily understand that he does our Church a great disservice
by exploding all Mystical Interpretations of the Apocalypse, the true Mystical
Explication thereof (such as I have pitched upon, and such as I challenge R. H.
or any man else living to show any flaw of moment therein) excusing our English
Church from all suspicion of that Antichristianism which is deciphered in the
Apocalypse, as does appear by the second Consectary of my Ioynt-Exposition,
Synops. Prophet. Book 2. Chap. 5. Besides what occurrs (in my Preface to my
Synopsis Sect. 17.) of a peculiar Attestation to the Church of England from the
completion of the Prophecy of the rising of the Witnesses. Not to omit also
that according to our mystical Interpretation, Episcopacy was in the Church in
the Symmetral times thereof. And that there is no warrant for separation from
the Church of England, it being so considerable a part of the Reformed Church
or the Church of Sardis. So plain is it that R. H. does disservice to our
Church by decrying all Mystical Interpretations of the Apocalypse. In the mean
time I have abundantly shown how altogether groundless as well as how
extravagant R. H. his Hypothesis is who would have the Apocalypse expounded in
a litteral sense, and supposes the visions must be fulfilled in the same order
they occurr in the Text; And how weak his objections have proved against Mr
Mede's Synchronisms.

That Mr. Mede never disapproved or was out of conceit with his own
Synchronisms.
But as weak as they are, they were the best his cause could afford him, and his
way more laudable thus to combat with his adversary in the open field, to try
if he could vanquish him, than to use those small arts and petty tricks that is
usual with a party of men that think any thing just that is for their Interest,
and stick not to report of men when they are dead, that they had changed their
opinions, whom, they being fixed upon firm grounds, they could never move when
they were alive. And thus as I have heard, has Mr Mede been served. His
singular Learning and Piety being a great countenance to what tenants he held,
and therefore the most plausible as well as the most compendious confutation
being his own disapproving of them upon better thoughts, there has been a
report raised that himself before he died was out of conceit with his own
Synchronisms. Which that it is a mere figment any unprejudiced man may be
satisfied from these brief considerations.

1. First, That in neither of those that wrote his life any such thing is
mentioned, nor in the Preface to his works in Folio, the writer whereof I know
to have been so curious in all things touching Mr Mede and so faithful and
impartial, that if it had been true it had not been omitted. 2. That it was the
Genius of Mr Mede as to be exceeding cautious how he entertained an opinion, so
to be as fixed and immovable when he had once entertained it. 3. He was an holy
conscientious man neither covetous nor ambitious, and therefore devoid of all
temptation to dissemble, and there was no persecution in those days to fright
him into a fit of dissembling. 4. Nor did he live till he was so old as to
dote, he dying in the fifty second year of his age, and therefore his
Synchronisms being for the main so firm as I have maintained them to be against
R. H. it was impossible but he should always be able to discern the validity of
them. 5. These truths as you may see, in his Clavis Apocalyptica, being
received by him with such exceeding great Reverence, Devotion and Thanksgiving
to God for his assistance and illumination, it is a most incredible prodigy,
when there is so little reason for it, that he should prove guilty of such
profane levity, as so rashly to reject what he had so devotionally received.
6. And lastly, These Synchronisms being the necessary basis of all his
Expositions of the Visions of the Apocalypse, in which as we may see in his
Epistles, he persisted to the very last, it is necessary that he should
likewise retain the same opinion of his Synchronisms to the very last. And Mr
Potter's invention touching the Number of the Beast, which falls in with his
own Interpretations of the Apocalypse, and would signify little without them,
(truths so closely hanging together on one string,) he gave I say a very high
Encomium of that invention of Mr Potter's in a letter written not passing half
a year before he dyed.
A confutation of a novel conceit of R. F. that the Number of the Beast is not
666. but 42.
And therefore for the vindication of Mr Mede's and Mr Potter's credit and of
the truth and solidity of that invention, I think it not amiss to bestow a few
lines, in confuting a novel conceit of R. F. that makes the number of the Beast
not to be 666, but forty two, that all sorts of coverings may be removed from
betwixt the Readers eye and the Truth.

The Number of the Beast, says he, is not 666. but forty two only, forasmuch
as the Figures in the number imply only that sum, which also agrees exactly
with the number of the forty two Pagan Emperors from Julius Caesar to
Constantine the great, when Rome or Babylon fell, and upon whose fall the
Saints reigned a thousand years, till Gog and Magog, that is, the Turk took
Constantinople. This is the sum of his Hypothesis, which how weak and absurd it
is I shall now briefly disclose.

1. First then, He does not prove, but only suppose, that the number of the
Beast denotes the time of his continuance and not his nature or constitution.
Which seems hugely improbable, the number of the Chiliads or Regiments of the
Lamb 144. denoting the nature of them and being to be numbered by the extraction
of the square Root.

2. He supposes not proves, that the letters of the Greek Alphabet when they
are set together in one line as (...) have but the value of their place in the
Alphabet, as that Iota should stand for nine, (...) for ten, (...) for
fourteen, (...) for seventeen and so of the rest. A man may have an humor as
Homer had to write as many Books as there are letters in the Alphabet, and so
(...) will be the first Book, (...) the ninth Book, (...) the fourteenth, (...)
the seventeenth, and so of the rest. But they will be then only numbers Ordinal
not Cardinal, nor in that sense fit to be put together to make up a sum.

3. The folly of this pretense is discovered in the very number it self (...).
For if it were as this Writer would have it, that the value of each Figure
should not exceed the Number of its place. And that (...) should stand only for
twenty two, (...) for fourteen, the next should not be (...) but (...) which
has the sixth place in the Alphabet, but (...) being no letter of the Alphabet
(unless you will have it the same with (...), which will be as much as eighteen
nineteen, and so quite confound the number of forty two) it is an infallible
indication that (...) is to be numbered the common way, since (...) is a Figure
for that common way of numbering, and that therefore (...) is 666. not forty two.

4. If this were the way of numbering, it were mere luck not skill to be able to
number the number of the Beast. But the Text says. Here is wisdom, let him
that has understanding number, the number of the Beast.

5. He does not prove but suppose, that the Number of the Beast belongs to the
Ten-horned Beast not to the Two-horned Beast which is the power Hierarchical
not Secular. And which Two-horned Beast in my Synopsis Prophetica, I have most
evidently demonstrated to be the same with the Whore of Babylon in my
Ioynt-Exposition of the seventeenth and thirteenth Chapters of the Apocalypse.

6. The Whore and the Two-horned Beast being the same, the Number (...) belongs
to them both it to either. And that it belongs to the Two-horned Beast, besides
Chap. 13. verse. 16, 17. where the Image of the Beast causes men to receive the
mark of the Beast, which therefore must needs be the Two-horned Beast; that
also Chap. 15. verse. 2. (...), shows plainly that the Mark and the Number of
the name belongs to the Two-horned Beast contrary to this Writers supposition.

7. Wherefore seeing the number (...) is the number of the Whore, and the
number of the Whore indicated by (...), in allusion to the Hebrew word (...),
which signifies (...), and the value of whose letters contain 666. thus: (...)
60 (...) 400 (...) 6 (...) 200
as Peganius, that pious and ingenious Interpeter has well observed, it
plainly follows that (...) is not 42. but 666.

8. To which we may add that the number being the number of the name of that
Beast to which the number belongs, let this Writer, as I can tell him that the
number 666. is the number of the name LATEINOS, let him I say tell me, what
name the number forty two is the number of.

9. Historians ordinarily number but forty Emperors from Julius Caesar to
Constantine, and Philippus Arabs was a Christian, so that there will be but
thirty nine Pagan Emperors: But suppose there be forty two Pagan Emperors: Yet

10. These forty two Emperors are not the Beast, and therefore forty two
cannot be properly the number of the Beast.

11. These Emperors are indeed the Head of the Beast, but according to this
Writer, the Beast. Therefore the Head of the Beast, O rem ridiculam and
monstrosam! will have seven heads, Chap. 13. verse. 1.

12. And Verse. 2. this Head of the Beast will have the feet of a Bear coming
out of it, which is a sign that this fancy of this otherwise ingenious Writer
has neither head not foot.

13. The Beast received a deadly wound, and was healed again, so that all the
world wondered after the Beast; but did these forty two Pagan Emperors in their
persons receive any such mortal wound, and were healed again, that all the
world wondered at them.

14. Men received the number of the Beast as a token of their Allegiance, verse.
17. but the number perpetually varying from Julius Caesar to Constantines time,
how could they be marked with the number of the Beast? It could not be forty
two in Julius Caesar's time but 1. in Augustus his time 2. in Tiberius's 3. and
so on.

And lastly, the Beast, whether you understand it of the forty two Emperors
Pagan, or the Pagan Empire from Julius to Constantine the Great, (for the
succession of these heads, and the continuance of the Empire Pagan from that
time will be the same) it is plainly said in the Text, verse. 5. That this
continuance is forty and two months: which whether they be meant Literally,
and then it is but three years and an half, or stilo Prophetico, signify forty
two months of years, that One thousand two hundred and sixty years, how ill the
sums agree with about Three hundred and fifty, the distance betwixt Julius
Caesar and Constantine the Great, let any one judge; so impossible is this
Writers conceit of forty two being the number of the Beast: And that Appendage
is but a further clog to it. For, 1. That Babylon which St John describes the
quality and ruin of, Chap. 17. and 18. rides the Beast which was, is not, and
yet is: which is the Roman Empire after it had degenerated into a kind of
Christiano-paganism, as I have with undeniable evidence demonstrated in my
Ioynt-Exposition of the seventeenth and thirteeth Chapters of the Apocalypse:
Wherefore that Babylon can be neither Rome Pagan, nor Rome Christian, and
consequently nor have her Fall in the times of Constantine. 2. The lamentation
over Babylon Chap. 18. shows, that not the City of Rome but the Papal Hierarchy
is meant thereby, and their Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Merchandises
perstringed. For as for Rome her self it was never famed for any great City of
Traffic; but this City of Babylon is described Chap. 18. as if it were the
greatest Emporium in the world. 3. The thousand years Reign of the Saints could
not begin in Constantines time, forasmuch as the binding and imprisoning the
Devil is coincident with that time, and as Grotius notes, is to commence from
that Edict of Constantine in Eusebius, ubi vincti Draconis fit mentio. Now let
us compare the description of the binding and imprisoning this Old Serpent,
Chap. 20 verse. 3. ( He was cast into the bottomless pit and shut up there, and
a Seal set upon him, that he should deceive the Nations no more till the
thousand years were fulfilled) with the state of things in this Millennium
begun in Constantine's time. There had not past quite Three hundred years of
this Thousand, wherein the Devil should deceive the Nations no more, but up
starts the Pope and Mahomet, two so great Impostors, that this Writer says,
page 21. the lot is fallen betwixt them who should be accounted the grand
Antichrist; and page 20. he does of his own accord and acknowledge the Murders
and Idolatries of Rome Papal. How is this consistent with the Devils being
close sealed up in the bottomless pit till the thousand years were expired? 4.
And lastly, the Turks besieging and taking Constantinople, which is his chief
Argument that the thousand years Reign of the Saints began in Constantine's
time, cannot be the besieging the Holy City, ( Revel. Chap. 20. verse. 9.) by
Gog and Magog, because the Holy City though it be besieged is not taken, but
the Turks have taken Constantinople, and possessed it above these two hundred
years: So that there is not one sound thread in the whole contexture of his
Hypothesis. Which I have thus copiously shown, on purpose to undeceive some
wanton confident wits, that think the Interpretation of the Apocalypse is a
mere piece of arbitrarious fancy, and that a man may make quidlibet ex quolibet
as he pleases, whenas there is but one right sense, which he that misseth will
be obnoxious to be thus entangled and bewildred by his rash and unskilful
adventures.


The number twenty five in what regard a character of the Roman Hierarchy or
Church of Rome.
In the mean time we see how sound Mr Mede's Judgment is in his high approbation
of Mr Potter's Invention touching the number of the Beast, that it is, not only
666 (for who ever doubted it till now, and we have abundantly shown, that there
is neither now any reason to doubt it) but is to be numbered by extracting the
square Root, which is twenty five, and is a number notoriously significant of
the Papal Hierarchy; Mr Potter, Chap. 19. proving very solidly, That the first
established number at once of Cardinal Titles and Cardinals, which was by Pope
Marcellus, was twenty five, which he confirms by at least half a score of good
Authors. And Chap. 20. out of Onuphrius, who writ a particular Discourse of the
Gates of Rome, that there were just twenty five Gates of Rome actually existing
betwixt the times of Pliny and Justinian, which does very well agree, says he,
with that time in which Marcellus did erect twenty five Cardinalships in Rome.
And how in other regards twenty five does characterize the Church of Rome may
be seen in this Author. And yet I do not think it impertinent to add one Regard
more to all these, and that a more Moral and Mystical one; namely, that twenty
five is a circular number arising from five drawn into it self, and ending in
five: For five into five is twenty five, which is a symbol of that circle of
Carnal Rites or Ceremonies in that Church which reach the five Senses only, not
the Renovation of the Inward Man into the living Image of God; as twelve is the
symbol of the Apostolic dispensation, which is the participation of the
promised Spirit of Christ, without which all Religion is but a mere Mask or
dead Vizard.

And now having thus fully vindicated Mr Mede's Synchronisms from the Cavils of
R. H. and the generally approved Mystical way of interpreting the Apocalypse
against his Litteral way, The Ichnography of the Temple, with the Inner and
Outer Court.
and showed the impossibilities and absurdities thereof, after I have set down
the Inchnography of the Temple, and the Inner and Outer Court for the more
easy understanding the eleventh Chapter of the Apocalypse, and those usual
phrases with me, of the Symmetral and Asymmetral times of the Church, I shall
conclude this long Epilogue. Thou must note therefore in the Scheme presented
to thy view, that a b is the Temple it self, a the Sanctum Sanctorum, or Holy
of Holies, and b the Sanctum or Holy, g d the Altar of Holocausts, A g, Ad the
Thysiasterium or Altarium, the place where the Altar stands, AAAA the Inner
Court, this whole space, which is (...), the Inner Court of the Temple,
containing all these things, being measured by the Reed which the Angel gave to
John, Revel. Chap. 11. is called Commensurate or Symmetral, and denotes that
Primitive State of the Church, wherein she had not yet degenerated into
Idolatrous Rites and Usages, and therefore in that regard is approved of the
Spirit of God. These times of the Church I frequently in my writings call
Symmetral, as having not yet deviated in this point from the measure of our
faith and practice, the Word of God. Hence they are deemed by the Holy Ghost
Commensurate or Symmetral.

But the other space B. BBBBBB, which is the Outer Court, is represented as
rejectaneous and profane in these words, verse. 2. (...), But the Outer Court
of the Temple leave out, and measure it not, as being to be trodden down by the
Gentiles, and to be defiled by a new kind of Gentilism and Idolatry, contrary
to the Word of God, which is the true measure of all Christian Rites and
Usages, with which these times not squaring they are called Incommensurate or
Asymmetral: So fitly do these two Courts denote these two different States of
the Church. But they signify not only the order of Dignity or Worth of one
before the other, but of Time also, for the Inner was before the Outer. And
moreover there is the same proportion betwixt the Inner and the Outer Court,
(which is as two to seven, according to Villalpandus his compute) that there is
betwixt the Symmetral times of the Church and the Asymmetral.

Thus have I crowded in more than could be well contained within the ordinary
compass of an Epilogue, What a true and clear Looking-glass of Providence the
Apocalypse is, and of what great consequence it is for all Christians high and
low to have a right understanding thereof.
but it was out of an extreme solicitude that nothing might be wanting to the
clear understanding, and certain assuring of the truth of this our Exposition
of the Apocalypse; it being of so mighty concernment for the Christian World
that this Book be rightly understood, that men may know what Religion they
ought to adhere unto, and what to forsake, and that the great Potentates and
Prelates of Christendom, seeing the State of the Church thus lively and truly
represented in this Looking-glass of Divine Providence, may conscientiously
guide their Affairs accordingly with judgment and prudence, removing what is an
offense in the eyes of God, and like Fathers of their People, and true Sons of
the most High, after so long a Tyrannical Reign of Antichrist bethink
themselves of the further introducing and enlarging the Righteous and
Comfortable Kingdom of Christ, which according to the Romish Expositors
themselves is thus described, Isai. Chap. 32. Behold a King shall reign in
Righteousness, and Princes shall rule in judgment: And a man shall be (that is,
men shall be, and especially they in power) an hiding place from the wind, and
a covert from the tempest, as rivers of waters in a dry place, as the shadow of
a great rock in a weary Land. Such nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers will the
Higher powers be in the Reign of Christ, to all his True and Living Members;
whenas in the Reign of Antichrist, or the Roman Hierarchy, they are the only
men that are exposed to danger, and have been slaughtered, and massacred, and
burnt with fire and faggot some hundred thousands of them, (for keeping Faith
and a good Conscience toward God) upon pretense of their being Heretics.

Of Heresy, and of the secularity of the Roman Hierarchy, and how they that
suffer for that Church are no Christian Martyrs.
Whenas there can be no Heresy, but it must be the profession of something
contrary to the truly Catholic and Apostolic Faith; whereas the Reformed
Churches generally hold all those points of Faith that were professed in the
Symmetral Times of the Church about four hundred years after Christ, before the
Apostasy came in. And certainly the Christian Faith was abundantly complete in
those Primitive Ages and wanted nothing. But the Dissenters from the Church of
Rome are held Heretics by them for not embracing such Articles, and Rites, and
Usages as are maintained by them for mere worldly Interest for increasing the
Power and Revenue of Holy Church as they call it; though in what it differs
from the Reformed Churches, suppose this of England for Example, Holy Church,
or the Roman Hierarchy, are nothing else but a Body Politic of Men that drive
on a Secular Design under a Religious pretense, and so may be looked upon
rather as a Secular Polity than Spiritual; but Christian no further than as to
the profession of that Christianity, we both agree, in a subserviency to their
worldly designs. For if they did in good earnest believe and love the Ancient
Apostolic Christianity, which obtained in the Symmetral Ages of the Church,
which was then consummate, and abundantly sufficient to Salvation, they could
not murder those that do heartily profess it, the rest being no part of that
consummate Christianity, but at best mere moss and filth added to it.

From whence it follows that no one that suffers in the cause of the Roman
Hierarchy or Church of Rome as opposite to the Reformed Churches, suffers as a
Martyr for Christianity, but as a Soldier of fortune that espouses the cause
of a worldly Polity, that guilds it self over with a specious Title of holy
Church. And truly it were very well if they quitted their lives thus as mere
Soldiers of a secular Power. But they giving testimony to all the Abominations
of the Roman Religion by their thus suffering (for they suffer not for the
primitive Apostolic Faith wherein we are all agreed) they giving testimony, I
say, to all their Idolatries, gross superstitions, wicked and Tyrannical Laws
against the true Members of Christ whom they nickname Heretics; (which things
make the Roman Hierarchy the real Antichrist) they are not only not the Martyrs
of Christ but the real Martyrs of Antichrist, they suffering for such Doctrines
and Practices as are against the law of Christ, and are the very support,
constitution, and peculiar interest of Antichrist. But as many as suffer by
this Roman Hierarchy as the faithful servants of Christ in Obedience to his
Laws that are contrary to the Institutes, Doctrines, and Practices of
Antichrist, they die as the real Martyrs of Christ and faithful witnesses
against Antichrist, their witnessing serving no Secular design, but the keeping
faith and a good Conscience and the approving themselves the sincere servants
of Christ.

The main thing therefore that I aim at is this, That they that suffer for
conscience sake by the Church of Rome are Christian Martyrs, and how much their
sufferings are against the Interest of the Secular Powers. And what a weight of
guilt lies upon them that have gratified the Papal Hierarchy by such
persecutions of the conscientious.
That they that suffer by the Roman Hierarchy (instigating the Princes of
Christendom to persecute the conscientious) being the real Martyrs of Christ,
and their persecution only for such things as are both against the Laws of
Christ, and only for the Interest of the Antichristian Hierarchy, nothing for
the secular Powers themselves, (such as are the Invocation of Saints, the
Worshipping of Images, the Adoration of the Host, the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, than which nothing can be imagined more reproachful and
blasphemous against the person of Christ, it exposing him to be swallowed down
into that bag of filth the bodies of men, or to be imprisoned in a Pyxis, to be
gnawn with rats and mice, or if fallen to the ground (and he cannot stay
himself, I mean this Deus Panaceus this Breaden-God of the Pontificians) to be
licked up by every obscene dog. And yet as glibly as he goes down he is a whole
man with head, arms and legs, with flesh and bones, and thus all swallowed down
at once without gnawing or chawing, nay, and that which is still more
prodigious, it is a whole living man in health and vigor, with arms and legs
able to run away from either mouse, rat, or dog, or chase them away from
himself, and yet he suffers himself to be gnawn and eaten up by these vermin) I
say these and such things as these Dissenters suffering for, which are against
common Sense, Scripture and Reason, and against the honor and Institutes of
Christ, and only make for the interest of the Antichristian Hierarchy, to
enrich and magnify their Priesthood as if they were more Omnipotent than God
Almighty, who according to their own Schools can do nothing that implies a
contradiction to be done, whenas Transubstantiation is nothing but a fardle of
flat contradictions, it may justly amaze any considering person, that the Civil
Powers in this long Reign of Antichrist have been so little sensible of their
own Secular Interest ( For in the multitude of People is the Kings honor, but
in the want of people is the destruction of the Prince, as Solomon speaks) as
to have suffered so many thousands of their useful innocent Subjects to be
sacrificed to the lust and ambition of that proud and bloody Hierarchy, to say
nothing of that great guilt of blood that lay upon the Civil Powers themselves
for listening to the counsels of that Iezebel.

The account that lay upon them in those times was heavy enough, when the earth
was as well full of darkness, as of cruel habitations, as the Psalmist speaks.
But now the fuller light of the Gospel being so manifestly dispread through so
great a part of Christendom, and the gross Idolatries, Impostures and Cruelties
of the Roman Church so generally known (which cannot but take hold of the
consciences of them that have the greatest sense and fear of God and the most
sincere inclinations to approve themselves the faithful servants of Jesus
Christ, and therefore will be the most certain to suffer by the barbarous
suggestions of that Woman that is said to be drunk with the blood of the
Saints, and the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus) what a vast weight of guilt will
lie upon such Civil Powers of Christendom as at this time of the day, shall
listen to the wicked suggestions of the abovesaid Iezebel, for the destroying
of the Prophets of the Lord, and whither and how far it will sink them, I dread
to think and am afraid to speak out. But it may be easily collected from the
voice of that Angel, Rev. 14. verse. 9. If any man worship the Beast and his
Image and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand, he shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone, and the smoke of their torment ascends up
for ever and ever. And if this be the fate of those that suffer themselves
through fear and violence to be thus debauched, what will be the fate of them
that force them and debauch them? The mighty shall be mightily tormented, Wisd.
6. verse. 6.

What assurance the Author himself has and others also may have concerning him,
that nothing but the mere Evidence of Truth has cast him upon such sentiments
touching the Church of Rome.
Such things as these being exhibited to the view of all men in this admirable
Looking-Glass of Providence the Apocalypse, which does so fully and faithfully
set forth the state of the Church, and how necessary it is to reform from the
Roman Impurities rather than to have an hankering again after the fleshpots of
Egypt, their gross Superstitions and Idolatries, has made me with all possible
care and diligence unfold the continued sense thereof with an unexceptionable
coherence of things from the beginning to the end of the Interpretation: And in
this Epilogue thus industriously to confute any thing that might seem to have
any show of argument against the truth of my Exposition. And that the Reader
may be less prone to slight my pains herein, I give him to understand that
nothing but the clear evidence of the truth has driven me this way, things
manifestly appearing to me thus, 1. Against my natural inclination which
disposes me to make the best of the Phenomenon of Providence which I meet with
in the world, and to interpret them with all imaginable favor and advantage,
out of that love and honor I bear to that Holy Godhead that is at the Helm and
steers all. And yet let me look never so earnestly upon things and never so
favorably, I cannot perceive otherwise than that the Church of Rome is very
grossly guilty of Idolatry and consequently of most barbarous Murders of
conscientious men that cannot comply with her in that heinous sin against God.
2. Against my repute and estimation in the World, the pretending to understand
the Apocalypse seeming a fanciful ridiculous thing to the Wits of this age that
are ready to snear and flear at any such profession, and indeed at the serious
profession of any Religion at all, as if it were an indication of but mean
parts and wit, and of great ignorance in matters of Philosophy. 3. Against the
civility of my nature thus to declare in such harsh terms, as they cannot but
seem to more courtly ears, That so great a part of the Christian Church as the
Roman Hierarchy, is the Whore of Babylon, which yet closely and impartially
attending to the Interpretation of the Angel, Revel. Chap. 17. verse. 8, 9, etc.
I am as well assured of and as little doubt of as I do of any demonstration in
Euclid. 4. And lastly, Against all my worldly Interest and the safety of my
person, as is plain I think to any one that considers the circumstances of
things of late.

There being therefore thus many clogs in my way I think any man may be well
assured as well as I am my self, that it is merely the Evidence of the truth
that has driven me to assent thereunto. But they that are of another mind from
me I will leave to themselves and others to consider, whether some carnal sense
or worldly Interest has not swayed their judgments. For as for profane Wits
and impatient of considering any thing that is weighty and serious, I will only
say to them, -- (...) while my self in the mean time am so well assured of the
Truths I stand for, that I hope I shall not stick (if Providence call me forth
to it) through the assistances of the promised Spirit of our Lord Jesus, (for
our strength is not of our selves) rather than to sin against God and my own
Conscience, to Seal the said Truths with my Blood.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of all the Treatises contained in Dr H. More's Philosophical and
Theological Volumes, many whereof having been originally writ in English, are
with the rest now published in Latin by the same Author.
PRaefatio generalissima, Vol. Philosop. Tom. 1.
in qua nonnulla obiter de Vita Authoris habentur, de Scriptorum vero
occasionibus ac stylo, generalique universorum scopo fatis fuse agitur.
Enchiridium Ethicum praecipua Moralis Philosophiae Rudimenta complectens, etc.
Scholiis subinde illustratum. Enchiridium Metaphysicum, sive, De Rebus
Incorporeis succincta and luculenta Dissertation, etc. Scholiis multo jam
auctior facta: Ubi inter caetera Objectionibus respondetur Viri Clar. I. C.
Sturmii, Math. and Phys. P. P. Altdorffini. Philosophematum eruditi Authoris
Difficilium Nugarum de Principiis Motuum Naturalium, sive de Essentiis mediis
and de modo Rarefactionis and Condensationis, Examinatio; cum Responsione ad
ejusdem Objectiones Quaestionesve circa Principium Hylarchicum sive Spiritum
Naturae; quae est prior Enchiridii Metaphysici Appendix. Adnotamenta in duas
ingeniosas Dissertationes, alteram Tentamen de Gravitatione and
Non-gravitatione corporum Fluidorum, alteram Observationes circa Experimentum
Torricellianum, quae est Enchiridii Metaphysici Appendix posterior. Ad
clarissimum and eruditissimum virum Christianum Knorrium, de usu december
Sephirotharum, etc. Epistola. Trium Tabularum Cabbalisticarum december Sephirothas
sive Numerationes exhibentium, (viz.) Tabulae Iudaicae vulgaris, Tabulae
Knorrianae vel Lorianae in sublimioris Cabbalae Clavem Zoaristicam destinatae,
and Tabulae Sephirotharum Graecanicae sive Pythagoricae ab H. M. restitutae,
Descriptio and Expositio. Quaestiones and Considerationes paucae brevesque in
Tractatum primum Libri Druschim, quibus accessit, ad Cl. and eruditissimum
virum Christianum Knorrium de rebus in Amica sua Responsione ad dictas
Quaestiones, etc. contentis, ulterior Disquisitio. Visionis Ezechielis sive
Mercavae Expositio ex Principiis Philosophiae Pythagoricae praecipuisque
Theosophiae Iudaicae Reliquiis concinnata, miraque cum locis quibusdam S.
Scripturae hactenus obscuris, luculentaque congruitate, consolidata.
Catechismus Cabbalisticus sive Mercavaeus, quo in Divinis Mysteriis Mercavae
Ezechielis explicandis and memoria retinendis, december Sephirotharum usus egregie
illustratur. Fundamenta Philosophiae sive Cabbalae Aeto-paedo-melissaeae, quae
omnem Creationem proprie dictam negat, Essentiamque supponit Divinam quasi
Corporeo-spiritualem, Mundumque Materialem aliquo modo Spiritum; cum brevi ac
luculenta praedictorum Fundamentorum Confutatione. Philosophiae Teutonicae
Censura sive Epistola ad Amicum quae Responsum complectitur ad Quaestiones
quinque de Philosopho Teutonico I. B. illiusque Philosophia. Ad V. ^. Epistola
altera, quae brevem Tractatus Theologico-politici Confutationem complectitur,
paucaque sub finem annexa habet de libri Francisci Cuperi scopo, cui Titulus
est, Arcana Atheismi revelata. Demonstrationis duarum Propositionum, viz. ( Ad
substantiam quatenus substantia est, necessariam Existentiam pertinere, and,
Vnicam in mundo substantiam esse) quae praecipuae apud Spinozium Atheismi sunt
Columnae, brevis solidaque Confutatio. Divinorum Dialogorum tres priores qui de
Attributis Dei tractant ejusque Providentia in genere. Rerum ac verborum
locorumque Scripturae in hoc primo Tomo Voluminis Philosophici occurrentium
Index. Collectio Philosophica in qua continentur, Vol. Philosop. Tom. 2.
Praefatio generalis. Antidotum adversus Atheismum. Appendix ad dictum
Antidotum. Enthusiasmus Triumphatus, sive de Natura, Causis, Generibus and
Curatione Enthusiasmi, brevis Dissertatio. Immortalitas Animae. Conjectura
Cabbalistica, sive Mentis Mosaicae in tribus primis capitibus Geneseos,
secundum triplicem Cabbalam, Literalem, Philosophicam and Divino-moralem
Interpretatio; cum singularum Cabbalarum Defensione. Ad Defensionem Cabbalae
Philosophicae Appendix, Scholiis multum aucta, ubi inter alia, Examini
respondetur Cl. viri S. Andreae S. S. Theologiae Doctoris and Philosophiae
Professoris Herbornensis. Divinorum Dialogorum duo posteriores qui de Regno Dei
tractant and de speciali illius Providentia per Christum super Ecclesiam a
principio ad finem seculorum. Rerum ac verborum locorumque Scripturae in hoc
altero Voluminis Philosophici Tomo contentorum Index. Volum. Theologic.
Praefatio ad Lectorem. Visionum Apocalypticarum Ratio Synchronistica. Magni
Mysterii Pietatis Explanatio, sive Vera ac fidelis Repraesentatio Aeterni
Evangelii Domini ac Servatoris nostri Jesu Christi, Dei Filii unigeniti,
Hominumque Principis ac Angelorum. Mysterii Iniquitatis Pars prior, sive,
Diligens justaque Delineatio verae Ideae Antichristianismi, in Realibus
genuinisque illius membris. Mysterii Iniquitatis Pars posterior, sive, Synopsis
Prophetica compendiosum continens Prospectum in illa sacrae Scripturae
Vaticinia quibus Regnum Antichristi insignisve lapsus seu Degeneratio
Ecclesiae, in eis rebus omnibus quae in Idea Antichristianismi comprehenduntur,
praefiguratur vel praedicitur. Expositio Prophetica septem Epistolarum ad
septem Ecclesias Asiaticas. De veris Rationibus sive Fundamentis Certitudinis
Fidei in rebus Religionis brevis Dissertatio. Antidotus adversus Idololatriam,
sive Dissertatio brevis, multa complectens Theoremata ad dignoscendum quid sit
haberive debeat Idololatria apud Christianos, apprime utilia, cum Applicatione
ad doctrinam Concilii Tridentini. Antidoti Appendix, in qua vera and adaequata
Notio seu Definitio Idololatriae communiter sic dictae proponitur, Exempla
plurima istiusmodi Idololatriae in Romana Ecclesia per propositam Definitionem
examinantur, Consuetudines quaedam in Ecclesia Anglicana vindicantur seriaeque
aliquot Monitiones de Idololatria Spirituali demum annectuntur. Divinorum
Hymnorum Heptachordon. Carmina quaedam in Scriptis Philosophicis Anglice
occurrentia and Latin hic per Authorem reddita. Rerum ac Verborum, locorumque
Scripturae in hoc Volumine Theologico explicatorum Index locupletissimus.
Praecipuorum Membrorum Antichristianismi Descriptionum simul and Praedictionum
eisdem respondentium, Index particularis.
FINIS.

