THE DOCTRINE OF Transubstantiation Considered, and fully CONFUTED, From a Union
of SCRIPTVRES: Hitherto not Performed.

By THO. MOOR, Author of the Clavis Aurea.

WITH An Advertisement, concerning a Dispute in the Country, between T. M. and
one Mr. S. on the 25th. of July. 1700.

LONDON, Printed: and Sold by W. Marshall, at the Bible in Newgatestreet. 1700.

Transubstantiation FULLY CONFUTED.
I Having pacified my Conscience, in writing my Clavis Aurea and its Additions,
which Book (although it was never Answered by any Preacher, yet I Suffered for
it; and indeed, should it be Answered, I think only to leave their Answer to be
compared to my Book aforesaid) was condemned to be Burned as Irreligious and
Seditious, and my self Fined, and Imprisoned in Newgate.

But this Subject of Transubstantiation, cannot in reason affront our Divines,
which indeed wants the clearest Confutation; for it has cost the Lives of many
Thousands of Men, Women and Children, and that by violent and torturing Deaths:
And because many are apt to say, I am a Jesuit, a Priest, and the like, I think
it also very necessary to assay, whether I cannot give a more clearer insight
into that Error, than what has already been done.

None can deny, but that our Senses perfectly contradict a mutation of the
Consecrated Bread and Wine into real Flesh and Blood, and that they are the
very same Substance in Taste, Smell, Sight and Touch, as they were before the
words of Consecration were expressed by the Priest, whereby it is not in the
least changed; yet we must believe this whether we can or no, otherwise we are
Heretics and Damned, they accounting it no moer Sin to destroy us than if we
were so many Dogs, etc. notwithstanding our blessed Savior teaches 'em to do
as they would be done by: Hence Persecution for Conscience in an Opinion in
Religion is forbidden, for no Persecutor himself can allow it Religious, or
would be Persecuted for his Consciencesake: But Persecution is more heinous,
when the Persecutor is not able to withstand the Arguments of the Persecuted.
Ignorance is a Sin; Persecution then must of necessity be a Sin, because it
ignorantly or knowingly, endeavors to keep Men in Ignorance: And who ever
Persecuted others more than those who have been extreme Ignorant themselves? In
short, God accepts of what we Conscientiously think is true, (and no Man can
dive into another Man's Conscience) it must then be great Iniquity to Persecute
one another Conscience, if Zealously affected to a Tenet, tho that Tenet
should prove to be Erroneous. Much more then, it must be great Iniquity to
Persecute a Man for those Arguments which cannot be Overthrown.

Now to the Matter in hand: in John 6 53. it is writ, Verily, verily, I say unto
you, except ye eat of the Flesh of the Son of Man and drink his Blood, ye have
no life in you. And verse 55, For my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is
Drink indeed. For which saying, many of his Disciples left him, verse 60. But I
find in verse 62, 63, Christ opens this, by telling them of his Ascension, viz.
What and if you shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before. As much
as to say, How will ye eat my Flesh when I am Glorified? And Christ adds; It Is
the Spirit that quick'neth, the Flesh profits nothing; The words that I speak
unto you, they are Spirit and Life. And again he adds, but there are some of
you that believe not. So that eating of his Flesh, Was Mystically spoken of
Believing in him: For to eat his Flesh carnally, was to profit nothing. And
again, observe; as soon as our Savior said, My words are spirit and life,
adds, But there are some of you that believe not. And it is writ in verse 47, He
that believes on me, has everlasting Life. And throughout the Scriptures it is
said, We are saved by Faith; and Christ being Ascended, is no more to be known
after the Flesh; as it is writ, 2 Cor. 5.16. Tho we have known Christ after the
flesh, henceforth know we him no more. How then can we eat in the Sacrament,
Christ's Flesh carnally, or drink his Blood. But we'll suppose the Consecrated
Bread and Wine at the last Supper were Christ's real Flesh and Blood, there is
no particular Command with or without any Penalty for us to believe it or not
believe it so: Neither can our Unbelief change the Substance of the Consecrated
Bread and Wine into another Substance. If Christ has left this Bread or Wine
of his Last Supper dubious, whether Figurative or Real, we can but dubiously
believe it so, whereby we humbly submit our Faith to God, believing it to be as
he has made it, which is as much in this respect as reasonably can be expected
from us.

Another Scripture on which they build this Error, is Matthew. 26, 27, 28. (as
for the Authority of their Church, I mind it not, because it is not to
contradict the Scriptures.) And as they were eating, Jesus took bread and
blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take eat,
this is my Body. And he took the Cup and gave Thanks, and gave it to them,
saying, drink ye all of it, for this is my blood of the New Testament, which is
shed for the remission of Sins. Now it is observed, that after these words,
Christ calls this the Fruit of the Vine in the very next Verse, saying, I will
not henceforth drink of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it
new with you in my Father's kingdom. Thus you see in Scripture the Figures of
things are called by the name of the Substance; and in words Mystically to have
the same effect: For had this been Christ's real Flesh and Blood, and really
broken and shed at the Last Supper, it had really remitted Sin, as being also
said to be shed for the remission of Sin. But we find it did not remit Sin,
because Christ after all this, suffered Misery and Death on the Cross, which
had been great Weakness in him so to do, if it had remitted Sin; and also to
pray, Father if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me. Whereby it is
evident, that the Consecrated Bread and Wine at the Last Supper, was not his
real Body and Blood. Again,

The blood of Bulls and Goats under the Law, were an Expiation, or remitted
Sin: Yet St. Paul says, it is not possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats
should take away sins, Heb. 10.4. Yet they did take away Sin, but 'twas
figuratively, denoting the Blood of Christ. Who can believe that Christ was
really slain at the Last Supper? If not, then it is testified that a Testament
is not of force till after the death of the Testator. See Heb. 9.16, 17. For
where a Testament is, there must of necessity be the Death of the Testator; it
being of no force while he lives. So that without shedding Christ's real Blood
even unto Death, there is no remission of Sin. Whereby it is evident, Christ's
Body and Blood eaten and drank at the last Supper, was but Figurative, not
being a sufficient Testament to remit Sin: And Christ being now in Glorv, and
never more to be known in the Flesh, it is impossible, as his Body and Blood was
never carnally eaten and drank, so never is nor never shall be.

Thus in short have I given you my Satisfaction against that old Error of
Transubstantiation, which at this very day is held by Kings, Princes, and
Learned Bishops, who, I am persuaded, believe it true, otherwise they could not
be so Cruel to Persecute others for denying it, and that by Fire, Inquisition,
Prisons, Massacres, and other Tortures. How Weak then are their Laity to Adore
'em, concluding that their Learning and Study can free them from writing
Learned Errors in Divinity. Learning in Tongues is of this use, To translate
words out of one Language into another, yet still the sense is the same: And
also serves the better to express those Mysteries God has Revealed: And it
serves sometimes to hide by hard and unintelligible words, the Ignorance of the
Teacher. But from such Learned blind Guides the Lord has and I trust will for
ever deliver me; for which great Mercy, let me always render Glory and Honor
to his Holy Name. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
IT is reported by some, That T. M. was Overthrown in a Dispute with one Mr. S.
which is False; for S. disproved none of M's Arguments, but only denied the
Consequences; which M, observing the fallacy of, let S. begin, waiting to put
him upon Uniting his seeming opposite Scriptures: S. having begun, he for two
Hours, brought only Scriptures against M's Scriptures, (but M's unhappiness
was, the People perceived it not) in which was no Satisfaction. S. having tired
his Auditors, M began, and urged S. to unite the seeming opposite Scriptures:
S. replied, He came not to Unite the Scriptures, whereas it was his business to
outdo M. in their Union, if he could, both for satisfaction of the Auditors,
and to have the better of the Dispute; How otherwise could he expect to get the
day? And besides, What did he come for? Vainglory! which M. despised, or to
play upon the Ignorance of the People, to gain their Affections, and give them
no Satisfaction, which M. designed not. How ean any Man be so Stupefied, to
conclude M. Overthrown, when S. did not pretend, nay, positively denied to
Unite the Scriptures: And when M. had United Mark 16.16. with Romans 11.32. the
People could not receive it, (as M. expected) nor S. contradict it, but
confirmed it, in saying, He did not say, There was Free Will in Faith. Yet he
contended for Free Will before in his long Harangue.

Now since S. could not be brought to Unite the seeming opposite Scriptures,
and having owned, That there was no Free Will in Faith, and would not have the
Dispute in Writing, nor in a Dialogue way, and the People not receiving M's
Union of the two aforesaid Texts, M. broke off the Dispute, as frivolous and
vain, from which no Satisfaction could be drawn.

I grant S. had his End (through his much Talking) viz. The Applause of the
People, who knew no more when Scriptures were United, than S. knew how to Unite
them.

Without a Union of Scriptures, there is no Satisfaction to be had, and that is
the reason we have wanted Satisfaction these many Hundred Years. But if Mr. S.
pleases, T. M. is ready to answer him in Writing concerning the Union of the
Scriptures, which will make his Logic of no Effect, as it never was, in
finding out the Truth of the Scriptures.

SOme Arguments and Considerations, serving as a full Answer to that Grand
Question, Whether Men can Will and do otherwise than what they do?

Bunyan of Election and Reprobation, unfolded and explained in Eleven Chapters.
Price 6 d.

The young Man's Guide, for Drawing, Limning, and Etching, with printed
Directions. 1 s.


