AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST The spreading Infections of the spirit of Antichrist,
abounding in these last Days under many Vizors: BEING A Discovery of a Lying
and Antichristian Spirit in some of those called Quakers; and therein some
opening, clearing, and Vindicating of the Great things of Gods Law, or Doctrine,
mainly struck at by them, as concerning the Person of Christ, and the Works
done in that Person for us; the infinite and abiding virtue of them, and of
them only for the taking away our Sin, and concerning his Second appearing, and
the Glory then to be revealed. Likewise concerning the Scriptures.

IN Relation of what passed in writing between them, and Thomas Moore Junior,
after and upon occasion of a Meeting at Glentworth, with the sum of what was
discoursed at that Meeting also; as likewise, Of diverse Queries from some of
them about Cambridge, with the Answers to them.

BY THO. MOORE Junior.

Prove. 5. 6, 7, 8. Lest thou should ponder the path of life, her ways are
moveable, that thou can not know them. Hear me now therefore, O ye Children:
and depart not from the words of my mouth. Remove thy way far from her, etc.
Chap. 14. 7. Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not in
him the lip of knowledge. Psalm. 17. 4. Concerning the works of men, by the word
of thy lips I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer. Printed at London
by R. Ibbitson for Livewell Chapman at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley. 1655.

The Epistle to the Reader. OR, A Preface to the following Discourse.
Christian Reader,
THe Occasion of my offering what follows to thy view, with the Reasons and
End, take as follows. And first, To the Occasion.

My self, and others, being invited by Mr. John Wray to his house, to b^get
Christian acquaintance, to the end we might have fellowship and furtherance in
the Gospel, and be strengthened to strive together for the faith of it; Upon
our meeting there, we understood that diverse of those called Quakers, that had
been lately very busy thereabouts, had notice of that our meeting; But that
some of them had also signified* their resolutions, not to be at it, even some
of the chief of them, that yet did come to it. How ever, Mr. Wray desired, that
for the profit of those many people that were presently met together, and for
the preparing their understandings for what discourse might afterward happen
between us and the Quakers, if they should come (as well as for the laying some
foundation for discourse: that it might be the more regular, and profitable;
That, I say, for these ends) some of us should first assert, and open to the
people some of those great things of Gods Law, or Doctrine, that are
Fundamentals in the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; And that we did
conceive Satan especially to strike against in these latter days, and so which
might be most profitable at this time to be discoursed.

This service falling upon me, I did first mind the people of those* many
warnings given us by the Holy Ghost, of the perillousness of the last times, by
reason of the abounding of iniquity, even spiritual wickedness, under glorious
pretense and show of godliness, and righteousness, yet under such a vizor,
denying the power, the root, and foundation of godliness, whence all motive and
motion to all right worship of God comes; being the enemies to the cross of
Christ, however in show zealous walkers, humble and mortified persons; yea,
that iniquity should abound in such manner, chiefly at such times, as when
thereg should be some ^batement to bodily persecution, that so there might be
some equal proportion of persecutions, or trials, in all ages to be sustained
by them that will live godly in Christ Jesus, and for the manifesting who are
approved among the many Professors of godliness, and that this last sort of
Trials, and Temptations, are especially to abound in the last days, and to
continue till the time of the end, Dan. 11* 34, 35. 2 Timothy 3. 12, 13. with 1
Cor. 11. 19. 2 These. 2. 3 - 10. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. and that this sort of
Temptations and Trials are every where signified to be the most dangerous, for
beguiling unstable souls, yea for corrupting, and subverting even such as were
going right on their way, from the simplicity in Jesus. See the Epistle of Jude
2 Pet. 2. 2 Cor. 11. 2 Timothy 3. Phil. 3. 17, 18, 19. the consideration of which,
I told them should be of this use to us, to move us to give more earnest heed
to the things that we had heard from the beginning, in the Word of the
beginning of Christ, as 1 Cor. 15. Hebr. 2. 1 - 3. 2 Pet. 1. 12* to the end,
with Chap. 2. 1. To receive, and drink down his Word into our hearts, with more
greediness, and to let it dwell there, to be filled with the Spirit, to
continue in the things that we had learned through she Apostles Doctrine, and
been assured of by the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit therein, as
Ephesians. 5. 16, 17. 18. Colos. 3. 16. 2 Timothy 3. 13, 14 15. And thereupon I took
occasion to open to them some of those great things of Gods Law, or Doctrine,
which are the summary and fundamental matter of Gods Teaching, and so to be
earnestly heeded, and continued in by us, and the main things secretly, and
intentionally, though under other pretenses struck at by Satan in these latter
days; As concerning the person of Christ, of God, and of Man, and that that
very Jesus of Nazareth, the Word that was then, and so made Flesh, is the very
Christ, and concerning the works done in and by that person for us, and the
infinite and abiding virtues of those works, as remaining in that Person in our
Nature, glorified in the Heavens with the Father for us; and the infinite Love,
and Glory of the Father, as appearing in that face of Christ, as revealed in
the glorious Gospel of him, who is the Image of God, in whom God was manifested
in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, etc. as 1 Timothy 3. 16. 2 Cor. 4. 4 6.

And concerning the Second, and glorious appearing of that Person promised, and
yet to be expected, and waited for by all Believers, with the glory then to be
revealed (the sum of what I said to most of those things is occasionally
inserted in the following Discourse, chiefly in the Answer to 1. N's. Letter)
after which I also added a word or two, to the way, or manner of Gods giving us
the knowledge of these things of himself in his Son, that so we might be
instructed in the way of being assured of the truth, and goodness of them, and
of tasting the sweetness and efficacy of them, to the preparing and preserving
us through faith unto the Salvation ready to be revealed in the last time; to
this I told them:

First, The way of Gods learning, or giving the knowledge of the truth, and
goodness of these things, is not by working the same things over again in our
persons, that were wrought and finished for us in the Person of Christ, not by
making us bear our sins in our own souls and bodies, that with our stripes we
might be healed, not by giving his Son again to dye in us for our sins, and in
us to rise from the dead for our Justification, to ascend into the Heavens, and
sit on the right hand of God; for besides that, those were such works as could
not be accomplished in our persons, so also they were finished in his, not to
be iterated. But the knowledge of the truth, and goodness of them given in the
testimony of Jesus; and of these Works, as wrought and finished in him, and the
infinite and abiding virtue of them with the Father for us, that so in
believing in him we might find the Word or Testimony of him through the
Spirit, effectually working the Works of God in us.

Neither Secondly, does he give the revelation of these things, now immediately
as to the first Apostles, nor in such manner as to the Prophets of old; but now
mediately through their Word, and by the evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit therein. So Timothy, and all secondary Ministers then, and since
received their Word, their Knowledge, and furniture in the things of Christ. In
the conclusion of this Discourse, I desired, that if any would reason about the
things they had heard, by way of opposition, or otherwise, it might be without
confusion, and in such order that the people might understand what was spoken
to, what opposed, or contended for, and what was said on both sides. And to
this purpose I told them, I thought it would be convenient to digest the sum of
what had been into some few Questions, to be discussed ( viz.) what the Essence
of Christ is? whether something essentially in many Persons, or one Person
distinct from all other Persons; and if one Person granted, then concerning his
Works, whether Christ did bear our sins in his own Personal Body only, as the
propitiatory Sacrifice, or Sin* offering? or so also in the bodies or souls of
others? And so whether in the works done in his own Body, in his abasement, and
exaltation, there was, and so remains in him in our Nature with the Father in
the Heavens, by means thereof, the only and abiding virtue for the taking away
of sin, or is the virtue for that also chiefly, or at all originally, in some
other work or works done in other persons? and about his second appearing, and
the glory then to be revealed, whether that be to be waited for by all
Believers in this corruptible state of the World, all the time of their
Mortality, or made in, or to any in this day? and concerning the manner of Gods
teaching these things, and our learning them of him, whether it be by having
the same things wrought, or accomplished over again in us, that was in Christ's
Person, as set forth to be the Propitiation, or by receiving the testimony of
him in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of power? and if so, how that,
whether mediately through the Apostles word, or immediately, as they.

The Quakers being come in, s^on after the beginning of this Discourse, To this
James Naylor answered, That there were two things that I had uttered in
Discourse which he denied, which when I had made good, or if I could not,
acknowledged my self a Liar, they would proceed to the Questions, the two
things were:

1 That God was not manifest in the flesh of the Saints.

2 That Timothy had not the same testimony that Paul had; what answer I then
gave, may be seen in what follows in my Answer to their Charges, and to James's
Letter, but when I showed how he falsified my sayings, he called me Liar, etc.
such Language was ordinary from them. And so pretending want of satisfaction,
and doing what he could to ^inder the people from receiving satisfaction, as to
these things, he kept off from the Questions propounded, till one of them (viz.
Rich. Farnsworth) began a set speech concerning himself, which he continued
about an hour; at the conclusion of which, I was desi^ous to mind the people
of the evil, and contrariety to the Gospel, of some of the things spoken by
him, that they might so mark as to eschew, as Romans 16. 17. but as soon as I
began, for but (by the way) calling his Discourse a witness of, or concerning
himself, I had presently himself, and two or three more upon me, bidding me
stop my mouth. He abhorred self (which yet also was but his own witness
concerning himself) one of them charged me with opposing or blaspheming the
words of the eternal God spoken by that man; yet at last I got liberty, to show
his abuse of some Scriptures (as in the following Discourse) then it being
afternoon about an hour, and my self and some others having rid ten miles that
morning before the Meeting, Mr. Wray d^sired us to break off for an hour to
refresh our selves, and likewise that we might meet at the public place
afterward, for more convenience of room, his House being too straight for the
Company; he likewise invited James Naylor, and his Companions to stay Dinner,
which whether any of them accepted I know not, but diverse of them grossly abused
him, for desiring an hours Respite, yet said nothing against meeting at the
public place; whether soon after we went, and many people, but they came not
at us, but sent us word, when we had been there some time, that they would ^ot
co^^ there, and at our return from thence, that if we would meet them in some
place in the Street, or in a Yard where they appointed, they would farther
reason with us; which we judged unreasonable, and therefore refused; yet Mr.
Wray invited them to come again to his House, either that night, or next day,
but they refused, and returned a scornful answer. That night they sent me
Papers, as in the following relation, and with the last, sent also a Challenge
by their Messenger, to give them a meeting at a Town a Mile off next day, which
though an unreasonable Demand, considering what freedom they had, and might
have, where we were, and with what scorn they had refused it, and also that on
the^r refusal of that, Mr. Wray had proffered them, that if they would appoint
a place at such a distance next day, we should m^et them, and then they refused
that also, saying, They knew not whether the Spirit might lead them that night
(and it is very probable, they hoped we would not have come at their Challenge)
yet going that way, we did call on them next day; and then had a more full
revelation of the spirit of Antichrist in them, from J. N. than the day before,
who in answer to some such questions as forementioned, said, That as Christ
bore sins in that his own Body that dyed at Jerusalem, so he had born sins in
his Body too; and so, that his first appearing to put away sin by the Sacrifice
of himself, had been manifested and accomplished in him, yea that Death, in
which it is appointed to men once to dye was past in him; Christ's second
appearing without sin to Salvation, manifested and accomplished in him, with
much of that nature; and that he that could not witness that with him was
Antichrist, and did deny Christ come in the Flesh; In Answer to which we
oft-times offered, and desired liberty to manifest, and prove to the people,
That the one offering of Christ to bear our sins, and to put away sin by the
Sacrifice of himself, it was accomplished and finished in one Person, not in
many, and once at one time or Age of the World, nor at diverse times, and that
the Second appearing of Christ is not yet accomplished, in, or to any person,
nor shall be in this day, nor till to all together; but we could get no
liberty, but were filled with Raylings, Reproaches, and Revilings from div^rs
of them together, in such manner as I never heard from any, so we last them;
and what has passed since, with the sum of what was then asserted, and
maintained by us, I have published in the following Discourse (with some
Queries I had from others of them, and the Answers to them annexed) for these
Reasons.

1 They did then (as we have showed here, and in the following Discourse)
grossly slander us almost in all we said, and would not suffer the people to
hear what was said in answer to their slanders, and have still persisted in
managing them against us, and the truth pleaded for by us, where they come, by
word and writing, as may also be fully seen in J. N. his Letter, with my Answer
to it; in which Answer I have largely opened our Principles, as to the things
discoursed of, that they that read may understand what they are, and how falsely
charged by them.

2 As also that it may appear, how they stand in direct opposition to, and show
the vanity, falseness, and evil of the bottom principles of both Quakers and
Ranters, in which they are both one. Which I have the rather done, to vindicate
the Doctrine of the grace of God in Christ, that brings salvation to all men,
from those foul aspersions cast on it by some (yea I have seen them in print)
in which its charged, with laying, or administering foundation for those filthy,
and ungodly principles, the falseness of which charge is manifest in the
following Discourse; yea it appears, that which is in express terms fought
against, and reproached by them, is, the asserting the great benefits prepared
for men in Christ, and redounding to them by Christ, while yet lying in their
wickedness, and thence directing them to look to a Christ crucified for them,
while they were yet sinners, and in their filthiness.

The truth is, They acknowledge not the grace of God, in the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, as accomplished in that his own body, ^^ being the
foundation of, or bringing salvation to men, all, or any, but would lay another
foundation, or overthrow that (though they can do neither) by directing men to
look into themselves, and to what is witnessed or wrought in them, for all
their consolation, rejoicing, direction, etc. yea its their counsel to all men
(I have often heard it, and seen it in many of their Papers, even to such as
they then judged to be yet wallowing in their filthiness, turned out from the
presence of God, murdering the just one in them, ^igh to cursing, etc. yet) to
turn the eye inward, to look, and take diligent heed to the light in them, to
the book of their conscience, etc. and that in opposition to, and to take them
off from looking unto Jesus, and the works wrought in his body for them without
them, and to such looking, or attention to him, in, and through the testimony
^^^ has given by the one mouth of his holy Apostles, and Pr^ph^ts, and left on
record for us.

They in their foolish, and vain imaginations, while professing to be wise,
being so besotted, as to imagine that one person of the Son of God, in the
nature of man, and the works done in his own body, and the manifestation of God
in him, and therein testified, to be but some farther types and figures of the
true light, the very Christ, and that to be something naturally in every man,
naturally, I say, for so it must be, if affirmed to be in every man, while yet
none of them have received (nor are they ever directed by them to look to, or
for) any supernatural grace, whether they talk of first, or second nature, yet
both are natural to the man, and naturally in him, and of him, according to
their principles, only the best, or second nature which they direct to look to,
that in the witness and operation of it as in them, they may have
righteousness, strength, and direction, is something dis-appearing (they say)
through the fall, yet not much dis-appearing it seems, when if they do but turn
the eye inward, they shall presently see, and meet with it, as the first mover
and teacher, appearing, and yet such a thing too, as no man has benefit by
till he can witness it in him; they are indeed foolish, and inconsistent
apprehensions, as well as most Antichristian, and ungodly; but their folly and
evil is not so manifested and detected, by any other spirit, or doctrine, as by
the testimony of Jesus, as the Son of God, the Savior of the world, and that
doctrine of the grace of God in him bringing salvation to all men, when rightly
held according to the Scriptures ( Tit. 2. 11, 12.) For as that holds forth
that very Jesus, the only immediately begotten Son of God, that was before us
all, even from everlasting with the Father, by whom, and for whom all things
were made, which in the fullness of times, was sent forth, made of a woman, made
under the Law, for us in that one body, etc. and therein delivered to death,
raised, and exalted according to the Scriptures, to beindeed the very Christ,
The Savior of the world, the true light that lightens every man that comes into
the world, that with his virtues, and influences fills all things, for the good
and salvation of mankind; and so instructs and directs all the ends of the earth
to look to him, and the grace of God, in, by, and through him, bringing
salvation to all men, and be saved; so it therein in the same light of the
Lord, cries concerning them, All flesh is grass, surely the people is grass,
Isa. 40. 6, 7. Men are altogether strangers to that wisdom and strength by
which they might be reconciled to God, the way of peace they know not, yea tha^
wisdom is not to be found in the land of beli^ing, Romans 3. 10, 11-19. Job 28.
12, 13, etc. They are without God in the world, and strangers to the life of
God, Ephesians. 4. 18. and 2. 1^. They are dead in sins and trespasses, yea the
carnal mind is (...) to God, it is not subject to the Law of God, ^^ither
indeed can be* so that they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Romans 8. 7,
8. The mind or conscience of the unbeleever is so wholly defi^ed, that while
he looks into it and stubbornly follows the dictates of it* against the light
and power of Gods grace coming to him, and striving with him, through Jesus
Christ, he is to every good work reprobate (of no judgment, light or
discerning) Tit. 1. 15, 16. Having the understanding darkened, being alienated
from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the
blindness of their heart, by the dictates of which being swayed walking in the
vanity of their mind or conscience, they are more hardened, and made insensible
to the gracieus, and spiritual instructions, and reproofs of God in the Gospel
of his Son, they are so wholly lost* dead, and darkness it self, yea so
unclean, and poluted in soul, and body, that they are altogether incapable of
having any work wrought in, or by them, in which satisfaction may be made for
their sin, or they may be rendered acceptable. This I say is plainly discovered
in that Doctrine that tell, us of the Grace of God bringing Salvation to all
men, as already wrought for them in and by Christ; for if men had not been
wholly strangers to, or had not been utterly empty of all, by which they might
have been helped, or if there had been any help in man, God would have spar^^
his own Son, and not have delivered him up for us all; if Righteousness could
have been had any other way, then Christ dyed in vain; yea, this Doctrine, that
tells us of the Grace of God bringing this Salvation in Christ unto all men, in
the discoveries, and saving tendencies, and operations of it, says yet more,
namely, That no man has in him, as of him, that Light, Spirit, or Wisdom in
the inward parts, by which he may get in the knowledge of what is done for him
in Christ, or apply it to himself; it is true, there is a spirit in man, but it
is as a Candle wholly out (as to things pertaining to life and godliness) and
it is the inspiration of the Almighty (not the stirring up something in it)
that puts light to it, that gives it understanding, and otherwise then as so
lighted by the Lord, it does not truly search, or discover the hidden parts of
the belly (compare Job 32. 8 and Prove. 20. 27. with Psalm. 18, 28. Job 35. 10,
11, and 38. 36.) nor while abiding in his Natural state, is there any such
wisdom, or capacity, or spirit, so as received by, or lodging in him, as are to
be his Teacher, and Rule, Romans 1. 19. 21. 28. neither is there in them any
light, knowledge, or understanding to make them sensible of their Idolatry and
wickedness, they not l^king to retain his knowledge inspired in the means,
(...) spirit is infaduated, Isa. 44. 18, 19, ^^* with Rom, 1. 19* 29. and so
the light^ or spirit naturally in them, or while stubbornly abiding in their
Natural state and condition, received by, and lodging in them, to which if they
be directed to turn the eye inward, to look to the light or spirit in them,
they will and must needs immediately turn, it is by the Judgment of the holy
Spirit, darkness it self, Joh. 1. 5. the spirit of the World, and of Satan, 1
Cor. 2. 12. and though it is true, that the true light is in the testimony of
jesus, or of Gods goodness, that is in and through him, through all means
shining in, and to the dark, and darkened hearts of men, even of such men, while
the day of Gods grace and patience is toward them, and that so as it might be
received, it would in such coming, enlighten the darkness, and strengthen to
receive it, yet the darkness receives it not, and so though the Word be nigh
them in their hearts that it might be, yet it is not received by them in their
hearts, or dwelling there as a light or principle to direct them, while so
abiding in their Natural state and condition, or in their unbeleaf, or
rebellion against the Word, or Testimony, in, and with which the light, spirit,
or power comes to them, which is no further received by, or dwelling in any
man, than that word in and with which it is, is received by, or dwelling in him.

From which consideration, that Grace of God that brings Salvation to all men,
instructs them not to look into themselves, or to any light, or spirit in them
for direction, but unto Jesus, in that demonstration of him, and strength to
behold him, brought to them in Gods lifting up the Son of Man before them, as
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, now to seek the Lord while he
may be found, and in the light and strength of the Lord in his reproofs,
brought them to turn from, and for sake their own ways and thoughts, ( Isa. 45.
22. with Joh. 3. 14, 15. Isa. 55. 6, 7. with Prove. 3. 23.) not to lean to their
own understanding, but to deny themselves, and become fools, that they may
learn wisdom, not of their own spirit, but of him.

This Doctrine, that so rightly discovers the weakness, emptiness, and
corruption of man (as before) does therein manifest their counselling every man
to turn the eye inward, to look unto the light in them, etc. To be the same
with, or like unto the directing men to seek to them that peep, and mutter, and
to them that have Familiar Spirits* and therefore of Satan, and not of God,
who directs us to seek to God and that in his own light, power, and way, as
given forth to us, To the Law, to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
that word, it is because there is no light in them; yea, even believers, in
whom the testimony of Christ being received, the Spirit of Christ therein, and
there with, is so received, and dwelling in them, and so Christ in that Word,
or testimony of him, dwelling in their hearts by faith, yet there is in them
another Law, mind, disposition, inclination, or spirit, though in the mind,
judgment, or spirit of the Believer, in a sense dethroned, yet not wholly
outed, but remaining, and warring in the members, where it is at hand, and
nearest (present with me, says the Apostle, Romans 7. 21. 23.) so as it may be
first in advising, or prompting in any case or matter, so that if the Believer
should indifferently turn his eye into himself for counsel and direction, he
may also be led to walk in the flesh, in the carnal mind, and so as other
Gentiles, in the vanity of their mind, whence those instructions and
admonitions, Romans 8. 5. - 13. Ephesians. 4. 17. surely that Doctrine of the kindness
and pity of God, our Savior, to manward, bringing Salvation in and by Jesus
Christ, is so far from administering foundation for such corrupt principles,
that it discovers the vanity and falseness of their foundation, and overthrows
it; doubtless were we more acquainted with it, and skilful in it, we should
neither desire, nor need any other weapons than that faithful Word, to stop the
mouths of these, as well as other gain sayers, as we have opportunity. But
having this occasion, let me a little mind thee (good Reader) what principles
have indeed administered foundation, and opened the gap for such spurious and
ungodly apprehensions or imaginations as forementioned.

1 This Principle, That the Letter of the Scripture, is not Scripture; or thus,
That the mind or meaning of the Holy Ghost, is not expressed in his words,
according to the natural import and signification of them, no not in things
main, and fundamental; and so in all other things, that it may be discerned in
the words, or records left, comparing Spiritual things with Spiritual, and
things hard and circumstantial, with things plain and fundamental, as we are
therein directed, but that the mind or meaning of the Holy Ghost is to be found
out, and determined by some other spirit. This principle has administered
foundation, or opened the gap for Popery, and also for men's deny^ing the Grace
of God to manward, bringing Salvation to all men in and by Jesus Christ; and it
administers as good foundation, or opens the like gap for all other corrupt
principles, for take away the Word of the Lord, as declared by the Pen of the
Scribe, and what wisdom is in them? yea they do all agree in this fixed great
Tradition, and rudiment of the World. That the letter of the Scripture (as they
call it) or the words, as written, and left on record, are not the faithful
expressions of the mind and meaning of the Holy Ghost, only they differ in
determining what shall give the sense. The Papists say, the Pope, or Counsel;
The opposers of the good of all men, (not much unlike them) say, the late
Fathers of the Church (and they must be such as they will account so too) or
learned men of the times; And these that follow after, differ not much; they
say, it must be some spirit of, or in them, which they suppose to be
infallible; As much ground for the one, as for the other, and so for taking
away one part of the Word of the Lord by one, as there was for taking away
another part by another, yea their bottome-Principle is one.

2 Another Principle that has laid, or is properly the foundation of such
corrupt Imaginations (as before) is that the eternal purpose, and decree of
God, is the absolute cause of men's sin, reprobation, and destruction; This
properly makes sin, no sin, or nothing sinful, but all men's actions and ends
of God, and also takes away the equity of his Judgment against them which
commit such things, and so leads to vain and ungodly Imaginations of no
Resurrection, or Judgment to come. And

3 That which naturally flows from both the forementioned, is; That God
dissembles with men, or pretends that which is not really in his heart, when
he offers most men grace in the Gospel, and swears he has no pleasure in
their death, but that they turn and live. This lays the foundation for men,
even as they would be like God, to dissemble with others; and in pursuance of
some worldly, or Antichristian design, to pretend Hamility, Mortification,
Zeal, Holiness, etc, while in their hearts they judge no Act, or practice to
be evil, or sinful in it self, (unless to him that judges it so) but as it
may hinder that their design secretly pursued. Yea,

4 That which I conceive has also done its part among the rest, in opening the
gap to such unclean spirits, is an Imagination that is secretly crept into the
minds of, and pleaded for by some truly gracious, ( viz.) That men may while
they are yet in this mort all body, and accumbred with the law of sin, the
carnal mind, yet warring in the Members, and against the law of the Believers
mind (though in the mind, or spirit of the Believer, in a sense dethroned, yet)
so as it is leading them captive still, as Romans 7. 21. 23. And also in the
midst of so many subtle, and powerful Adversaries; That yet I say, in this
time of their temptation and weakness. They may have already so attained, and
be already so perfect, as that from such time, or degree of attainment; It is
for ever impossible for them, in listening to any spirit, to be corrupted from
the simplicity in Christ, or so to be drawn away with any errors of the
wicked, as to fall from their own steadfastness, or to fall away, as Heb. 6. 6.
and 4. 11. which Imagination not only exalts it self against the plain Import
of these Scriptures, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14. 2 Cor. 11. 3. 2 Pet. 3. 17. with Heb.
6. 4, 5, 6. and chap. 4. 11. Mark. 13. 35, 36, 37. with many others. But as we
have said, also opens the gap for any manner of ungodly and unclean spirit, by
moving the entertainers of it (as soon as ever they can conclude themselves to
have so attained) to forsake, or let slip out of their hearts, the fear of the
Almighty, by which they should be kept from departing from him, and
presumptuonsly venture upon the listening to, and parleying with any evil
spirit, or way propounded (at least if under good pretenses) yea, this
Imagination, that (whether they hear his vayce, and follow him or do hear and
follow a stranger) they cannot fall or perish; It hinders them from believing
or discerning that they are back slidden, or fallen, when indeed they are so;
And so from receiving timely admonition, while (it being but in part) they
might be recovered, Prove. 14. 16. and 28. 14 yea, this likewise further
prepares them for such spirits, as we have dealt with in the following
discourse* It requiring but a little addition, to make up their Devilish
Doctrine of perfection. yea, 5 And lastly, All those Principles, or
apprehensions, in which men are directed to have their rejoicing, and
consolation originally in some gracious frames, or quallifications wrought in
them, or some works of Righteousness done by them, and not in the Person, or
works of Christ in his own body for them, which Principles are too much
retained by many* that in words acknowledge him, (though in these their works,
they deny him) these Principles I say, have opened the gap for such spirits,
which come very suitable to their proper lust, and way, and seem not at first
so to malign the person, and works of Christ, but rather to hold the
acknowledgement of them, though as of things not relative to the ground of
their Faith and hope, nor as being the matter of their rejoicing, and fountain
of their teaching, in which they agree well enough* so that people thus
principled, as aforesaid, have little, or nothing really to turn from, that
they may join with what is first commended to them by such spirits, only some
opinions that were irrellative to the foundation of their Faith, and rejoicing
to be a little more slighted; and the rejoicing that was before placed in
some works, or Imiginations of their own; now to be placed in some other of
the like kind; Yea, surely all that are so principled, will and do presently,
close with them, on their coming to them, only such of them as are kept off by
tradition, that are resolved to believe as the Church believes, and hold the
traditions of their Elders, and Fathers (right, or wrong) And the Devil has so
sure possession for the present of them, he cares not for troubling them much
with any thing to their disturbance, but if they be such as have been in any
measure taken off from leaning on tradition, etc. and yet retain those
Principles, they casily elose with such Spirits as fore mentioned, and that
without any great turn, or alteration* They are still but growing, and going on
upon the same bottom-Principles; where as those that have been truly acquainted
with the forementioned Doctrine of the Grace of God, that brings Salvation to
all men, they cannot go out from their Brethren in the acknowledgement of that
Grace, to close with such spirits as forementioned; but they must first
fundamentally recede from, and renounce the fundamental Prinples that therein
they have been instructed into, 1 John 2. 19. (as also has appeared in some of
them that I could mention) which they are not so rightly or easily persuaded
to; yet through the retaining some lust, or lusts, always reproved by that
Grace, too many even of such as have been going right on their way, have been
moved with distaste at the Doctrine, or Instruments by which they are reproved*
and then to listen to such as promise liberty, or seem to close with them, or
come in a way suitable to such lusts (whether more grossly worldly, or more
Spiritually Antichristian and ungodly) and yet pretend mortification too.

And truly, by such evil Documents and Principles, or by such diverse Lusts
(retained) after the lifting up, or magnifying something of Self; this part of
the Christian World, in my apprehension is) so prepared for such Atheistical,
and Antichristian Principles, coming under forms of godliness, that there is
very great likelihood of their spreading under one vizor or another, especially
considering the Predictions concerning the latter days; therefore in the next
place I have taken this pains.

3 Because I conceive the things discoursed of are very profitable, and needful
to be understood, and diligently beeded by all Christians, especially in these
days, in which Satan with so much subtilty, and as an Angel of Light, and in
his Ministers as Ministers of Righteousness, endeavors the undermining, and
subversion of the great things of Gods Law, in which are contained both the
foundation, and end of our faith, and hope. And in such a case see the Apostles
example. 2 Cor. 11. and how he admonishes Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. and 3. total. and
4. 1-6. yea mind well how he propounds example, admonition, and instruction to
us, Phil. 3. when such as pretended Circumcision, and so Zent, Mortification,
Humility; and as Col. 2. yet endeavored to cut them off from Christ, to make
faith in him void; he then beseeches to be followers together of them, and
mark them that walk so, as we have them for an example, who may be known, and
distinguished by the end of their conversation (which is, Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, and for ever the same, Heb. 13. 7, 8, 9. rather than by
the particular acts simply, as appears by what follows; therefore more need of
a diligent and right consideration, that we may know who we are to join and
walk with, as Brethren, for there are many walk (then they are not Sots, nor
Talkers only, but walkers also; zealous in conversation, as if they would not
touch, taste, or handle any thing unclean) concerning whom the Apostle had told
them often, and did then tell them weeping (as intimating their hardness to
receive his testimony, and character of such spirits, which shows they were not
such grossly appearing, and indeed if so, they had not been so dangerous to
Believers) They are, says he, the enemies to the Cross of Christ, their end
(namely in their pretended walking, or conversation) is destruction (even the
marring the Visage of the Son of Man, Isa. 52. 14. The casting him down from
his excellency, as in his testimony, and in the heart of the Believer; and so
the Believer from his faith, and hope in him, Psalm. 62. 3, 4. Their design to
overthrow the Faith, to corrupt from the simplicity in Jesus, 2 Cor. 11. Gal.
1.) and to that purpose serving, and magnifying their belly, some light spirit,
or lust in them, some internal or external operations of them (as Col. 2. 1
These. 2. 9, 10.) therein glorying in their shame, minding earthly things (as
Jude 19.) though under pretense of spirituality; but such as worship God in the
Spirit, and so are directed to walk as they have the Apostles for an example,
they think to have their rejoicing in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in
the flesh, their conversation is in Heaven, in Christ, their Treasury there,
from whence they look for him, the Savior, the Lord, who shall change their
vile body, in that his appearing, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious Body, according to the working of his mighty power, by which he is
able even to subdue all things to himself. The Lord mercifully pardoning my
unworthiness, afford his blessing with such weak endeavors, that they may tend
to his glory, and the good of others, is the prayer of the most unworthy of all
so favored of God.

From my house at Lin, Aug. 15. 1655. Tho. Moore junior.

A Lying and Antichristian Spirit discovered in some of those called Quakers.
And therein some opening, clearing, and vindicating of the great things of
Gods Law, or Doctrine, mainly struck at by them, as concerning the person of
Christ, the works done in that person, the infinite and abiding virtue of them,
and of them only for taking away our sin, His Second Appearing, and the glory
then to be revealed, here to be waited for by all believers.
In the relation of what passed in writing between them and Tho. Moor jun.
after and upon occasion of a meeting at Glentworth.
THe Charges framed by James Naylor, against Thomas Moor, after the meeting at
Mr. Wrayes, the last of May 1655. and sent to the said Thomas Moor that
evening, requiring Answer to be returned in writing.

Charging the said Thomas Moor to have affirmed (in Discourse with them that
day) as follows,

That God is not manifest in the Creature. That none have their call to the
Ministry immediate, but mediate, only the Apostles, but not Timothy. That he
had not the same testimony as the Apostles had. That the Scriptures are the
absolute rule and medium of Faith. That Paul saw Christ personally with his
bodily eyes, after his Ascension. That Naylor was a false witness, in saying,
That he had seen Christ. That he (the said Moor) never saw Christ as Paul did.
That the benefit that Drunkards have by Christ, is, that they enjoy that drink
wherewith they are drunk. That there is something which is not of God, which
teaches the creature to deny sin.
The Answer to the aforesaid charges, sent them the same evening, by Thomas
Moor.
1. THat God is not manifest in the Creature, I never said, But that God was
not manifested in the flesh, in a full and absolute sense, in any natural son
of Adam (in the time of this mortality) nor so as he was manifested in that
person, the only begotten Son of God, that is now received up into glory in
the nature of man, in that one body.

2. To the next Charge, that which I said was, That Timothy did not receive his
word, nor so his furniture to his service in the Gospel, immediately from the
person of Christ, as the first Apostles, but mediately through their word, and
by the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit therein (and for proof of this
I brought that, 2 Timothy 1. 14, 15. and 2. 1, 2. and 1 Timothy 4. 14.) And so all
others for blessing on whose ministration, our Savior prays; besides, those
first Apostles, that immediately received their word from him, are thus
distinguished, Joh. 17. 20. Them also which shall believe on me through their
word.

3. That Timothy had not the same Testimony, as the Apostles had, I said not,
nor delivered any thing in like expressions, nor do I understand by his
expressions what he means, or would fasten upon me; If he mean, that he had not
the same that they had, I disown it; if he mean, that he received it not in the
same manner, it is spoken to, and Answered before.

4. That Paul was strengthened with his bodily eyes to behold the person of
Christ after his ascension. To this I desire this be considered (which I then
propounded, though it could not be heard) Act. 9. 7. 8. And the men which
journyed with him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man, and
Saul arose from the earth, and when his eyes were opened he saw no man. Do not
the verses together imply, That immediately before his falling (at least) in
that light shining about him, he did see the glorified Body in the Heavens
(which might occasion his falling to the Earth) even the man (Christ Jesus)
from whom the voice came, whom they saw not at all that were with him (though
they heard a voice?) especially, if we compare it with that, 1 Cor. 15. 8.
where after he had said. He was seen of James, then of all the Apostles, he
adds, And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time: I
desire in the fear of God. This may be considered, was he born out of due time,
to enjoy a spiritual appearance, or discovery of him? or was he the last to
whom he so appeared? yea, is it not plain, that he appeared to him last of all,
in the same manner as he had done to the other before? I stretch not my words,
in the same manner, further than to a personal appearance, or visible
demonstration of his person. And do they not say, That their eyes had seen,
that their hands had handled of that word of life, in such a sense as Believers
since had not seen? compare 1 John 1. 1 2. with 1 Pet. 1. 8. Joh. 20. 19.
(Whence Paul to prove himself an Apostle, says, Have I not seen the Lord? 1
Cor. 9. 1.)

5. That Naylor was a false witness, in saying that he had seen Christ. To this
I Answer.

That Naylor would not suffer me to speak out what I was about to say, as to
that, and other things, all will bear me witness; yet I suppose I at first
said, and I am sure did after explicate my saying thus, That if he had said, he
had seen Christ, as Paul did, in the same manner, or (I might say also)
received the word in the same manner, immediately from the person of Christ,
which was the thing reasoned about, then he was a false witness.

For they were the Apostles last in that respect, 1 Cor. 4. 9. Paul the last of
them, to whom he so appeared (as before) 1 Cor. 15. 8.

That he might have seen Christ after another manner of demonstration (which in
this immediate Revelation, was not wanting but more abundant to them also) I
will not deny, yea, that he yet in some sense, and at this time might (through
the Spirits demonstration of him in his words) for many see and hate (as those
Joh. 15. 24)

6. That I never saw Christ in the same manner, that Paul and the rest of the
Apostles did with their bodily eyes, I own; yet not having so seen, I desire to
love him, even that person, and to wait for his second appearing (as those 1
Pet. 1. 3 -- 7, 8. 1 These. 1. 9, 10.

7. That the benefit Drunkards have by Christ, i^. That they enjoy that drink
with which they are drunk. That that is the benefit, I said not, ^^^ one of the
benefits; And they enjoy many more, and all to a saving (...), and not to abuse
them, which is the thing that makes them (...) their condemnation great in
abusing such benefits, which (as then more fully explicated) was the answer
given to their Queerying, What benefits Drunkards had by Christ?

8 That every thing that teaches to deny sin is not the true light; many false
principles and lights teach to deny many sins, as that which teaches to
establish a righteousness of a man's own; yea, the wisdom of the flesh teaches
to deny many lusts of the flesh. And having thus fully answered, I desire him
to Answer and Prove,

1 That God is manifested in his flesh, and how? 2 That no wicked man has any
benefit by Christ, nor any man till he can witness Christ in him? 3 Whether the
Writings of the Prophets and Apostles be a dead letter? 4 Whether Christ be any
thing that bears our sins in us, as the propitiation, yea or no? Which
things, if he asserted not let others witness.
The Answer to one of the forementioned Charges, as it was writ and left for
them the next day.
ON review of their Paper next day I find another Charge, which truly I slipped
over unawares, in my answer to it the last night, viz.

That the Scriptures are the absolute Rule and medium of Faith. To this I
answer, viz.

That which I said to this, I am sure was with this clause, According to which
it is begotten and regulated, which I suppose they wittingly leave out, for it
was often urged, on their cavilling at it; And for proof and demonstration of the
sense of what I affirmed, as to that I propounded that Job. 7. 38. He that
believes on me as the Scripture has said. And that Act. 10. 43. To him give
all the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him,
etc. I had then spoken further to that, if I had not been taken off in the
midst by Naylor, with a reproach for bringing those Scriptures as parallel, and
derision at the thing thereby signified, that the name ^f Christ, and so of God
in him, through, and according to which, faith in him is begotten, is declared
in the Scriptures.

To this I further add, Prove. 22. 19 20. That thy trust may be in the Lord, I
have made known to thee this day even to thee, have I not written to thee
excellent things? -- with Psalm. 19. 7, 8. The Law, or Doctrine of the Lord is
perfect converting the soul, the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the
simple, etc. with these compare 2 Timothy 3. 15. 16, 17. The holy Scriptures
(which he had known from a child) are able to make thee wise to salvation,
through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by inspiration
of God, and is profitable for all Doctrine, Reproof, Instruction in
Righteousness, etc.

And if I had also said, that they are, as left on record for us, a perfect and
absolute means, through which Faith is begotten, and nourished; I do not
therein deny other means God uses for discovery of Christ, or of his goodness
that is in and through him, or the usefulness of them, or Gods teaching by
them, only say as that Psalm. 19. The Law, or Doctrine of the Lord, as compared
with all other means is perfect, or absolute. But that which I said was as
before, and was thus expressed, and in this saying as follows,

Though the Scriptures be the absolute and perfect medium, or Rule, according
to which Faith is begotten, and regulated; yet Jesus Christ himself as declared
in them, is made the foundation and bottom of it, as well as the object of it,
in whom the Father is believed in, as Joh. 12 44, 46. with chap. 5. 23, 24. in
him it centers, and about him is exercised, even him that Jesus of Nazareth,
etc. the same that was reproached by them, as a figure, and one, by whom many
men have no benefit.

These Answers to their charges are as they were, the first of them, sent to
them, and the other left for them (as before) unless in the addition of a
quotation or two, and of some words of the Scriptures quoted, and some little
filling up of a phrase (then in have omitted, now added) in some places to
render the Answers given the more understandable to them also, that were not at
the meeting.

The things in these Answers briefly spoken to, are most of them more fully and
largely spoken to in the following Answers to James Naylors Letter, especially
those about Gods being manifested in the flesh, and Paul's enjoyment of a
visible demonstration of that person, in which he was so manifested after his
being received up into glory. That also about the Scriptures, and the
difference between Paul, and Timothies receipt of their Word, and so their
furniture to their Ministry, is spoken to again in the said Answer, but more
fully in the Answer to the Queries I received from others of them, which are
after that inserved; Likewise what benefits or blessings are prepared for men
in Christ, even in the just for the unjust, for such as are wicked or
rebellious, that through him they might be brought back to God, as Psalm. 68.
18. with 1 Pet. 3. 18. and how all his benefits with which he daily loads them,
in his forbearances, not presently cu^ting them off, or executing Judgment on
them in their Rebellions, but waiting that he may be gracious, and in all the
streams of his grace in continuing and renewing his mercys; adding also,
sometimes favorable, sometimes more sharp chastisements, or judgments, and in
his vouchsafing in and with all the supernatural influences of the light and
power of his Spirit, and so bringing in all means, the testimony of Jesus, or
of Gods goodness, so as through him, nigh to them in their hearts, enlightening
in the discovery of Gods goodness, and Christ's preciousness for sinners, and
the necessity of being found in him, and washed by him; and therein reproving
of the vanity of these Idols, the evil of their ways, etc. in such wise, and
to such end, that therein these instructions, and reproofs of instruction might
be received, through such his grace bringing salvation to them (though not by
any such light or power as they speak of, that is an indwelling principle in
them) I say how all these benefits are salvation (as 2 Pet. 3. 9. 15 Isa. 30.
18. Ps. 68. 19, 20.) even springing out of the bowels and virtues of that
salvation wrought in Christ for them; and themselves such salvations, as in
which Jesus Christ in the name of the Father; and as the ends, and virtues of
his cross* is, saving men, not only from the poison and destructiveness of the
first Death (that is abolished by him; but also from those Judgments being
poured out in fury to their cutting off; that might daily bring forth,
according to the Rule of the Gospel, involving under a second Death; yea, they
have all tendency and aptness in them to lead to farther, and special
salvation, by, and through Christ. The grace of the truth comes forth to save
men, and so as they may be saved by it, however men by observing lying vanities
deprive themselves of their own mercies, and so their table, their welfare,
becomes a snare and a trap to them (as Joh. 3. 17, 18, 19. and 12. 47, 48. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Jona 2. 8. Psalm. 69. 22.) This also I say, is further spoken to,
in the following Answers, and particularly in the conclusion of the Answer to
the Queerys forementioned, in* answer to a like reproach of the grace of God
in Christ to manward, in the conclusion of those Queerys. But more fully in
that book entitled, Mercies for men.

To that, that many false principles or lights teach to deny many sins, there
is nothing added directly to it, in the following Answers, though James gave
some occasion for it in his letter, yet in the answer to that, I waved it,
partly because he corrupted and altered my sayings, so as to render them
absurd, in his renewing of his Charge there, with reference to what was written
in answer to that Charge at first, as may be seen, in comparing that Charge in
his Letter following, with my said former Answer forementioned (which is word
for word, as it was sent to him) so ^^^^ he therein fight^ with his own shadow.
And partly because I would ^^^ draw out that Answer to a greater length, having
been large in it, to the opening of things more fundamental; But it being woved
there, I shall here add a word or two to it (yet with brevity for like reasons
as before.)

1 In his said letter, himself fully signifies, That even that spiritual
wickedness, which teaches to deny God etc. may yet teach, and lead to deny some
lesser, yet grosser evils, even so to deny, as to leave (or forsake) such gross
evils, as drunkenness, swearing, etc. Surely therein, he acknowledges, that
such spiritual wickedness teaches to deny some sins, unless he mean, That
those gross evils of drunkenness, swearing, etc. be no sins; I am indeed
ready to suppose them to be of that number, that judge no act or practice as
Drunkenness, Swearing Adultery, etc. to be in it self sinful, but to him that
judges it so, or not otherwise sinful in them, than it is open, gross, and so
scandalous, and striking against their being satisfied in their spiritual
Covetousness and Adultery, in beguiling unstable souls (of which their minds
are full, as 2 Pet. 2 14.) For it is a shame to speak of those things that are
done and allowed by some of them in secret (as Ephesians. 5 12.) But if this be his
meaning. That drunkenness, Swea^ing, etc. are not in themselves sins, or sinful
(as is fully signified in his expressions in the said letter, where he says,
That which taught me to leave some gross evils without, etc. and after mentions
drunkenness and swearing, yet does it not therein teach to deny sin, but to
deny God, etc.) I say, if this be his meaning, why does he call them evils, and
gross evils too, if no sins, or sinful? I leave him with his Contradictions.
But,

2 The Holy Ghost instructs us, That all evil or unrighteousness is sin, 1 John 5. 17. For sin is the transgression of the Law, 1 John 3 4. so that by the
Law (which says, Thou shall not lust, etc.) is the knowledge of sin, Rom 7. 7.
and 3. 19, 20. 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10. And yet also that touching the righteousness
which is in the Law, Paul was blameless, while yet he had not received the true
light, but was a furious enemy to Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 6. As the Jews whose
zeal was yet a zeal of God (though not according to knowledge, as Romans 10. 2.)
And against many sins (even such sins as for which, The wra^h of God comes upon
the children of Disobedience) as Adultery, Joh. 8. 4, 5. and abuse of the
creatures in Drunkenness, and Gluttony, as appears in their false charging our
Savior with such things, Matthew. 11. 19. yea they were men much for fasting
mortification, and holiness, Matthew. 9. 14. Luke 18. 11. Joh. ^. 18. And so were
the false Apostles and teachers that came among the Christians after, Col. 2.
16. 18. 21, 23. 2 Cor. 11. and yet thereto moved and guided, by that false
light, or principle, and spirit in them, which indeed was darkness, and did
therein pursue such ends, as the establishing a righteousness of their own, and
sometimes* also, that they might appear to men to be just, temperate, holy,
etc. in pursuance of which end, they were also more in appearance than in
truth, and large in their boastings, proclaiming every man his own goodness,
yea sometimes as in the last mentioned chiefly, they herein pursued this as the
main end, in, and with the former, That they might the more powerfully
insinuate themselves into the minds of such as were going right on their way to
the corrupting them from the simplicity that is in Jesus, destroying their
faith, and hope in Christ, beguiling them of their reward etc. This the end of
their walking, Phil. 3. 18, 19. 2 Cor. 11. and of their voluntary humility, and
neglecting of the body, etc. Col. 2. 18. 23. yet many of the things they denied
and abstained from, from such principles, and to such ends, were sins, and
sinful, and many of the works they did, and pressed others too in themselves
good. Whence our Savior says to his Disciples, All that they (namely as
sitting in Moses seat, and urging the things required in the Law, and
admonishing of the evils reproved in it) bid you observe, that observe and do,
but after their works do not; for two Reasons, First, They say and do not:
Secondly, The works they do, in which is signified, They also do something good
and commendable, and abstain from some evils, though short of their sayings,
but even that which they do is to an evil end, yet as to their apprehension,
and according to the judgment of others, that can judge but according to
outward appearance, they many of them, have attained perfection, in the denying
and mortifying of not some, but all sins, some things they do from such false
principles, deny, and abstain from, that are indeed sins, and sinful; and those
may be done to many of them, in their account and apprehensions, all sins, or
at least they are not sensesible of those greater sins they live in, and glory
off, as appears also in these spirits we have to do with.

Observe what follows:

Richard Farnsworths Challenge (word for word) as it was sent to me, the said
Tho. Moore, by one of their own party, on the foresaid Evening of the last of
May, as soon as I had returned Answer to to their Charges (as before.)
MOved of the Lord to write this to the chiefest of those called (by the name
of) Manifestarians, in, and about Boston and Lyn, That if they will grant to
this, which is hereafter laid down, we will try our God these ways, as the
servant of the Lord tried Baals Prophets, and their God by sacrifice, without
fire, etc. So I am freely willing made by the Lord, o try and prove your
proudboasting spirit, by these particulars, as is hereafter propounded and
expressed.

First, That the chiefest of you grant to go abroad with me, where I shall be
led to preach the word, for two weeks together.

Secondly; That you and I eat no food, as outward bread, and flesh, nor any
outward victualling, provided by any man, or creature for that time, nor drink
either Beer, Ale, or Wine, nor partake of any other outward thing, except a
little spring water; and that neither you, nor I, look upon any book all that
time seen with a visible eye.

Thirdly, That for two weeks time, we have meetings every day (or every other
day) one week for the first amongst those called Manifestarians (and others, as
the Lord shall please) and I be permitted amongst them to speak the word of the
Lord, and each other day, he that joins with me herein to speak also; and he
shall permitted be, if he dare say, and by the Spirit of truth affirm that he
has any thing to speak immediately from the mouth of the Lord; He shall I say,
be then permitted to speak one day, as I do another (or part of each) one week
amongst those called Manifestarians, and others, that the Lord shall lead unto
(and no outward help, neither meat, drink nor book, as aforesaid) and another
week amongst those that the world scornfully calls by the nickname of
Quakers.

And lastly, That for the two weeks time, he part not from me day nor night,
that he receive no more outward help than I do.

And this way of trial, I have freely from the Lord expressed; And then it must
be acknowledged after all this, That the only true God upholds by his power in
those things, by all that knows him, and his power; and I dare trust him, and
do in obedience to the Lord, upon this proffer, challenge any Manifestarians,
so called, or the highest notionary Priest, or other Priest, or Bapist, Dipper,
or Sprinkler with outward water, in Lincolnshire, or in any part of England.

Do not call this a temptation nor a boasting (for it is not fleshly) but if
you will try your spirit, and God this way, try him, and whether Spirit and God
does thus uphold without the help of man, etc. let him be acknowledged to be
the Lord, That Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 17. and the only true God. And that which
fails, let him be accounted the God of the world, that blinds the minds of
people which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
which is the Image of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. and 3. and 4.
verses. And for that Spirit of darkness that puffs them up with vain glory,
pri^^, and conceits.

And if the said Manifestarians, etc. so called, refuse to do according to
this, which is here written from the Spirit of the Lord, let them cease their
vain contentions, and fleshly boastings, and fleshly disputings also of others
men's words, and let them cease their preaching in their wills, whereby they
seek their own glory; And come down thou, that in thy brain-knowledge art
exalted, and sit in the dust, and submit to that of God in thy conscience, I
command and charge thee, in the presence of the Lord, as thou will answer it
before him, lest for thy Disobedience and Rebellion, the Lord meet thee as a
Bear bereaved of her Whelps, and tear thee to pieces, and none be able to
deliver thee out of his hands.

This way which is before made known will not appear fleshly, but clear
contrary to the flesh, and the fleshly man, yet though it do, the spiritual
man, that witnesses with (the Spirits Ministers, or) the Ministers of Christ,
and of God, did approve themselves (in ways contrary to the world) both in
much patience, and also in afflictions, and in necessities, and in distresses,
and in stripes, and imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, and in
fastings, etc. They therein approved themselves as the Ministers of God, 2 Cor.
6. 4, 5. etc. And this way will be contrary to the world; for the world never
did so, neither can the worlds nature endure it now; Then it will be
miraculous, and so a miracle of Grace, and the gracious working of the Divine
power of God, to uphold and furnish therein.

To this expressed, and expressly send me your Answer with speed, either to
Thomas Killams at Balbie, or to Edward Muglinstons at Swanington, in
Leicesteshire, or else cease your boasting, lay down your crown of vainglory,
and fall under the judgment of the just, and bend your necks under the yoke;
Let that in the conscience me answer, and flesh be thou silent hereafter.

Written from the Spirit of the Lord, in (and by) the servant of the Lord, and
also witnessed with my hand, who am known to the world, by the name Richard
Farnsworth.
The latter end of the third month (55)
For the chiefest of those called Manifestarians, in, or about Boston, and
Lyan, These are to be delivered with care*

The Answer to the Challenge by Tho. Moor.
THough I know not any called Manifestarians, nor what manner of persons they
apply that name too, nor take my self at all included in their Challenge by any
of those names inserted, yet the Paper being sent to me, lest they be wise in
their own conceit, or take occasion from our silence to glory before the weak,
and for others good, I shall give this brief Answer.

1 In their expressions to try our Gods, whether Spirit and God be the true
one, etc. They intimately acknowledge, that they do not own, or worship the
same God that I did confess before them, which indeed I believe, though they
then endeavored to hide it from the people.

2 I thank God, I am not wavering in my thoughts, whether That God, That Lord,
That Spirit which I then confessed, be the only true, and living God, for
though there be, That are called Gods, whether in heaven or in earth, (as there
be gods many, and lords many) yet to us (that through his Grace have been
helped in any measure truly to know him that is true, to behold him, and enjoy
union with him by faith in his Son) There is but one God, the Father, of whom
are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
him, and one Spirit of God proceeding from Father, and Son; All others are
Idols, which we are to keep our selves from (1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. 1 John 5. 20, 21.)
and not to listen to any spirit, that shall move us to inquire after any other
God, save the Lord ( Deuteronomy. 12. 30. etc. and 13. 1, 3. Matthew. 24. 23, 26. Luke
17. 23, 24. and Chap. 21. 8. with 1 John 5. 20, 21.) That is is the true God,
and eternal life, that did appear, and was manifested in that one person of God
and man, which was a man approved of God among them that yet received him not,
Act. 2. 22. and so the Kingdom of heaven was said to be among them, while he
was with them in person, and personal Ministration, and so also in them in the
spiritual influences thereof, striving and working in, and with them for
acceptance, the word being made nigh them, in the preaching of it ( Luke 17.
20, 21. Romans 10. 6, 8. etc.) which person in whom only the fullness of the
Godhead dwells bodily, was after to be taken from them personally; And then
even his Disciples should desire to see one of his days (namely that of his
second Appearing) and should not see it, until they, and we that look for him
shall enjoy it together, Luke 17. 22, 23. ult. Then shall he swallow up death
in victory, and wipe away all tears, and take away the rebuke of his people: In
that day it shall he said, Lo, this is our God, and we have waited for him, we
will be glad* and rejoice in his salvation, Isa. 25. 7, 8, 9. For who is God
save the Lord, and who is a Rock save our God? 2 Samuel 22. 32. Therefore I shall
wholly refuse any Challenge on these terms, To try our Gods, etc.

3 The things they require, are contrary to what the Lord requires of us, by
which also I know, they were not thereto moved of the Lord, as they pretend.

1 They require me to follow, or go with them, where they shall be led for two
weeks together, etc. Whereas we are only to follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, which cannot stand with such an engagement to follow any other spirit
whither he may be led, etc. yea we are expressly admonished, To mark such as
cause divisions contrary to the doctrine which we have learned in the word of
the truth of the Gospel (compare, Romans 16* 17. with Col. 1. 5. and 1 Cor. 15.
1, 4.) and to avoid them, for they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own belly, their lust, will, or spirit, or the light in them,
which is darkness what ever it be, if it spring not from the person of Christ,
as declared in the Gospel, who is even so the true light, they magnify not
Jesus, but themselves, in the internal, or external operations of their own
spirits, And by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple,
under pretense, and show of godliness, they deny the power, and root of
godliness, are the enemies to the Cross of Christ, his personal sufferings, and
the only vertuousness of them for the taking away our sin, and the love and
glory of God as appearing in that face of him; This they seek to undermine and
slight under pretense of magaifying Christ in them, glorying therein, in that
which is their shame, their internal proof of the mystery of iniquity, with
power, and signs, and with all d^ceiveableness of unrighteousness in them that
perish from the faith, for in them only it has efficacy, Phil. 3. 17, 18. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10, 11. from such I say we are straightly admonished of the Lord,
To turn away, 2 Timothy 3. 5. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him
be Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16. 22. If any pretend to acknowledge Christ, and
yet lift not up, praise not, magnify not above all, and unto, and for all
things pertaining to life and godliness, the Son of man, Jesus Christ, as now
already come in the flesh, and through sufferings entered into glory for us, as
the only ground and foundation of our faith, and matter of our rejoicing, and
song to others, and fountain of our teaching, that is that spirit of Antichrist
not to be followed, its indeed not only against Christ, but his most pernicious
enemy, being a contrary Anointing, from which we are to fly, at least as soon
as we perceive it in any, as Prove. 14. 7. Go from the presence of a foolish
man, when thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge, which I often after
hearing some of their Discourse declared, and as I could get liberty thus
demonstrated, I perceived not to be in them, but the lip of a contrary
Anointing, and yet they are tempting me to follow after them, a company, and go
with them night and day, though they know such are my apprehensions concerning
them: Now whether it be right in the sight of God, that I shall obey God or them
in th^^, let others judge, yea I will in the strength of Gods grace observe the
directions of the great Shepherd, when any shall say, Lo here, or lo there is
Christ, either in this form of Church, or Stategovernment, or in this order, or
as these, in the secret chambers, in some internal operations, as found and
accomplished in them (in such manner as we cannot discern it unless we lay
aside all that knowledge of God in Christ, we have received through and
according to his word, as fleshly, ^o go after them) appearing the second time
without sin unto salvation, and accomplishing that rest and hope of glory and
perfection now, in, and upon them, which we through the Spirit wait for to be
revealed in the Resurrection of the dead, when we shall all be gathered
together to it (which, and more to that purpose, was Naylors and Farnsworths
witness concerning themselves) we are, I say, expressly admon^shed, then not to
go after such, and that for this reason, in which we are fortified against
their juggling. That the coming of the Son of man, that day of his second
appearing in the glory of his Father, and with his holy Angels, should
certainly be as the lightning from the one end of the heaven to the other, at
once accomplished to them altogether, and visible to every eye, even to those
that shall weep, and wail because of it, Matthew. 24. 26, 27. Luke 17. 22, 23,
24. Rev. 1. 7. Therefore if a Prophet, or Dreamer of dreams, should tell us of
a sign, or a wonder, and that also should come to pass (as we know Antichrist
shall come with signs and wonders in the latter days) to move us to turn aside
from following the Lord, or to inquire after another God, or to take us* off
from our waiting for his Son from heaven, whom he has raised from the dead, we
will not hearken to them, nor go in company with such wicked men, as Deuteronomy. 13.
1, 2, 3. and 28. 14. Psalm. 1. 1, 2, 3.

2 They require me to eat no food, etc. Whereas our Savior bids his Disciples,
even those great Apostles, who were to give forth the last* and fullest
Revelation of the Gospel, for obedience to the faith among all Nations, which
was in that first publication of it to be confirmed with. Miracles by them
also, even then when he gives them power in his Name to heal the sick, etc. yet
then he bids them twice together, eat, and drink such things as they give, and
set before them among whom they went preaching, Luke 10. 7* 8. And the Apostle
Paul tells Timothy, They are Doctrines of Devils, that command to abstain from
meats, which God has created to be received, and that with thanksgiving, of
them that believe, and know the truth, etc. 1 Timothy 4. 3. I shall therefore
answer them as our Savior does the Devil in a like case, It is written, thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy God.

3 They require me to lay aside all books, etc. the holy Scriptures not
excepted. Whereas the Holy Ghost tells us, he has therefore written to us
excellent things, that so our trust may be in the Lord; and we may have those
words, as written, and left in record for, and to us, to answer all that are
sent to us, Prove. 22. 17. 21. and commends to us the example of a better
Preacher than any of them, in this, That he sought out acceptable (safe,
profitable, and plain words for the people) and in his search found, That which
was written, was upright words of truth, Eccles. 12. 10, 11. and renders it as
part of the character of a godly man, he exercises himself in the Law (or
doctrine of the Lord,) both day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. yea the same holy Spirit
commands Timothy to give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine, to
meditate on, and give himself wholly to these things; and in so doing, study to
show himself approved, a workman that needs not be ashamed, 1 Timothy 4. and 2.
15. But these spirits lay their commands upon us, not so much as to look on
them in the Records left us in Books neither night nor day. A notable piece of
policy: For if they can but keep us from going to the Law, and to the
Testimony, with their internal light, or power they boast of, we may the
easilier be mistaken in it, and lead to follow those that peep and mutter, as
Is. 8. 18. 20. That tell a vision out of their own heart, and not out of the
mouth of the Lord ( Jer. 23. 16. 31. Eze. 13. 2, 3.) and yet say, He says,
That think to make Gods people forget his name by their Dreams which they tell
every one to his brother or neighbor. But how do they say, We are wise, and
the Law of the Lord is with us, or in us, when as lo in this it appears, the
making of it is in vain to them, The pen of the Scribe is in vain, Jer. 8. 8.

4 They prohibit me to speak the word of God, unless I dare insolently boast
that I have any thing to speak immediately. I suppose he means, unless I have
that thing immediately which I would speak, and does not mean, that I should so
have i^, as to speak it immediately too, for they themselves speak not
immediately, but use their tongues, when they say, He says, as Jer. 23. 31.
but against that their meaning, I am strengthened and admonished by God in those
instructions to Timothy, Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou have
heard of me, etc. And yet been also assured of by the Holy Ghost mediately in
that hearing of faith, ^^ Tim. 1, 13, 14. and 3. 14, 15. The things thou have
heard of me^ among many witnesses, The same commit thou to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also, Chap. 2. 2. And professes to be filled
with joy, when he calls to remembrance the unfeigned faith in him, which dwelt
first in his Grandmother, then in his Mother, by whom he was educated from a
Child in the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, which are able to make him wise
to salvation through faith, which is in Christ Jesus; And thereupon also, puts
him in remembrance to stir up the gift of God that was in him mediately, by the
putting on of his hands, etc. 2 Timothy 1* 5, 6, 7, 8. with chap. 3. 14, 15. like
to that 1 Timothy 4. 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given
thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery; yea, our
Savior prays for blessings on their Ministration to the worlds end, and only
on theirs; besides, the first Apostles, that received their word immediately
from himself, I say, besides them, only on theirs, that through their word or
doctrine should believe on him.

And by these I know, he was not moved to this challenge by the Spirit of the
true God, God in Christ, not only the nature and end of the challenge being to
try our Gods, but also all the things required in it, being so contrary to all
his instructions, and requirings, whose Kingdom is not divided against it self.
God is one: But that one only true God, that has revealed himself in his Son;
so that he that sees the Son, in, and according to the testimony God has
given of him, he therein, and so far sees the Father, Joh. 12* 44 - 46. in
whose face God has shined in our hearts, the light of the knowledge of his
glory. He that is our God, and according to our weak measure has been
acknowledged by us, is not their God, or Rock, themselves in this paper being
witnesses, (as Deuteronomy. 32. 31.)

Tho. Moor, jun.*
Written from Bullingbrook 7 June, 1655. POSTSCRIPT.
ELias way of trying Baal, etc. we need not for trying and discovering them,
because God, who in sundry manners spoke in times past to the Fathers by the
Prophets, has now spoken to us in these last days by his Son. etc. And we
ought to give earnest heed to the things we have heard, which have been spoken
by the Lord himself, and confirmed by them that heard him; God having born them
witness, with signs, miracles, etc. which were the first and full publishers of
that last Dispensation; nothing more is to be added, or altered, therefore no
sign to be looked for, for the the confirmation of that, so confirmed, only
the sign of the Prophet Jonas, the cross of Christ, and the demonstration of
the Spirit in, and with it left for continuance to the worlds end; others signs
and wonders for confirmation of what he speaks, only the spirit of Antichrist
shall come with in these last days, but we are not to follow them; for if they
have Moses, and the Prophets, and will not hear them, neither will they believe
if one should rise from the dead.

To that of the Apostles approving themselves in necessities and fastings, etc.
it appears they were not wilful or voluntary fastings, or macerating of their
bodies (as in those false spirits, Col. 2. 18, 23.) in which they so approved
themselves; for then they had been no necessities, but such as necessarily came
on them for the Gospel sake, or in following after the Spirit.




There is in this copy of the Answer, a little abbreviation in the relation of
Naylors witness concerning himself, as also in the explication of Luke 17. 22,
23, etc. of what was sent them, because the same things are more fully spoken
to in the Answer to James Naylors Letter, which follows.

James Naylors Letter, as it was sent about the Country open, and came to me
about the latter end of June, 1655, Verbatim.
For Thomas Moor.
BY the indwelling of God, and in his presence, I do bear testimony against thy
Antichristian Doctrine, preached by thee Thomas Moor before many people, which
I did then bear witness against, whilst I had liberty of the place, and do
still before all men, That thou art out of the Doctrine of Christ, and his
Faith, who deniest God in his Saints, which is the promise of God, and of
Christ, and that which the Apostles preached, and witnessed to, and exhorted to
wait for, which thou pleadedst against, and would bring Paul for thy proof,
who never preached such a Doctrine after he knew God; but said, Know you not
that your bodies are the Temples of the living God? as he has said, I will
dwell in you, and walk in you; and you are the Temple of God, and the Temple of
God is holy; which Temple you are, and if any defile this Temple, him will God
destory ( 2 Cor. 6. 16. Joh. 14. 20. 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. etc. and 6. 19, 20,) And
Christ in us the hope of glory, and Christ in you, except ye be reprobates;
Which thou said was not God in us, plainly showing, thou never knew him nor
see him, for who has seen the Son has seen the Father also, and he that has
them not, has not life; so death speak: in thee, who deniest the living God
and the Lord that bought thee, and that is the spirit of Antichrist, who denies
Christ to be come in the flesh, as thou did, and many more of thy Disciples,
who, when I witnessed him come again (since his Ascension) without sin to
salvation, you could not receive it, but took it in writing, as matter of
accusation against me, showing what Generation you are of, such as ever sought
accusation against the Son of God, where he is manifest to salvation, but who
are ignorant of his salvation, could never bear the confession of his name.

And when I confessed the flesh of Christ, your carnal reason stormed at it,
like the blind Jews, saying, How could I have his flesh in me? which one of you
after confessed too, when he saw the letter declared of it, so that further
than your carnal reason can read in the l^tter, You will not believe; what a
Generation would you have been, had you lived in the times of the Apostles? who
preached down Circumcision, Temple, and Sacrifices without, such things as the
letter said should continue for ever, yet they preached them down without, and
confirmed them within in spirit, which is the ground and bottom of all, and in
which all must end. And that the word which became flesh, which is ascended,
they knew to be the Bread of life, which they broke, and fed on, who was their
Rule and Mediator; But the ground of your Faith is seen, and what testimony you
bear, who say, The Scripture is the absolute rule and medium of Faith, as thou
Thomas Moore did before the people; And when I asked thee, if God could not
give Faith without it, then thou wast forced to deny what thou had said. But
such Doctrine as this thou make people believe, who are ignorant, and not
able to try thy spirit. Oh shame with thy preaching! If the Scripture be the
absolute Rule and medium, then Christ is not the absolute Rule, unless thou say
the Scripture is Christ; And thus thou not knowing Christ to rule thee, thou
set the letter in his stead for the Rule of Faith: But of Abraham's Faith,
thou are not, nor knows it, who had an absolute Rule before the Scripture was;
But this Doctrine excludes all from faith, who have not the letter: so thou
that art a Minister of the Letter, preachest another Rule and Faith, than ever
any of Christ's Ministers preached, who preached the Word and Faith, in the
heart of them to whom they preached, and Christ in them, who is the absolute
Rule and ground of Faith; and the Law written in their hearts, and the Spirit
of Truth their rule and guide into all truth, and the light in their hearts,
which gave them the knowledge of God, and his glory, which never was known by
the letter without; and Christ says, the Kingdom of God is within you, which
the Pharisees durst not deny ( Romans 10. 8. Hebr. 8. 10, 11. Joh. 16. 13. 2 Cor.
4. 6. Luke 17. 20, 21.) But thou art more brazened against the truth, and
would exclude God out of his Kingdom, and persuade all thou can not to
look for him within, but without, lo here, lo there; But Christ says, Go not
forth to such Teachers; and thou art found to be one of those he forewarned of,
and in that work he foretold of, which is against him, and with the same spirit
thou art seen to be an enemy to his Appearance, who is the eternal life of his
people, which is not without the knowledge of God in his Temple, for death
reigns in the creature, where God is not present; and this word of
Reconciliation thou withstands, and all that are led by thee will have cause to
curse thee, when it is too late, and time is spent to no purpose, and the day
of visitation passed over.

And from the immediate call, which I witness, wherewith I am called, I do
testify against thy false Doctrine, who denies, That any have been immediately
called since Christ ascended, only those who saw him bodily upon earth; and
when I instanced Paul, thou said, he saw Christ personally with his bodily
eyes, when he was called; And when I said, then must he be come personally
again since he ascended; then thou said, Paul was in Heaven, and saw him
there with bodily eyes, when the Scripture says, he was fallen to the earth,
and saw no man (with his bodily eyes) being blind three days; and such confused
stuff thou utteredst forth, to uphold thy lies, wherewith thou keep blind
people in Babylon, but with the light thou art comprehended, thy ground, root,
offspring and end, praised be our Redeemer for ever; and in thy paper thou
tellest of his seeing Christ after the same manner the other Apostles did, Then
must it either be bodily upon earth; or the other went bodily into Heaven to be
called both which are yet unproved by plain Scripture; And thy implying is no
ground for me to believe that which I know is alye; and here thou art found
preaching another Gospel, which no plain Scripture will warrant, and all that
know God in them, sees thee acoursed, and thy Antichristian Doctrine, who denis
the Father, and the Son, and fellowship with them, who has spoken to his
people in all ages, and does at this day, where the ^ar is circumcised, but the
serpents seed could never hear him, whose ears are open to that wisdom, yet
can thou not be content, to speak thy own condition, but in thy busy mind
would exclude others, and this is thy work, to shut up the Kingdom, and
deceive the Nations that are without; but we are entered, and the Elect is
witnessed, which cannot be deceived; and we know him that is in us, and we in
him; only they who will not own the light, such are made to be deceived, and
over such only have thou dominion for a season; But thy time is coming to an
end, that makes thy rage great. And thou are forced to utter what testimony
thou bear, such as none of Christ's ever preached, That God is not known in
his people; Is this thy word of Reconciliation? and to what must they be
reconciled, if not to God? And how must they all be taught of God, if they must
never hear his voice more? but thy Ministry begets not such children, nor such
sheep thou knows not, but opposes, who have seen him, and heard him, such thou
call false witnesses, so thou appearest to be a witness to that which thou
have never seen, and many such witnesses there are in the Nation, who preach up
separation instead of reconciliation, which pains might be spared amongst them
you preach to (all having that by nature) but that the Devil fears his Kingdom,
which is only upholden by ignorance of God in his people, whose eyes are
blinded; but whose eyes are open, and have seen him, bear witness of him, and
what we have seen and heard, we declare against all false witnesses, who have
naught but by hearsay from others, who have eyes and see not, ears and hear
not, a heart that does not understand, who knows not the spiritual man, his
eyes and ears, and so judge of God to be like themselves, as thy companion did
say, That God had neither eye, nor ear, nor heart, and thus with your carnal
imaginations, you will judge of the eternal God. A nest of blasphemers, who are
blind and deaf, and would make God like you; read the Scriptures ye blind
guides, if ever any gave the like testimony of God as you do; against you do I
bear testimony, who knows the eyes of the Lord to be over the righteous, and
his ears open to their prayers, but the imaginations of the wicked grieve him
at the heart (1 Pet. 3. 12. Genesis 6. 5. 6.) And thy false doctrine, I deny, who
said, There is something which is not of God, which teaches to deny sin; and
to prove it, thou said, something teaches to deny sin; and establish
self-righteousness; where thou show thy sottishness, who would make people
believe, That to set up a greater evil by denying a lesser is a denying of sin;
this is thy own teaching and practice, but we know that which teaches to deny
one sin, teaches to deny all sin, and this is of God alone; but that which
teaches to set up self-righteousness, denis not sin but establishes it, as
that which taught thee to leave some gross evils without, that thou the better
may be believed, when thou denyest the Kingdom of God within, and the
knowledge of God in his Saints, for the Devil knows its in vain for drunkards
swearers, etc. to preach this Doctrine, yet does not this teach to deny sin,
but to deny God, and set up darkness in his seat, and this is spiritual
wickedness in heavenly places, which is sin above all others; and thou that
say thou have not the same call the Apostles had, nor the same testimony,
have thy call from another, whom thou never saw, and bears the testimony of
Antichrist, against such as have seen Christ, and withstands his appearance in
his Saints, and art of that spirit who denies Christ come in the flesh, and
that is the spirit of Antichrist, which ever withstood his appearance in his
people, and would divide him from his body, and shut God out of his K^ngdome.
Now do not say this is railing, as you use to do, for it is truth, as many can
witness, and much more of thy false Tenants, which may be declared against in
word or writing, which those two days, thou uttered before many witnesses as
opportunity served.

Also consider if thou dealt like a Christian, in slandering us with Burglary
and breaking into the house, when we was sent for many miles to give you a
meeting (as far as I know) a^ your desires, and I had free liberty to come into
the house from the owner, with all other friends, nor did we resist his
commands in departing (though we were unwilling to leave the work, so much
desired by the people) And this can John Wray witness against thee, if he will,
however the thing is true in the sight of God, and we are free from Burglary,
or breaking his house, but out of envy would thou cast this upon us, as that
in thy consci^nce shall one day witn^ss though now through subtilty and
disobedience, thou be seared and blinded, and would blind others also. But
blessed be Isreal's lig^t* by which we see thee, and all the blind leaders, who
undertake in their own wills, and for self ends, to lead to him they never saw,
nor heard.

J. N.


The Answer by Tho. Moor Jun.
James Naylor, I expected before this, a direct Answer in writing to the Paper
sent thee, which also you told me, and others you had finished, and when you
had taken a copy of it, it should be sent, but by a letter received from thee
sinc^, perceive your mind is altered, it seems the spirit by which you are
immedia^ely guided sometimes puts you upon that, which on better considerations
you refuse to obey him in. Till I have your answer to that I might reasonably
have waved this, yet lest I should not have such another occasion from you, to
deal plainly with you, I return this Answer to thy Letter. Not he that
commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends: And the Lord
commends not but bears testimony against that man, and will in due time cut
him off (he so persisting) that loves and makes a lie, Rev. 22, 15. either in
openly, or privily slandering his neighbor, Psalm. 101. 5. 7, 8. and 50. 19.
22. and 52. or in preaching another Jesus, which the Apostles have not
preached, moving us to listen to, or receive another spirit, which we have not
received in the hearing of faith, or another Gospel, which we have not
accepted, nor the Apostles which have spoken to us in the name of the Lord
delivered, whether they do this, by Word, or Spirit, or letter, as from them,
perverting the Gospel of Christ to introduce another Doctrine (as 2 Cor. 11.
1-4. Gal. 2. 2 These. 2. 2.) And wherein thou have done both these in thy
letter, I shall declare, whether thou will hear or forbear, as I am admonished,
and strengthened of God (according to that Ezekiel. 2. 4* 5, 6, 7. J^r. 23. 28, 29,
etc. Rev. 22. 10* 11, 12, to the end.)

First, Thou have loved and made these lies and slanders of me, and others, and
after conviction of the most of them to be such, yet persistest to manage them.

1 That I deny God in his Saints. 2 That I deny Christ being in them, mentioned
Col. 1. 27. 2 Cor. 13. 5. to be Gods being in them. 3 That I said Paul was in
heaven, When he saw the person of Christ. 4 That God is not known in his
people. 5 That I said, I had not the same testimony the Apostles had. 6 That I
charged you with Burglary, and breaking into the house. 7 That any of my
companions should say, That God had neither eyes, nor ears, nor heart. 8 That
Mr. Wray commanded you to depart his h^use, with diverse more, as That I was
forced by thee to deny what I had said about the Scriptures and other such
slanders almost in every mention of any thing, as my sayings, in thy l^tter;
And that thou may acknowledge these to be falsities, and slanders of thy own
loving, and making, if thy conscience be not wholly seared, which I almost
fear it is, I shall revive something to remembrance, that will so manifest it.
First, to the first and fourth of these slanders, I shall speak together* Thou
well know, if thou know any thing, as to this, That there was nothing
said by me of that nature, or to that purpose, That God is no^ in his Saints,
or not known in his people, but the contrary, even in that ^^^^ of the
Discourse thou did take the occasion of thy slande from, (...) opening of
that Scripture, 1 Timothy 3 16. that which I said, was this, (...) this purpose,
That this Scripture did speak concerning Christ, and of these things as done,
and true in his person only; In him, That word made flesh, in that one personal
body, prepared for him (the only immediately begotten Son of God in the womb of
a Virgin) as in that his own body in our nature, he was delivered to death for
our offenses, and raised again for our justification. In him, as so considered,
God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels,
preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into glory.
And that this Scripture speaks of these great things of the mystery of
godliness, as done only in that one person, I propounded this consideration
for one, That the word that is immediately prefixed, and especially applicable
to the first clause, is in the Preterperfectense (or in the time past) God was
(not, God is) he was manifest in the flesh; yea the phrase of the last clause
renders that, as a thing also done and finished in the person spoken of, He is
received up into glory; And surely, In that person, and in him only, this is
absolutely true, God is in the nature of man, even in the flesh, in which he
descended, received up into glory, not now receiving, or to be received, but
now already received up into glory, set down on the right hand of Majesty on
the Throne of glory in the heavens.

Consider I pray you, how suitable to this understanding of the last, and first
clauses, is that which is affirmed of this person, Heb. 9. 24, 25, 26. Christ
is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of
the true; But into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us,
nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the former high Priests entered
into the holy place every year with blood of others, he needs not daily to
offer up sacrifice (for this he did once, Heb. 7. 27) for then also must he
often have suffered since the foundation of the world, but now once in the last
Ages of the world, he has appeared to put away sin, by the sacrifice of
himself, even as its appointed unto men once to dye, so Christ was once
offered, not in many Ages, or diverse times, but once in the last Ages, when men
were multiplied into many, whereas they were but one, when the ordinance of
death passed on them, yet in that one, it passed on the whole kind; so Christ
was once offered to bear the sins of many, even of all of that kind, all men,
every of the nature he took, then when they and their offenses were multiplied
into many, he says not, to bear sins in many, for then indeed, he must often
have suffered, But now once he was offered, in his own body, even that, so, and
then prepared him, Chap. 10. 5-10. to bear the sins of many, Then was God in
Christ condemning sin in the flesh, yea then, and therein, when one dyed (not
in, but) for all, and rose again: Then was God in Christ reconciling the world,
not imputing their trespasses to them, but causing them to meet together on
him, 2 Cor. 5. 14. 15, 19. with Isa. 53. 6. Romans 8. 3. 1 Pet. 2. 24. And
raising him, and giving him glory as the public man, that by, and through him,
our faith, and hope might be in God* 1 Pet. 3. 18. and 1. 21. with these, and
that 1 Timothy 3. 16. compare that Joh. 13. 31, 32. See how our Savior there
directs us to the person in whom the time, and works in which God was so
manifested, and glorified in the flesh, and did straightway after the finishing
of these works, glorify it in that person, even then, faith our Savior, when
Judas was gone out to betray him, when he was presently to finish those works
the Father gave him to do on earth (yea, his soul was already in trouble* Joh.
12. 27.) now (says he) even in that his being made an offering for sin, is the
Son of Man glorified, and the Father is glorified in him; If God be glorified
in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify
him.

Then, and therein was the Son of man glorified in his being appointed and set
as the surety in that public place, that by the grace of God he should taste
death for every man, he was therein said to be crowned with glory and honor
above all other persons among Men or Angels, for no man could redeem his
Brother, nor give to God a ransom for his soul; the Redemption of the soul is
more precious, neither was there any other thing or person in Heaven or Earth
that was counted worthy but this Holy One, Herein was the Son of man glorified:
And so in Gods supporting him, and carrying him through so great sufferings,
when all our sins met together on him, Psalm. 40. 11, 12 -- 16, 17. Heb. 5. 7,
9. Likewise in Gods giving so glorious a testimony to him at his death, Mat.
26. 50 -- 54. And in his Resurrection from the dead, This Jesus who was made of
the seed of David according to the flesh, was declared to be the Son of God
with power, according to the spirit of holiness, Romans 1. 3 4.

In these things the Son of man was glorified, and ^o the Father glorified in
him; in the exercise and agreement of all his holy and glorious Attributes, his
Wisdom, Holiness, Truth, Mercy, Goodness, Power, etc. for manssalvation; God
was manifested in the flesh, condemning sin, and yet therein preparing
Atonement and Propitiation for sinners, and straightway after the finishing
of these works in his own body, the father (who glorified him in himself in his
own Power, Name, and Glory (declaring himself satisfied in, and for what he
delivered him) raising him from the dead, in which he was justified in the
Spirit, or according to the Spirit of Holiness) did further, and fully, and
perfectly glorify him in the same body, in receiving him up to glory, and
setting him on his own right hand in the Heavens, far above all Principality
and Power, Might, and Dominion, and every* name that is named, not only in
this world, but in that to come, and has put all things under his feet, and
gave him to be the head over all things to the Church, which is his body, the
fullness of him, (then distinct from him, in his personal body, now raised and
glorified, yet they in that to be done in and upon them, are the filling up or
completing of him in the ends and virtues of his cross) who (as so considered,
namely in the ends and virtues of his cross) fills all things, as Ephesians. 3.
8, 10, but he gave himself for h^s Church, for all that through his grace to
man-ward come in to him, That he might wash them with the washing of water by
the word, that so he might in the issue present it to himself (as he now
presents it in himself before the Father) a glorious Church without spot or
wrinckle, Ephesians 5. 25-27. and ch* 1. 20, 21, 22, 23. 1 Pot. 3. 22. Phil. 2. 6-11.
Joh. 17. 1-5. Col. 2. 9. Read these Scriptures, and compare them, and see how
they explicate and agree with the explication given of that 1 Timothy 3. 16. And
after some little Discourse to this purpose, demonstrating that Scripture to
speak of the manifestation of God in that one person, and not in diverse, in,
and through whom only the Fathers goodness and glory is preached, and the
preaching of it in the Gospel now fully made known from the Jews to the
Gentiles, in, and through whom truly, and only* the Father is believed on in
the world, John 12. 44, 45, 46. Romans 1. 16, 17 -- 19. and 2. 4. with Act. 4.
10, 11, 12. and 17. 24-31.

I say after this I added, that indeed it could not properly be said, That in a
full or absolute sense, God was or is manifested in the flesh of any natural Son
of Adam in the time of this mortality, nor so as he was in that person, who was
not naturally of us, but made so by a work of new creation, and now through
sufferings for us entered into his glory; to this purpose were my words, to
which also I then added, as follows, or to this purpose (contrary to what thou
have falsely charged me with) That it is true, God has said, he well dwell and
walk in his people, that through grace believe in him, according to the
testimony given of his Son; but that the spirit of the believer primely and
chiefly is the subject of his indwelling or habitation, which is said to be
made alive for righterusness sake, while yet the body is dead because of sin,
and to serve the Law of God, while yet the flesh is much inslaved by the law of
sin, remaining and warring in the members, and the body of death remaining on
them, even in the best of believers while here, in those in whom Christ dwells
in his Spirit, and by faith, Romans 8. 10. and 7. 23. 25. whence the Apostle
says, he knows that in him (that is, in his flesh) dwells no good thing, Romans
7. 18. yet the fountain of all goodness being received into the mind, spirit,
o^ inner man by* faith (as Ephesians. 3. 16, 17.) that also springs up, and acts
forth through the mortal body moving and strengthening it to all its service,
and suffering, whence also the body is said to be the Temple of the Lord, it
being the Tabernacle of that mind, spirit, or inner-man, in which God primely
and chiefly dwells, and manifests himself in and through the testimony of
Jesus, there received (2 Cor. 5. 1-5. 8* 14, 15. and chap. 4. 6* 7.) as well as
also more generally, because that also is bought with a price to be his (as in
that 1 Cor. 6. ^0.) yea, the bodies of believers are so the Temples of the
Lord, as not only bought with a price, but taken possession of, owned, and
accepted in his Son, with whom they are united by faith. That God will also
manifest himself fully and gloriously in those bodies, when he that raised up
the Lord shall also raise us up by his own power, a in that 1 Cor. 6. 14. Then
shall he change our vile bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body by that mighty working by which he is able to subdue even all
things to himself.

Surely James, had thou any fear of God before thy eyes, thou would be
ashamed of thy gross ignorance, that can see no difference or distinction
between the body being the Temple of the Lord, and so being also holy, as being
redeemed, called, accepted, devoted to be his, and for him; And the Lord being
fully and glorioufly manifested in his holy Temple. Have thou not read? indeed
I fear thou do give very little attendance to reading the Scriptures, because
I find in thy discourse and papers, they are slighted as a dead letter, and
most of them, as quoted by thee, have a false reading put upon them; But I say,
have thou never read? that then was the time, once in the last ages of the
world, when Christ appeared in that body, then, and so prepared for him, as
before, and was once offered to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, even
then was the Son of man glorified, and God was glorified in him, and he did
then straightway glorify him, carrying him through sufferings into glory, in a
full and absolute sense (as in the Scriptures forementioned) But that the day
of the manifestation of all the residue of the Sons of God of mankind, even the
day of the redemption of their bodies, when the glory of God shall be revealed
in the Saints fully, and so he glorified and admired in all them* that now
through grace believe, because the Apostles testimony was received by them in
that day; that this is yet to be waited for til the end of this world, in this
corruptible state of it, till the Lord himself personally come again, and in
the glory of his Father, and with his holy Angels, and bring all those that
sleep in Jesus, with him, and so till they shall all be gathered together unto
him to the enjoyment of it, till that day in which their enemies shall be all
trodden down a^mire in the streets, who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power,
when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, etc. Then shall the righteous
shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, when all the tares are plucked
up, and cast into the fire, which cannot be done by any of the servants in the
world that now is, nor shall be done by the Angels till the end of it, and
while they remain among them, they, as well as this body of death upon them, do
hinder the glorious manifestation of the Sons of God. Surely then, even we,
says the Apostle (as well as our expectation of the whole Creation to be then
restored or renewed, we also) that have the first fruits of the Spirit, do
wait, or tarry, for the adoption, that is* the redemption of our bodies, and so
for the manifestation of the Sons of God. If thou have not read this, or have
forgotten, having too much I fear suffered the knowledge, faith and hope of it,
to slip out of thy heart: Or however, I pray thee for thy own good (if it may
be) read, consider and compare these Scriptures (comparing them with that
forecited concerning that manifestation of God in the flesh, in the person of
Christ, Joh. 13. 31, 32.) Romans 8* 18, 19, 23-25. with 2 These. 1* 5* 6* 7-9, 10.
and chapter ^. 1, 2. Mat. 13. 28, 29, 30. with ver. 37-40, 42, 43. Psa. 37. 6, 7.
Mal. 4. 1-3. 1 These. 4. 14-16, 17. Tit. 2. 12, 13. 2 Timothy 48.

Again, do thou not remember, that when at first thou did charge me with
denying God to be manifest in the flesh of the Saints (which were the
expressions of thy charge on its first appearance, though much altered, and
higher after in thy paper, and since in thy Letter) that then I denied thy
Ch^rge, and told the people over again what I said, suitable to what I have now
and before written, as much as I could g^t liberty, and what I would stand to.
It is true, thou toldst me then I was a liar, in disowning what thou would
charge on me; but thou wast a single witness to that, and when I left that to
the people, thou had from one of them ( viz. Mr. Wray) a sober and Christian
answer (to this purpose as ^ remember) That the end of that meeting, he
thought, was not to catch at, and strive about words; and although to his
remembrance, what I had said about Gods being manifested in the flesh, was to
that purpose, and in like expressions, in which I had then again repeated and
delivered it; yet if some could not be satisfied, but that some expressions did
fall from me, that might in their apprehensions carry more in them than I would
stand to, or own, as my sense of them, yet then he thought it reasonable, that
I should have that Christian liberty, my self to explicate my sense of them,
and meaning in them, that I would stand to, and no more charged on me as my
saying. And this liberty likewise he desired you should have; and I think you
needed it, and had it, when you said, The Judgment after death was past in
you, and yet after explicated your meaning, That you was past the danger of it,
though the last nothing near comes up to the first.

But James, Thou have in thy jangling about this, and in such other catching
at, and strife about words, and in thy slanders, clearly manifested to them
that will not shut their eyes, that thy intention in that discourse, was to
endeavor any way thou could to subvert the people from understanding what we
had propounded to be reasoned about, concerning the essence of Christ, what it
is; whether something essentially in many persons, or one person distinct from
all other persons; and if one person granted, then whether in the works done in
his own body, in his Incarnation, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, there
was, and so remains in him in our nature, in that his own body, by virtue of
those works so finished in it, the only, and abiding virtue for the taking
away of sin; or is the virtue for that also, chiefly, or at all, in some other
work, or works done in other persons. And about his Second Appearing and the
glory then to be revealed, whether that be to be waited for by all believers,
all the time of this mortality, or made in, or to any in this day. I perceive
it did not please thee, that has pleased the Father, that in all things he
should have the pre-eminence, in whom only dwells the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, and so communic^bly in its influences.

Thou had surely done more fairly, if thou had let the people know, that
thy intention was to make a nullity, or a type, shadow, or figure of that
person Jesus of Nazareth, and of those works done and finished in his own body,
in which himself bore our sins to the tree, and was raised, and glorified; or
at least, to make thy self and others his equals, in all those manifestations
of God in him, as Korah, Dathan and Abiram, would have dealt with Moses and
Aaron, in those things in which they were eminent Types of him, and did they
not endeavor it with thy pretense? All the Congregation is holy, and the Lord
is among them, Number. 16* 3. and as those foretold of Jude 11.

2 To thy second Slander, That I denied Christ's being in them, mentioned
Collos. 1. 27. and 2 Corinthians. 13. 5. to be Gods being in them.

Surely James, Either the spirit by which thou art immediately guided is very
forgetful, or else thou art very confident of my forgetfulness, and presuming
on that; art not afraid to alter thy own charges, as often as thy thoughts
alter, about the advantagiousness of the manner of laying them* I remember,
thou did charge me before with something of this nature, but then in these
expressions, That I denied Christ to be God, and the life of Christ being
manifested in the flesh, to be Gods being manifested in the flesh. And this
thou said I did in giving this Answer to that Scripture, 2 Cor. 4. 10, 11.
That the life of Jesus might be manifest in our mortal flesh (viz.) That that
was not God; this was thy Charge, and now it is thus much altered, That in
answer to those two other Scriptures, Col. 1. 27. 2 Cor. 13. 5. I said, That
was not God in us.

To thy Charge in both forms, I shall Answer so far as to discover thy falsity.

First, to the first, My Answer to that, 2 Cor. 4. 10, 11. was this (though I
well remember I was cut off by thee in the midst of it, and thou would not
let the people hear it) that that Scripture says not, That God was manifested
in their mortal flesh, bu^ that he might be. In which answer is fully granted,
that in the life of Jesus being manifested in their mortal flesh, God is, or
may be said therein to be truly manifested. But that which is denied in that
Answer, is, That that Scripture speaks of that as a thing now done in them,
that which was now done and manifest in their body, was death, unto which they
were daily, and always delivered, that the other might be, That the life also
of Jesus might be made manifest in our body, in our mortal flesh; he does not
say, it now was in the time of this mortality, but that it might be so in this
flesh, that now was mortal, For if in it we suffer with him, even in the same
body, we shall also reign with him, and be glorified together. And when thou
did charge me with this, next day, I b^gan to give thee this Answer
forementioned; it is true, thou would not suffer me to speak out my Answer,
nor the people to hear what was spoken either day. But I almost think thou
did perceive, what my Answer was, and would have been, and that it would have
been too many for thee to overthrow, and therefore was angry with it in its
first appearance, and would not let the people understand what it was, but
presently stopped my mouth, and their ears, with reproaches and slanders.

I had in my thoughts this twofold Answer to have given to your abuse of that
Scripture, if I could have obtained but humane civility from you.

1 That already mentioned ( viz.) That the Text says not, That the life of
Jesus was manifested in their mortal flesh, now while mortal, But that they was
delivered to death now always, that that might be, and when, and wherein they
expected, that should be fully accomplished, is clear in that which follows,
verse. 13, 14. - We also believe, and therefore speak, knowing (says he) that
he which raised up the Lord Jesus shall also raise us up by Jesus, and shall
present us with you (they shall not one prevent another in that)

And that phrase, That the life of Jesus might be manifested in our mortal
flesh, does no more signify, that that life of Jesus shall be fully manifested
in it, in the sense spoken of, while yet it is mortal, than that equivalent
Scripture, Romans 8. 11. does signify. That the body shall be mortal when
raised, or that the resurrection shall be made in any, in the time of this
mortality, where he says, He that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also
quicken your mortal body by that spirit that now dwelt in them. But that he
speaks there of such a quickening or raising from the dead, as in which their
mortal bodies shall be made immortal, is plain, in that he compares it with the
raising Christ from the dead, having also affirmed before, that now the body is
dead because of sin, while yet the spirit is made alive for righteousness sake.
And to that death that is now, or still upon the body, even after we have the
first fruits of the Spirit, he opposes that quickening of the mortal body
spoken of; all which plainly shows, that he speaks there of the blessed and
first Resurrection, which more properly than the other is called a quickening,
because it is a resurrection to life, of which they in their bodies, that sleep
in Jesus, shall all be made partakers together at his Second* Appearing,
speaking of that he says, He shall quicken your mortal bodies, yet this mortal
shall then, and therein put on immortal^ty.

2 This further Answer, That if it should be granted you, that the life of
Jesus might be in some sense truly said to be manifested in the mortal flesh,
now while mortal, yet it makes nothing against what was said, about Gods being
manifest in the flesh; for this we had then at first laid down, That the Spirit
of life in Jesus being received into, and dwelling in the mind, or spirit of
the believer, in that word or testimony of Christ received and abiding there,
does also show forth it self, and act in, and through the mortal body, moving
and strengthening it to such service, and suffering as the renewing of the mind
leads to: Yet all this says not, That properly and in a full and absolute
sense, God is manifested or glorified in the flesh of his Saints in the time of
this mortality; much less, that he is so manifested either in such manner, or
in, or to the accomplishing of such works, as he was manifested in the flesh in
that one person, that now in man's nature is received up into Glory, which were
the things denied.

Secondly, To your Charge, in its last form, with reference to those two
Scriptures, Col. 1. 27. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Truly, I do not remember that those two
Scriptures were at all mentioned in any Discourse, by way of conference that
was between us, at least not so mentioned, as you might have any answer to what
you would have made them say; I remember indeed Rich. Farnsworth in continued
speech abused them; But there was nothing said to him, until he had finished
his large witness concerning himself, after which, the time being shore, there
was but little said by me, though more than could all bear without storming
that we did not rather fall down and worship him, and admire his words, as some
of your company did, as the words of the eternal God, and not of a man (more
highly blasphemous than that, Act. 12. 22.) but that which was said, was not
with reference to his abuse of those Scriptures, but to his abuse of those two
other Scriptures, To. 7. 23. and 8. 10. which occasionally falling upon, we
shall briefly mention.

He witnessed that he was delivered from the Law of sin in his members, that
it was not remaining or warring there, and from that body of death there
mentioned, with allusion to those expressions, as signifying that Paul
witnessed the like concerning himself, whereas Paul complains of both, as yet
accumbring him, speaking in the present time, not in the time past, I find then
a law in my members warring -- Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death! He was not yet delivered, but wretched by reason
of it remaining, Though yet he could thank God through Jesus in whom he had
perfect deliverance, which he enjoyed by faith, and therein also freedom from
under the condemnation of that holy Law of God, which discovers sin, and
sentenceth the sinner to death, and daily victory in the combat, over the
dominion of sin, and fear, or horror of death, yet still it remained, and
warred in him, and so in all believers, while here, as to that purpose was then
told the people.

Again, he witnessed largely of his body being wholly mortified and dead to
sin, as the fruit of Christ being in him, and therein, and so God manifested in
his flesh; And this he said also with allusion to those expressions, Romans 8 10.
If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, etc. which expressions he
changed thus, The body is dead unto sin: To that also I told the people, that
the bodies being dead unto sin, as it was not therein the expressions, so
neither could it there be meant, because he says, The body is dead because of
sin, now its being crucified, or dead unto sin, is no part of the fruit of sin,
nor happens it to any because of sin, but because of, and as the fruit and
virtue of Christ's righteousness, where in any sense, or measure, its truly
found: But that here spoken of, is something of misery still remaining on the
believer, because of, or as the fruit of sin, though Christ be in them, and so
the spirit alive for righteousness sake, yet the body is dead because of sin,
yea it is yet in it self a wretched vile body, as Romans 7. 23. Phil. 3. 21.
though redeemed, and taken to be the Lords, yet not in it self while here
wholly subdued to him, nor conformed, or made like to his glorious body, until
the Resurrection, and then it shall certainly so be, we wait for the Adoption,
That is the redemption of the body.

You did indeed discover your selves in these, and the like passages to be of
no judgment concerning the faith, and of the same spirit with those 2 Timothy 2.
18. that say, The Resurrection is already made, or past in them, and so
overthrow the faith of some that did not cleave so close to the foundation of
God, in giving earnest heed to the things they had heard in the Doctrine of the
Death and Resurrection of Christ, which foundation yet stands sure against
all your Batteries, having this seal for its confirmation, The Lord knows
them that are his, he owneth, approves, stands by, to the saving,
preserving, and strengthening in all service and suffering, all them that having
received the Spirit in that hearing of faith do keep that in believing
remembrance, and abide in it as the fundamental doctrine, they therein abide in
unior, and fellowship with and protection of the Son, and so of the Father in
him (2 Timothy 2. 19. 1 John 2. 24, 25 26, 27. 2 John 7. -9. Joh. 10. 27-29. and
14. 21. 23. and 15. 1-4, 5, 7, etc.) though such as were never firmed in that
foundation, especially being kept from firmness therein, through retaining
diverse lusts, and such as after knowledge of the truth received, do wilfully
slight, reject and turn away from that preaching of the Cross as foolishness,
having itching ears, to listen, or inquire after any thing, that may be
plausible, and also suitable to some lust of their own, yet secretly retained
and pursued, though such, I say, may be, and are turned aside to fables, and
led captive by such spirits, Therefore let every one that names the name of
Christ depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19-22. and 3. 6, 7. and 4. 1-4. Joh 15.
6.

But to return to our present business, in that which was said to the discovery
of his abuse of these Scriptures, and against his witness concerning himself,
yet there was no mention of his abuse of those two Scriptures forementioned,
nor at any other time, in our discourse with you, that I know of, but being in
this false accusation thus propounded, as those in which so great strength lies
for you, that you have thought fit for them to wave that in 2 Cor. 4. 10, 11.
as more inconsiderable to your purpose, we shall a little consider what they
say.

That Col. 1. 27. says, That Christ in, or amongst the believers, The hope of
glory: And indeed he is so amongst them all, and in, or unto all of them, for
they are all called in one hope of their calling, both in respect of the ground
and foundation of their hope, and in respect of the end of it, the things hoped
for; And truly Jesus Christ, and so the Father in him, is the original,
summary* and fundamental matter of it in both respects; but it is that same
Jesus Christ* and not another, which they had preached in the Gospel to every
man (see verse. 28.) and indeed there is but one Lord, and not another Jesus;
not one in the heavens sitting on the right hand of God and another dwelling in
us but that same Jesus that is in our nature in that body (then and so prepared
for him as before) set down on the Right hand of Majesty in the heavens, even
he, that person, that is personal^y absent from the believer, is dwelling in
the believers heart, by faith of, and in him, and so the Father, in, and
through Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 6. 7. Ephesians. 3. 17-19. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Joh. 12. 45. Yea it
is that same Jesus, after that consideration of him also, as in that his own
personal body, He was delivered to death for our offenses, and raised again for
our justification: And so in the virtues thereof, is become a perfect Savior,
Propitiation, High, Priest etc. And so able to save to the utmost all that come
to God by him, even as he is preached in the Gospel to every man, That is, even
so in the believers heart by faith, for he is yesterday, and to day, and for
ever the same. And after the same consideration of him, he is (being received
by faith, which is the evidence of things not seen) in, and to the believer,
the only bottom ground, and foundation of all his faith, and hope in God, both
in respect of the promise of this life, and that to come, yea the thing hoped
for, he in, through, and with whom all things are expected, as he is now given
virtually and spiritually in the testimony of him, so all things pertaining to
life and godliness, are given in, and with him in a like manner, and to be
enjoyed by faith in him, and in the first fruits of the Spirit; And when he
shall appear again, personally in the glory of his Father, and with his holy
Angels, then all things forementioned to be given with him in such manner, as
to be enjoyed by way of actual possession in fullness and glory, and in such
enjoyment of his personal presence for ever, even the fullness of all spiritual
blessings (which now we are blessed with in Christ our Treasury) and the total
and eternal redemption of the body; of this glory, Christ is in, and to our
hearts, the hope, not the possession, nor do we possess the glory, for then
hope should cease, but if we hope for that we see not (which indeed we do when
Christ our forerunner is our hope, as aforesaid) then do we with patience wait
for it. Surely this Scripture is far from telling us, That the glory, glorious
rest, Kingdom, and enjoyment of promises, which the Fathers dyed in the faith,
and hope of, not having received them, was now revealed in, and upon them, it
signifies fully the contrary, in saying Christ was in, and to them the hope of
it.

Like to this is that, 2 Cor. 13. 5. A rule given to prove themselves by,
whether they be in the faith, in that one faith of Gods operation, and in which
they should be accepted, and approved; The Rule is, Jesus Christ is in you, or
else ye are unapproved, yea stand as disallowed, disowned in the Apostles
Doctrine, and so in Heaven, as being not in the faith; The thing here to be
considered is, How Christ is in them? If they be indeed in the faith, surely
that is easily understood, if we consider this Rule of Trial, as it has
relation to the thing to be tried, or proved, which is, Whether we be in the
faith, not Whether we be in the actual possession; Sure then, or for that there
will be no need of such trying, and proving, nor to say one to another, know
the Lord, when they shall all know him, from the least to the greatest, even as
they are known, which they shall do in that day when that Covenant which is now
given them, in, and with Christ, and as he is given, shall be fully performed.

But now while they need to try and prove themselves whether they be in the
Faith, which is the evidence of things not seen, and the confidence of things
hoped for, that is thus to be proved; If Jesus Christ (and there is but one
Christ, and after the same consideration, as before, if he) be in them, that
can be no otherwise than as before, as in his testimony declared the ground and
foundation of their faith, and hope, the matter believed, and object believed
in, then their faith is of God, and centuring in God, even the Father, for he
that sees him, sees him that sent him; and he that believes on him,
believes on him that sent him, he is come a light into the world, that
whosoever believes in him should not abide in darkness, Joh. 12. 44-46.

3 Thy third Slander is, That I said Paul was in Heaven, when he saw the person
of Christ there with bodilyeies; Truly, this also is wholly without any color
of ground from any thing I said or writ; That Paul had an immediate
demonstration of the person o Christ, even of the glorified body in the
Heavens, and did hear the word of his mouth, even receive the Gospel
immediately from that person, was that I said (though indeed not on such
occasion as thou mentionest in they letter, but) in Answer to thy witness, That
thou had seen Christ, as Paul had; And also by way of demonstration, That
Timothy, and so all secondary Ministers in the Gospel since, had not their
demonstration of the person of the Lord, nor their furniture in the Gospel in
the same manner, that those first and great Apostles had, who were also the
Apostles last in that respect, of which Paul was one, though born out of due
time, and the last so immediately called and furnished. On this occasion I say
was that assertion forementioned; And that also that appearance or immediate
Demonstration of the person of Christ, was such as his bodily eyes were
strengthened some little time to behold, or see, that also (at least) I
supposed, and gave my reasons for; But that I positively affirmed so much, I
remember not.

I suppose you will find in my Answer to your Charges, that on the mention of
that Charge, I neither own nor disown it as charged on me; but being then in
haste, only desired you again to consider, what was propounded as to that.
This I mention not as doubting whether he did or no, though to dispute such a
thing with men that have no faith in that person, I think is in vain, because
such men are also unreasonable or absurd, 2 These. 3. 2. They will not regard,
understand, or be swayed by the plain import and force of the words of the Holy
Ghost, they would as lightly cast off the words themselves, and reject all use
of them, or allusion to them, if they did not fear its being disadvantagious to
their design among a people where the Scriptures are generally esteemed: But to
that which I said about this (whether laid down by way of position or
supposition it matters not) this was plain enough to be understood, in both my
saying and writing, That he was on earth, when he enjoyed that immediate
demonstration and was so strengthened to behold that person, that glorified
body in the Heavens, that Just, or Holy One, ( Act. 22. 14 with chap. 2. 27-30*
31.) and to hear the words of his mouth; I say, that he was on earth then, is
plain in what I said about it, for I brought that, Act. 9 3 7, 8. as implying
that he was strengthened to behold that glorified body in the Heavens, even in
that light shining round about him, above the brightness of the Sun, which
sight occasioned his falling to the earth. And it is clear, that then he
appeared to him in the way, verse. 17. And that he had then (and probably after)
such a sight of the Just one, as was, as to the manner of his seeing,
equivalent with the manner of hearing vouchsafed him of the words of his mouth,
see Act. 22. 14. which whether it was not with bodily ears also let the Text be
considered ( Act 9. 7.) which says, The men that were with him heard a voice
also, they heard a sound of a voice, though the voice, or the distinct words of
that sound they understandably heard not, Act. 22 9. (that discovers what
manner of bearing was vouchsafed) but, says the Text, seeing no man, as it
(even thereby) appears Paul d^d (even that m^n Christ Jesus, from whom the
voice came) before his falling at least. And that which makes it more clear is,
that he says, 1 Cor. 15. 8. Last of all he was seen of me, as of o^e born out
of due time; And it is evident, he was not the last to whom he was spiritually
demonstrated, nor born out of due time, for that, yea, to prove himself an
Apostle, as well as the rest, 1 Cor. 9. 1. even one of those immediate
Messengers and Ambassadors of the Lord, for obedience to the faith among all
Nations for his name (as Romans 1. 5.) though last of all called, and furnished,
he says, Have I not seen the Lord? which must needs be in another manner of
demonstration than only spiritual; for so all believers have seen him (as Gal.
3. 1, 2.) in or through the hearing of says, yet all are not Apostles, 1 Cor.
12. 29. yea, his sight was in such manner of demonstration, as other believers
since have not seen, as in my first Answer, and might be more fully showed, but
I forbear, only this I have mentioned, partly to discover the falseness of thy
charge in this Letter; And that it may appear; as in all said, it does, That I
do and did, in all said about it, apprehend, and fully signify my
apprehe^sions to be such, that Paul was on earth, when he had that
demonstration of the person of Christ in the Heavens; And are you so sensual
that you cannot believe, that God may manifest his Son, even in his person
visibly to men on earth, while yet the same person so demonstrated remains in
Heaven? Is not he able to give supernatural demonstration of objects, and
streng^h to behold them too? And what more is this we have said of Paul, as to
sight of the person, than was vouchsafed to Stephen, the first Martyr we read
of after Christ's A scension? with what eyes did he look up sted fastly unto
Heaven? and was it not with the same that he saw the glory of God, and Jesus,
even the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God? See Act 17. 55, 56.

But why art thou not ashamed to mention my words by piece mea^, leaving out
such a material clause, and yet calling it my saying? As when thou chargest me
with saying, That Paul saw Christ after the same manner that the other Apostles
did, I did indeed in the paper query, whether that last of all of me, etc. 1
Cor. 15. 8. as added to the former Verses, do not signify, that he appeared,
or was demonstrated to him in the same mannen, that he had been to the other
after his Resurrection, and before this, But thou well know its backed with
this caution, which is so placed, that it cannot go for my saying without it;
But thou leavest it out, knowing it would spoil thy intention, and clear me of
thy slander, as likewise all forewritten about it in that paper will do; The
Caution is this ( I stretch not my words, in the same manner, further than to a
personal Appearance, or visible Demonstration of his person) which surely he
might enjoy as well as Stephen, though he on Earth, and the Lord in Heaven.

But thou will not believe any thing (thou say) that thou know to be a
lie, however fully implied (though in Scripture, for there was no other
implications mentioned.) I suppose thou will not say, whatever thou think, that
the Scriptures do by any fair and clear implication signify a lie; But to wave
that, How do thou know that this is a lie, That Paul enjoyed such a visible
demonstration of the person of Christ, as before? for thou speak to that, as
well as to the other branch, which I have disowned; and of them both together,
signifies, thou know it is a lie. I say how do thou know it, or how shall
we know it, when thou bring nothing at all to prove or demonstrate it to be
such? Is this all the Answer we must look for when thou affirmest any thing, or
deniest any thing. I know, I witness it to be True, or I know it to be a Lie?
Indeed these were the strongest Arguments, and Demonstrations we had from thee
in our meeting, to any thing that I know of, and with these, and such like, in
the mouths of diverse of you together, you could be as confident, wise, and
strong in your own conceit, as seven men, that could render a reason, and stop
the mouths of others too with these, when you had none of the faithful word to
do it withal; I know it is a lie, and I pray how do thou know? do thou
think we will all fall down and worship James Naylor, in receiving what he
urges upon us only in his own name? I know, I witness, etc. It may be such may
do it, as will not receive, or have rejected the testimony of the other J. N.
Jesus of Nazareth that came in his Fathers name, Joh. 5. 43. But give us leave
to question how thou know, and because thou do not tell us, I will guess
in this (thy conscience knows whether I guess right or no;) I fear thou do
not at all in thy heart believe or acknowledge that one person of Christ, as
personally absent from thee, while in this clay Tabernacle (that that which we
read of that person, and the work done in him, is slighted, as figures of some
other truth to be found in us, is evident enough to me, as I shall further make
appear anon; but that which I here look upon, as the ground of this thy
confident knowledge, is something more, namely) That thou have in thy heart
wholly rejected the faith, and acknowledgement of that one person of the Son of
God, in our nature, in one individual personal body, even the same that was
crucified, slain, and hung upon a tree, that Jesus of Nazareth to be now
received up into glory by the Father, in the Heavens, and there remaining in
the most glorious presence of God; even in the Heavens, as opposed to the
Earth, where the former high Priests served, and where while he is, he is
personally absent from us, while we are in these bodies on earth. I suppose
thou may think there might be such a one as Jesus of Nazareh, and that he
dyed, as is written of him, and happily that he rose again; but if thy thoughts
go so far, I doubt they leave him there, even that Jesus of the seed of David
after the flesh, as one, that in all done before in him was but a type of some
first appearance, to be accomplished in us, and now as a type or figure,
vanishing, and ceasing from thence so to be; So that what we read of his
Ascension into Heaven, and remaining in the Heavens until the Restitution of
all things, and of his second* personal Appearance, is to be understood of some
other internal mystery to be accomplished now in us, not so plainly expressed
in the words, which must therefore be slighted as a dead letter. I fear I have
almost touched upon thy thoughts (though we will not boast as thou do of
compreheading and discerning us perfectly, in root, end, and offspring; while
yet God knows, and all that know us, know, thou do not discover us at all,
nor speak as one at all acquainted with whence we come, or whither we go; but
as he, Joh 3.) now if thou be so far given over to strong delusions to believe
such a lie, that there is not such personal body in our nature in the Heavens
(as before) thou must needs from thence be confident Paul did not see him; for
he could not see that which is not.

But to remove such false ground of such a confidence, there is sufficient
demonstration and power in his words, as left on Record, and will be yet to
thee in the consideration of them, if thou have not wholly crucified the Son of
God to thy self, and so thy self to the light and power of his words.

See I pray thee ( Luke 24. 39, 40. with verse. 51.) How our Savior in the last
discovery of himself to his Disciples after his Resurrection, and before his
Ascension, demonstrates himself to h^ve a real body, and not only the shape or
appearance of one (which a spirit without a body may assume) by his having real
flesh and bones to be felt, And that body to be he himself, the same that was
peirced and nailed to the cross; so demonst^ated by his hands and his feet, ^^
little before to Thomas, by his side and hands, Joh. 20 27. and at that time of
his having so demonstrated himself unto them, he led them out as far as to
Bethany; and be lifted up his hands and blessed them, and it came to pass while
he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into Heaven, compare
it with Act. 1. 9, 10, 11. Where having in the verses before repeated the
Narration of his showing himself alive to them after his passion, by many
infallible proofs, and then of his commissionating and blessing them, he says,
And when he had spoken these words, while they beheld (that may assure us,
their senses were not deluded, but it was even the same person, in the same
personal body as before demonstrated by his hands and feet, his flesh and
bones, which their eyes had seen, and their hands had handled, even that word
of ^^e in that flesh which he was made, now spiritualized or made in the
Resurrection, a spiritual body, yet the same so made) Even while they behold,
he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their fight, and while they
looked steadfastly toward* Heaven as he went up, behold two men stood by them
in white apparel; which also said, ye men of ^^lilee why stand ye gazing up
into Heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into heaven; Note the wisdom and
care of the Holy Ghost here, lest being taken out of their sight* they or any
after should doubt, whether that body, as then demonstrated, vanished or what
became of it; He adds here, that he was taken up from them into heaven; even
the same Jesus which they had seen, and in this his Ascension in their sight in
which he was taken up from them verse. 9. 11. with Luke 24. 51. He was carried
up into heaven, yea says Mark. He was thou received up into heaven and sat on
the right hand of God, Mar. 16. 19 even there in the heavens, he is ^et on the
right hand of the Throne of Majesty there officiating as a Minister of the true
Sanctuary, etc. Heb. 8. 1. 2. Christ after the same consideration of him is
ascended into the heavens, after the like unto which consideration David is not
ascended, but dead and buried; And after what consideration is that otherwise
than in that body in the humane nature, which is now received up into glory
even therein? and so God has actually, fully and gloriously made that same
Jesus whom they crucified both Lord and Christ; See Act. 2. 22-36. and 5. 30,
31. And the Heavens must receive him till the restitution of all things Act. 3.
21. In the heavens being opened, Stephen saw the Son of man standing on the
right hand of God (signifying his readiness, and power to help, and stand by
his suffering Saints) even the same that descended into the lower parts of the
earth, is ascended up far above all heavens (Within the reach of our sight, or
comprehension of our mind, as here below, without some supernatural
demonstration and strenthning to behold, when it is affirmed Stephen saw the
heavens opened, and the Son of man standing, etc.) Ephesians. 4. 8-10. Heb. 4. 14.

If any shall here think to amuse us with such Questions, As, are we sure what
is meant, or signified by the word Heaven, when used in this case, that is,
what is meant by that heaven, or those heavens, into which our Forerunner in
our nature is entered, and in which he is received, until the restitution of
all things, whether is meant thereby a place on high, in which that one
personal body resideth, or some state of glory, dignity, or spirituality into
which Christ might pass or ascend?

For Answer to this, We say first, let it be remembered, That it is distinctly
proved, That it is Christ after the same consideration of him, in which he was
laid in the Sepulcher, I mean in that body in our nature which they slew, the
same, though not in the same quality, but raised a spiritual and glorious body,
that is ascended, and not as this foolish question would in the issue of it,
lead us to conceive Christ passing out of flesh into spirit, or out of that
body, into an imagination (as we may truly call it) in the bodies and souls of
others. This being remembered, which also will again appear in our Answer, we
answer thus, That by heaven may sometime be meant, some state, or condition of
happiness, or glory, as well as a place, we shall not oppose; but the Question
here being only what is meant, or signified by Heaven, or the Heavens, when
Jesus Christ his ascending into them, and being there received is spoken of? to
that we answer, Most frequently when so spoken of, it signifies directly, and
only speaks expressly of the place into which he is gone in that body, and
where he is received until the restitution of all things, and not of the state
of dignity, or glory, which he there possesses, that is usually signified by
another phrase joined with his ascension into Heaven, namely his sitting down
on the right hand of God, on the right hand of power, and of the Throne of
Majesty in the Heavens; observe* That word, in the Heavens, signifies, the
place in which he is so dignified. The word when so used, always especially
means it, and frequently speaks only expressly of the place, etc. And what that
is, we thus far farther answer, in which farther Answer, we shall more fully
demonstrate the truth of what is said.

1 The Heavens (or that place of glory, or heavenly places on high) where the
most glorious being, dwelling, and presence of the Essence, and Majesty of God
is, who though in r^spect of his inspections, influences, and operations, he be
every where, and in his gracious spiritual presence, and manifested nighness,
in and through his Son, dwelling in Son, even in the hearts and societies of
his people, yet in respect of the most glorious presenc^, and dwelling of the
Essence of his Majesty, he dwells in the light into which no man (no mere man
as from Adam) can approach, whom no man has seen at any time, nor can see, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Joh. 1. 18. The Lords Throne is in Heaven, Psalm. 11. 4. In heaven
as opposed to the earth where we are; so heaven is expr^sly said to be the
place of his habitation, from whence he looks upon all the inhabitants of the
earth, Psalm. 33. 13, 14. God is in heaven, and thou on the earth (says the
Preacher, Eccles. 5. 2.) therefore let thy words be few, in prayers, or
speaking to God, as considering his Greatness and Majesty so infinitely above
thee, and his perfect discerning of thy thought afar off, which is therein
signified, for from heaven where is the Throne of his Majesty, he perfectly
beholds all the sons of men, His eyes behold, his eyelids try the children
of men; yea the greatness of his glory is signified in its being so far above
us, and unapproachable by us: O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in
all the earth? Thou have set thy glory above the heavens! Whence also our
Savior directs us, That in all prayers this be commemorated in our
acknowledgement of the Father, That he is in heaven; likewise examples, and
instructions, are frequent in Scripture, to the use of that gesture of lifting
up the eyes to heaven in our prayers, praises, etc. With the Father in the
heavens, even in that light into which no mere man can approach, is that Son of
man that is the only begotten Son of God, appearing in his most glorious
presence in the heavens themselves, 1 John 2. 1. Heb. 9. 24. set on the Throne
of his Majesty in the heavens, not on the earth, Heb. 8. 1. 4. with Chap. 7. 26.

2 The heavens as opposed to the earth, to that earth where the Disciples were,
and where while they remained, he was parted from them, in his being carried up
into heaven, and where while they did, or we do remain, we are personally
absent from that person, and have not him personally with us (as he is in
heaven) in the time of this our mortality. See the Scriptures forecited with
that, 2 Cor. 5. and Matthew. 26. 11. Mark. 14. 7. Joh. 12. 8. The highest heavens
as opposed to the lower parts of the earth, where he was buried, Ephesians. 4. 8-10.
The heavens are opposed to the earth, where the former high Priests served,
Heb. 8. 4.

3 The heavens from which at his second appearing, he shall descend, or come
down, We look for the Savior from heaven, Phil. 3. 10. Wait for his Son from
heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. The Lord himself shall descend from heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
16. where by heaven cannot be meant, his state of dignity, and glory, but his
place only, in which he is now received, for us, and possesses that glory: for
in respect of his state of dignity and glory, as he is personally glorified in,
and with it, he shall never descend, or come lower, but keep his station even
then, when he shall be seen coming in the clouds of heaven, yet still sitting
on the Right hand of God, Mark. 14. 62.

If after all this it be replied, Can flesh and blood enter into the Kingdom
of heaven?

We answer No; Neither can corruption inherit incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 50.
which latter clause in that verse, as well as what follows, We shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed, shows, That by flesh and blood is meant the
body in this its mortal state, which same body, shall be raised, though in
another state, as it was in the person of Jesus; and so though flesh and blood
cannot, yet the same flesh and bones (the blood as the life was in it, being
poured out and gone) the same body in the Resurrection spirituallized and
immortalized, is entered, and set on the Throne, and so shall all his in their
bodies, in which now they suffer, when so changed, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for them with him for ever.

If any say, What weight is there in this acknowledgement, that it should be so
earnestly contended for? or that so much danger should be conceived in the
sleighting of it; what relation has it to the ground, or foundation of our
faith or hope?

I answer, It is that in which all the ground and foundation of our faith and
hope was finished, or perfected, and without which all done before had been
nothing; for even as if Jesus in the same nature and body in which he suffered,
had not been raised from the dead, and therein taken from the prison, as a
discharge of our debt in him, we had been yet in our sins, whatever he had
suffered, and faith in him had been vain, 1 Cor. 15. 17. The same may be, and
is affirmed concerning the necessity of his ascension and presenting, and
offering that sacrifice to the Father, in that most glorious presence of him,
from which we stood condemned, and being there received and accepted, And
abiding for ever a high Priest of good things to come, after the order of
Melchizedeck; for if he were on earth, he could not be a Priest after this
order, to abide for ever, Heb. 8. 1, 4. For such a High Priest became us, who
is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, made higher than the
heavens, who needs not daily to offer, as those Priests, etc. Heb. 7. 25, 26,
27. If he could have carried his sacrifice no higher than the former Priests,
even into heaven it self, and there presented it in the most glorious presence
of God, and if it had not been for the worth, value, and excellency of it
accepted there, and so he with it, or he himself accepted, and set down as the
perfect Sacrifice and Sacrificer, he must then have offered again, and could
never with such offerings have made the comers perfect; therefore the infinite
perfection of his Sacrifice and Righteousness in the discovery of which all
other righteousness is decryed, is by the Spirit demonstrated in this, That he
is gone to the Father, and we see him no more sent down to suffer, or offer
for sin, Joh. 16. 10. Heb. 10. 1-10, 11, 12. Yea if he had not ascended on
high, he could not have been so glorified in our nature, as was the end of his
suffering, and as was needful for us, he could not have received in the man,
and so for men, that eternal redemption, which he had obtained through
sufferings, and so that plentious furniture of gifts for men, even for the
Rebellious, that the Lord might dwell among them, and that to that purpose he
might fill all things with the influences, and virtues of his sufferings, and
give the peculiar gifts to the Church, Heb. 9. 12, 14, 15. Ps. 68. 18, 19, 20.
Ephesians. 4. 8. 10, 11. He could not have been glorified with the Fathers own self
fully and perfectly in our nature, and for us, even with the glory he had with
the Father before the world was, If he had not ascended, and gone up into
heaven, and remained there in that body glorified by virtue of sufferings for
sin, presenting therein the infinite virtue of those sufferings; for otherwise
the glory of God could never have been brought down amongst, or unto men, nor
men received into it, so that he could not have been a High Priest for ever,
and of good things to come if he were on the earth; but now he is entered into
the heavens themselves, there to appear in the presence of God for us, there to
sprinckie the Mercy-seat, with the continual presentation of the infinite and
abiding virtue of his blood, in that body in our nature and person (by virtue
thereof, and to all the ends for which he suffered) raised, and glorified, in
the presence of God, where we need the perfect Sacrifice and high Priest to
abide for ever; and he is both in that one body, and in such exaltation
perfected and finished; In the Name and Anointing of the Father, a Prince, and
a Savior, Act. 5. 30, 31. That from thence the goodness of God may come forth
in all things, and to all men, and his presence with his people; And therefore
also he is able to save to the utmost all that come to God by him, seeing he
ever lives with the Father for them; God has given him glory, that our faith
and hope might be in God by, and through him, 1 Pet. 1. 21. And truly, we could
have no ground of hope of the resurrection and glorifying our bodies, that they
may dwell for ever with the Lord, even in that light into which no man can now
approach; If our Surety, and Forerunner were not for us already entered (which
thing also was vertually done from the foundation of the world, as soon as we
had need of him there) If our nature in him were not received up into glory,
even now before the glory of God be, or can be fully and gloriously brought
down to us, as it shall be when there shall be new heavens and new earth, we
could not be received into his glory with him: It was needful for him to go
away, to ascend to his Father, and ours, in, and through him, that so with him
he might prepare everlasting Mansions for us, and from thence come again, and
receive us to himself, that we might be with him for ever, as well as it was
also needful for him so personally to go away into heaven, and there to appear
in the presence of God for us, as the perfect Sacrifice, and Mediator, that
thence in the Name of the Father, influences of Grace and Spirit might here be
sent forth to us, to guide our feet in the way of peace, and prepare us for the
glory to be revealed, Joh. 14. 1 2, 3. and 16. 7. with Chap. 20. 17. whence its
mentioned, as the bottom and ground of the believers consolation, and
encouragement, We have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but
also for the whole world. This is a material branch in that bottom of our
consolation, and that in which all of it is made up and completed, That he is
with the Father: This our Propitiation and Advocate, as so considered is with
the Father, where we need him daily, 1 John 2. 1, 2.

Doubtless where this acknowledgement of that person, as raised from the dead,
now set on Gods right hand in the Heavens, and so, and there, in that body in
our nature, made the head of all Principality and Power, and the head of his
body the Church, Ephesians. 1. 18-20. I say, where this true acknowledgement of the
Head, in whom only dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2. 9, 10. is
not holden but slighted, or rejected; There is equally in that heart, a
slighting, or rejecting the hope of the reward to come in the Resurrection of
the just, of entering with him into his glory; That which only may beget, and
preserve such hope, being let go, the faith, and hope it self must needs be
destroyed, Col. 2. 18, 19. And where this faith and hope is made shipwreck of,
there is usually something made up in the imagination in the stead thereof (as
now accomplished in them) to beguile themselves and others with, as also is
signified in that, Col. 2. 18. And in those that denied the Resurrection, and
did overthrow the Faith, and Hope of such as would listen to them; yet they
pretended not to deny it, but did witness it past, or already made in them in
this life, compare 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12-18. with 1 Cor. 15. 12, etc. And so those
that slighted and scoffed at the promise of his coming, yet they pretended to
witness it, saying lo here, or lo there, in this, or that imagination, or
operation, he was already come the second time, accomplishing the promises we
through the Spirit wait for, in or unto them (compare 2 Pet. 3. with Matthew. 24.
23-27. and Luke 17. 22, 23, 24.) which imaginations are more pleasing to the
sensual, and fleshly mind, because they lead to make their boast of themselves,
and not of the person of Christ, and works done therein, and to rejoice in the
imagination of what they have, rather than in the hope of what is to come. And
surely, if we may know the tree by its fruits, as our Savior instructs us, I
have good ground to be strengthened in my forementioned apprehensions
concerning you, as being of no judgment concerning the faith of, and in the
person of Christ, as through sufferings glorified in our nature in the Heavens;
because I find this fruit of it evidently appearing in both your discourse and
writing* I shall discover it in some of its branches, the mention of which may
fitly be added here, reserving that about Christ's second appearing witnessed,
as accomplished in thee, to be spoken to by it self in fit place.

In thy discourse thou did witness, that death mentioned, Heb. 9. 27. In
which its appointed to men once to die, to be past in thee, and so
consequently, the Resurrection made in thee; what makes this of all the reward,
and end of his sufferings, and sactifice set before us in the Gospel, but what
we might be capable of possessing in this time, and state of mortality? Yea,
thou affirmest in thy Letter, that you are entered (meaning as appears in the
former expressions, into the glorious rest and Kingdom) whereas the Apostle
when he tells us, they had boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of
Jesus, and did in that boldness, through and ^y him, draw near and come to God,
Heb. 10. 19-25. and 7. 25. yea, by faith and hope did enter, or were entering
into that within the veil, Heb. 6. 19. yea, Heb. 4. 3. he says, We which have
believed do enter into rest; yet in all this he says not, They had entered,
but signifies they were yet entering in believing, running the race set before
them, the Crown not given unto them in the time of this mortality, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
only by faith, and hope, they pierced through to it, which strengthened them
to run; yea, says he not expressly? Heb. 4. 9, 10. That there remains yet a
rest for all the people of God, even for those that sleep, and for the
survivers? none of them yet fully entered into that everlasting Sabbath, but
the forerunner, which he proved thus, For he that is entered into his rest, he
also has ceased from his own works, as God did from his; which none has yet
so done but the forerunner (what ever they may boast of, that truly cease from
nothing of their own, but exalt themselves in their works of vanity, and error)
See Heb. 6. 19, 20. Observe the distinction there carefully observed, between
our entering, and the forerunner having entered, we have, says he, in the
Word, Promise, and Oath of God (as given and confirmed in Christ,) Hope as an
Anchor of the soul, sure and steadfast, which enters into that within the
Veil, whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus made an High Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedech; We in believing do enter, and so are
entering by Faith and Hope, he only for us in already actually and fully
entered into the possession of glory.

Against thee therefore do I bear witness, as one of the world, that have thy
portion in this life ( in which if we only had our hope in Christ; we were of
all men most miserable) as for us, we will behold his face in righteousness (in
his Son, and in the promise of life and glory given us in him) being supported
thereby in this confidence, when we awake (in the morning of the resurrection)
we shall be satisfied with his likeness, Psa. 17. 14. 15. 1 Cor. 25. 18, 19.
etc. 1 John 3. 1. 3, Not as though we had already attained, either were already
perfect, but we follow after, if that we may apprehend, that for which we are
apprehended of Christ Jesus, if by any means we may attain to the Resurrection
of the Dead (the first resurrection) We desire not to count our selves to have
apprehended, but to go on, forgetting the things behind (things already lost
and parted with, cast behind our back as dung for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord) and reaching forth to those things set
before our face in the Gospel, pressing toward the mark for the price of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus; Running with patience the race that is set
before us, laying aside the weights, etc. so as looking unto Jesus the Author
and finisher of our faith, who through sufferings is already entered into glory
for us, while others who are the enemies to the cross of Christ, under a
pretense of zealous walking, and holy conversation, aim at this, as the end of
their conversation, or walking, The destruction of our Faith, and Hope in
Christ, and to that purpose, magnify their belly (some internal operation,
happily back^ also with signs and wonders, and with all deceiveableness of
unrighteousness in them that perish, 2 These. 2. 9, 10.) glorying in their
shame, minding sensual, and earthly things (under pretense of spirituality) we
desire to have our conversation in Heaven, where the person of Christ, in that
body, in our nature, our treasury, is received by the Father, from whence we
look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body,
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, by that mighty power by
which he is able to subdue even all things unto himself, as Phil. 3. 7. to the
end, Heb. 12. 1, 2. I have been large in these things forementioned, if it may
be, for thy good, if not, my confidence is in him, that others will hear and
shall fully reap the benefit, when he that is now received in the Heavens,
shall from thence appear in his glory to our everlasting comfort, and you shall
be ashamed world without end. To the rest of thy Slanders, I shall speak
briefly.

4 To thy Fifth Slander, That I said, I had not the same testimony the Apostles
had; This also is altogether groundless from any thing thou had from me; I
did as much as I could avoid the speaking of my self, because I dare not make
my self of the number of some that commend themselves, measuring themselves by
themselves, etc. 2 Cor. 10. 12. what they are now, with what they were before,
and with what others now are, as the Pharisee, Luke 18. 11, 12. and the false
Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. 12-18, etc. 2 These. 2. Knowing also, that he that speaks
of himself seeks his own glory, Joh. 7* 18. I was willing to leave that to
such proud boasters, (as 2 Timothy 3.) to exalt themselves, and smite others on
the face, to their reproach and shame, as 2 Corinthians. 11. 20, 21.

That which I said was of Timothy, and all other secondary Ministers of the
Gospel, since the first trusters in Christ, who received their word immediately
from his person, all since, and so including my self (yea happily I might, when
put upon it, acknowledge the same particularly concerning my self) that they do
not receive their word, furniture, or mission, immediately from the person of
Christ, as the first Apostles did, But mediately in believing through their
word (as more fully in discourse, and in answer to your challenge) But was not
this often in the same discourse told thee, and is it not full in the paper
sent thee, and in so many words? that the word, or testimony was and is the
same, for those Apostles gave it in his name, for obedience to the faith among
all Nations; but the manner of receiving it from him various, (and so in some
sense the Call, the same also; though the manner of the work to which called,
in some things different; and so the manner of their receiving it, and being
made of the number called to such peculiar service) or can thou not
distinguish between the testimony it self, and the manner of receiving it? I
fear its not so much weakness, as wilfulness.

5 To your Sixth and eighth Slander (as forementioned) viz. That I charged you
with Burglary, and breaking into the house, and that Mr. Wray commanded you to
depart his house.

I Answer, You know the falseness of these, as of the rest. To the first, I
remember that on some occasion I told you, I would not commit Burglary, or
break into any man's house; you then would fain have catched something of it, as
intimately charging you with doing so the day before, to which I then told you,
I did not so charge any of you, nor think otherwise, but that you had very fair
leave to come and stay, though all that you say to that I believe not, viz.
That you were sent for; Happily you might have notice of our meeting there, but
that I am sure was not by any desire of ours, nor did I know, that was any
occasion, or end of our meeting, but as I heard by flying reports: only was
desired to come, and give them a visit, by him that best might in^ite me to
that house.

To the next, which at least you imply, That Mr. Wray commanded you to depart,
It is like all the rest; you know he invited you all to Dinner, and told you
you should be all welcome, though I think you were most of you too scornful to
accept it; And the reason he desired us to meet in the public after, was only
for convenience of room, because of the multitude of the people, nor did you
then say any thing against meeting there, only when you perceived it was not
like easily to be prevented, you spoke against breaking up a while for a
Dinner; but that also you did in such language as you might reasonably think
would rather provoke not to listen to your proposal therein; And doubtless what
ever you pretend, you were glad of the occasion to be gone. I question no^, but
you would have come freely enough to the other place (as we were all desired)
had you looked for any advantage to your Design, of marring the visage of the
Son of Man.

6 To thy Seventh Slander, That any of my companions should say, That God had
neither Eyes, nor Ears, nor Heart, This also I know to be like the rest, for I
am sure I heard no discourse of that nature; and I was never in any time of
discourse so far from thee, that thou could hear it, and not I; And whoever
of thy companions told thee it, I know it to be false, because I know them
better than thee, or thy companions do; happily they might say, That God (even
the Father) has not eyes, ears, etc. as a man, nor sees as man sees, and
possibly also, they might be cut off, or interrupted in the midst of some such
saying by your incivilities, as at other times; but this Slander may be as well
without any color of ground, as all the rest; and the same I do on good ground
judge, of what thou said of one of us confessing that which thou had
acknowledged about Christ's flesh in thee; we bless God, we all know, the flesh
of Christ is now to be fed on, and enjoyed by faith, in, through, and according
to the testimony of it, and its virtues, brought us in his words, which are
spirit, and life, and not otherwise.

Many more of thy slanders might be discovered, as that, That I was forced by
thee to deny what I had said about the Scriptures: Truly if I had used any
expressions not so safe, or warrantable, I hope I should willingly being so
convict, have left them for better, and I think I should therein have done
better than thou did, in standing to maintain so often, and seriously these
very expressions, That God was hurt with men's sins, when as the Scripture says
plainly, If thou sinnest, what do thou to him? Thy wickedness may hurt a man
as thou art, etc. Job 35. 7, 8. But I know nothing that I did, or need to deny,
or go from that I said; but thou have mentioned nothing of my sayings right,
either in that, or any thing else, my very sayings at first delivered, and
after repeated, do show the falsness of thy charge; they were these, That
though the Scriptures be the absolute rule and medium, according to which faith
is begotten and regulated, yet Jesus Christ himself, as therein declared, is
made the foundation and bottom of it, as well as the object, in whom the
father is believed in; That here taken for granted about the Scriptures, is far
from denying him, what it affirms him to be; And if (as in the Answer I writ,
and le^t for thee to that charge, If) I say, I had said, That they are the
absolute and perfect means, through which the preaching of faith is discovered,
and so faith begotten, that is far from denying other means; It only says, as
that Psalm. 19. They as compared withal other, are perfect, as is more at large
in that Answer.

Many more I say, of thy slanders might be discovered: But what should I speak
farther of thy slandering us; thou have as grossly belyed the Apostles
themselves, as in that Romans 10. 8. where thou say, The Apostles preached the
word, and faith in the heart of them to whom they preached, whereas the Text
says, not the word and faith; But the word of faith which they preached; and
of that he says not simply, It was in their heart, either as dwelling, or
received there; But that it was nigh them in their heart, etc. And speaks there
expressly of such a nighness of it in their heart, as is to men in the preaching
of it, even before faith of and in it be effected in them, and that they might
believe, etc. saying, The word is nigh thee in thy heart, that if thou shall
believe, etc.

I might mention many more of thy abuses of them, whose doctrine thou would
pervert, to color, or countenance thy vain visions out of thy own heart, yea
our Savior himself, thou slanderest to that purpose, as will appear in making
good, the next part of what I do in the presence of God charge thee with, which
is,

That (perverting the Gospel of Christ to that purpose, and pretending spirit,
and immediate call to it also) thou preachest, or bear witness of another
Jesus, than he whom they (the Apostles, as well as also the Prophets that have
spoken to us in the Name of the Lord) have preached and born their testimony
to; and movest us to listen to another Spirit, that we have not received in the
hearing of faith; and bring another doctrine or message, which we have not
accepted, nor the Prophets, and Apostles of the Lord delivered, or spoken of;
yea, so contrary to theirs, that they cannot stand together, which when he that
comes to, or amongst any of us does, we have good cause then especially to be
jealous over one another (and such jealousy may be born with) and have then
also more especially need to strive together for the faith of the Gospel,
having also so good encouragement, hope, and strength therein, That we need be
in nothing terrified by our Adversaries, though they charge us with having a
Devil, as they did our Master, and speak great swelling words, of vanity,
promising liberty to them that will listen to them.

First, That thou preachest another Jesus, etc. appears in this,

1 The Jesus to whom thou bear witness, is one, or something, that is not
already come in the flesh, but still, and daily com^^g, and as with reference
to some persons, not yet having come, or appeared at all, to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself; Its something, whose appearing in the flesh,
suffering, or offering himself to bear our sins, as a sacrifice for them, was
not perfectly finished at once, and in that one person of Jesus of Nazareth, so
as not to be made, or accomplished over again, neither in the same, nor in any
other person, which did fully appear in thee, and Richard Farnsworth,
witnessing his coming in the flesh, his offering himself to bear sin, and as
the sacrifice for it to be, or to have been accompl^shed in your persons, in
some late operations, in, and upon you, which also you signified to be such, as
we were yet strangers to. And now in thi^ thy Letter, thou chargest us with
denying Christ come in the flesh, because we affirmed* That appearing or coming
of his in the flesh to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself, to be finished
in that one person Jesus of Nazareth, and so now past, and not accomplished in
thee, or any other person.

Whereas the Jesus of whom they bore witness, is one person distinct from all
other, that needs not daily to offer himself, or as those former Priests
daily to offer sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples, for
this he did once when he offered up himself, Heb. 7. 27. he did not* ^or does
offer himself often, for then must he often have suffered since the foundation
of the world; but now once in the end of the world, has he appeared to put
away sin by the sacrifice of himself* -- And as it is appointed to men once to
dye (which evidently speaks of the natural and first death, which in the
ordinance or appointment of God passed on all men in one, when sin entered into
the world in that one offense, for as much as all therein sinned ( Romans 5,
12-18.) and once seizes on every individual, so as in that death that came by
Gods appointment, on men as sinful men from Adam considered, they indeed dye
but once) even so Christ was once offered, not many times, or in many Ages, but
then once in the last Ages (as also is showed before) to bear the sins of many,
even of all men, that in one were appointed to dye, when they, and their
offenses were multiplied into many: Note that he says not, To bear sins in
many, for then also the offering could not have been ^i^^shed at once, but must
have been often iterated, but now once one dyed for all (not in all, or in that
sense in any other person, but did himself bear* our sins in his own body to
the Tree, etc. Heb. 9. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. 1 Pet. 2. 24.) He
dyed once, and can dye no more, Romans 6. 9, 10. Rev. 1. 18. nor is there another
offering to be made, or that to be made over again; But with that one offering*
in that his own body, made, and finished once for all, he is set down for ever
on the right hand of God, a Prince, and Savior (as before also in the*
beginning of this discovery is showed) read, Heb. 10. 1-12. Against the truth
of which, and to introduce such a Jesus as is daily appearing, and offering
himself to bear our sins, and make propitiation for them in men, you perver^ed
such Scriptures as tell us of Gods being made to serve with men's sins, and
wearied with their iniquities, Isa 43. 24. And being pressed with them, as a
cart is pressed with sheaves, Amos 2. 13. and of men's crucifying the Son of God
to themselves, Heb. 6. 6. so said you he is crucified for sins, and made to
bear sins by the wicked every day; The gross abuse of which Scriptures, as
brought to such a purpose is easy

1 These Scriptures speak of it as an act of men to make him so, Ye have made
me to serve with your sins, ye have wearied me, etc. Isa. 43. 24. Mal. 2. 17.
They have crucified the Son of God to themselves, and put him to an open shame,
Heb. 6. 6. But in that one appearing in which he appeared to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself, no man had any hand in making him to be sin, or to
bear our sin, or to be an offering for it; man sinned, and occasioned so his
necessity of such a Sacrifice, but he could do nothing to the imputing his sins
to, or laying them upon Christ, or preparing himself such a Sacrifice; though
men had a hand in crucifying him in that one body, yet they did it not, nor
could do it for our sins, or to prepare themselves such a propitiation and
sacrifice in him, but for his bearing witness to the truth, therefore they
buffetted him, scourged, and crucified him; But it was the Father that imputed
to him, and laid on him the iniquities of us all; and delivered him to that
shameful death of the cross for our offenses; This was the only work of God,
and is mavelous to behold, he made his soul an offering for our sin, he made
him to be sin, and a curse for us; And the Son he willingly offered himself to
bear our sins in his own body, Isa. 53. 9, 10. Romans 4. 25. and 8. 32. Heb. 9.
26. etc. and 12. 2. Psalm. 118.

2 These Scriptures speak of such things, or actions done by men, as tend
directly to their utter destruction, which indeed is only of men's selves, they
having wearied him in the sense of those Scriptures God left them; and did
therefore because of their so wearying him, pour out his fury, etc. Isa. 1. 14,
15. Jer. 6. 11. yea such as have so crucified the Son of God to themselves, and
put him to an open shame, the Text says, Its therefore impossible to renew
them again to repentance, Heb. 6. 6. And where sin being not wholly finished,
so as to occasion an utter separation, God yet had mercy again, and blotted out
their sins for his names sake, Isa 43. 25. yet that was so far from being the
fruit of that their making him to serve, or wearying him with their sins, that
it was indeed the more wonderful being after such long provocation and
obstinacy. But on the other hand, this one act, or work of God in making
Christ's soul an offering for sin, causing our sins to meet together on him, and
his bearing them in his own body, is that very thing in which is all our help
and salvation, which indeed is only of God; with his stripes we are healed,
Isa. 53. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 24.

3 Yet also it is clear, That even that his being wearied, or pressed with
their sins, though it was their act to make him so, yet his being so made, was
not in any operation in them; but something accidentally caused, or occasioned
in God, or from him toward them, by their long persisting in their obstinacy
and provocations, even until the day of his patience was out, or almost out
with them, then he is said to be wearied (though in a proper sense, as man he
faints not, nor is weary) when he does, or is ready to do that which men do
when they are weary ( viz.) give over forbearing or waiting, as in that Jer. 6.
11. And so that Amos 2. 13. may be read, either or both ways, I am pressed, or
I will press you (so some Translations render it) as a cart is pressed with
sheaves; but (as before) in this offering of Christ to bear our fins in his own
body, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them, but causing them to meet together on him, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
with Isaiah 53. 6.

4 True it is, That mentioned, Heb. 6. 6. is not only something made, or
occasioned by them, but also in the first branch of it, an operation made in
them, and to them, they crucify the Son of God to themselves, yet that not
for, but wholly against themselves, and causing that weariness in God, of
forbearing them forementioned; surely its like that internal operation* 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. deceiveableness of unrighteousness, greatest unrighteousness
under a vizor of Righteousness, or form of godliness in them that perish; It is
such an internal operation, as in which the person of Christ, as crucified for
us, with the ends, and ver^ues of his Cross, is made of no account, dead, or
undesireable, if not execrable to a man; The preaching of the Cross is to them
that perish foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 18. Surely James, I have good ground to
believe, this is that operation in you, which you witness to be Christ's
appearing or coming in the flesh in you there to put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself; and that also which you, call his second appearing in you, etc. I
could be glad to hope this were not wholly finished, for if so, there remains
nothing but a fearful looking for of vengeance to consume the Adversaries, etc.
If Christ come to dye in this sense, in, or to a man, no resurrection of him
answerable in, or to that man is to be expected.

Other Scriptures also, I remember, you abused to this purpose, such as tell
us, He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself, 1 John 5.
10. And the Commandment given, i^ true in him, and in them, Chap. 2. 8.

Surely you are willingly ignoranr, or not able to distinguish between the
witness being in a man, received in believing, and the thing witnessed, being
actually wrought in him. Doubtless the main thing witnessed in those Scriptures
is the person of Christ, and the works of our salvation, that were perfectly
wrought and finished in that person, without our motion or knowledge, 1 John 1.
and chap. 1. 2. And so of that propitiation, and eternal life, That God has
therein, and so prepared for us, and given us in him, as in a sure treasury,
fountain, and receptacle for us, that it might be received and enjoyed by us,
even now by faith, and in a first fruits of the Spirit, and in the hope of the
Harvest, in so receiving him, even in believing on his name, 1 John 5. 10, 11,
12. with Joh. 1. 1-12, 14. which person and works so finished in him are no
otherwise in any, but by faith of, and in them; and so in the virtues tasted
and experimented: But whosoever so believes on the Son of God, he has the
witness in himself (not the thing witnessed wrought over again in him, nor any
otherwise in him, than by faith etc. as before, but) the witness of that
person, and those works as perfect in him, is actually received in the receipt
of the testimony God has given of him. It is a good description of the doer of
truth, he comes to the light, that he may see all his works (that he desires
to own as the ground and matter of his rejoicing, and hope) wrought in God, in
Emmanuel.

And so the other place says, the thing was true in them, that was true in
him; not because it was actually wrought in them, as in him; but expressly,
because the darkness was past to them, and the true light had then shined,
which disovers him as that only begotten Son of God, full of grace and truth,
Joh 1. 14. and so learns all truth, as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 21. yea, leads
into all truth, and so gives proof and experiment of the goodness, virtue, and
efficacy or power of the truth in the receipt of it, through such lifting up, or
demonstration of the Son of man, and so of the truth, as it is in him, Joh. 16.
13, 14.

2 The Jesus or Christ, to whom thoubearest witness is such, as whose second
appearing without sin to the salvation of those that look for him (with
reference to those expressions, Heb. 9. 28.) is already past, or has been
accomplised in thee; This is clear in thy letter (though there the word second
be left out, which was often urged by thee in discourse) That Christ is come
again in the flesh, since his Ascension, which also thou call thy confessing
the flesh of Christ; and further signifies (in following expressions) This to
be thy confession of the flesh of Christ in thee, or his coming in the flesh,
(The second time even since h^s Ascension) in thee; And did call in
discourse* his appearing again, and the second time in thee, in his body his
flesh, and spirit, Christ, holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,
made higher than the heavens, with many other such like expressions, which some
took in writing, least thou should deny them, (though not as any matter of
Accusation against thee, to thy harm, as thou slanderest them) which writing I
not having by me, mention* no more than I well remember, And is the sum of
it in thy Letter.

Whereas, that Jesus the Christ which they have preached, is personally
received by, and continuing with the Father in the heavens, until the time of
the Restruction of all things, Act. 3. 20, 21. from whom all believers are
personally absent, while in these mortal bodies, 2 Cor. 5. 6. His second, and
glorious Appearance (in that body in which he once suffered for sin) without
sin, to the salvation of those that look for him; with all the blessed hope
then ^o be revealed, the fullness, and Harvest of the Spirit, and glorious
Redemption of the body, is yet to be waited for by all believers, not
accomplished in, or to any of them, all the time of this present world; whence
^he Apostle propounds it as the posture in which the believer stands all the
time of this present world, in which he has ungodliness and worldly lust; to
encounter with, looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of
the great God and our Savior, Tit. 2. 12 13. with 2 Pet. 3. 3. 11. 12. 1 Thessalonians.
1 9 10. Phil. 3, 20, 21. And so that salvation of them that look for him ( Heb.
9. 28.) to the accomplishing of which, he shall appear the second time; and
then without sin (in any such imputation of it, infirmities, or sufferings by
occasion of it, as was upon him in his first Appearance) even in the glory of
his Father, and with his holy Angels; That salvation of them, I say, is clearly
that total salvation* that shall be revealed, and accomplished in the last
time, 1 Pet. 1. 5. even after the natural death, and in the Resurrection, in
which they shall be redeemed from the power of the grave in the first
Resurrection, and so from the hand of the enemy, that the second death shall
have no power on them, but they shall be ever with the Lord, posse^^ing the
glorious rest and Kingdom for ever, which appears in that its a position so
placed, as answering to the judgment after death, mentioned in the former
verse, Heb. 9. 27, 28. In that judgment after death unto which all in these
bodies must come, Then and therein shall he appear without sin to the salvation
of them that look for him; so that they shall stand in the judgment having
righteousness and strength in the Lord; yea, in the Lord shall they be
justified, and redeemed from all their iniquities fully and perfectly, and
shall glory, Isa. 45. 24, 25. Psa. 130. 8.

Yea, when that Second Appearing of Christ shall be accomplished, it shall not
then be made or accomplished in an internal operation in this or that, or many
persons, that we should need to look here or there for him; but that one person
shall appear personally in that his own body in our nature, as now glorified
with the Father, even as he was seen go into Heaven, so his second coming shall
be visible to all; as the lightning from the one end of the Heaven to the
other, and accomplished to them all at once, and together, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14-16.
Matthew. 24. 26, 27, 28.

To corrupt us from the belief of the truth, and expectation of which blessed
hope, and to int^oduce thy other Jesus, whom thou did witness to have
appeared the second time in thee, even to have come again in the flesh since
his Ascension, etc. (as before) thou did pervert these Scriptures that I well
remember, Luk* 17. 20, 21 Joh. 14. 3.

The first of which thou mentionest now again in thy letter, with a great deal
of vaunting and reproach, as if it spoke so much, and so plainly to what thou
had affirmed, as to render it greatest folly, shame, and blindness, to oppose
such thy witness of thy self: Let us therefore again a little look upon it, and
see if thou have not grossly abused our Savior in perverting his words contrary
to the plain intent and scope of them. See if our Savior do not in that place
clearly signify, That his second coming in that body, and therein the glorious
revelation, and bringing down of the Kingdom and glory, is yet to be waited
for, even by his Disciples, all the time of this mortality; They themselves
should desire to see one of his days, and should not see it (namely, in this
time and state of their mortality, nor till they all come together with all
that are his.) Let the whole Chapter be viewed from the twentieth verse, to the
l^st; When he was demanded of the Pharisees, When the Kingdom of God should
come, He answered, The Kingdom of God comes not with observation, or outward
show (of pomp, or glory of this world, of which his Kingdom is not as they
expected, Joh. 18. 36.) neither shall they say lo here or lo there, for
be^old the Kingdom of God is within you, in the midst of you, or among you; its
clear, by what follows, That this first part of his Answer speaks of the first
appearance of that Kingdom, in that person, the Messiah, the King, the Lord,
and Savior, whose first appearance was not with outward glory and pomp of this
world, as they looked for, but in weakness, and abasement; and this was he,
that was now personally among them and approved by God among them by miracles,
and signs, which God wrought by him in the midst of them, as they themselves
did also know, for he was anointed with the holy Ghost and with power, by
which his word and works were spiritually demonstrated in them, or to their
hearts, Act. 2. 22. and 10. 38. and so the word of the Kingdom nigh them in
their hearts, as Romans 10: And so while this person was with, and amongst them,
in his personal ministration, The Kingdom was also in them, in the spiritual
discoveryes of it, working for acceptance with them, for as long as he was in
the world, he was the light of the World, in his personal ministration, and
these persons had seen and hated him, and his Father, Joh. 9. 5. and 15. 24. in
this sense, The Kingdom of Heaven was so among them, as in former ages it had
not been among any, for the Law, and the Prophets were until John, and from
that time the Kingdom of Heaven was preached, Luke 16. 16. And yet still, the
person, and the works of, and in that person (in, and through which, the
Kingdom was brought nigh them, and in the midst of them) was distinct from
them; But thus demonstrated in this first appearance, and in the works by him
then accomplished among them.

Now observe what follows, And he said unto the Disciples, the days will come,
when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and shall not
see it.

It seems this was one of the days of the Son of man, which they did see, in
which the Kingdom of God was among them. And that this which they did see was
the first of them (namely, the first day of Christ's appearing personally on
earth, and in the nature of man) appears in that he says ( Luke 10. 24. Matthew.
13. 17.) That many Prophets, Kings, and righteous men had desired to see those
things they did see, in this appearance of the Son of Man, and had not seen
them; None of the Fathers before saw his day, not the first of them, as
actually revealed and accomplished in their time, and among them, as these
Disciples and spectators did; Though they did see his day by faith, and so the
things to be done by him in his first and second Appearance, yet it was so as
afar off in respect of the actual revelation and accomplishment of them, and as
things to come (compare Joh. 8. 56. with Heb. 11. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 10. 11, 12.)
Therefore that day of the Son of Man, which now they did see, in which the
Kingdom of Heaven was brought among them, and therein made nigh them in their
hearts by spiritual demonstration (as before) that was the first day of the Son
of man, not the second (as the abuse of it to the forementioned purpose would
persuade us.)

Neither did his own Disciples yet desire to see another day of the Son of Man,
certainly knowing, that this was the Messiah, and ignorantly hoping, that he
would presently at this time, of his appearing restore the Kingdom to Israel,
Luke 24. 21. Act. 1. 6.

But our Savior here instructs them, and that by way of further answer to the
Pharisees question, When the Kingdom of God should come; That that day of the
Son of man in which he should appear in the glory of his Father, and with his
holy Angels, in which Gods Kingdom should come to be revealed in the glorious
state of it, was not yet accomplished amongst or unto any, no not to those his
own Disciples; yea, that should be another day of the Son of man, distinct from
this, a second appearing, which also was to be waited for by them, during the
time of this mortality they should desire to see it, and should not see it. And
herewith our Savior also admonishes them, That when any should say to them,
with respect to this second Day of the Son of Man, and the blessed hope, and
glorious Kingdom then to be revealed, See here, or see there, it is
accomplished or fulfilled in this or that secret and mystical way, and in, or
to this person, or that, though you yet discern it not, that they should not go
after, or follow such, and that for this reason, For as the lightning that
comes out of the one part under Heaven, shines unto the other part under
Heaven, so shall the Son of man be in his day; Whence also he compares it to
the days of Noah, and of Lot, for the suddenness of it, and its universality,
to all at once, even to all the surviving Enemies, such as shall weep and wail
because of it; and not only the surviving friends, but all those that sleep in
Jesus, that have part in the first Resurrection (though the rest of the dead
shall not live again, so immediately, or presently, on his appearing, nor till
some time after, yet) these the children of the first Resurrection, shall
together be raised, and changed into the likeness of his glorious body. To
signify which further unto them, our Savior at the latter end of this Chapter,
in Answer to their Question, Where this should be, says, Wheresoever the
carcass is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together; That so they may be
quiet, as those that have no need to be too solicitous, or inquisitive to know
where, or when, any further than is plainly revealed, because it shall be as
the lightning, etc. (as before) let them now follow him in the regeneration,
and they shall be all gathered together in, and unto that glorious day of the
Son of man when it comes.

And indeed, their only privilege and benefit by that second day of the Son of
man, that by his grace appearing through his first day are begotten to faith,
and hope in him, and so moved to wait for him, is signified by our Saviors
turning his speech in this second part of his Answer to the Pharisees Question,
from the Pharisees, and directing it to his Disciples; They only may look and
long for that day with desire and joy. His first Personal Appearance was not,
nor is his ministerial and spiritual comings forth to men, to judge, but to
save the world, and that through him the world might be saved: But his second
Personal Appearance shall be to judge, and render to every man according to his
work (according to the Rule of the Gospel) that shall be only to the salvation
of them that through his grace are here begotten to hope in him, and look for
him; the rest shall be ashamed and confounded for ever. Those that have
rejected his grace extended to them, and striving with them through his first
Personal Appearance (through which all the Grace of God bringing salvation to
all men, came forth in all ages) shall have no day of grace, nor any such nigh
coming of the Kingdom, either in it self, or in the word, or tender of it,
afforded them in, and by his second day, as the forementioned abuse of this
Scripture would signify to us, in urging that first part of the Answer of our
Savior to the Pharisees, verse. 20. 21. for proof of the second appearing of
Christ, accomplished to, and in men now in this day, which thing signified,
namely, That the second Appearing of Jesus Christ in the flesh* and in the
Spirit, his coming again since his Ascension, etc. (as in the forementioned
expressions of thy Discourse and Letter) was accomplished in those Pharisees
there spoken to, who yet had not owned him in his first appearance, is also
quite contrary to your own principles, and expressions too, in other parts of
your discourse and writings, in which you signify it to be the peculiar
privilege of your selves, and such others, to have experimented Christ's coming
again in you since his Ascension, and this accomplished in some late operations
in you (many of which Farnsworth boasted of) which you signified us all along,
and all others that would not admire and worship you, to be strangers to, yet
now this Scripture must be brought and urged again and again, to prove the said
coming of Christ again in Flesh and Spirit after his Ascension, etc. to have
been now accomplished in these Pharisees, that were not yet the Disciples of
Christ, nor had owned him in his first Appearance, and at this time also, in
which our Savior himself affirms, He was not yet ascended, Joh. 20. 17. and
the Holy Ghost says the like of him. Joh. 7. 39. Herein is the truth of those
Scriptures verified in you, that tell us, Such men as have not faith, or are of
no judgment concerning the faith of, and in that person, they are also
unreasonable, or absurd men, their own sayings, and principles will not stand
one by another, for indeed themselves understand not what they say, nor whereof
they affirm.

But I shall wave the further notice of your Absurdities in this, and proceed
in the consideration of what may be more for our commodity and instruction, and
for yours also, if not too late, or you be not too proud to receive it.

See I pray you, how to this second day of the Son of man, which he has said
his own Disciples should desire to see, and should not see, till they and we
(all the Disciples) be gathered together, our Savior speaks further in the
beginning of Chap. 18. Instructing us by a Parable, always to pray, watch, and
be as men longing and waiting for it, and not to faint, or take up short,
assuring us, That God will much more readily, willingly, speed^ly, than the
unjust Judge (who yet was overcome by Importunity) avenge his Elect, and that
speedily, which he plainly signifies, he will then, and not till then fully do,
in that day of the Son of man, yet to come, and to be waited for by them all
(as 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6-9, 10. and 2. 1. 2.) Yet the Lord is not slack, as men count
slackness, but his forbearance is salvation, he is not willing that any should
perish, and therefore waits that he may be gracious, as 2 Pet. 3. 9. etc. Isa.
30. ^8. But he that shall come, will certainly come (who ever scoff at the
promise of it) and will not tarry longer than his time, Yea the Lord will
hasten the work, etc. of his faithfulness and truth, in which he has also
given assurance in what he has already done, Nevertheless, says our Savior,
when he the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? Surely he
signifies but little, few will be found in the expectation, and waiting for his
coming; most that pretend to magnify him, will before that day have taken up
short, as if it were already accomplished in this, or in that; others almost
discouraged, and damped through the abounding of iniquity, etc.

The other Scripture that was perverted by thee, to the forementioned purpose
in thy second days Discourse, is, That saying of our Savior, Joh. 14. 3. If I
go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you to my self,
that where I am, ye may be also. Is it not clear, that that shall be
accomplished to them altogether? And then, and not till then, when he shall
bring all that sleep in Jesus with him; compare this with 1 Th^ss. 4. 14-16,
17. They did indeed see him again, after he was a while taken from them by
death, he being raised appeared to them many times before his Ascension, and
they were therein comforted, and confirmed, and happily therein there might be
some first fulfillings of that promise, Joh. 16. 16. etc. A little while and ye
shall see me again, because I go to the Father. But as that text speaks not
expressly of his coming again (though it shall then have its full and perfect
fulfilling) so in that first fulfilling of it, though they did see him again,
yet was not that properly his coming again, but farther demonstrations of that
first appearance, and of the works done in that person therein, and thereby.
And truly, because he was to go to the Father, they had those demonstrations of
the person that did ascend in our nature, before he did so; And because he is
gone to the Father, he also shall come again in his day, and receive them to
himself, as Joh. 14. 3. The ground of all our consolation and hope (as before)
being made complete in this, That we have an Advocate, the Son of God in our
nature, even in that body in which he bore our sins to the Tree, in heaven
(with the Father) From whence (namely from heaven) we also look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, by that mighty working, by which he is
able to subdue even all things to himself.

The other parts of my charge follow necessarily, this first being so fully
showed, and therefore with more brevity may be passed over, as to say, in the
next place.

2 That thou movest us to listen to, and receive another Spirit, than that
which is in, and with that hearing of faith, Gal. 3. 1. 3. For is not the Lord
himself in that revelation of him, or the testimony of Jesus, even as committed
to the Apostles to be ministered, and as preached by them, that Spirit of
Prophecy, that Spirit prophesied of, and that now fits for Prophecy, and is
the life and quintessence of Prophecy? compare 2 Cor. 3. 17. and the other
verses of that Chapter, and Chap. 4. 1. etc. with Rev. 19. 10. Is not that
testimony, as so come forth, the Spirits testimony, given, and opened by him,
in, and with which he is certainly present? See Act. 2. 16-36, etc. And thence
the Gospel called The power of God to salvation to every one that believes;
yea his words, which he spoke unto those that yet received them not, spirit and
life? Romans 1. 16, 17. Joh. 6. 63. And do not they then move us to listen to,
and receive another spirit that bring another Doctrine or Testimony, and indeed
of another Jesus (as before)? and cry down the testimony of Jesus, as declared
in the Apostles Doctrine, as letter, and dead letter, while in the mean time
also, they magnify the words spoken by themselves, as the words of the Eternal
God, and curse others for but calling their words into question; while yet also
they reproach them for desiring to have their faith in Christ regulated
according to the testimony of Jesus, so given by the Holy Ghost (as aforesaid)
and the Preachers of that testimony, as Preachers of letter, and command them
to throw it by, and wait for some other immediate teaching. And wherein you
have done all this is clear in your Discourse, and in Farnsworths Challenge,
and in this thy Letter throughout, notwithstanding it was plainly told you what
the affirms of the Ministry of the Gospel, as committed to them, in the very
place abused by you to this purpose ( viz. 2 Cor. 3.) that Ministry, as so
committed to them, and delivered and left in record by them, that as opposed to
Moses Ministration, or the Law, as given by him (to which yet he gives more
honorable Titles than you can afford the Everlasting Gospel) he calls that (not
a dead, but) a killing letter; now that cannot kill, that has no life in it.
But this Ministry of the Gospel, as committed to them, which also was witnessed
in the Law and Prophets, this as opposed to the Law, (I say) he calls the
Ministration of the Spirit, yea Spirit; the Ministration of Righteousness, of
life, and of glory, whence its called the Glorious Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. 4.

Now when this is slieghted and rejected as a dead letter, and yet some inward
light or spirit, boasted of, and propounded to be listened to, and received,
that must needs be another spirit, than that which is in, and with that hearing
of faith yea a contrary spirit, such as is in, and with such contrary and
strange Doctrines as bring another Jesus, a contrary Anointing: And so I come
farther, and particularly to make good the last part of my charge.

3 That thou bring another Gospel, than what the Apostles have preached, and
all true believers have from the beginning accepted, which indeed is not
another Gospel; It affirms, or brings us no glad tidings; It is Gospel but in
pretense only, not in truth; It is indeed another Doctrine or Message (such as
in which the Message they received of him, and declared unto us, is endeavored
to be perverted and abolished) to which thou pretendest an immediate call, and
furniture from God (in which thou excludest thy self from that prayer for
blessing on their Ministration to the worlds end, who through the Apostles word
or doctrine believe on him) But if thou were an Angel immediately coming from
heaven we are to hold th^e Accursed in this thy work: And to make it appear,
That it is another Doctrine or Message, and contrary to what they have
preached, and such as will not at all stand together with it, let this Letter
be viewed, though thou have expressed things darkly and subtly, that thou
might wind out, when thou should see cause of fear thou could not manage
it, or that the endeavoring to manage it would spoil thy design, in
discovering thee too grossly, yet they that will not wilfully shut their eyes
may discern in this Letter, that thy Doctrine, Message, or pretended Gospel, in
the sum or issue, and end of it is, to preach down that person, Jesus of
Nazareth, of the seed of David after the flesh, and those works of our
salvation, wrought, in his person, in his Incarnation, Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension; I say, to preach him, and those works as done in that one person,
down, as types, and shadows, or figures of the true Christ, which is to be
found in some other thing, or works accomplished in many persons, even so to
preach down him, and those works done in him, that manifestation of God in the
flesh, in that one person, as for us; I say, so to preach them down as the
Apostles preached down Circumcision, Temple, and Sacrifices without. It
contents not thee to preach down the same things, the Apostles preached down as
figures, etc. but thou must preach down what they lifted up as the body the
truth, and so to abide for ever, thou must preach that down, as types, and
figures too; See if this be not clearly signified in thy Letter: Where, after
thou have charged us with denying Christ come in the flesh, because we bore
testimony against thy witness of Christ being come again, since his Ascension,
or having appeared the second time in the flesh, now glorified, and without sin
to salvation (according to that promise, Heb. 9. 28.) which was more full in
thy Discourse, but full enough in thy Letter, in which thou call thy witness
of Christ's being come again since his Ascension, thy confessing of the flesh of
Christ; yea (as is signified in what follows) of his flesh in thee; for indeed
that was thy witness, as is also signified in thy Letter, That Christ was come,
or had appeared again in the flesh since his Ascension, and so the second time,
and without sin to salvation, and all this accomplished in thee (as before) I
say, After thou have charged us with denying Christ come in the flesh, because
we witnessed him to be already come, and his second coming to be waited for,
and did bear witness against this witness of thine forementioned; And then also
reproached us for not believing concerning this any farther than we can read in
that which thou call Letter; To this thou addest, What a Generation would we
have been, had we lived in the times of the Apostles, who preached down
Circumcision, Temple, and Sacrifices without? such things, as the Letter said,
should continue for ever, yet they preached them down without, and confirmed
them within, in Spirit, which is the ground and bottom of all, and in which
all must end. Do thou not herein clearly signify an acknowledgement, that
the sum or end of thy mission or message, in thy confession of the flesh of
Christ (which we opposed) was to preach down that person, and those works
wrought, and finished in that person, in his own body, as distinct from every
one of us, and without us in our particular persons, which the Apostles said
should remain in the essence of the person, and abiding virtue of the works in
that person with the Father for ever? even to preach him and them down; as they
preached down Circumcision, Temple, and Sacrifices without, etc. even as but
another, or farther type, shadow, or figure, that so thou may confirm thy
imagination of something within, as the truth. Is not this plain in thy
comparing, our opposing thy witness forementioned, and not believing concerning
the flesh of Christ farther, or otherwise, than we read in the Apostles
writings, with such opposition of the Apostles preaching down Circumcision,
Temple, and Sacrifices without, etc. in their day? Yea its farther plain in
that thou say, The confirming them within, in spirit, is the ground and
bottom of all, and that in which all must end: In which word All, thou have
evidently reference, not only to the things last mentioned, But to the things
first mentioned also, concerning the flesh of Christ, about which was our
contest, and so thy witness is, That the confirming them within us in spirit,
is not only the ground, bottom, and end of all those types and shadows of the
Law; (Concerning which neither is thy witness true, For Christ is the end of
the Law for Righteousness, even to every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. yea in
the works done and finished in his own body; He is the body, the prime and main
thing figured in all the types and shadows of the Law) But also of the personal
appearance of Christ, and the works done in, and by that one person in his own
body, and the mention of his second appearing; the confirming these ^ things
within us (in some imagination or operation wrought, or found in us) says, Thy
witness is the ground and bottom of all, and that in which all must end. Now
if this be not another Gospel, or Doctrine than what the Apostles preached, and
in this Letter so acknowledged too, let the considerate Reader judge.

Yet I shall also here add a word or two, to make it farther appear, That this
thy Message or Doctrine, is not another manner of, or farther revelation of the
same thing, or such as in which the things they said should come, are declared
as fulfilled, even so, as they said they should be, as the Apostles Message or
Doctrine, as added to, and following the Prophets was: But so absolutely
another Doctrine, and contrary to what they have preached, that the truth of
them both cannot stand together as the things written by the Prophets and
Apostles did, seeing the Apostles said nothing, but what the Prophets did say
should come to pass, who signified beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, and
of the glory that should follow. The righteousness of God as its now come forth
in Christ, was so witnessed to in the Law and Prophets, that the Apostles
Doctrine was but a farther revelation of the same mystery of God in Christ
before witnessed, and according to what the Prophets had before said should
come, more fully opening, and in all things confirming them, Romans 3. 21. Act.
26. 22, 23. 1 P^t. 1. 10, 11.

But this Doctrine, in which Gods being manifested in the flesh in that one
person, and the works done in his own body for us, is preached down, as they
preached down the outward Circumcision, Temple, and Sacrifices, as being but a
farther type, shadow, or figure of the truth it self, and that to be found in
something else, is so far from agreeing with the Apostles Doctrine, or
witnessing what the Apostles said should come so as therein to confirm their
word, as they did the Prophets; that it wholly contradicts and blasphemeth
both, and cannot be in the least measure granted, but the truth of theirs is
therein denied.

For they have in their revelation of the Mystery told us, That that Jesus of
Nazareth, and no other thing or person was the eternal word that was in the
beginning with God, and was God, by whom all things were made, and in whom in
all Ages was life, and his life was the light of men, even he to whom John
witnessed, that was not John, but another person distinct from John, and all
other persons, who was in those days made flesh, by a work of new creation in
the womb of a Virgin, and so came into the world in the nature of man, and
dwelt amongst men, in that his own personal body, and they his Disciples then,
in that personal converse they enjoyed with him on earth, did behold his glory
as the glory of the only begotten of the Father (there is not another thing, or
person among men, or Angels, that is the immediately begotten Son of God the
Father) and him, as so made flesh, and in that body delivered to death for our
offenses, and raised again for our justification, they did behold, and witness
to be infinitely full of grace and truth, as the fountain for all others, and as
the truth and body of all types, figures, and shadows of the Law. Yea farther.

That they in receiving that word, and testimony, which himself began to
preach, and which they received immediately from him, and fully after his
Ascension, they had therein received of his fullness (in respect of the
ministration or revelation of him to be given to mortal men)-And grace for
grace: A pla^n and full ministration or revelation of the grace of God in, and
by Jesus Christ to receive grace through; whereas our Fathers before, though
saved by grace, yet received that grace through a ministration of works; For
the law came by Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus Christ, etc. read Joh. 1,
1-18-29-40-45, etc. The former things were indeed shadows, and so they were
always signified to be, but Christ is the body, Col. 2. 17. And what ever is
said in the Law, and the Prophets of their continuing for ever (I mean those
typical Sacrifices, and Ordinances) It appears plainly signified (even in those
Scriptures of the Prophets if they be compared) that in the things themselves
that were types and figures of the true, and as they were so, they were only to
continue for ever as Ordinances among them in their Generations, till the Seed
should come, that was promised before that Law was given; and in him, the
truth, end, and fulfilling of them was to remain for ever and ever; The Law was
added because of transgression, till the Seed fore promised should come (Gal.
3. 19.) and did in the whole, and every part of i^ shadow out, and witness good
things to come, lead to a better righteousness and hope, than was to be
attained in, or by it, and that only to be found in Christ that was to come in
the nature of man, who is the end of the Law for Righteousness; He is the body,
truth, and end of all those former things that indeed were shadows, and so was
witnessed and directed to by them, Romans 3. 21. Heb. 9. and 10.

So that the Law, Prophets, and Apostles do all agree, and with one mouth,
witness, declare, and confirm him to be, The He, the Son of God, the Savior of
the world, in whom only dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily; In all which
former witnesses, and latter manifestations of his power and coming, they have
not made known cunningly devised fables, but the Apostles were eye witnesses of
his Majesty etc. And to what they said, had also the testimony of the sure word
of* Prophecy, saying nothing, but what they said should come to pass, 2 Pet. 1.
15, 16-19. Act. 26. 22, 23.

Yea, the ministry committed to the Apostles, is given as the dispensation of
the fullness of times, in which God has gathered together all things that
before lay scattered, in diverse witnesses, types and figures, into one, even in
Christ Jesus, For God who at sundry times, or in many parts, and diverse
manners, spoke to the Fathers by the Prophets, has now in these last days
spoken to us by his Son, whom he has made heir of all things, by whom also he
made the worlds, who being the brightness of his glory, etc. When he had
(observe the Text) by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of
the Majesty on high: That person, and the righteousness accomplished in and by
him for us, and remaining in that person in the Heavens with the Father, shall
never be abolished. The Heavens and Earth, in the state in which now they
stand, shall wax old as a garment, and be folded up, yea, they shall be changed
and renewed: But not so, this person, and the virtue of the works done in his
body, he is the same, and his years fail not, or change; yea, to him, as so
delivered to death for our offenses, and raised again for our Justification,
and now glorified in our nature, has he put in subjection the world to come,
of which the Apostles have spoken, Ephesians. 1. 10. Hebr. 1. tot. and 2. 1 -- 5-8,
9.

That Temple, those Sacrifices, etc. were indeed the figures of the true, and
therefore iterated, because they could not make the comers perfect, but that
one offering made in that one body (then, and so prepared for him, as before)
and so the power, and glory of God, which he thereby, and therein invested
within our nature, this is the Truth it self, the end of all types and figures,
and therefore no more to be iterated, because he is able with that one
offering, and in that name, and glory of the Father he is thereby invested
with, to save to the utmost all that come to God by him; yea, he is so in
Heaven the Savior of all men, especially of them that believe; And therefore
neither is there another manner of preaching to be given, but his presence
promised with that to the end of the world, Matthew. 281. 8, 19, 20. Yea, that
preaching, as so given, shall be even so confirmed, and all the Truth and Glory
of God, gloriously and fully manifested in that person, as there declared, in
his second, and glorious Appearance, when he shall frustrate the tokens of the
Liars, and make the Diviners mad, Isa. 44. 25, 26* and 8. 11-16-20. 2 These. 1.
6-10-12.

For they have declared the thing plainly as it is, and fully, so that we in
coming to this ministration, or dispensation of the fullness of times, and so to
know, believe, and hope in Christ, according to it, are not come to another
Sinai, but to Sion, to the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem etc.
even so as by faith in, and according to the Gospel, as now come forth, we
receive therein a Kingdom that cannot be moved, but shall even so stand for
ever, and be fully revealed, and given to us, as herein it is received by
faith; wherefore let us hold fast grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably
with reverence and godly fear, until he receive us to glory with him, as he
has said, For our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 22* 28, 29. He that will
not hear that Prophet shall be cut off* no other message or messenger to be
sent, or means to be used by God for his help, that being rejected, nothing
remains but vengeance to consume the Adversaries.

Surely then, That Doctrine that preaches down that Jesus of Nazareth, and the
works done in that his own personal body, as for us, as they preached down
Circumcision, Temple, Sacrifices, as being but a further shadow of some truth,
or good things yet to come, or to be found in some other thing, or work in many
persons, is clearly another and contrary doctrine, and tends to overthrow the
Doctrine, Faith, and Hope of our Lord Jesus Christ, as declared by the one
mouth of his holy Apostles and Prophets since the world began, and therefore
not to be followed, but held as execrable by us; neither are we to bid them to
house, or bid them God speed that bring it, after knowledge of them to be such,
he that so does is partaker of all their evil deed^, yea, we are to avoid, and
turn away from such. Having therefore clearly (and fully to my own
satisfaction* I speak as in the sight and presence of God) discerned thee to be
one of those strangers, that bring such a strange voice, or doctrine, as the
sheep are not to listen to; Yea, so contrary to the true Shepherds voice, as
even to the introducing another Jesus, another Spirit, another Gospel, etc. (as
before is showed) and having also (according to my weakness) now discovered it
from what I have under thy hand, I shall refuse further to meddle, or have to
do with thee, unless I shall perceive in thee (what I much desire, if it may
be, though I have little hope of it, viz.) some perception of the evil and
danger of thy way, and thy heart inclined to turn to the Lord, from whom thou
have deeply revolted. In the perception of which in thee, or any other deceived
by thee, or in such deceits I should surely much rejoice, and have to that end,
thus endeavored it*

THO. MOORE.


A Preface to the Relation of the following Queries, and the Answer to them, by
Thomas Moore.
MEEting accidentally (a little before the meeting at Mr. Wray^s) with several
papers, some directed to my self, and some others (yet not sent to me, but
dispersed into the hands of diverse) which are filled with nothing else, but
proud boastings of themselves, the Indicters of them, and of their light, or
spirit, and railing accusations against others; And some directed to Alice
Morden, and others, which are chiefly Queries, without laying down in any of
them, any positive answer, or discovery of their judgment unless in the close,
by reproaching the acknowledgment of one that dyed for all, the just for the
unjust, bearing our sins in his own body to the tree; And intimately all the
way scoffing at the promise of, and waiting for his coming again, rendering
that, and the hope then to be revealed, as a thing made, or accomplished in
men, and in this day: yet not plainly laying down their principles (if they
have any) as to these things (indeed it evidently appears to me, they are of no
judgment concerning the faith) meeting I say with these papers (at a place
near Cambridge) I was desired to give some answer to them. The first mentioned,
I wholly waved for these Reasons.

1 There is nothing in them requiring Answer, but the substance of it is in
those last mentioned.

2 They are stuffed with self-commendations, and raylings, and reproaches of
others (as before) and the grace of God that has appeared by Jesus Christ,
teaches us, not to walk with them in that way, not so to answer a fool
according to his folly, as therein to become like him, in* walking in such a
way, and use of such weapons, ( though so to answer a fool according to his
folly, as may tend to the making his folly manifest, l^st he be wise in his own
conceit, Prove. 26. 4, 5.) The Apostle durst not make himself of the number of
some, that commend themselves, etc. 2 Cor. 10. 12. nor durst Michael the
Archangel, when comending with the Devil, bring against him a railing
accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke th^^ o^ Satan, etc. Jude 9. Zac^. 3. 2.
Yea, the holy Ghost admonishes us not to render to any man evil for evil, or
railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, etc, 1 Pet. 3. 9. Romans 12. 17.
(according to that excellent pattern, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 22, 23.)

And although Answer might have been given to those papers also, and not in
their way, yet it is hard for us to meddle with such unclean spirits, without
getting some defilement by them, as the being provoked to, or learning
frowardness, or des^re of vain glory, in meddling with such froward and
vainglorious spirits, whence we are admonished, not to go with a furious man
(no not in joining issue with them in their proud boastings, and perverse
disputings, but to withdraw our selves from them, as 1 Tin. 6. 3, 4, 5.) lest
we learn his ways, and get a snare to our soul, Prove. 22. 24, 25.

3 Another reason of my waving them was, The little expectation of profit to
such persons in dealing with them; See thou a man wise in hi^ own conceit?
and thence, hasty, heady, perverse, self-willed, and furious in his words or
matters, there is more hope of a fool than of him* Pro. 26. 12. and 29. 20.

4 The assurance that I have, that he that reproves a scorner gets to
himself shame, and he that rebukes a wicked man gets himself a blot, Prove.
9. 7. The truth of which, I have both before and since proved, in having to do
with such spirits as these. And for these and like Reasons, I thought to have
waved this also, were it not for these following Reasons.

1 There is something intimately charged on us in the Inscription (namely, the
denying the alone sufficiency of Gods teaching) and many things propounded by
way of Query, which being rightly answered according to the Scriptures quoted
as the ground of the Queries, will tend much to the discovery of the ground of
their mistakes, and to the strengthening the believer against them.

2 Though the Queries as they are propounded, may be discerned to be foolish
and unlearned, such as are to be avoided by believers; yet such is the pretense
of zeal for God, and spirituality in the acknowledgement and worship of him, in
the Querist, that the folly and unlearnedness of the Queries, and the evil
spirit running along in them, will not presently be discerned by the weak
(without some discovery,) who not discerning the same, are more apt to be
en^angled with them.

For their sakes therefore I have assayed to propound something (after a true
relation of the Queries word for word, as in the paper that came to my hands)
by way of Answer, or rather discovery of the folly and evil couched in them.
And also that this may be of use for the recovery of such as are entangled with
such spirits, if not past hope of recovery, as I fear some are, as likewise
lest they should have occasion any of them by our being wholly silent, to
glory, or be lifted up in the conceit of their own wisdom.

The Queries of some (called Quakers) about Cambridge, with the Inscription, or
Dedication, and Conclusion of them, as they were propounded, and sent in
writing, in the name of Thomas Biddal, as follows.
To Alice Morden, and the rest, which are not yet given up to Delusion; to all
who deny the teaching of God, to be sufficient to guide to God; to all that own
it without humane helps, or learning, or teaching of men.
^. WHat and where that New Jerusalem is, which John saw come down from Heaven,
wherein there is no night, neith^r need of light of Sun, Moon or Candle, for
the Lord God and the Lamb is the light thereof; and into which in no wise shall
enter in any thing that si defiled, or works abomination, or makes a lie,
but ihose whose n^mes are written in the book of life? Rev. 21. 22.

2. What, and where that Sion is, which Isaiah and Micah spoke unto, unto which
all Nations should flow, where the Lo^d will teach the people of his ways,
from whence the Law of God and his word shall go forth, after which they shall
learn war no more, but shall say, come, and let us walk in the light of the
Lord? Isa. 2. Mic. 4.

3. What, and where that Covenant is, which the Lord has promised in the
latter days, wherein he will write his Law in their heart, and put it in their
inward parts, and they shall no more teach every man his neighbor, and every
man his brother, for all shall know him, from the least to the greatest of
them, Jer. 13. Heb. 8. And whether we may expect to come into the Covenant in
these days?

4. Where, and what that anointing and unction is by which the Saints know all
things, and need not that any should teach them, but as that anointing
teaches them of all things, which is true, and is no lie, 1 John 2. and
whether it be the same in these days to them that have it?

5. What, and where that Comforter is, which when he is come, shall reprove the
World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment, and shall guide into all
truth, and show things to come, and shall show the things of Christ, and
glorify him? Joh. 16.

6 Whether any of the servants of God may expect, and wait to receive his word
from his own mouth immediately, as all the Messengers of God in all Ages did,
or whether no other word is now to be heard in Books, which God spoke to o
hers? Jer. 23.

7 Whether any man may wait for the fulfilling of that promise in these latter
days, that all thy children shall be taught of the Lord? and whether that
teaching be sufficient, without any humane help, or learning, to guide in the
ways of God, or no? Joh. 6. Isa. 54. 13.

8 What, and where that word is, that people should hear behind them, saying,
This is the way, walk in it, when they turn to the right hand, or to the lef^;
And where that Teacher is, that shall be removed to more into corners, but
shall be in the midst of them; and whether we may look for that word in these
days? Isa. 30.

9 What that word of faith is, by which none needs to say, Who shall ascend up
to heaven to fetch Christ from above, or who shall descend into the deep, that
is, to bring up Christ again from the dead, but that word is nigh thee, in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, which the Apostle preached to them that had it in
their heart; And whether the same word be not now in the hearts of the people,
though they mind it not? Romans 10.

10 What that voice of Christ is, which his sheep knows, and how they come to
know it from other voices, and all that hear it, will not hear the voice of
strangers, and hirelings, and thieves, and sorcerers, but by the same voice are
brought to know Christ, and follow him, Joh. 10. And whether his sheep may
expect and wait for the same voice now, and to know it from all other voices
which are false?

11 What that way is in the wilderness, which Isaiah spoke of, Isa. 35. 8.
which shall be called the way of holiness, which the unclean shall not pass
over, but it shall be for wayfaring men, and fools shall not err therein, in
which way the Redeemed shall walk, and the Ransomed of the Lord shall come to
Sion; And whether any may expect to find in these days such a way, as are
strangers and fools in the world?

12 What that manifestation of the Spirit is, which is given to every man to
profit with all, and whether there be any profit, but by it; and whether it be
not of it self ^n infallible guide in all the way of God, according to its
manifestation? Joh. 4. 23.

13 What, and where that worship of God is truly, in which God alone looks to
be worshipped in; And whether any can worship in spirit and in truth, but those
that are born of the Spirit: And whether that he that is born of the Spirit,
needs any other guide in the spiritual worship, but that Spirit of which he
is born according to his measure, Joh. 1. 9. And whether such worships has not
been, and are now differing from all other worships in the world, and therefore
hated by them, as in all Ages?

14 What, and where that light is, that inlightens every man that comes into
the world, which being come into the world, is the condemnation of all those
that are in darkness, because of their evil deeds: And whether this be not the
condemnation of all the world that believe not in it, but walk in darkness; And
whether there be any other condemnation, but it, seeing Christ said, If I had
not come ye had not had sin? Joh. 3. Romans 8.

15 What the Law of the Spirit of life is, which made Paul free from the law of
sin and death, which had warred against the law of his mind, and had formerly
held him in captivity to the law of sin, that was in his members; And whether
any in these days, that are come to that warfare may look for that freedom by
the Law of the Spirit of life?

And thus I have written these few lines, the Lord revealing by his Spirit in
me, the great delusion, sorcery, and bewitched doctrine that you are under, of
these bewitching Simon Magus sorcerers, which have put you upon a Christ
crucified without you, notwithstanding you, and the rest, are in your
filthiness and first nature. Whereas the Holy Ghost has declared, That they
must be pure in heart that must see God, Matthew. 5. 8. And has neglected to
tell you of a washing of regeneration, and new birth by the Holy Ghost in you,
Tit 3, 4, 5, 6. And has brought another Gospel contrary to what Christ has
already preached, and therefore he renders such accursed, 1 Pet. 1. 12. And
the Lord speaking by the mouth of Paul saying, My little children of whom I
travel again in birth until Christ be formed in you, Gal. 4. 19. And the Lord
in mercy look upon you, for my bowels yern toward you, and pity you, to see
Prophets and Teachers creep in among you to draw you from your guide, 2 Pet. 2.
1.

Written from the Spirit of the Lord, from one whom the people of this world
calls Quaker, known by the name of Thomas Biddal
,

The Answer to the foresaid Queries by Tho. Moore.
ANd first to the Inscription or Dedication of them, which runs thus:

To Alice Morden, and the rest, which are not yet given up to Delusion; To all
who deny the teaching of God to be sufficient, etc. In which words, that which
is imported in the plainest sense of them is, That they look upon this as a
testimony sufficient, that men are not given up to Delusion ( viz.) That they
deny the teaching of God to be sufficient to guide them that own it, to God,
without humane helps, or at least, that those that do so are not given up; This
appears their sense, if the indicter of this understood himself, but that
rather I suppose, he did not; however, to this Inscription and Dedication, we
shall lay down this for Answer.

That to deny the absolute and alone sufficiency of the teaching of God,
without humane helps, or man's teaching, is a sin of a very high nature, and an
evidence of being in a great measure given up to delusion, Jer. 8. 8, 9, and 6.
10* 11. and 23. 16, 18, 22 etc. Isa. 8. 16-20. 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5. 1 John 2. 19.
20-24-26, 27. and Chap. 4 6.

That therefore we may know, who they are that do so, that we may beware of
them, and of all steps leading to this evil, Let us consider,

First, What Gods eaching is?

Secondly, Where, and how himself does preach, or hold it forth unto men?

Thirdly, How, or wherein men may be said to deny the alone sufficiency thereof?

First, What Gods teaching is, as to the matter of it: There is in it, 1
Something summary and fundamental of all the rest, by which primely it may be
known, and distinguished, 2 Some things contained in, springing out of, and
built upon, or arising from those things that are main, and fundamental in it.

1 Those things main and fundamental in Gods teaching, are concerning Jesus
Christ (before promised and witnessed, and in his undertaking virtuous, now
manifested) as delivered to death for our offenses, according to the Scriptures
(therein bearing our sins in his own body to the Tree, not bearing them, or
leaving them to be born in that sense in our souls or bodies) and raised again
from the dead for our justification, according to the Scriptures. And so
concerning his own (the Fathers) love and goodness to man-ward, the glory of
which is now manifested in the face of Christ, even in those works done in, and
by his first personal Appearance and the acceptance and virtue of them with the
Father for us, and the end of them to be fully revealed, and accomplished in
his second personal and glorious appearance, according as declared to us in the
Gospel, or testimony of God concerning him, who has abolished death by his
appearing, and brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel, 1 Cor.
15. 1-4. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Romans 4. ult. 2 Cor. 4. 6. 2 Timothy 1. 10. and 2. 8.

In this the Spirit and teaching of God is primely known and distinguished from
all others, it does unto, and for all things, confess, acknowledge, and praise,
or commend Jesus Christ as already come in the flesh (not coming, but come, and
now through sufferings entered into glory in that his own personal body in our
nature, and for us) according to the Apostles Doctrine, 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3 6.
for reproving the world, and teaching, and leading the believer into all truth;
It takes of his things, and shows to the soul, and so glorifies him, even lifts
up the Son of man; the personal abasement, sufferings, or cross of Christ, with
the ends, and virtues thereof, as now manifested in him, being raised, and
received up into glory, Joh. 16. 8, 9 10, 13, 14. with Joh. 3. 14. Romans 1. 1-3,
4. 1 Timothy 3. 16. 2 Timothy 2* 8.

This is so the sum, and subject matter of all the Fathers teaching, That
every one that has heard and learned of the Father, comes to Christ,
according to the testimony God has already given of him, Joh. 6. 45. And he
that believes not the testimony or record that God has already given of
Christ, makes God a liar, 1 John 5 10. Yea it is so the summary and
fundamental matter of all his teaching, that he is said to learn all truth, and
so to teach and lead into all truth, in Jesus in the demonstration opening, and
usefulness of Jesus, and those things of him, according to the record God has
given of him by the one month of a ^ his Prophets and Apostles* since the world
began, Ephesians. 4. 20, 21. with Joh. 16. 13 14. Act. 3. 20 21. This the purpose,
and grace of God given us in Christ from the beginning, now manifested by the
appearing of Christ, etc. as 2 Timothy* 1* 9, 10. That the Son of man must be
lifted up above all, and for, or unto all help, and healing of men, even as
Moses lift up the Serpent in the wilderness, That whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have eternal life: For God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son (namely the Savior of the world, and to be so
lifted up) That whosoever believes in him, etc. Joh. 3. 14, 15, 16.

2 Those things contained in the matter of Gods teaching, as springing out of,
and arising from the things main, and fundamental, are Doctrines and
Instructions concerning all things needful to be known given, and opened in and
through the demonstration, opening and usefulness of the knowledge of him, in
what he has done, and is become for us, for so says our Savior. The holy
Spirit (as now coming forth, in, and with the testimony of Jesus, as the works
of our salvation are finished in his body) he shall reprove the world of sin,
of righteousness, and of Judgem^nt, and all this, in, with, and through that
testimony of Jesus, as given forth to them, for thus he explicates, Of Sin,
because they believe not on me; of Righteousness, because I go to my father,
and ye see me no more; He comes down no more to suffer (in which the infinite
and abiding virtue of his once suffering is declared) And the second, and
glorious Appearance they should not see in the time of this mortality, nor till
we all come together; Of Judgment, because the Prince of this world is judged
already, which also was done in him, as Joh. 12. 31, 32. speaking of that
vertually done, from the beginning, now presently to be actually done in his
own body, and by his being lifted up from the earth (both on the cross, and
then because of that, being raised on the right hand of Majesty) he says, now
is the judgment of this world, now is the Prince of this world cast out. And
with this Argument, or in the Demonstration, and usefulness of this, as he
reproves the world of Righteousness, that all theirs is nothing, his only
perfect, and will stand them instead; So he reproves them also of Judgment,
shows the vanity and falseness of all theirs, whether of Condemnation or
Absolution, or in their apprehensions concerning things and persons: And
likewise he says, He shall teach them (the believers on him) further in, and
by the same Instrument, and shall so lead them into all truth, and show them
things to come; for says he, He shall not speak of himself, but whatever he
shall hear that shall he speak, he shall take of my things, and show unto you,
he shall glorify me, etc. Joh. 16. 8, 14. In the demonstration and opening of
him, God learneth all truth; and so also therein instructs and directs to
all right demeanors toward God and men; So the Apostles gave all their
commandments by the Lord Jesus, in the demonstration, opening, and applying
the things of him did give the ground and reason of them, show their equity,
move, and press to the observing them, in the strength afforded in those
mercies of the Lord, in, and through that testimony of Jesus, 1 These. 4. 2.
Romans 12. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 13-18 etc. Ephesians. 4. 1-8 10. For that Grace of God that
brings Salvation to all men, (especially in this appearance of it now come
forth by Jesus Christ) teaches that denying ungodliness and wordly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for
the blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, etc. Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13.

2 That in the second place propounded to be considered, is where, and how this
teaching of the Father is held forth by himself unto men, surely that is,

1 In all the books of his Creation, and providence, in all mercies,
chastisements, and changes of his providence with men, Job 33. 14-29, 30. and
36. 22. 26. Psalm. 19. 1-7. and 107. with Romans 10. 17, 18. But,

2 More clearly, and abundantly in the holy Scriptures, which were both given,
and left upon record by immediate inspiration, and furniture of God ( Romans 15.
4. 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20, 21. 1 Cor. 14. 37. 2 Pet. 3. 2. 1 John 1-4, 5.) and are
therefore profitable for all doctrine or teaching, etc. They are able, being
his words (and preserved in the Records of them from any fundamental or
material perversion, on the account of his righteousness, who has so promised,
Psalm. 12. 6. Prove. 12. 19. Isa. 8. 16. 20. and 44. 25, 26.) and so owned by
him, and accompanied with his spiritual presence to the end of the world, Mat.
28. 20. able, I say, to make us wise to salvation, both of our selves and
others, through faith which is in Christ Jesus, and thoroughly to furnish the
man of God to every good word and work, 2 Timothy 3. 14, 15, 16, 17. and 2 Timothy 4.
ult. The Law, or Doctrine of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19. 7. even as spoken
out by the one mouth of his holy Apostles and Prophets from the beginning of
the world; those that have spoken to us, and left things on record, in the name
of the Lord, Act. 3. 21-25. Jam. 5. 10. 2 Pet. 1. 19, 20. and 3. 1, 2.

And who those are that have so spoken, and what those things are that are so
delivered in his name, as the certain and infallible Oracles of God, we in
these last days are thus helped to know, and understand.

First, To all those things written before time, which we are to look upon as
the Oracles of, The Scriptures of truth (as Romans 15. 4. Dan. 10. 21.) our
Savior and the Apostles, in their preaching and witnessing to the Truth have
directed us.

And that by 1. Expressing by name most of those holy men of God by whom any of
those things were spoken, and written, or concerning whom any thing material
for our instruction is left on record, and that with evident reference to the
things written in their Books by them, or of them, (as to instance a little)
Moses, Joh. 5. 45, 46, 47. Moses, and Samuel, and all the Prophets that follow
after, Act. 3. 22. 24. (note, they are mentioned in such order as we have them,
so Luke 24. 27. 44. and Act. 13. 33. 35.) David, Act. 2. 25-30. and 4. 25. Rom:
4. 6. Matthew. 12. 3. Mark* 1^. 36 37. Solomon, Matthew. 12. 42. Act. 7. 47.
Isaiah, Matthew. 3. 3. and 4. 14. and 8* 17. and 12. 17. and 13. 14. and 15. 17.
Luke 4. 17, 18. Act. 8. 28. 30. and 28. 25. Romans 9, 27-29. and 10. 16. 20. and
15. 12. Jeremiah, Matthew. 2. 17. and 16. 14. and 16. 14. and 27. 9. Daniel,
Matthew. 24. 15. Hosea, Romans 9. 25. Joel, Act. 2. 16. Jonah, Matthew. 12. 40, 41.
Zachariah, Son of Barachiah, mentioned as one of the last of the Prophets
before Christ, Matthew. 23. 35. Job, Jam. 5. 11 Time would fail me to tell of
those many Prophets, and righteous men expressed by name, with reference to the
things written of them in those divine Oracles, as Abel, Enoch Noah, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, with his Brethren, Joshua, Gideon, Barak and others, See
Act. 7. Heb. 11.

2 By quoting or alluding to all the things, or matters contained in their
books, (as through the merciful providence of God, and on the account of his
righteousness, they are preserved to us) as the certain and infallible Oracles
of God, even to the matters and sayings contained in their books, whose names
are not expressed by them, as well as in those whose names are expressed; the
Apostles having said nothing, but what the Prophets did say should come, and so
demonstrated and confirmed their further Revelation of the mystery which they
have given for obedience to the faith among all Nations, out of the Scriptures
of the former Prophets, Act. 26. 22, 23. Romans 1. 2, 3. and 16. 25, 26. 1 Pet.
1. 10, 11. 2 Pet 1. 19-21. I might give manifold instances of this also* but I
shall content my self with a few of many. The Doctrine of the Creation, Genesis 1.
and 2. and particular sayings therein quoted and alluded to 2 Cor. 4. 6. Matthew.
19. 4. 5. 1 Cor. 11. 8, 9. Of Gods resting the seventh day Genesis 2. 2. Heb. 4.
4. Of the sin and fall of all in one offense* and death passing on them
thereby* Genesis 2. 16, 17. with chap. 3. tot. See Rom 5. 12. 14 18. 1 Cor. 15 21.
^2. Of the promised seed of the woman, and the destruction of Satan's works
thereby Genesis 3. 15 with Isa. 7. 14. See Gal. 4. 4 5. Heb. 2. 14, 15 1 John 3.
8. Matthew. 1. 22, 23. The passages concerning Abel* Cain, Enoch Genesis 4. and 5.
Heb 11 and 12. 24. 1 John 3. 12. Noah, and his preaching and the Spirit thining
therein, and in other means with men, Genesis 6. 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20 21. The
wickedness of the old world, and their destruction by water; Noah, and his
family being saved in the Ark. Gen 6. and 7 etc. See the forecited place, and 2
Pet. 25. and 3. 6. 7. The several passag^s concerning Abraham his fearing and
walking with God Gods ^ovenant with him, confirming it in his seed* in which,
blessing to all Nations was promised calling that seed in Isaac; giving him
Circumc^sion a^ an outward Seal of it, his following the call of God into a
strange Land, his offering up his only Son, as at large in Genesis. See those
in several places by our Savior, and his Apostles quoted and alluded to, as
the certain and infallible Oracles of God* Heb. 11. Romans 4. Gal. 3. with diverse
more; The like we may say of the p^ss^ges concerning Isaiah, Jacob, Jos^ph, and
his Brethren, their envy and selling him, Gods delivering him Isreal's going
into Egypt, their affliction there, Gods deliverance of them, his Judgments on
Pharaoh, his leading his people through the Sea and Wilderness, his giving the
Law by the hand of Moses, their evil manners, and his judgments on them in the
Wilderness, his bringing their seed into Canaan, giving them Judges, and
afterward Kings, the erecting him a house by Solomon, etc. Act 7. with 1 Cor.
10. 1-11. and diverse others, and so the whole ^aw and the Prophets as the
witness of Jesus, and Gods righteousness in him, was held forth in them, Romans
3. 21. how often and severally they are in the whole, and in each part alluded to
by our Savior, and the Apostles, would be a work too long in this place,
otherwise it might be showed as to every particular of the narrative doctrinal
part of their writings, and Prophecies; and not only so, but likewise in their
predictions of things to come; some discovered to be accomplished, as they said
they should come, as Matthew. 1. 22* 23. Act. 26. 22* 23. Others more distinctly
and fully opened, and assured to be accomplished in the second Appearing of
Jesus Christ, as Act. 3. 20 21. 1 Cor. 15. 54. So Ezek^els, Daniels* Zacharies,
Haggaes, and other Prophecies alluded to, and opened to John in his Revelation*
as might be seen by comparing them; our Savior, and the Apostles have so
directed us, to all those which through Gods merciful Providence are preserved
to us, as such, of all the things written before time.

Secondly, Those following Narrations and Declarations of the mystery, as now
come forth, and manifested in Christ; which were given us from the mouth and
person of Christ, the great Shephard, and confirmed, and left on record to us
by them that heard him, and were of the first, and immediate trusters in him,
as so manifested, and received their whole Word, and Doctrine immediately from
him, (as Heb. 2. 3. Ephesians. 1. 9-12. Joh. 17. 6. 8-18. Act. 1. Gal* 1. 1 Cor.
15.) Those also are the same and no other that were foretold, and prophesied
of, as so to come forth on the appearance or coming of the Messiah; no* only
in respect of the Declarations, but in respect of the declarers also, as Isa.
40. There is a clear Prophecy of the Forerunner, and of his work and message,
verse. 3-8. Then in the following verses, of the more full coming forth of the
glorious Gospel by Jesus Christ, and his Apostles.

So Isa. 44* 26. He shall confirm the word of his Servant, and perform the
council of his Messengers; with apt allusion to which, see Heb. 2 ^. speaking
of the great salvation, he says, which began to be preached by the Lord
himself, who is that servant, Isa. 42. 1. and was confirmed by them that heard
him, which were his Messengers, or Apostles for obedience to the faith among
all Nations. Romans 1. 5. So Isa. 8. speaking Prophetically of the first Personal
Appearing of the Messiah, both in that Chapter, and Chap. 7. 14. and how
therein he should be born of a Virgin, etc. And then be also a Stone of
stumbling, and Rock of offense to both houses of Israel, as he was in that his
Appearing, coming in such a despicable manner, as they looked not for.

With reference to that time he says, the testimony of him should be bound up
among his Disciples, the Law or Doctrine, sealed and confirmed among them, and
so by them, and in their records to us, all Nations ^ince, as appears in that,
with reference to that testimony and doctrine so bound up, and sealed among
them, he by and by admonishes us, To the Law and to the Testimony with every
spirit, if they speak not according to that Word, it is because there is no
light in them. And it farther appears it is to be applied to his immediate
Disciples in his personal ministration, and to those that were immediately
begotten by him, and received their message, and furniture immediately from
him, in that concerning himself, and them together. he says, Behold, I, and
the children which God has given me, are for signs and wonders in Israel;
which in like expre^^ions is peculiarly applied to those Apostles, that
peculiarly and immediately was given him out of the world for children, Job.
17. 6, 8, 18. and 21. 5. And so he and they together in their ministration, and
records left, and setforth as it were men appointed to death, For they are made
a spectacle to the world, to An^els, to men, etc. 1 Cor. 49.

Likewise other where they are prophesied of, as to the Nation, or Family of
which they should proceed (even of the Jews) that should b^ing the last, and
fullest revelation of the Gospel unto all Nations, That they should be of the
Tabernacles of David, that should be reared up among the Gentiles, Amos 9. 11.
with Act. 15. 13. etc. That Saviors should come upon mount Sion, to judge the
mount of Esau, Obad. last; So says our Savior also Salvation is of the Jews;
the Gospel came entirely, and wholly out from them, and was by them brought to
the Gentiles, 1 Timothy 3. 16. nor are we to listen to, or wait for any new, or
farther revelation to be given forth in the time of this mortality, or from the
Gentiles, for the word of the Lord, came not, nor comes first or immediately
from them, but to them only, 1 Cor. 14. 36, 37.

And that these Scriptures of the Prophets written aforetime, and commandments
of the Apostles of our Lord and Savior, are the infallible, and (...) things
contained in the Scriptures, may use this as an argument, but themselves
destroy the validity of it, for they cannot see the streightness and agreement
of his words, but set them together by the ears, and being unlearned and
unstable in the great things of his Doctrine, do necessarily pervert things
hard to be understood, and mangle the word of God to their own destruction,
Isa. 28. 12, 13. 2 Pet. 3. 16. But the word of God is true from the beginning,
and demonstrates its excellency of truth, rightness, and harmony from the
original of it (the testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of Prophecy) and
every one of his righteous judgments indureth for eve^, He that believes,
shall neither make haste, nor be ashamed, Psalm. 119. 160. Isa. 28. 16. with 1
Pet. 2. 6, 7.

2 All things standing and continuing to this day according to the Ordinances
therein set them, Psalm. 119. 89 90, 91.

3 Their perfect and acute, declaring the end from the beginning, as in their
several times they have come, and do come to pass, Isa. 46, 9, 10. with Chap.
41. 22, 23. and 43. 12. Joh. 16. 4. with Chap. 14. 25, 26. 2. Pet. 1. 12, 13.
to the end, with Chap. 3. 1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 4. 1. Matthew. 24. 25. We might have
demonstrated the truth and validity of these Arguments in diverse instances to
each of them, but it would make this work too tedious, I am ready by Gods grace
to do it, when it shall be required by any.

I might also have mentioned many more secondary Arguments of like import,
which God himself uses, for confirming and strengthening the believer, and
furnishing him to stop the mouths of gainsayers, with that faithful word, but
I forbear.

In these Scriptures of truth, God has written to us excellent things in
counsels and knowledge, that he might make us know the certainty of the words
of truth, that our trust may be in the Lord according to them, and that we may
have them to answer all sent to us, with Prove. 22* 17-21. In them has he made
known the mystery of his will, the whole counsel of God, that is to be, or may
be revealed unto mortal men, even in those Scriptures that Timothy had been
instructed into, and known from his youth, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. Ephesians. 1. 9.
Act. 20. 27. Romans 16* 25, 26. But then also,

3 For bringing this teaching of God contained in these books near unto us* in
a way suitable to our need, and weakness, God has provided another ^xpedient,
namely,

By giving gifts to men (in the hearty belief of his testimony, and receiving
the love of it so, as to save them, though yet they are of like passions and
infirmities with others, yet therein furnished them with) such gifts as may be
for the profit of others, to every one of those that are in any measure truly,
or thoroughly reconciled to God by Jesus Christ, is given grace, some gracious
gift for the benefit of others; the manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every one of them, even some distinct understanding of the Spirits testimony
concerning Christ; so as they are helped to discern and know, what God has
given them in Christ; and this for the profit of others, that they may each
according to his measure be useful one to another, and to others, through the
Spirit in administering some gift, for teaching, opening, or stirring up in the
Grace of God, Jesus Christ now being ascended on high; And having received all
immeasurable fullness of gifts in the man, and for men, that in, or through the
dispensation of them, men might be prepared for habitations of God: He has
given these gifts to men; some Apostles, some Prophets* some Evangelists, some
Pastors, and Teachers, to perfect or furnish the Saints, for the work of their
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity
of the faith, and knowledge of the Son God, unto a perfect man, etc. Psalm. 68.
18. Ephesians. 4. 7-11, etc. 1 Cor. 12. 7. etc. And so the Apostle Peter said of
that which they spoke, and others heard that that was of those gifts which
Christ had received on the right hand of his Father, and did then shed forth,
Act. 2. 16. 33. Though the gifts be diverse, yet all given by that one, and the
self-same Spirit, that lifts up, and glorifies Christ, according to the
faithful record, 1 Cor. 12. Romans 12. Yea, all those gifts distributed, and set
in the Church since the first Apostles, who also opened the Prophets, and were
last in respect of that their peculiar Office, or work, of giving another
manner of, and fuller revelation of the Gospel than had been given before, and
that for obedience to the faith among all Nations for his name; I say all gifts
distributed, and given unto believers since, who through their word believe;
they are for the comparing, and opening Scriptures, or showing the things of
Jesus Christ to others by, and according to them, and to what is written, and
already revealed in them. The holy Scriptures (especially, as now completed
since the dispensation of the fullness of times, came forth by the Apostles)
being able to make wise to salvation though faith which is in Christ Jesus,
etc. And thoroughly to furnish the believer to all his service in exercise of
those gifts, he has received from God for the profit of others.

Thirdly, We come now to consider, how or wherein any may be said, to deny the
Alone sufficiency of Gods teaching; surely that may be seen in the for^er
considerations.

1 That they deny the Alone sufficiency of Gods teaching, that either deny the
Lord that bought them, or acknowledge and confess him not according to the
testimony God has given of him; Do not lift him up, ^^ magnify him in his
Cross, with the ends and virtues thereof, as declared in the Apostles Doctrine,
as the ground and foundation of all Faith, and Hope, the matter of our song,
the fountain of all our teaching, do not acknowledge that vision of God in
Christ to be indeed as now revealed, The Vision of all visions, and sufficient
in the light, and power of God, in, and with it, to teach, and open all
Doctrine, and lead into all Truth; I say, such do therein deny the Alone
sufficiency of Gods teaching, that being, as before, the summary matter of his
teaching, and the way of his teaching all things, and leading into all truth.

2 They that deny, slight, or throw by the holy Scriptures, either in their
authority, or clearness, certainty, agreement, truth, or sufficiency, as not
being able to make wise to salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus,
and thoroughly to furnish the man of God to all his service, etc. (as before)
without some additional helps of men's learning, or art, or without the
imaginations of their own spirit, or some other spirit, than what is in and
with them, to give the meaning, and lead to the use of them, they that come not
up to those sound words, as delivered by them that have spoken to us in the
name of the Lord, in which the righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to
Faith, as it is written, They to whom the pen of the Scribe is in vain, for
opening and interpreting the mind or meaning of the Holy Ghost; what wisdom is
in them? surely they have therein rejected the word of the Lord, while they
render that as a dead letter, and so vain and empty; fallible and uncertain,
without the addition of their gloss or fancy, which they have not seen, heard,
or met with in that word of the truth of the Gospel; And therefore not by the
Spirit, Jerem. 8. 8, 9. Col. 2. 18.

3 They also that despise, and slight, as fleshly, and of man, the Instruments
and Means of Gods appointing the Posts, or Pillars of his setting up, for these
his teachings to be conveyed and brought near unto us, in, or by, and for us to
wait upon him in, Prove. 8. 34. and 9. 3. Zach. 7. 9-12. 2 Timothy 4. 1-5. They
despise not man, but God, who has also given us of his holy Spirit, 1 These* 4.
2. 8. They are sensual, what spirituality soever they pretend, not having the
Spirit, Jude 19. 1 John 2. 18, 19. Hebr. 10. 24, 25.

And of this sort, I fear they are that had a hand in the forementioned
Queries: But hoping some of them may not yet be given up to Delusion; and
however for the benefit of those that desired it, and of others, I shall yet
add something farther, in Answer to the Queries (many of them being answered
in this already said.)

1 Query, What, and where that New Jerusalem is, which John saw ^^^^ down from
heaven, etc? Rev. 21.

Answ. 1 It appears not yet come down in, or unto you; for you profess yet to
be traveling with pain, and grief of heart, and bowels yerning for the
miseries others are like, in your apprehensions to fall into, And that Christ
might be formed in them. But though such pity, pain, and grief, toward objects
in misery (or in evil ways leading to it) as you pretend, be in truth, in the
hearts of such as indeed love the Lord Jesus Christ (and hold fast his name and
grace therein) in the time of this mortality, yet in that New Jerusalem, when
come down from heaven, there shall be no more crying, pain, nor tears, they
shall be all wiped away. All former miseries, and occasions of weeping shall be
forgotten, Isa. 25. 6, 7, 8, 9. Rev. 21. 4. They shall even rejoice when they
see the smoke of their torment rise up for ever, whom before they pitied, Rev.
19. 2, 3-7. with Chap. 14. 2, 3, 10, 11.

2 But for farther Answer, It is not yet come down from God out of heaven unto
any; It is yet as our life is, hid with Christ in God, when Christ who is our
life shall appear, then shall we appear with him, and be like him in glory;
That it is not yet come down from God out of heaven, (though believers by faith
do come unto it, in, and through the Gospel (especially as now come forth, Heb.
12. 22.) This appears,

1 In that its showed in the vision then to come, when he makes new heavens,
and new earth, and all things new, Rev. 21. 1-5. which are things that he will
make (not has made) Isa. 66. 22. And which all believers in this corruptible
state of the world, all the time of their mortality, are yet looking and
waiting for, 2 Pet. 3. 12, 13, 14. Tit. 2. 12, 13. Phil. 3. 21. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
Isa. 25. 8, 9. not here enjoyed by way of actual possession by any of them. But
Jesus Christ in that which he has done, and is become for them with the
Father, as preached in the Gospel to every man, being received by faith, is
even so in them, and to them the hope of glory, the ground and foundation of
the hope of things, not yet sensibly enjoyed or possessed ( Col. 1. 27, 28.
with Romans 8. 19. 24, 25. Heb. 11. 1.) yea in a sense the thing hoped for, as in
respect of his second personal appearance on the earth, which shall be in the
glory of his Father, and with his holy Angels; Then, and thereby do they look
for an accomplishment of those glorious promises of the new heaven, and new
earth, and the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven, and of all
things restored, or made new by him, Act. 3. 21, 22. Rev. 21. 5. Phil. 3. 21.
When he shall also bring all that sleep in Jesus with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14, 16,
2 Thessalonians. 2, 1, 2, with Chap. 1, 6, 7* etc. ^ Tim. 4. 8. Rev. 20. 4, 6.

2 It farther appears, that it is not yet come down from heaven, in, or to any
persons, because in it there is no death, pain, or mortality, but in, and
amongst the best of believers here, even while the Spirit is made alive for
righteousness sake (delivered from the condemnation, and bondage of the Law by
the body of Christ in the discovery of it, even by the Law, Doctrine, and power
of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, and so quickened to a new and living
hope, and so also in desires and affections through the Resurrection of Christ,
as Romans 7. 4. and 8. 2, 3 4, 1 Pet. 1. 3. 1 John 3.3) yet the body is dead,
because of sin, Romans 8. 10. yea besides these mortalities, there is infirmities
and passions of the mind, through remainders of the old man, yet in their
members warring, though through Jesus Christ they get victory daily, Romans 7.
23, 24. yea in many things they all offend, James 3. 2. 1 John 1. 1. 8, 10. And
so there is with these mortalities yet upon them, which are the fruit of sin,
and as a remembrance of it, there is, I say, with them particular chastisements
and corrections for sin, of which they are made partakers, as there is found in
them sins against light, and grace committed, needing discovery and purgation,
1 Cor. 11. 30, 31, 32, Heb. 12. 4, 5-11. Their bodies are yet vile, both their
particular personal bodies, and their societies also, they are not yet made
glorious, without spot or wrinckle; But he shall in that day, when Jerusalem
comes down from heaven, so present them; compare Phil. 3. 21. with Ephesians. 5. 26,
27. He is therefore now all this day washing them, that he may in the issue so
present them with his likeness in the morning of the Resurrection, as the
issues, and virtues of his sufferings, Ps. 17 ult. Rev. 14. 1-5. and 7. 12-17.
1 John 3. 1-3.

2 Qu. What, and where that Sion is? Isa. 2. Mich. 4. etc.

Answ. The former Answer may serve for Answer to this also, Sion and Jerusalem
being so near a kin, as they are in those Scriptures mentioned, and in Heb. 12.
22. For though as in those Scriptures, the Law, Doctrine, or word of the Lord,
do now come from thence to the Nations, and they that with the heart believe,
or receive that word, do by faith come unto it, and are made of it, in such
believing, yea do so come forth of its waters, that its truly said, Jerusalem
that is above is the mother of them all; yet its still Jerusalem above, even to
them, and not come down (as is showed before) Gal. 4 26. Yea farther,

Though in this day we have a first fruits of the Spirit, in performance of
those promises, yet the fullness and harvest of that, and the redemption of the
body, and things pertaining more properly thereto, we wholly wait for, and are
not yet possessors of the Nations are yet learning war, whereas when those
promises are accomplished, They shall learn war no more, neither is the enmity
removed out of, nor bondage of corruption taken off from the creatures, as is
promised then to be fully and clearly accomplished (compare with those
Scriptures, Isa. 11. Romans 8. 19-25. Act. 3. 20, 21.) according to the ends, and
virtues of Christ having made peace by the blood of his Cross, Col. 1. 20. Heb.
2. 5 8. 9.

3 Qu. What and where that Covenant is? Jer. 31. 33, 34. Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12,
etc.

Ans. 1. In respect of the foundation, ground, and assurance of it. It is Jesus
Christ himself, as raised from the dead, and exalted, and glorified in our
nature in h^s own personal body, by and with the virtue of his sufferings, the
most glorious presence of God in the heavens; compare Isa. 55. 3, 4. with Act.
13. 34. Heb. 4 14, and 8. 1 2-10.

2 In respect of the matter of it, or promises in it, They also are all in him
yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. given us through, sealed in, and the way
for coming forth, made by, his blood, yea so given into him and into him
inseparably, That they may be given only with him, in and through the knowledge
of himself, and so received by faith, in the receiving him by faith and so its
a Covenant made, and sure in him, with all the seed, viz, those that come to
God by him, now I say, now made with them, in the giving him in the knowledge,
and faith of him, in what he has done, and is become, and in the ends, and
virtues thereof for a Covenant to the people, and in some first fruits of the
Spirit performed also, Romans 8. 32. 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Isa. 42. 6. and 55. 3, 4.
But,

3 In respect of the performance of it, in the harvest, or fullness of those
spiritual blessings, we have in Christ, and the redemption of the body, etc. by
Christ, it is yet to be waited for, even all the time of this mortali^y* and
till he come (as before) as may be seen in the Scriptures forecited, and also
in comparing Hab. 2. 2. 4. with Heb. 10. 35, 36, 37, 38. In the beginning of
which Chapter, he also mentions the same Covenant, as made and sure in Christ
to all that come to God by him, and to be so made with all the Israel of God,
yet with reference to it again, in this latter end of the Chapter, with
allusion to that of Habbakkuck, he signifies yet a time for the exercise of
faith, and patience, in doing, and suffering, according to the will of God,
before the promises in their performance or accomp^^hment shall be received,
that vision of God in which they shall be revealed in the accomplishment, being
the second and glorious appearance of J^^^s Christ in our nature, which is yet
to be wait for (compare the (...) Habbakkuck says, The Vision shall surely
come; The Epistle to the ^ebrews says, He shall come, etc. But the just shall
live, and be preserved to that day, through faith, kept by the power of God
through faith u^^^ the salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time; he is
all this day in a spiritual first fruits, writing his Law in their hearts, in
the demonstration of his Son, and his grace in him, and that in, and through
those means forementioned. But while they are here, that being not fully done
nay, but in a little first fruits they imperfect in every thing, as to
attainment, not knowing as they are known, etc. they have therefore need still
of all those means, instruments, and helps for the doing of it, or having it
done in them, in which himself has appointed, in, and with the demonstration
of his Son, to be present for the working it in them more and more unto the
perfect day; and so of the helps, and instrumental teaching of one another, but
then they shall know as they are known, and that all of them from the least to
the greatest, and therefore shall not need, etc. Yea then shall their iniquity
be so perfectly blotted out, as Act. 3. 19, 20. as to be no more remembered any
more by any remainder of it, or its fruits upon them; whereas in this day,
there is a remembrance of it, as we have showed before; Then shall he perfectly
and totally redeem Israel from all his iniquities, that to be waited for, Psalm.
130.

Truly this Covenant is violated, or broken (as Isa. 24. 5.) by such as tread
underfoot the blood of it, count it as a common thing, as if of no more, or
other virtue, as to any Covenant of remission, and peace, than like sufferings
of other persons, Heb. 10. 29. Do wilfully after knowledge of the truth
received, reject, and turn from that Sacrifice, ^^ draw back, being proudly
lifted up above the reading the whole vision ^^ God in the face of Jesus
Christ, where its written, that it may be (...), hat so they may run to the
end, insolently boasting of it, even in (...), as a thing made and accomplished
in them, in this day, compare Hab. 2. 4. with Heb. 10. 26-38. and 2 Timothy 2. 18.

4 Qu. Where, and what that Anointing is, 1 John 2. 21-27. - And whether it be
not the same in these days to them that have it?

Answ. It is in, and upon him that one person of God, and of man, Jesus that
was of Nazareth, it is in him in our nature immeasurably ( Joh. 1. 14. and
3.34.) and for us, Him God has anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows, Psalm. 45. 1, 2-7. In him it has pleased the Father all fullness should
dwell, even the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 1. 19. and 2. 9. Yea in
him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2. 2. In him is
Gods Name, Exodus 23. 21. The revelation or manifestation of his glory to the
sons of men, as well as his Power, Authority, and Majesty (as he is anointed
with both, Act. 10. 38. Joh. 1. 18. and 8. 12. and 12. 44-46. 2 Cor. 4. 5, 6.
which Name of God as in him is that precious ointment powered forth, by, and
through him, Cant. 1. 3. And so its explicated in that 1 John 2. 20-27. where
its clear, That that which is called the Unction, verse. 20. And the anointing,
verse. 27. is the same that is called* The truth, verse. 21. intimately, The
testimony of Jesus, in which he is declared to be the Christ, the Anointed one,
the Son of God, the Savior of the world; And so the Fathers name declared in
him, verse 22, 23. which is the summary and fundamen^al matter of Gods teaching
(as is fore-shewed) expressly it is called verse. 24. That which they had heard
from the beginning, the word of the truth of the Gospel, even the word of the
beginning of Christ, which what it is, is explicated, 1 Cor. 15. 14. The sum of
the Gospel concerning Christ, which they had first, and always preached, as
that in the heart-mindfulness, or remembrance of which the believer is saved,
or preserved from every evil word, and work, and way: The sum of which is
concerning the Death and Resurrection of Christ, and Gods glory appearing in
him, the same is here meant by the things heard from the beginning called the
anointing, as appears in that (like as in that of 1 Cor. 15. so here) he says,
verse 26. that he writes these things to them concerning them that seduce them,
to direct them how to be preserved from them, namely, by giving earnest beed to
that anointing, the things heard from the beginning, as likewise Paul to
Timothy in a like case, Evil men, and seducers shall wax worse, and worse,
deceiving, and being deceived, but continue thou in the things that thou have
learned, and been assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them etc. 2 Timothy 3. 13, 14, 15. Surely the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy,
Rev. 19. 10. whence Paul directs Timothy, as the way in which he might be
helped with understanding in all things, ever to remember, That Jesus Christ of
the seed of David, was raised from the dead according to his Gospel. And this
anointing, this light of the Lord, this glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the
Image of God, is certainly the same, for that preaching of it was given by
those great Apostles for the obedience of faith unto all Nations, Romans 1.
1-3-5. and 16. 25, 26. The dispensation of the fullness of times, etc. Ephesians. 1.
10. And of the same virtue, and quality that ever it was for teaching all
things, and leading into all truth, it being the arm or power of God to the
saving whosoever believes, for therein is the righteousness of God revealed,
etc. Romans 1. 16. 17. So that believers still need no man, or spirits teaching,
that teaches otherwise than as that anointing teaches them of all things, and
as that has taught them, even as they have heard from the beginning, so they
are exhorted in the next verses to abide in him. It will never teach another
thing, or reveal Gods glory in another manner. They have also therein need, and
encouragement diligently to heed and attend more to the same in, and through
all means vouchsafed.

5 Qu. What, and where that Comforter is? etc. Joh. 16.

Ans. He is the holy Spirit of truth, proceeding from the Father, and the Son,
in his light, influences, and operation. Therein thus distinguished from other
spirits, he takes of the things of Jesus and glo^^fies him, he lifts up the Son
of Man as already come in the Flesh, and now received up into Glory in man's
Nature; this he commends, and l^fts up, according to the Apostles Doctrine, and
Gods glory herein (as is showed before) for reproving and enlightening the
World, and for teaching and leading the Believer into all truth, Joh. 16. 8, 9,
10, 13, 14. with Chap. 15. 26, 27. and Chap. 3. 14, 15, 16. 1 John 4. 1 - 6. as
before more at large, in the Discourse about the matter and manner of the
Fathers teaching. And this Spirit as in his essence he dwells in the person of
Christ, in whom dwells not only the fullness of God, but of the Godhead bodily;
so in these his instructing and reproving influences, he is in the Gospel, he
goes forth to men in, and with the testimony of Jesus, with whom God gives all
things pertaining to life and godliness, even through the knowledge of him.

6 Qu. Whether any of the Servants of God may expect to receive his Word from
his own mouth immediately, as all the messengers of God in all Ages did? or
whether no other Word is now to be heard in Books, which God spoke to others?

Ans. First, All the Messengers of God in former Ages did not receive the Word
in a like manner immediately from God, not Paul and Timothy; Paul neither
received it of man, neither was he taught it but by the revelation of Jesus
Christ; God was pleased to give in, or into him an immediate and full
revelation of his Son (even of the whole Gospel of his Son, that he might
preach him among the Gentiles, Gal. 2. 12. 16.) which revelation of the whole
Gospel, he had from the person of the Son of God immediately, or in such manner
without the help of men as Instruments, that he was therein fitted to be one of
those great Apostles, to give forth the last and fullest revelation of the
Gospel to all Nations for the obedience of faith, having both seen the Lord,
and received the Word immediately from himself, as they did, though born out of
due time thereto, 1 Cor. 9. 1. and 15. 8, 9, etc.

Not to Timothy, for he heard and learned his Doctrine mediately even of the
Apostle Paul, and so by the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit through
his Doctrine and Ministration, and so also his gifts, and fitness for his
service, by the laying on of his hands, etc. 2 Timothy 1. 13. and 2. 1, 2. and 3.
14, 15. 1 Timothy 4. 11 - 14 15, 16.

So likewise the Thessalonians, from whom sounded the Word of God to many
others, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8. They themselves received it mediately through the
Apostles Doctrine, and Ministration, through such demonstration of the Spirit,
as accompanied the word which they heard of them; See 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5, etc. and
2. 13 etc.

Secondly, none since may expect in this day to receive it so immediately, as
Paul did, but mediately through their word, both the message, and fitness to
declare it. This appears,

1 In that they are said to be the Apostles last, in respect of such immediate
furniture, and mission, 1 Cor. 4. 9. and 15. 8. whence also, they were to give
the Revelation of the mystery for obedience to the faith among all Nations* (as
well then to come, as then in being) And if any man think himself to be a
Prophet, or spiritual, to render himself such, he is to acknowledge that the
things, they, the Apostles and Prophets have written, are the Commandments of
the Lord, and not any other word that may come to him, or from him, Romans 16.
25, 26. 1 Cor. 14. 36, 37. 2 Pet. 3. 2, 3.

2 It farther appears in that our Savior prays for sanctifying to, and
blessing on the ministration of no other since those immediate messengers. But
such as shall believe on him through their word, Joh. 17. 20.

Neither is any other word to be heard, listened too, or received by us, is the
word of God; But that so already spoken by immediate inspiration, and
commission, by the one mouth of his holy Apostles, and Prophets, and what comes
up thereto: All spirits are to be tried by it, 1 John 4. 6. 1 Timothy 6. 3. Before
we bass from this Query, note the inconsistency of their professed Principles,
and Practices, and the secret wickedness discovered in it. In the Query they
signify, That none ought to hear any other word in Books that God spoke to
others, but only what himself has immediately received from Gods own mouth;
and yet they write these Queries to such as they look upon as people deluded,
drawn from their Guide, and so far from having received Gods immediate
teaching, or submitting to it, or waiting for it, that they judge them fit to
be given up for Rebellion, and not only these, and diverse such Papers, but
their printed Books and Papers are very numerous, and are generally dispersed
by them to all people, with earnest pressing them to read them: It appears by
comparing what they say, and do, that their meaning is not to take us from
reading Books generally, for they would have us read, more then ever, such as
they disperse and commend; only they desire to take us off from reading such
Books, as do indeed contain in them matter spoken by God to others, as the holy
Scriptures, and what in any measure truly comes up thereto.

Surely, They are wiser in their Generation than the children of Light, for
they know, should we diligently read, and mind the holy Scriptures, we should
be therein strengthened to discern them, and their Books, so as to throw them
by as needless and unclean: Therefore they first and openly cry out against all
Books, and reading (that so they may include, or take in the holy Scriptures,
and whatever is suitable thereto, against which is their only design) the Evil
Spirit in them well knowing, that men are very apt to conceive some light
esteem of, or distaste at the Scriptures, and what is consonant to them
(because that is always reproving them, and testifying their Wisdom, Works, and
Lusts to be vain and evil) especially when they are encouraged thereto, under
pretense of Spiritual^ty, and higher Notions, and yet with such secret promise
of liberty, or exalting something as is suitable to their proper lusts; and if
they once be moved to slight those Books, and so the things heard from the
beginning, they will of themselves enquire after, and not be taken off from
those Books, and Novelties, through which they were first persuaded to such
light estimate of the Scriptures, under pretense of taking them off from Men,
and Books, etc. When once the Ear is turned from hearing the truth, or the
Heart brought to dis-relish sound Doctrine, then it is easily turned aside to
Fables, and the same Evil Spirit will secretly (while he cries out against
hearing men, and reading Books) allow them heaps of Teachers, and Books too,
and direct them not only to hear and read, but to worship them, in which the
truth of those Scriptures (excellent to this purpose) are verified, Col. 2. 18,
19. 2 Timothy 4. 1 - 4.

7 Qu. Whether any may wait for the fulfilling of that Promise, Isa. 54. 13.
Joh 6. and whether that teaching be sufficient? etc.

Ans. To the first part of this Query, I answer; They that know his Name will
trust in him, and wait for the certain fulfilling of all his gracious Promises
in his own time and way, for they are all, Yea, and Amen in Christ; and the
performance of them coming forth with him, according to the manner of Gods
giving him, who is now given vertually, and Spiritually, and in the testimony
of him mediately, and so all Gods teachings in, and with him, but shall in his
time appear personally, and visibly, and then all things with himin like manner
gloriously and immediately in fullness and glory. He that believes makes not
have, Romans 8. 32. 2 Pet. 1. 3. Ephesians. 1 17. Col. 3. 4. 1 Cor. 13. 12. Romans 8.
18. 1 John 3. Isa. 28. 16. In answer to the Second part of this Query, I add,
That I suppose here the man had forgotten his Inscription, or Dedication, for
there he directs his Queries only to them, that deny the alone sufficiency of
Gods teaching, and yet here makes it one of his Queries whether they do so, or
no; or else if these Queries were framed as is thought, by some of a more
subtle pate than his whose hand is at them, then this with some other
tantologies, and significations of weakness in the Inditor, may be looked upon
as done of purpose to keep us from thinking that any of their Grandees had a
hand in it, but be it as it will, it is a blemish to their pretense of being
immediately guided by an infallible spirit; yea it signifies their spir^^ to be
both forgetful* and not understanding what it says, nor whereof it affirms; as
well as also their propounding so many confused Queries, and in such manner,
without laying down any thing plainly by way of position, signifies their
spirit to be fearful of discovering his Principles, (if he have any) lest he
should not be able to manage them, or lest presently discovering them, and
endeavoring to manage them, he should spoil his design at first. And surely I
could have passed over more weakness in expressions, without such notice of it,
if it had not been a little necessary on this account, to show the vanity of
their pretense of immediate revelation from Gods Spirit, and being furnished
to, and acted in all by it. It is none of the Character of Jesus Christ, but of
the foolish Woman, her ways are moveable, that thou can not know them, and
therefore moveable, left thou should ponder the path of life, Prove. 5. 6.
yea, this also is mainly to be observed in her Instruments, they are proud, yet
knowing nothing, always doting about questions, and strife of words, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 4. Whereas on the other hand, the Servants of Christ by his Spirit have
been always led in all lowliness of mind, not to commend, or preach
themselves, but Jesus Christ the Lord; and therein to testify of him, what
they did know in the plain demonstration of the Spirit, even in words which the
Holy Ghost taught them, that they might propound and lay down somewhat for the
feeding, and profit of others, as 2 Cor. 5. 12 - 14, 15. and 4. 5, 6. whose
word therein was not yea and nay, but in him, (even in the demonstration of
Christ, and the things of him) was yea, 2 Cor. 1. 18, 19. 1 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8. -
11. - 16. 2 Timothy 2. 15, 16 - 23. 24. Tit. 2. 11 - 15. 2 Timothy 3. 14 - 17. and 4.
1 - 5.

For direct answer to this part of the Query, I shall add nothing here, but
refer the Reader to the Answer to his Inscription, where I have fully given my
testimony to the alone sufficiency of Gods teaching.

8 Qu. What, and where that word is, that people should hear behind them, and
where that teacher is? etc. Isa. 30. 20, 21.

Ans. 1 That word mentioned, verse. 21. is now in the testimony of Jesus the
Lord, as he has been delivered to death for our offenses, and raised for our
Justification, and is received up into glory, as that testimony is now come
forth in full, since the Ascension of Jesus Christ; for though God did speak in
diverse manners unto the Fathers by the Prophets, yet he has in these last
days spoken unto us by his Son etc. Hebr. 1. 1, 2. and the Spirit of God in
this dispensation of the fullness of times, teaches all things, and leads into
all truth, by taking of the things of Jesus, and showing them according to the
testimony now come forth, and so opening, and making use of them, in and unto
every case and matter (as is before more largely showed) yea this word then was
no other but the same light, teaching, and direction of the Lord, which also
then was in, and did issue forth in and through that testimony, or witness of
Jesus the Lord, and Gods righteousness in him, as that testimony was then come
forth, which was witnessed in the Law, and Prophets, Romans 3. 21. yea preached
from the beginning. And hence (having reference to the eighteenth verse of that
Isa. 30. it is there fully signified to be met with in waiting for the Lord,
yea it is plainly expressed as part of the privilege of them, that through his
goodness and forbearance to manward, in which he waits that he may be
gracious, are overcome to wait for him, to have all their teaching, light, and
direction from him, as he was then witnessed, and their enjoyment of promises
in and by him; whence that Isa. 2. 5. O house of Jacob come ye, and let us
walk in the light of the Lord. That testimony of Jesus being indeed the Vision
of all Visions, the spirit of Prophecy, Isa. 29. 11. with Chap. 28. 12. 16.
Rev. 19. 10.

2 To the Second part of the Query, What that Teacher is (mentioned verse. 20.)
which should be in the midst of them, etc. For answer to this, We must take
leave to mind our Querist of his mistake of the words of the Scripture to
which he alludes, it being a material mistake. To which doubtless, that Spirit
that breathed forth those words by the Prophet, would not have led him, but
some lying spirit, that under pretense of bringing Scripture would pervert it,
and steal away from us the Word of the Lord, and that we may not discern him,
makes it a matter of reproach to look into Books, to search the Scripture
whether those things be so, or no, as he presents them to our imagination; the
word in the text is (in the plural number) Teachers, which he renders, that
Teacher; and thine eyes shall see, for that which he renders thus, it should be
in the midst of them, the words are thus, Though the Lord give you the bread of
Adversity, and the water of Affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed
into a corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers. And where those
Teachers are, the text tells ( viz.) present with them, and before their eyes,
even now in the days of their adversity, while the person of the Lord, the
fountain of their teaching, for whom they wait, is personally absent from them
(as 2 Cor. 5. 6.) and not seen by them (as 1 Pet. 1. 8.) yet from him they
enjoy this benefit, that do wait for him, as the influences of the light of
his testimony, and Grace that brings Salvation to all men, Their eyes shall
see their Teachers; surely those are the several and various Instruments, and
means of teaching that he affords them, which are all his Works, and
Providence about them in all Mercies, and Chastisements, yea in their very
Adversities; as also his Records, and Servants, whatever he is doing about
them, or vouchsafing to them, their eyes shall see their Teachers in all these
things; whence Elihu admonishing Job, to consider, Who teaches like God? who
has enjoined him his way? etc. - Calls upon him, to see that he magnify his
Work, that men behold, every man may see it, Job 36. 22 - 25. for indeed, all
the Works of the Lord, and his various Providence about us, are Instruments
by, and through which he is conveying his teaching (as before is showed) Job
33. 14 - 29. Psalm. 19. and 107. therefore says the last Verse of that Psalm,
Who so is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord. Blessed therefore are the people that wait for
him, even now they shall fare well in the evil time, before they come to sit
down in their everlasting rest, when they shall weep no more, even now in this
time of their weeping, or adversity, whatever God try them with, or deprive
them of, yet their eyes shall see their Teachers; they shall meet with
instruction from the Lord, and from the testimony of him (the fountain of their
teaching) in, and through all that is before them, to direct and strengthen
them more to turn from dumb Idols to serve the living God, and to wait for his
Son from Heaven, for that Grace of God that brings Salvation to all men
(spoken of verse 18) teaches them in, and through all occasions and means
which are many, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts, they should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, so as waiting for the
Lord ( Isa. 30. 18, 19.) and then and therein looking for that blessed hope,
(mentioned in the beginning of verse 19. to dwell in Sion at Jerusalem, and to
weep no more) even in the glorious appearing of the mighty God, and our
Savior, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. Isa. 35. 4 - 10.

9 Qu. What that word of faith is? Romans 10. 6 - 8.

Ans. That which they did preach, which word did declare the Descension, and
Ascension of Christ, not only as the Works of God, but as then already wrought,
verse. 9. and the Word declaring them as done in one for all, now come forth to
be so believed, and acknowledged by them, that Word in the preaching of it
comes, or is made nigh unto men, even in their heart, and in their mouth, that
in that nigh coming of it through the power in, and with it, it might be
received, though it is not naturally nigh to, or in any man, but shines in the
darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not, Joh. 1. 5. nor otherwise is
it, as a habit, or indwelling principle in men that believe, or mind it not, 1 John 5. 10. Romans 1. 28.

10 Qu. What that voice of Christ is, Joh. 10. - and how they come to know it
-- And whether his sheep may expect, and wait for the same voice now, and to
know it from all other? etc.

Ans. Here are three or four Queries in one; to the first the former Answer may
serve, for that voice of Christ is nothing else, but that Word which God sent
first to Israel, and then to all the Gentiles, preaching peace by Jesus Christ,
he is Lord of all, which God has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son,
who began to preach it personally, and confirmed it by them that heard him,
That in that Word, as so delivered, Repentance, and remission of Sins might be
preached, not in the name of any other work, thing, or person, but in his Name,
who himself bare our Sins in his own Body to the Tree, that it might be
preached to all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, that word of Righteousness
which the Apostles preached, and left on Record, Luke 24. 46, 47, 48. Act. 10.
36, Heb. 1. 1 - 3. and 2. 1 - 3.

To the Second Query under this Head we answer; It is known by its own light
and power, even by the demonstration of Spirit, and of power, that is in, and
with that Word as so preached; which lifts up Christ, and the glory of God in
him; and therein, and thereby opens the understanding to understand the truth
and goodness of the Scriptures, declaring him (as is showed before) and know
his voice therein.

To the Third, Whether his Sheep may now expect it? etc. we answer, It is
already preached, and made known to all Nations, for the obedience of Faith,
that in the listening to, and receiving it (not as the word of men, but as it is
indeed the Word of God) according as men by its own light, and power in its
coming to them are enabled, men might be made of the Sheep of Christ, in that
peculiar sense, and being Sheep might be guided by the same; and they that wait
for any other Voice, wait for a Delusion, a strange Voice, and therein render
themselves none of the Sheep of Christ.

To the last Branch, how it may be known and distinguished from all other, I
answer; by its own light and demonstration, that Word of God, wherever so
received as before, it effectually works in them that believe to the
discovery of all strange Voices, to be strange, by this Rule, They lift not up
Jesus according to the Apostles Doctrine; and to the moving, and strengthening
them to turn from all such, because they know them not, Joh. 10. 4, 5. 1 John
4. 1 - 6. and 2. 20 - 27. 11 Qu. What that way is? Isa. 35. 8.

Ans. Jesus Christ as delivered to Death for our Offenses, and raised again for
our Justification, is the way, the truth, and the life, and no man comes to
the Father but by him, Joh. 14. 6. He, that only Rest, and Foundation,
propounded and laid by God for the people in the Law, and Prophets, Isa. 28.
12. 16. with Ephesians. 2. 2. 20. and so the way of our approach and access to the
Father, verse. 16, 17, 18. yea the beginning of all the ways of God; he, in and
by whom sinners may now approach for washing through his Blood, but they that
remain filthy and unclean still, will not suffer themselves to be washed, or
made free from sin by the Son of Man through the truth now in this day of his
Grace, shall after be shut out for ever, and not enter by him through the gates
into the City in his second appearing, which shall be only to the Salvation of
those that through the grace by his first appearing are of the number of
lookers for him, were here as Travellours, Strangers, and Pilgrims, etc. they
all, (and not the unclean) shall then together enter with him into the joy of
their Lord, where they shall dwell and walk for ever with the Lord in a high
broad way, where shall be no straitness, nor occasion of stumbling, yea the
Lord himself shall be to them a place of broad Rivers, and streams, where shall
go no Gally with Oars, Isa. 33. 20, 21. Revel. 21. 1 - 8. 25 - 27. and 22. 1 -
14, 15. Heb. 9. 28.

12 Qu. What that manifestation of the Spirit is, which is given to every man
to profit withal -- And whether there be any profit but by it -- And whether
it be not of it self an infallible guide? etc.

Ans. To the First Part of this Query, That manifestation of the Spirit (spoken
of, 1 Cor. 12. 7.) is of that one Spirit, that being immeasurably received in
the Nature of man, in and by that one Person of the Son of God, is sent forth
in his influences of light, and power unto men, according to the measure of the
gift of Christ; and his manifestation is concerning Christ, as the works are
now finished in him, and the Declaration of him come forth in the Gospel, and
so of the things of him, and the Fathers glory in him, by which he teaches all
things, and leads into all truth, (as before is showed) Compare this, 1 Cor.
12. 7. 11. with Ephesians. 4. 7 - 11. and Joh. 16. 13, 14. some distinct
understanding of which testimony of the Spirit concerning Christ, for some
profitable opening, or usefulness of it to others, is given to every hearty
believing receiver of it. The other parts of this Query are in his former
Queries, and sufficiently answered before.

13 Qu. What, and where that Worship of God in the Spirit is truly, etc. -- And
whether any can worship in Spirit, and in Truth, but those that are born of the
Spirit - And whether he that is born of the Spirit needs any other guide?
etc. And whether such Worships has not been, and are now differing from all
other - And therefore hated.

Ans. Here are five Queries in one; To the first we answer, That Worship of
God in Spirit and Truth mentioned, Joh. 4. 23, 24. is, that worship of him,
that is, in the light and power of, and according to the Spirits testimony
concerning Jesus, as now come forth in the Gospel, and so in Christ Jesus who
is the Truth. And this called worshipping in spirit, and in truth, as opposed
both to the Samaritans worship, which was never right, but in, and according to
the wisdom of the flesh, and so in a false way; and also as opposed to the
Jewish worship, which sometimes was right, while yet it was in and through
(that killing letter of the Law to which the Ministration of the Spirit, the
Gospel as now come forth is opposed, 2 Cor. 3.) and also in and through the
Types and Shadows of the Law (to which Jesus Christ, the Body, and truth of
them is opposed, Col. 2. 17. Joh. 1. 17.) This sense of the Spirit, and Truth,
in which God is to be worshipped, is confirmed in other Scriptures, for the
Spirit. See Rev. 19. 10. The Angel admonishing John, not to worship him, but
God, instructs him thus; The testimony of Jesus (and not any Messenger that
brings it) is the spirit of Prophecy (in which God is now to be worshipped) for
the truth. See Phil. 3. 3. we are the Circumcision, which worship God in the
Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus the Truth, and have no confidence in the
flesh, etc. And so our Savior interprets the true Worship, Joh. 5. 22, 23, 24.
The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, that
all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father, he that honors
not the Son, honors not the Father that sent him. And to let us know who it
is that indeed honors the Son, and so the Father that sent him; it follows,
he that hears my Word (which also is the word or testimony of him that sent
him concerning him, Joh. 7. 16. and 14. 23, 24. 1 John 5. 9-12, 13.) And so
believes on him that sent me, etc. like to this is that, Joh. 12. 44. 49. and
that twofold Rule for the trial of Spirits before spoken to, 1 John 4. 1-6.
They then that magnify, or glorify the Word of the Lord, as declared in the
Apostles Doctrine (as Act. 13. 48.) and according to it believe, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and so in the Father are the true worshippers.

To the Second part of the Query we answer, That as it is true, that no man
speaking by the Spirit of God, renders Jesus (in his Person, or works done in
his own Body for sinners) execrable, or undesirable; so likewise is it true,
that no man can truly say, confess, or acknowledge Jesus as the Christ, in his
Doctrine, or Worship, but by the Spirit of the Lord, 1 Cor. 12. 3. and whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ, he is therein, and thereto bornof God, 1 John 5. 1. Joh. 1. 12. 13. the other parts of the Query, as much as is needful,
are answered before.

14 Qu. What, and where that light is, Joh. 1. 9. that being come into the
World is the condemnation of all that are in darkness? etc. -- And whether it
be not the condemnation of all the World that believe not in it -- And whether
there be any other condemnation? etc.

Ans. In this Query is also a confusion of many Queries, and after the first
part of it, something first taken for granted, and then propounded as a Query,
we shall briefly answer it thus.

1 Not John the Baptist, but Jesus that was of Nazareth (the supposed Son of
Joseph) that was conceived of the Holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin Mary,
born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Augustus Caesar, etc. even that word
that was then, and so made Flesh, and came and dwelt amongst men (and not any
other thing, or person) who through sufferings is now entered into glory; That I
say, and no other Person, or thing, is The true light that lightneth every man
that comes into the world, Joh. 1. 8, 9. 14. 15-18. 41. 45. and 8. 12. and 12.
44, 45, 46. Acts 4. 10, 11, 12.

2 The Text says not This light is the condemnation of all (or any) that are
in darkness, but this is the condemnation, That light is come into the World,
and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil; Their
loving darkness rather than light, when the light comes unto them (and not the
coming of the light to them) is the condemning sin, and that which makes other
sins condemnable, as also, Ioh. 15. 22. 24. Zach. 5. 1-4.

3 This light personally is received by the Father in the Heavens, Act, 3. 20.
but in his influences virtually, and Spiritually among men, and dwelling in
them, in whom he dwells by faith, Ephesians. 1. 17. 2 Cor. 4. 6. Ephesians. 3. 17-19.

15 Qu. What the Law of the Spirit of life is, which made Paul free from the
Law of Sin, and Death, which had warred against the law of his mind, and had
formerly held him in captivity to the Law of Sin that was in his members -- And
whether any in these days that are come to that warfare, may took for that
freedom by the law of the Spirit of life^

Ans. Besides the confusion of two or three Queries in one, here are some
things taken for granted, which we can by no means allow, because the Text it
self demes them ( viz.) That by the Law of Sin, and Death, spoken of Romans 8. 2.
is meant the same with the law of sin in his members, (mentioned Chap. 7. 21,
23.) which did war against the law of his mind, and led him captive in some
sense to it self; and

2 That he was made free from that Law of Sin in his Members, that it was not
so much as warring against the law of his mind now; both these I shall wholly
deny; and as they hang together, so they will fall together in answer to one;
That by the Law of Sin, and Death, Chap. 8. 2. is not meant the same with the
law of sin in his members, Chap. 7. 21, 23. appears in this, That from the Law
of Sin, and Death, mentioned Cha. 8. 2. he says, he was made free; but of the
other, Chap. 7. 21, 23, etc. he affirms not that he had before, but that he did
now find a law in his members, warring against the law of his mind; indeed,
before the Gospel of the Grace of God came, or was received, there was no
discovery, or disturbance of that-Law in his members, and therefore no occasion
for such a war; but since was the Combat, and though it had been unthroned
in his mind, yet it was still warring in his members, and he was not yet
delivered from it, though he could rejoice in God, in whom he had perfect
deliverance, and enjoyed it by faith and hope of perfect deliverance in himself
by Christ, when he should be delivered from the whole body of this Death; yea
by that Law of Sin and Death mentioned Romans 8. 2. (as appears by the next
verses) is meant, that holy and righteous Law of God, mentioned Romans 7. 12-16.
for so in the next verses of that Romans 8. with reference to the same Law,
mentioned verse. 2. he signifies, the reason of its inability to give us life
and peace, was not any weakness, or imperfection in itself, but the weakness of
our flesh, and also propounds that as one great end of what Christ has done,
that the righteousness of that Law might be fulfilled in them that believe,
etc. And that Law is therefore called a Law of Sin, and Death, because it
discovers Sin, and sentences and concludes the Sinner under death, yet itself
is holy, just, and good, Chap. 7. 10. whereas the other Law, Chap. 7. 20, 23.
is sinful, sin it self, a body of sin; this being understood, the foundation of
the Query falls; yet this further Answer we shall give. By that Law of the
Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, by which he was made free from the
condemnation, and charges of this law of Sin, and Death, is meant nothing else
but the Gospel of Christ (which is that Old and New Commandment of the
everlasting God, the Law of Liberty, Joh. 12. 47-50. 1 Ioh. 2. 7, 8. Iam. 1.
25.) the Doctrine of the Spirit of Life that is in Christ Jesus, or (of that
Spirit) concerning the life, Justification, Peace, and Redemption in Christ
Jesus. This appears plainly,

1 By considering the next Verse, in which he demonstrates how, and with what
Argument the law of the Spirit of Life in Christ freed him, in which he
propounds the main and fundamental Proposition, and Argument of the Gospel in
such cases, and in all other; for what the Law could not do (in that it was
weak through the flesh) God sending forth his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, etc. as 2 Cor. 5. 21.

2 It appears by comparing this with Romans 1. 16, 17. and 1 Cor. 1. 18. etc.
where the Gospel of Christ, even that preaching of the Cross, as by them
delivered, is said to be the power of God to Salvation to the Believer, etc.

3 It further appears, by comparing this with 2 Cor. 3. where that Dispensation
of the Gospel, or Ministration given to the Apostles, and by them to us, is
called the Ministration of Spirit, of Life, of Glory, etc. as opposed to the
Ministration of the Law as given by Moses, which (as so opposed) is called a
killing Letter, a Ministration of Death, of Condemnation, etc.

And this Gospel is still of the same quality, it effectually works in them
that believe, in discovering and opening what Christ has done for them; in
delivering them from the Curse of the Law in himself, as in the public person;
that in coming in to him, by faith in him, they might enjoy the benefit,
pacifying their Conscience, and healing their Nature; and so in the discovery
of the Virtues, and acceptance of what Christ has done with the Father, and is
become according to the ends of his Cross. This having the Arm of God in it, as
well as solid Arguments to that purpose, it purges the Conscience from guilt
of sin by the Law, and from dead works, to serve the living God, and so
quickens to new and livening hope, and affections, through the Resurrection of
Jesus, so as they have their Remission, Peace (as also Sanctification,
Preservation, etc.) through his Name, Acts 10, 43. and 13. 39. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
Romans 6. 17, 18. Joh. 8. 31, 32, 36. 1 Cor. 6. 11. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Joh. 17. 11.

To his Conclusion at the close of the Queries, in which he boasts of Gods
revealing by his Spirit in him, the great delusion others are in, in being
instructed to look to a Christ Crucified without them, while they are in their
filthiness, and first nature, etc. as more at large may be seen in the Copy of
his writing fore inserted; To this I say we answer.

Surely the Lord does not reveal any thing by his Spirit in, or to any, but so
as therein he enableth them that receive his Revelation, in some measure to
make it known; he to this purpose appears, that he may make them witnesses of
those things in which he appears. How then shall we believe that God has
revealed to him the delusion others are in, when he is not able in the least
measure to make it out, at least he has not done it in these lines? only
endeavored by a multitude of confused questions to find it out, as one not
knowing, and himself in all fore-written, not laying down at all what in his
apprehension is truth, or what is error posi^ively; but left that to be
gathered in the manner of his Queries; unless we may find some discovery of
his Revelation in this conclusion, surely here is something more plain than in
all before, ( viz.) That they are bewitching Simon Maguses Sorcerers, and
preach another Gospel contrary to what Christ has preached, that pu^ people
upon a Christ Crucified without them, notwithstanding they are in their
filthiness, and first nature, etc. See more at large in the conclusion of his
Queries.

For answer to it, let us see what Jesus Christ and his Apostles have preached
(as to this) The Son of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost, for
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son (the Savior of the
World, and) to be so lifted up, as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, as an Object prepared for the healing of all that have sinned, and
must dye, that whosoever believes in him, as so lifted up before them, should
not perish, but have everlasting life; For God sent not his Son into the world
to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved; and Jesus
Christ by the Grace of God tasted Death (not in, but) for every man, and gave
himself a Ransom to God for all men, he gave his Flesh for the life of the
World, and is the Mediator between God and Man, the standing Propitiation, not
for our sins only, but also for the sins of the whole World, and a testimony
unto men in due time, having himself in his own Body (not in our Bodies) born
our sins to the Tree; he dyed, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us
to God, being put to death in the Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, etc. When
we were Sinners, and without strength, in due time Christ dyed for the ungodly.
Surely, if men had been pure, or might by any other means have seen God. Christ
should not have dyed for them; This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save sinners, etc. Search
the Scriptures. Neither does this Doctrine lead men to neglect, or slight the
washing of Regeneration, or the forming of Christ in the knowledge and faith of
him, in what he has done, is become, and will do; and so in the virtues, and
saving operations of him in the heart. But on the other hand, both urges the
absolute necessity of it, according to the means and capacities thereto
vouchsafed; for if men could have entered the Kingdom without another Birth, he
would never have been at such cost for the opening a Fountain of Pardon, and
purging, to wash us in; and also shows the only open door, way, and means to
it; and by which it may be effected ( viz.) His Name, through faith in it,
which things considered, it will appear, They are but the reproaches of them
that reproach him, that herein fall on us, which we desire patiently and
joyfully to bear.

The. Moore junior.
POSTSCRIPT.
SInce my writing the Premises, I have met with the Queries (foreinserted) in
Print, published among other such stuff, by some that are ashamed of their
Name, or know not what to call themselves, or else (as is likely) refused to
subscribe those Queries, because they had delivered them into the hands of many
others of their young Disciples in several places, as well as to Tho.*
Biddall, to be given* forth as their own immediate revelations (the property of
their spirit being to reveal* Questions, without any substantial or certain
Answers) and having done so, now to have subscribed to them James Parnell, or
any other particular name, would have rendered T. B. in one place, and some
others in other places Liars, in pretending them theirs.

In that in Print by them the superscription is much altered, and many of the
Terms in the Queries; their spirit it seems on better advisement, sometimes
finds cause to alter his expressions and terms; I mention it, to show that
wherein they glory, they are found as others. They have also waved their
Railing conclusion, and in its room added a sixteenth* Query to those I had
(viz.) What that Grace of God is that brings Salvation, and has appeared to
all men? etc.

For Answer to that, I refer the Reader to the Preface, where I have showed,
How that Doctrine of the Grace of God brings Salvation to all men, and so
appearing unto them, directly strikes against, and overthrows the foundation of
all their imaginations. And that indeed, they believe no such thing as the
Grace of God appearing to men, and bringing Salvation to them, as a thing
wrought in another for them, and thence, and therewith moving in saving
operations, but do put in the room of it the fancy of some Grace, Light,
Disposition, or Quality discovered, revived, or stirred up in a man, to be the
Author and Finisher of their imaginary Salvation, and so at the best seek to
establish a righteousness of their own; mean while not submitting to, but
stumbling at the righteousness of Christ's Which also further appears, in their
Railing on the directing men to a Christ Crucified for them, without them,
while they were yet sinners (see the conclusion of their Queries as
fore-inserted) compare with this, that which immediately follows that sixteenth
Query forementioned, as now published by them, ( viz.) The light in your
Conscience, the tru^ Teacher, and that as opposed to Teachers from without. So
in the Title Page of that Book, it is called, A direction to all, to turn their
minds within, etc. Now that which is always, and at all times within, cannot
properly be said to be brought to a man. And here also the considerate Reader
may see, how falsely the Querist in some Queries set before these in the Book
forementioned, pretends to disown, That the light he boasts of is Natural, or
naturally in a man; doubtless their imaginations of its being always in men as
a Habit, or in-dwelling Principle (while yet they have received nothing of that
given from above) how much soever disappearing, and whether they call it first,
or second nature, do render it such; as likewise is showed in the Preface,
where the vanity and filthiness of these Dreamers (that commend to every one
the Visions of their own heart, and teach them to follow their own spirit, that
yet have seen nothing, as Ezekiel. 13. 3. and yet call that Spirit, and the Word
of the Lord, as those, Isa. 4. that would eat their own Bread, and wear their
own Apparel, only be called by his Name, to take away their reproach) is
discovered. Nor is it unusual for these spirits to pretend highly against a
thing for advantage to their design* when yet in their hearts, or bottom
Principles, they justify, or allow it; or on the other hand, to pretend as
much for a thing, that in heart they are enemies to, and their Principles
strike against, as I could clearly evince, were it not for brevity sake.

The Reader may see a little in J. N's Letter to me, where he admonishes those
he calls blind Guides, to search the Scriptures, and in another place
intimates his reverence of the Scripture, such, that he will not believe any
thing that cannot be proved by plain Scripture, and yet other where in the same
Letter (though in subtle terms) reproacheth us, as blind, carnal, and a
generation of Persecutors, because we would not believe further, or otherwise,
concerning his confession of the Flesh of Christ in him, than we could read in
the said Scriptures, which there he calls letter; yea Farnsworth in his
Challenge expressly commands us to throw by the Records left, and preserved to
us in Books, and not to read, or look on them night or day.

Further also this appears in the said Farnsworth, in a Book I have lately seen
of his, where he subscribes Forneworth (I know not which is his ^^ght name) in
which Book he pretends highly against the Ranters, of purpose to make simple
people believe, that his Principles tend more to godliness, and honesty, and
^re not such as they began to dis^em by the fruits, the Ranters were, when as
in truth, as in the foresaid Preface we have hinted, their bottom principles
are one. Yea, it appears in that Book, where in pretended opposition to the
Ranters, he tells them, the Cross i^ inward* etc. he knows they fancy that as
much as he, and in his way, and have lifted up their imagination of the Cross
of Christ, as some internal operation, to render as foolish the Personal
Sufferings of Christ, and the virtues of them, for taking away sin, and also to
excuse their avoiding the Cross in outward sufferings to themselves, that would
have attended them for his Names sake, had they lived godly in Christ Jesus*
yea himself acknowledges of them, as Ranters so called, That once the pure Law
was set up, and the Judgment within them to have freed them from sin, only
blames them for turning to a loose, and profane life, whereas he knows, if he
know any thing, that their Principles lead naturally to it, but those
Principles he owns, and yet cries out against their gross Profaneness, and
Atheism, because that is grossly scandalous, and hinders others from listening
to their imaginations; whereas it is their imaginations of the light in them,
which all that know God in Christ have primely detected, and showed the light
in them to be darkness it self, and the root of all Atheism and Profaneness,
which yet were no other than are now promoted by these people, under another
vizor. And that it has the same fruit in them also, (though they ende^vour to
hide it) appears,

1 In one owned by themselves as the chief of them about Norwitch, that while
he pretended perfection, and others applauded him as a perfect man, yet lived
secretly in uncleanness (and if credible reports may be believed, a long time,
if not in Murder too for the hiding of it, though but) lately manifested.

2 It did appear in our Antagonists inhuman language and carriage, the chief of
them, and many of them together, and with great indignation, as being full of
the gall of bitterness, frequently terming us, Liars, Serpents, Beasts, Sots,
Dogs, reproaching some by their Age, as old Sot, Beast, etc. which I am sure
is fatre enough from Scripture president, though some of them pretend that; yea
some of their revilings were such as I cannot in civility mention (as many can
witness) besides their many very gross, yet peremptory slanders* some of which
we have discovered.

3 That their Principles have the same fruit in them, as to gross Atheism, or
Blasphemy of a high nature, as in the Ranters may appear, by comparing those
Blasphemies of Wilkinson, which Forneworth mentions in the foresaid Book, with
what I also lately saw in a Book of J^. Parn^^s, which Book he calls the
Watcher, The Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands. In that Book speaking
of that he calls corrupt reasoning, or arguing, he says, Before that was, I
am; with seeing allusion to that of our Savior, Before Abraham was, I am; What
does he less in this than equalize himself with God? which to that person only
is no Robbery, who is the Eternal, and only begotten Son of God, it being the
peculiar Name, and Attribute of God, I am; he is that which he is from
everlasting to everlasting, and of himself, and he only is so, that is the
former of, and gives being to all things, and so the only begotten Son, by
whom, and for whom he made all things, is honored with the same honor with
the Father, the Father having given to him to have life in himself, as the
Father has life in himself, yea he and the Father are one in Nature, and being
(though evidently distinct in manner of being) from everlasting to everlasting
thou art God; not so James Parnel, he is not before all things, for by him they
do not consist; but by him, in whom it has pleased the Father that all fullness
should dwell, even the fullness of the God. head bodily, that in all things he
should have the pre-eminence, Col. 1. 15 - 19. and 2. 2. 9. Heb. 1. total Joh.
5. 20, 21 - 23. and 1. 1 - 14. in these things I say it appears, That their
bottom Principles are one, and also have secretly the same fruit, though gilded
over with pretense of Zeal, Holiness, Mortification, etc. in these, and I pray
what stands that in, but in pretending themselves, and commanding others to
abstain from meats created to be received, etc. in despising Dominion, speaking
evil of Dignities, casting off all Civil and Natural respects where due, and
like things?

I am sorry any Christians should be so weak to be beguiled with such things,
as have only a show of Humility, Mortification, etc. but in truth are the
issues of greatest Pride, and contempt of the Wisdom and Grace of God in
Christ; and most unsuitable to the Apostles Doctrine, and practice, who instruct
us to honor Fathers, Masters, etc. in their place, yea to count them worthy
all honor, etc. yea themselves entitle one, The elect Lady, another not then
elect, Most noble Festus, another King Agrippa, etc. and have noted them as
Doctrins of Devils, that command to abstain from meats which God has created
to be received, etc. as before we have showed.

Doubtless it is another true Character of these Spirits, which we may here
add to what we have given before. They speak Lies in Hypocrisy, having their
Conscience seared with a hot Iron. See further for this, Page 88 89.

Since the finishing of the Premises when they were almost out of the Press, I
met with a Reply from R. F. (to my Answer to his Challenge) dated above a Month
before I had it, in which he says there was no name to that Answer sent him;
sure I am, my name was subscribed to that I sent, and if any after did take a
Copy of it, and forget the subscription, and sent that, it is more than I know;
besides, he makes much ado about my saying, I know not any called
Manifestarians, or who he applies that name to; he says, Master Wray called us
so in some Letters, which whether so or no I know not; I never heard of any
such thing, nor had I ever seen Mr. Wray, or he me, to our knowledge, before
that meeting, and if he did give any such Character (according to his
apprehensions) of us, yet the thing I said is true; nor was it propounded to
shuffle off, or evade the business, as he says, for notwithstanding that, I
took the Challenge as directed to my self in their intentions, and so answered
it fully, I may truly say, he is glad to make a bluster about Circumstances,
that without giving any fair answer, he might yet make their ignorant Disciples
believe he has notably replied; the sum of his pretended reply further, is
chiefly a renewing of their old Charge, so often already answered, and showed a
false accusation, That I deny Gods in-dwelling in his people; yea here he adds
something that it seems they thought not of before, viz. That I said, God would
not be manifest in his people; the falseness of that, with the rest, the Reader
may see in my Answer to I. N's Letter, as also of his Charging Mr. Wray again
in this, with turning them out of his house, with many other things; yea all is
so fully answered before, I shall here add no more to it.




FINIS.
The faults, if any have escaped in Printing, the courteous Reader in desired
to impute to the Authors absence from the Press, and, kindly, as he goes along,
to mend them with his Pen.

The Contents of some of the things principally treated of, with notice of the
Scriptures chiefly opened in the following Tract, especially in the Answers to
James Naylors Letter, and to the following Queries.
I Concerning Gods being manifested in the flesh, in the person of his only
begotten Son, eminently and peculiarly. This briefly assorted, p. 2 Enlarged
and opened, and thereto these Scriptures opened, and compared, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
with Joh. 13. 31, 32. and Heb 9. 24, 25, 26, with other Scriptures, p. 21, 22,
23, 24 Further cleared, in showing the difference between Gods being manifested
in the Flesh in that one Person. and his dwelling, and walking in his people;
and how the body of the Believer is the Temple of the Lord, with some
distinction observed between its being so, and his being gloriously manifested
in that his Temple, and so the manifestation of the Sons of God, which is yet
to come, with some hints of explication of these Scriptures hereto, Romans 8. 19
- 25. with 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6 - 10, 11. and 2. 1, 2. with 2 Cor. 5. 1 - 6. 1 Cor. 6.
14, 15. and diverse others, p. 24, 25, 26 When and how the life of Jesus shall
be manifested fully in the mortal flesh, or body of the believer that is now
mortal, according to that, 2 Cor. 4. 10, 11. Romans 8. 11. with 1 Cor. 15. 53.
Phil. 3. 21. and other Scriptures, p. 27, 28, 29 Some clearing of those
Scriptures ( Romans 7. 23. and 8. 10.) from Farnsworths abuse, p. 30, 31 Christ
being in the Believer the hope of glory, and how; likewise how his being in
them to be enquired, as a Rule-for trial whether they be in the faith, p. 31,
32, 33
2 Concerning Paul's enjoyment of a visible demonstration of the Person of
Christ in the Heavens, briefly spoken to, p. 2. and 3, more fully, p. 34, 35
Then occasionally is proved and opened, That Jesus Christ in that one personal
Body prepared for him, is ascended, and received by the Father in the Heavens,
until the restitution of all things, p. 36, 37, 38, 39 The necessity and
usefulness of it, p. 40, 41, 42 The dangerous issue of casting off, or
slighting that true acknowledgement of the Head, p. 43 The distinction between
our entering, and his being already for us entered, p. 44.
3 Concerning the one Offering of Christ to bear, and put away sin by the
Sacrifice of himself made and accomplished in that person only, p. 49 This made
good against some batterles made against it, and therein these Scriptures, Isa.
43. 24. Amos 2. 13. Heb. 6. 6. 1 John 5. 10. and 28. as much as pertains to
that business opened, p. 50, 51
4 Concerning the Second appearing of Christ, which shall be without sin, and
to the utmost Salvation of them that look for him, and how it is to be waited
or tarried for by all Believers, all the time of this present world, p. 52, 53
In making it good against their batterles these Scriptures opened, Luke 17. 20,
22. to the end, with chap. 18. 1 - 8. p. 54 Some hints to such explication, p.
11 Likewise Joh. 14. 3. with other Scriptures, p. 55, 56, 57, 58 The glory then
to be revealed on them that wait for him with distinction between that and the
promise of this life, occasionally spoken to, p. 24, 25, 26 More directly in
answer to th: 1, 2 and 3. Queries, p. 83, 84, 85
5 Concerning the matter and manner of Gods teaching, and the alone sufficiency
of it, p. 71, 72, 73. And so, what the voice of Christ is, and how known and
distinguished in answer to the tenth Query, p. 94 6 Concerning the holy
Scriptures, what they are, and how the righteousness of God engaged for
preserving the Records of them, p. 74, 75, 76, 77. Gods primary way for
demonstrating the Truth, Goodness, and Authority of them, p. 78. Secondary
Arguments demonstrating the same, p. 79 7 The excellency, spirituality,
plainness, and glory of the Ministry, or dispensation of the Gospel, as
committed to the Apostles, and by them given to all Nations for the obedience
of faith, p. 59 60, 61, 62 63, 64, 65. 8 What other means God uses for
bringing his teaching nigh to us, p. 80 9 Who they are that deny the alone
sufficiency of Gods teaching, p. 81, 82 10 The distinction between the manner
of Paul, and the rest of the Apostles receiving their testimony, and furniture
to their Ministry, and Timothy, and all other secondary Ministers then, and
since receiving theirs, p, 2. and the same spoken to again, p. 14. and 15.
likewise in answer to the Sixth Query, p. 88, 89. In the answers to other
Queries, besides those already hinted to, are diverse Scriptures opened, and
compared with others; chiefly these.

1 John 2. 20 - 27, Joh. 16. 8 - 14 p. 86, 87, 88. with p. 71, 72, 73. Isa. 30.
18 - 21. p. 91. Romans 10. 6 - 8. with Joh. 1. 5. p. 93. 94, I^a. 35. 8. p. 95.
Joh. 4. 23, 24. p. 96. Joh. 1. 9. p. 97. Romans 8. 2, 3. p. 97. 98, 99.

The people called Quakers are discovered in this Discourse. 1 To be lovers and
makers of Lies; compare their Charges in their first Paper, and in James's
Letter with my Answers, p. 2, 3. and 21. 24. 26, 27, 28, 29. and 46, 47, 48. 2
To be movers of us to enquire after another God, than the only true God in
Christ. See the Answer to their insolent Challenge, p. 11, 12 3 To be of those
spirits that endeavor to introduce the imagination of another Jesus, another
Spirit, another Gospel then what the Apostles have preached, p. 59, 60, 61, 62,
63, 64, 65 And boast of confirming that imagination with signs and lying
Wonders, and with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them that perish.
See their Challenge, with the Answer to it, p. 9, 10, etc. to the 15 4 To be of
those seducing Spirits, having their Consciences seared as with a hot Iron,
that command to abstain from meats that God has created to be received with
thanksgiving, etc. That do reject, and would take from us the Word of the Lord,
and not suffer us to look on it in the Records left us, neither night, nor day;
That do forbid the exercise of those gifts mediately given through Prophecy,
etc. See all this in the Challenge, with the Answer forementioned. 5 That
appear in all to be proud, knowing nothing, doting about questions, etc. and
there in unreasonable and absurd men, that have no faith.
See further the Postscript.
FINIS.

