THE BANNER OF Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, DISPLAYED; And Their SIN DISCOVERED:
In Several SERMONS, Preached at Bristol.

By JOHN MOORE, Curate of Brislington; and Queen-Charlton, in the Diocese of
Bath and Wells.

Concordia, parvae crescunt
Discordia, Magnae dilabuntur.
BRISTOLL: Printed by W. Bonny, for the Author, and are to be Sold by most
Booksellers in London and Bristoll. 1696.

JOSEPHUS TO THE READER.
CHore, (a Man Noble in Birth, and famous for his Wealth amongst the Hebrews;
endued with a certain kind of Popular Eloquence) seeing Moses placed in the
highest Estate of Dignity, was sore troubled and opressed with Envy: For although
he was of the same Tribe, and Kindred, yet thought he it a great Indignity in
himself, to be held his Inferior; being both more enabled in Riches, and
nothing Inferior in Parentage; for which Cause he began to Mutiny and Murmur
amongst the Levites, (which were of the same Tribe with him, and his Kindsmen)
telling them (in Vehement Discourse (That it was not to be suffered, nor
permitted, that Moses, under a pretense of certain Divinity, should by
Ambitious Policy, (to other Men's Prejudice) only Study his own Glory: showing
them how of late, without all Law and Right, he had given the Priesthood, to
his Brother Aaron, and Distributed other Dignities at his own Pleasure, like a
King, without Allowance and Approbation of the People.

That this Injury done by him, was not to be endured, by Reason, that he so
covertly had insinuated himself into the Government, that before he might be
espied, the People should be brought under Servitude. For he that knows
himself to be worthy of a Government, s^riveth to obtain the same but by kind
Persu^sions, and Consent of the People; and not by Force, and Violence: But
they that despair by good means to at^ain thereunto, unto, do notwithstanding
abstain from force, least they should loose the Opinion of their Goodness and
Honesty, yet endeavor they, by Malicious Subtilities to attain thereunto.

That it concerned the Commonwealth, to Extinguish, and Root out the subtle
Insinuations of such Men, least of private, they should at last grow public
Enemies. For what Reason, said he, can Moses yield, why he has bestowed the
Priesthood on Aaron, and his Sons? For if that God had Decreed, that this
Honor should have been bestowed on one of the Tribe of Levi, there were more
Reason that I should have it; who am of the same Kindred with Moses, and who
surpass him, both in Riches, and Age.

And if this Honor appertained to the most Ancient of the Tribes, that those of
Reubens Loins, ought by right to enjoy it, namely Dathan and Abiram, and
Phalal, who are the most Ancient of that Tribe, and the most powerful in Riches.

These things spoke Chore, under pretense, and color of the Weal of the
Commonwealth, (that is, for the good of the People) but in effect only to
raise a Tumult amonst the Multitude, and Intrude into the Office of the
High Priest.

This Discourse of his, passing by little and little, from Ear to Ear, amongst
the Multitude, and Multiplied by the Envious, and such as Maligned. Aaron, at
last brought the whole Tribes into a Mutiny; so that Two Hundred and Fifty of
the chiefest Nobles, grew at length to be Partakers of Chores Conspiracy; and
all of these enforce themselves to take away the Priesthood from Moses's
Brother, and to Transfer it to him.

The People likewise were in such sort Incensed, as that they sought to stone
Moses, and ran all of them by confused heaps, with noise and uprore, crying out
before the Tabernacle of God, That the Tyrant was to be cut off, and the People
delivered from Thraldom. Who under pretense of Religion, had insupportable
Thraldom imposed upon them, for if it had been God, that had chosen him, (i. e.
Aaron) to be High Priest; he would have preferred such a one to the Dignity who
had been worthy, and would not have departed to those who were far inferior to
others, that if he had Decreed to Confer it on Aaron, he had remitted the
Commission of his Election to the People? and not left the disposing of it to
his Brother.

Moses, who long before that time, had perceived Chores Treacherous Slander,
and saw the People very sore Incensed, was notwithstanding, nothing at all
abashed thereat; but being resolved in his Conscience, that he had Governed the
State uprightly; and well assured that his Brother obtained the Priesthood not
by his favor, but by God's Election; he came into the Congregation, where he
uttered not one word against the People; but addressing himself unto Chore, he
Expostulated with him, and Accused him, in as much as was for him possible,
being (besides his other Qualities) Fashioned, and Composed by Nature,
Eloquently, to speak in public Assemblies.

I think, ( says he) Chore, that both thou, and every one of those, ( pointing
with his Finger at the Two Hundred and Fifty Men of his Faction) are worthy of
Honor: Yea, I Contemn not the rest of this Assembly, although they are not to be
compared with you in Riches, and other Endowments. For neither does Aaron
therefore possess the Priesthood, because he is Richer, for thou have more
ample Possessions than either of us, neither because he is more Noble, for God
has equally Imparted the same unto us all, having given us one and the same
Grandfather: Neither have I been moved thereunto by Brotherly Affection, to
bestow it on him, which was due to others: For had I not Respected Gods Right,
in Disposing of this; I had not forgotten my self, to further and prefer
another, since there is no Man more near my self, than my self, or whom I had
rather wish well to, then my self: For what Wisdom had it been in me, to expose
my self to those Dangers, which they incurr, who make breach of Laws, to suffer
another Man to Reap Fruit of my Impiety.

But God forbid, that my Conscience should be stained with any such Sin;
neither were the Fruit mine also, would God leave it unpunished, neither in me
who should Contemn him, neither in you, for that ye were not Ignorant of that
ye ought to do, and of that which was Graceful in his Sight.

He himself it is, that has chosen the High Priest, and by this means has
acquitted me of that ^ccusation, that in this Respect, might be Objected
against me; for although Aaron has obtained this Degree, (not by my Favor, but
by Gods^ own Appointment) yet notwithstanding, he Refers and Remitteth the
Matter to the public Disposition, and Order of you all; neither requires he
any Prerogative, for that ^he has Exercised the Charge already; or for that at
this present it is Granted him to intermeddle with the same; but esteems it
to be the greatest Happiness that may befall him, to see your Mutinies, and
Seditions cease. For neither have we injured Gods Will, in that, we also wish
your Assent, and Allowance; but that, which of his own Accord he has given, it
was not Lawful to refuse, with a safe Conscience. As reciprocally it is a thing
most reasonable, that they which receive it, should always enjoy it, since God
himself had given them both the Assurance and Confirmation.

God therefore, will once more Determine, who amongst you shall be chosen to
Offer Sacrifice unto him, and to take charge of those things which appertain to
Piety; for it is a most Absurd Matter, that Chore, should have Power to desire
a Dignity, and that God should be deprived of that Authority, to dispose the
same, as best liked him.

Cease therefore, to Mutiny amongst your selves, and to be troubled, upon these
Occasions, and let every one of you that desire the Priesthood, to Morrow
bring each of you his Censer, with Perfume and Fire from his House. But thou, O
Chore, give place unto God, and expect his Election, neither Arrogate to thy
Self, a greater Authority than God has, but come thou also amongst the rest of
thy Competitors in this Honor, to hear his Judgment, neither see I cause, why,
Aaron, should not be there also present, to be Judged with thee, in that
hitherto, he has Virtuously, and Uprightly behaved himself in that Office,,
and is likewise of the same Tribe, and Race, that thou art off.

Ye shall likewise offer Incense in the Presence of all the People, and when
the Perfume, shall be past, let him, whose Sacrifice shall be most Acceptable
in Gods sight, be declared, and published for the High Priest, so shall I be
acquit of that Slander, which is so wrongfully urged against me; whereby, I am
charged upon my own particular Grace and Favor, to have bestowed the Office of
the Priesthood on my Brother.

After that Moses had spoken in this manner, the People gave over Murmuring,
and forbear suspecting Moses, allowing in themselves, all that which had been
spoken, as being profitable for the Commonwealth, so that hereupon, they
dismissed the Assembly.

The next Day, the People reassembled themselves together, to assist the
Sacrifice, and to hear the Strife decided amongst the Competitors; neither was
this Assembly without Tumult; for the whole Multitude were in suspense, in
expectation of the Event, and some of them were desirous that Moses might be
Convicted of Deceit: But such as were of the wiser sort amongst them, desired
an end of the Sedition; for they feared least the Commonwealth should be
utterly ruinated, if the Tumult should proceed any further; the Multitude,
likewise being desirous of Novelties, and prone to speak evil of their
Magistrates, were divers^y disposed upon every Occurrent. Moses, also sent his
Servants, to Dathan and Abiram, to Summonsthem to Appear (according to the
Covenant and Accord) to attend the Issue of the Sacrifice; but their Answer
was, that they would not Obey him, nor that they would any longer permit that
Moses by his subtle and sinister Devices, should signorize over the People.

Which, when Moses understood, he took diverse of the Elders amongst the People
with him; and being no ways moved with the Contumacy of Dathan, be came unto
him (being willingly Attended by those who were drawn to Accompany him.)

Now when Dathan and his Friends, understood that Moses, with the Nobles came
unto them, both they, their Wives and Children Assembled themselves before the
Tabernacle, expecting that which might ensue.

They likewise came Guarded with their Servants, who were Armed to Oppose
themselves against Moses, if so be he should offer them any Violence. But no
sooner drew he near unto them, but that lifting up his Hands toward Heaven, he
Cried out with a loud Voice, in the hearing of the whole Multitude; and Prayed
after this manner.

O God! ( said he) thou Lord over all that which either Heaven, Earth, or Sea
contains; thou art a sufficient Witness with me of all my Actions, for that I
have managed all things by thy Will: And thou art he, who have given me Power
to Execute my purposes: Thou that always in Commiseration of the Hebrews, have
been my perpetual Help and Assistance. Hear this my Prayer, for nothing that is
either done or thought can be hidden from thee; for which Cause, I hope, thou will not Disdain to Testify and Justify the Truth; and manifest the
Ingratitude of these Men.

Thou do exactly know the Antiquity of my Race; now also Testify the Truth
for me, in those things which these Men (although they know the contrary) are not
ashamed to impute unto me, at such time as I led a Peaceable Life. And that by
thy Council, I forsook the Possession of my Goods, and the Fruition of my
Peace, to Engage my self in these Miseries, which I have suffered for these Men.

And first of all, for their Liberty, and now likewise, for their Safety, I
have readily undertaken grievious Travels; now therefore, since I am grown into
Suspicion amongst these Men, who by my Care, and Providence, have escaped so
many Mischiefs, and Miseries. Thou that appearedst unto me in that Fire on the
Mountain of Sinai, and Vouchsafest to speak unto me and to Confirm me by the
sight of Miracles, that in thy Name sentst me a Messenger into Egypt, and have
given me Means to escape their Servitude. And have made Pharaoh's power and
Armies inferior to my Fortunes, that when we were ignorant of our Ways; thou
gave a Passage through the Sea, in whose Bottom and Womb the Egyptians were
Drowned; that gave us Arms when we were unweaponed; that made the bitter
Waters Savory, and fit to be drank of; and in our scarcity of Water, forced
Drink for us out of the Bowels of the hard Rock, when we found no Meat on the
Land, thou did send it us from the Sea. Moreover, as a thing never hard of
before, afforded us Meat from Heaven, and have Established our State with Laws
and Customs. Be thou, O Lord, my Judge in all things, and my Impartial Witness,
that I have neither bin Corrupted by any Bribe, of any Particular Hebrew, to
favor Injustice, nor that I bave suffered a Poor Man in his just Cause, to
loose his Right against a Rich Adversary.

And now having Administered the Commonwealth, will all Sincerity, I am called
in Question for a Crime, whereof I am altogether Guiltless. as if I had
bestowed the Priesthood on my Brother, for private Affection, and not for thy
Command sake: Make it known that all things are disposed of by thy Providence,
and that nothing is brought to Effect by Casualty, but by thy special
Ordinance, and to Express, that thou have care of the Hebrews, Testify the
same, by thy just Punishment Inflicted on Dathan and Abiram, who Accuse thee to
be Insencible, and boast that thou art Circumvented by my Subtilies: But thou
shall make thy Revenge more notorious against the unbridled Detracters of thy
Glory, if they Perish after no common Manner, least any Man should suspect that
they suffer nothing Inhumane. But let the Earth, which they unworthily tread
on, open it self, and swallow them up, both with their Faculties and Families.

By this means, both thy Power will manifestly appear unto all Men, and thou
shall leave an Example to Posterity, that no Man hereafter shall dare to think
other wise of thy Majesty, then becomes him, and my Ministry shall be approved
to proceed from thy Direction: But if those Crimes be truly urged which are
Enforced against me, then let the Curses Return and light on my own Head, and
let those whom I have Cursed, live in safety; and thus exacting a Punishment
from those that disturb thy People, keep the rest of the Multitude in Peace,
Concord, and Observation of thy Commandments, secure and void of that
Punishment, which is due unto wicked Men; for that it is contrary to thy
Justice, that the Innocent Multitude of the Israelites, should answer their
misdeeds, and suffer their Punishments.

Whilst he spoke these Words; and intermixed them with Tears, the Earth
instantly trembled, and shaking began to remove, (after such a manner, as when
by the Violence of the Wind a great Billow of the Sea floteth and Waltereth)
hereat were all the People amazed; but after that, a horrible and shattering
noise was made about their Tents, and the Earth opened and swallowed them up,
both them and all that which they esteemed dear, which was after a manner so
exterminated, as nothing remained of theirs to be beheld; where upon. in a
Moment, the Earth closed again, and the vast gaping was fast shut, so as there
appeared not any sight of that which had happened. Thus perished they all,
leaving behind them an example of Gods Power, and Judgments.

And this Accident, was the more miserable, in that there was not any one of
their Kinsfolk and Allies that had Compassion on them; so that all the People
whatsoever, forgetting these things that were past, did allow Gods Justice with
Joyful Acclamations, esteeming them unworthy to be bemoaned; but to be beheld
as the Plague and Perverters of the People.

After that Dathan, with his Family was extinguished, Moses Assembled all those
that contended for the Priesthood, committing again the Election of the
Priesthood unto God, that the Estate thereof should be Confirmed to him, whose
Sacrifice should be most acceptable in God's sight, for which cause the Two
Hundred, and Fifty Men Assembled themselves, who were both Honored for the
Virtue of their Ancesters, and for their own Abilities, far greater than
theirs; with those also stood Aaron, and Chore, and all of them Offered with
their Censers before the Tabernacle, with Perfumes, such as they brought with
them, when so great a Fire shone as neither the like was ever kindled by Man's
Hand, nor usually breaks from the Bowels of the burning Earth, nor was ever
quickened in the Woods in the Summertime, by a Southern Breeze. But such a one
as seemed to be kind* in Heaven; most brightsom, and flaming: By force and
Power whereof those Two Hundred, and Fifty Men, (together with Chore) were so
Consumed, that there scarce appeared any Relics of their Carcases, only Aaron
remained untouched, to the end it might appear that this Fire came from Heaven.

These things thus brought to pass, Moses, (intending to leave a perpetual
Memory to Posterity, of that Punishment) to the end they should not be igorant
of it, Commanded Eleazer, the Son of Aaron, to Consecrate their Censers affixed
to the Brazen Altar, that by Reason of this Monument, all Men might be
terrified, who think that the Divine Power can be Circumvented by Humane Policy.

THE BANNER OF Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Displayed, and their SIN Discovered:
In several SERMONS, Preached at BRISTOLL.
Numbers xvi. xxiii, xxiv, xxv, xxvi. And the Lord Spoke unto Moses, saying,
Speak unto the Congregation of Israel, saying, Get you up from about the
Tabernacle of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. And Moses rose up, and went unto
Dathan, and Abiram; and the Elders of Israel followed him. And he spoke unto
the Congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you, from the Tents of ^hese wicked
Men, and touch nothing of theirs, least ye be Consumed in all their Sins.
ISrael, was once Gods choicest Jewel, snatched forth of the Fire of sore
Affliction. A People, wonderfully Redeemed with a Mighty Hand, and Stretched
out Arm of Heavenly Power, from cruel and bitter Bondage.

A People, thoroughly Taught and Instructed, in the Sacred Oracles of God, and
purest of his ways.

A People, fed with Bread from Heaven; for Man did eat Angels Food.

A People, that had God and Christ for their Guide and Conduct, and Angels, and
the best of Men for their Guards and Governors: A People, that wanted no Mercy,
nor Blessing, that either Heaven or Earth could aford.

And yet, from amongst this People, did such a Root of Bitterness spring up,
and such a deadly Sin, a deadly Sin appeared, which did more highly provoke the
Lord to Anger, and more hotly kindle the Fire of his Jealousy and wrathful
Indignation, than either the Sin of Sodom, or the Wickedness of Egypt.

For when the Lord sent his Angels to destroy S^^om, for their Sins of Pride,
and fullness of Bread, Idleness, and hard Heartedness to the Poor, he meekly
heard Abraham's Petition for them, and patiently suffered him to Pray and
Interceed for them, as long, a sin reason he could desire. O Let not the Lord
be Angery, (says he) and I will speak but this once, Peradventure, there shall
be Ten (that is Ten Righteous Persons) found there, and the Lord said, I will
not dest^oy it for Ten sake, Genesis 18. 32.

And before he Executed his Judgments upon Egypt, for their unjust Dealings,
and exercise of Cruelty upon this very self same People in my Text, he treated
with Pharaoh, from day to day, by Moses and Aaron, with Signs and Wonders, to
try if he would soften his hard Heart toward them.

But, for the Sin of these, his lately, and for a long time, beloved People, he
was so deeply incensed against them, that he hastily, and suddenly commanded
Moses and Aaron to separate themselves from them, that he might Consume them in
a Moment. ver. 21.

The first thing then, before I come to the Words of my Text, must be to
enquire what their Sin was, that so we may the more readily and easily
understand the Doctrine we are to learn from thence.

Their Sin and Wickedness under the cloak and color of Holiness, is drawn up
in a brief Remonstrance, in ver. 3, in these Words:

They gathered themselves togather against Moses, and against Aaron, and said
unto them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are Holy
every one of them, and the Lord is amongst them: wherefore then lift ye up your
selves above the Congregation of the Lord.

In which bold Remonstrance of theirs, there are four Articles. which they
xehibited in foro in open Court, two directly against Moses and Aaron, one
pretendedly for God, and the other point blank for themselves.

1. In the First, they draw up a charge against Moses and Aaron, for exceeding
the Bounds of their Commission, Ye take too much upon you, ye do more than you
can justify, more than ye have Warrant from God to do. This Lordliness of
yours, is not Jure Divino: we know our Duty to God without your Lordly teaching
of us.

Hence it was that Moses told them ver. 28. Hereby shall ye know that the Lord
has sent me to do all these Works; for I have not done them of my own Mind.

2. The second Article, contains a Plea for their own Holiness, to Justify the
Innocence of their Enterprise, and to let all Israel know, that their
Proceedings were from Religious Principles, that Religion is the Center of all
that they go about to compass; seeing all the Congregation are Holy, they will
not allow one profane Person to be amongst them: If we were a wicked and
profane People ye might have some color.

3. In the third Article, they take God to witness that their Intents were Just
and Honest, that they thought nor meant any Harm nor Evil to any one, and
avouch God to be the Primum Mobile of their Intents and Purposes* as if they
had said, Be it known unto you Moses and Aaron, and let all Israel take notice,
that what we do, proceeds not from our selves, we are moved of God to do it,
and that it is a Revelation of the Mind and Will of God, the Lord is amongst us.

4. The fourth Article, contains a seemingly Rational Argument, for the
Confirmation of the former three. Wherefore then, mark that word, Wherefore
then lift ye up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord?

Are not we the Congregation and People of the Lord? Are not we the only holy
People of an holy God? Have not we the presence of the Almighty God amongst us?
What Reason have you then, to lift up your selves above us? Can ye teach us
better than the Lord, who is in us? for so one Latin Translation reads the Text
Omnis multitudo Sunctorum est, et in ipsis est Dominus, the People are all
Holy, and the Lord is in them. Why do ye then go about to prescribe us a way,
or tie us up to a Form of Worshipping God.

This was the substance of their Charge against their faithful Rulers.

Their Prolocutors were Corah, a self-wil'd Levite, and Dathan and Abiram, two
unstable Reubenites, accompanied with the Aid and Assistance of 250 Chieftains,
the boldest and and most confident, that they could pick or choose in the
Warlike Camp of Israel.

Now, who could presently think or immagin, that under these Words, we are all
Holy, and the Lord is amongst us* there should lie so great a Sin, as to
provoke a Gracious and Merciful God to destroy miraculously those very People,
whom not many Years before he had miraculously delivered from Opression and
Slavery.

Who would have thought that this outside clean Cup, and Platter, had been
inwardly filled with Ravening and Wickedness? That those white Painted
Sepulchers had been full of dead Men's Bones and Rottenness. Who would have
imagined, that these Men's Principles, would have dug so many Graves for the
Israelites Carcases, as afterward they did? That such Confusions and
Disorders, would have followed the Heels of these Men, professing extraordinary
Holiness and Righteousness?

Our work then at this time, will be to get the true and real Knowledge of
these Men's Sin; that knowing it, we may the more resolvedly derest and abhor
it, and thence shun and avoid them.

And this way we must go to work, even to enquire of the Oracles of God, what
they were, in a threefold respect.

1. What they were in their Generation and Tribe.

2. In their Qualifications, or Parts.

3. In their Estimation, or Credit, and that 1. With God. 2. With the People.


1. For their Generation, or Tribe, we read, that they were of the two Tribes
of Reuben and Levi, as the first ver. of the chap. plainly shows in these
words, Now Corah, the Son of Izhar, the Son of Kohah, the Son of Levi, and
Dathan, and Abiram, the Sons of Eliab, and On, the Son of Peleth, Sons of
Reuben, took Men.

Of which two Tribes, these two things are Recorded, that they were Unstable,
and Selfwill'd, and by no worse a Man, than their own Father: And this upon his
Deathbed too; two infamous Blots, in both their Escutcheons; the Records are
written in Genesis 49. the Blot, upon Reubens Escutcheon at ver. 3. Reuben, thou
art my Firstborn, my Might, and the beginning of my Strength, the excellency
of Dignity, and the excellency of Power, Unstable as Water, a foul Blot, in a
fair Escutcheon.

The Blot in Levi's Escutcheon, at ver. 5, 6. Simeon, and Levi, are Brethren,
Instruments of Cruelty are in their Habitations

O my Soul, come not thou into their Secret, unto their Assembly, mine Honor,
be not thou united: For in their Anger they Slew a Man, and in their Self-will,
they dug down a Wall.

In their Self-will, there is the Blot in Levi's Escutcheon.

Now if we join the Blots in both their Escutcheons together, and compare them
with these Men's Words, and Actions, in my Text, we may safely conclude the
truth of that Proverb,

Naturae sequitur Semina quisque suae. And take this for a Maxim in Divinity,
That Instability of Heart, to walk with God in his ancient ways, and
Self-will'dness of Spirit, to prefer a private Error in Judgment, before the
public Peace and welfare of the Church: Is the grand Anvil, upon which the
Devil has forged all his Machination of Heresy, and Scisme, to the Continual
disturbance of the Church, in all Ages of the World.

2. In the next place, we will consider them in their Qualifications and
Endowments, and this to 1. Negatively. 2. Possitively.


1. Negatively, they were not the Ignorant sort, although Thousands of those were
seduced by their Leaders, nor yet of the lowest, basest, and meanest among
them; although Thousands of these were ready to Aid and Assist them in their
Enterprise, nor were they openly Profane, or Debauched Persons, although such
(had there been any such in Israel) would easily have become Sticklers to these
Men's Principles.

2. But Possitively, for their Qualifications, they were Men of excellent Gifts
and Parts, for there were many Levites amongst them* and many of good Rank and
Quality. Reubenites of the Tribe of Jacobs Firstborn; and without all
Peradventure, Stout Men of their Hands too, if need required. And this is clear
from what is Recorded, in ver. 2. And they (i.e. Corah, and his Confederates)
rose up before Moses, with certain of the Children of Israel, Two Hundred and
Fifty Princes of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, Men of Renown.

The Fame of these Men spread far and near throughout all Israel, sparkling in
the Firmament of the Church, like blazing Stars, talked of in every Tent,
especially of these Two Tribes Thus did their Renown ring in the Ears of
unsteadfast and backsliding Israel.

Famous and Renowned they were, for what? Not for any open or vissible Sin or
Wickedness; for the Iniquity of these Men, was a Misterious Riddle to many
honest Hearted Israelites.

Latet anguis in Herba. The green Herbs of their admirable Knowledge, and
seeming Holiness, did so flourish and spread it self in the sight of all the
Redeemed Tribes of Israel, that they could not see, nor perceive the Serpent at
the Root.

Israel, was Gods chosen People, above all Nations upon the face of the Earth;
and these Men the choicest of all Israel Psalm. 78. 31.

Having now considered them in their Generations, and Qualifications, it
remains, that we consider them in their Estimation; in what Esteem they were
both with God, and the People.

And 1. That they were once in high Esteem with God, Moses himself
acknowledges it in ver. 8, 9. And Moses said unto Corah, Hear, I pray you, ye
Sons of Levi: Seems it a small thing to you, that the God of Israel, has
separated you from all Israel, to bring you near to himself, to do the Service
of the Tabernacle, and to stand before the Congregation, to Minister unto them.
And that they werein great Credit and Esteem with the People, we have their own
words for it, in ver. 41.

But on the Morrow, all the Congregation of Israel, Murmured against Moses, and
against Aaron, Saying ye have Killed the People of the Lord. How strong were
the delusions of these Men? When notwithstanding the visible and unheard of
Judgments, which the Lord Plagued them with. In causing the Earth to open her
Mouth, and swallow up some of them; and Fire from Heaven to consume the rest.
Yet on the Morrow, whilst these things were fresh in their sight and memory,
they could tell Moses and Aaron, with murmuring Words, that they were guilty of
Murder, in the the Death of these Men, Ye have Killed the People of the Lord.

Ye have not only lifted up you selves, and made your selves Lords over Gods
Heritage, but Treacherously, and Cruely, Murdered the Saints, and People of God.

Thus did they by way of Recrimination, charge the Meekest, and Faithfullest
Man upon the face of the Earth, with the Guilt of the greatest Wickedness, that
could possibly be Committed. And doubtless, had they had an Armed Power,
answerable to their Envious and Arrogant Hearts, they would have Erected a
Sanedrim of their own, and Arraigned him as Guilty of the Death of all the
Israelites, that dyed for their Wickedness, in the Wilderness, since the Day
that they came up out of the Land of Egypt, till then. Just so, the worst of
Hellish Villanes, except Judas, and Julian. the Apostates, Araigned the best of
Kings, (Jesus Christ excepted) King Charles the First: I mean, as Guilty of all
that Blood, that had been shed in the three Kingdoms of England, Ireland, and
Scotland, in the time of those unnatural and Bloody Wars, continued for so many
dreadful Years of that Pious Prince's Reign.

And here I could willingly make a Digression from my matter in hand, by
saying, That I could wish that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes, Fountains of
Tears, that I might Weep Day and Night; not only for the Sins of mine own
unstable Heart, but for the ensuing Miseries, which without speedy and
unfeigned Repentance, will certainly fall upon the Church of God in these
Kingdoms; the Lord has shak'd his Rod at us, for several Years past, nor has
he yet laid it aside, for the noise of it, is still in our Ears, and we seem to
take little or no notice of it, as if we did either stop our Ears at it; and so
refuse to hear it, or by a careless slighting of it, make a puff at it, or were
wholly void of Sense and Reason, not to understand the meaning of it; like
those whom the Prophet Isaiah exclaimed against, chap. 1. ver. 3. The Ox
knows his owner, and the Ass, his Masters Crib; but Israel does not know, my
People does not consider.

I must confess, it is very sad to think that when God condescends to speak to
poor Mortal Creatures in so many different ways, as he has done to the People
of these Kingdoms; and so few of us understand his meaning in any of them.

That we should be so destitute of Evangelical Wisdom, that we should neither
Hear nor See, nor Taste nor Feel God in the various Dispensations of his
Providence, but continue in a senceless, stupid, dull frame of Spirit, as if
we resolved to walk contrary to his Providence, be they what they will. But
least a larger Digression should divert your Thoughts from the Subject I am
discoursing of, I will immediately return to them where I left them, and show
you more of their Sin and Wickedness; for so strangly and so strongly, were
these Israelites ensnared, and bound with the Cords and Chains of this
spiritual Delusion, and so cheated by the seeming Holiness of these eminent and
famous Men, that they adventured to Canonize them for Saints, after they were
dead, although they died Impenitent Rebels.

And a probable Reason why they had such an esteem for them after they were
dead, was either because the Two Hundred and Fifty Men, Confederates with
Corah, Justified their doings to the Face of Moses, in the Tabernacle of the
Lord, and in the presence of God, and died with Censors in their Hands and
Incense burning thereon.

Or else it was because they intended to play over again the same Game that
their Brethren had lost, and so prove a second Brood of Religious Rebels.

That this is more then probable, the words in ver. 42. do plainly demonstrate,
for do but mark the Words, And it came to pass when the Congregation was
gathered against Moses, and against Aaron, that they looked toward the
Tabereacle of the Congregation; and behold the Cloud covered it, and the Glory
of the Lord appeared.

Hence it is very evident, that these Chips of the old Block, were resolved to
revive the good old Cause of their deceased Friends, and had not the Lord again
Graciously preserved his Church, this last Seditious Commotion, might have been
worie than the former.

For Corah and his Company, did but charge Moses and Aaron with the Sin of
self-promotion.* But these Offspring, of theirs, charge them with the shedding
of Innocent Blood, even the Blood of the People of the Lord; and so might
pretend that God had put into their Hand the Sword of Vengeance for Innocent
Blood.

These things being well weighed and considered, without doubt, this was the
Root and Rise of their Sin.

The high conceit, which they had of their own Knowledge and Holiness, together
with the Applause and Estimation which they had with the People, had so lifted
them up with Pride, that they thought themselves so full of Knowledge, and so
Holy, and in both so perfect, that their Consciences would not suffer them to
live any longer in obedience to a written Law, that is, to such a Law, or to
such Rules and Orders as should be delivered to them by any other hand then
their own.

And this is clear, if we consider the time of their public discovering of it;
and we shall find that it was immediately upon Moses's pressing them to a
strickt Observation of an harmless Ceremony for Decency, and Order, to be
placed upon the border of their Vestments.

The Form of it, and the Orders of God for it, is written in the 4 last ver. of
the foregoing chap. the words are these,

And the Lord Spoke unto Moses, saying,

Speak unto the Children of, Israel, and bid them that they make them Fringes
in the Borders of their Garments, throughout their Generations, and that they
put upon the Fringe of the Borders a Ribband of blue

And it shall be unto ^ou for a Fringe, that ye may look upon it, and rem^mber
all the Commandments of the Lord, and do them: And that ye seek not after your
own Heart, and your own Eyes, after which you use to go a Whoring.

That ye may remember and do all my Commandments, and be Holy unto your God.

I am the Lord your God, which brought you out of the Land of Egypt, to be your
God: I am the Lord your God.

Which Command, was no sooner delivered by Moses, but presently Corah and his
Confederates, stood up and told him to his Face, That he took too much upon
him, to order them what to do.

These things have at last brought me through a Wilderness of troubled thoughts
home to my Text, which contains four parts.

1. A Message from God to Israel, by Moses and Aaron, ver. 23. 24.

2. The Message it self, which was both short and smart, and we may observe,
that as these Men's Remonstrance was short and bitter, so Gods. Answer to it in
this Message, is shorter and smarter, Get you up from about the Tabernacle of
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.

3. Moses, the Messenger's Expedition to deliver it: And Moses rose up, and
went unto Dathan, and Abiram. He that had an Ear always ready to hear, had an
Heart always ready to obey. I^ God bid Moses rise, he is ready to go; if God
bids him go, he runs. so the Psalmist.

I made have, and prolonged not the time to keep thy Commandments. Psalm. 119.
60.

And again, I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou have set my Heart
at Liberty. ver. 32.

4. Moses's Love to, and care for the rest, whom he thought not past recovery,
delivering his Message to them in such a frame of Spirit, as he thought most
likely to prevail with them, if any thing would, in begging and entreating
them; Depart, I pray you, from the Tents of these wicked Men, and touch nothing
of theirs, least ye be Consumed in all their Sins.

Now from these parts of the Text, and from what has been spoken as previous
to it. I shall deliver these six Propositions, or Points of Doctrine.

1. That it is dangerous and unsafe for Christians to Congregate themselves
with such a People, (though never so full of Knowledge and seeming Holiness) that
do deny Conformity to such Laws and Ordinances, as God has delivered to them,
by the Hands of faithful Governors.

2. That God will reject and disown the Knowledge and Holiness of such a People.

3. That the Sin of such Nonconformity, does exceedingly provoke the Lord to
Anger, and stir up the Fire of his Jealousy.

4. That a People under such Delusions, may think themselves Holy and
Righteous, and at the same time, be most sinful and wicked.

5. That it is no new thing, for a Spirit of damnable Delusions, to shelter it
self under the Cloak and Masque of extraordinary Holiness.

6. That it is the Part and Duty, of all the Servants of God, in their several
and respective Places, and Callings, to use all Lawful means, and endeavors,
to stop the further breaking forth of such horrible Delusions, and Destructive
Principles.

Having delivered these six Propositions, I shall return to prosecute the first.

Which, whilst I am doing, I humbly pray you, to hear me without Prejudice; for
the Lord, who knows the Secrets of all Hearts knows that I have none against
the Persons of any of the Sons of Men; for I Believe that Christ died as well
for them, as for my self, and therefore I cannot hate them: And the Method I
shall Observe will be this.

1. I offer to your Consideration the Reasons, why I Judge it dangerous, and
unsafe to Congregate with such a People.

2. I shall give you a Prospect of the preposterous and unlucky Dispositions of
these Men's Spirits, under this new discovery of theirs, Scisme, I may call it.

3. Give you a Taste of the harsh, bitter, and lamentable Effects, which this
new Doctrine of theirs brought forth in the Commonwealth of Israel; which, when
we have weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, we shall easily be persuaded
to believe Solomon, That there is no new Thing under the Sun.

4. Show you how the Just, Holy, and Righteous God took this Disturbance of the
Church's Peace at their Hands, and what a kind of Savor, the Smoke of these
Men's Incense* did send up to Heaven.

6. And Lastly, Consider what the more then probable drift, and design of these
Men might be, which they intended to carry on, under this false ^eligious
Cloak; and I beseech you, Christians, that you will mark me warily, whilst
^lav down my Reasons for Proof of my first Assertion, that so ye may neither
misaprehend me here, nor misreport me abroad, to my Prejudice, and Scandal of
others.

The first Reason, why it is dangerous so to Congregate, is

( Reason, 1.) Because every particular Christian, has not the special Gift of
the Holy Ghost, to discern Spirits.

Every Man and Woman, in any true measure Professing Christ, may have so much
Knowledge, and be so far enlightened, as to be sencible of their Misery, by
reason of Sin committed in the State of Nature, to know what Christ has done
for them, in satisfying Gods Justice, and removing the Curse of the Law, and
Punishment due to such Sin.

To believe in him for Pardon of Sin, to love and delight to do his
Commandments,

And yet not have the special Gift of the Holy Ghost, to diseern Spirits.

The Apostle St. Paul, in the 1. Cor. 12. 4. says. That there are diversities
of Gifts, but the same Spirit that gives them.

And then at ver. 8. reckons them up in order, thus

For to one, is given by the Spirit, the Word of Wisdom; to another, the Word
of Knowledge, by the same Spirit;

To another, Faith by the same Spirit; to another, the Gift of Healing, by the
same Spirit;

To another, the Working of Miracles, by the same Spirit; to another, Prophecy,
by the same Spirit; to another, the Discerning of Spirits; to another, diverse
kind of Tongues; To another, the Interpretation of Tongues. And then Concludes,
thus,

But all these, works that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every one
severally, as he will.

Knowing then, that there are many lying Spirits, and many false Christ's, many
false Prophets, and deceitful Teachers, gone forth into the World; who ever
have, and ever will, by their sly Insinuations, endeavor to draw away
Disciples after them; and seduce the Servants of Christ, to leave and forsake
the plain Highway of Salvation, to go into the bypaths of Heresy, and Scisme;
and so undiscernibly ma^age their Crafty Devices, that the very elect, choice,
and eminent Christians, will hardly escape from being entangled with such
Deceits: Now then, seeing that these things are certainly true, it cannot but
be dangerous and unsafe, for the best of Christians to venture themselves into
any such Congregations, as have made a causeless Separation from such a Church,
where the the Word of God is truly taught* Public Prayer in a Form of sound
Word, suitable to every State, and Condition of Men; answerable to all their
wants, both for Soul and Body, and all put up to God, in the Name of his only
Son Jesus Christ: And all this Confirmed, and Established, by the Successive
Royal Laws, and Sacred Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances, of the most Christian
Kings, Princes, and Parliaments, that ever were since the Reformation, as the
Church of England is in Statu quo.

Our Blessed Savior, has assnred us, by the words of his Sacred Lips, That
many will come in his Name, and deceive (not a few but) many.

And the Apostle St. John; says, That there are many Antichrists, and exhorts
them not to believe every Spirit, because many false Prophets were gone forth
into the World.

Seeing then, that the number of Deceivers are many, and the Deceived a
Thousand times more; I hold it the greatest Wisdom that can be in a Christian,
to take heed how he adventures into every Congregation of People, least he
become one of those many, that Christ fiath foretold, will certainly be
deceived, for want of this special Gift of the Holy Ghost, to discern Spirits.

( Reason 2.) A second Reason is, because such Men's Principles, will leave a
black Brand of detestable hatred, upon their very Names amongst the Generations
of the People of God, that shall Survive them.

For though they may prosper for a time, and take their swinge for a time, and
run their Wildgoose chase for a time, and though they take liberty to kindle
these Fires, and compass, themselves about with such Sparks; and though they walk
in the Light of these Fires; and Sparks of their own kindling, yet this shall
they have at the hand of the Lord, they shall lie down in Sorrow, and leave a
Curse upon their Names, amongst the Surviving Gen^rations.

And this was verified on these very Men in my Text, for when the Geneologies
of the Surviving Tribes, were Numbered and Recorded, there lies a Blo^ of
Disgrace upon their Names, so that in plain Terms, their Names stunck after
they were dead.

The Record is to be seen in Chap. 26. of the Book of Numbers, ver. 7, 8, 9.
the Words of the Record are these.

These are the Families of the Reubenites, and they that were Numbered of them
were Forty and three Thousand, and seven Hundred and Thirty.

And the Sons of Pallu, Eliab.

And the Sons of Eliab, Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram. This is that Dathan,
and Abiram, which were Famous in the Congrega^tion, who strove against Moses,
and against Aaron, in that Company of Corah, when they strove against the Lord.

And the Earth opened her Mouth, and swallowed them up, together with Corah,
when that Company Died, what time the Fire Devoured two Hundred and Fifty Men;
and they became a Sign.

Nor did their Names stink only upon Record, but in the Memories and Thoughts
of the Surviveing honest Hearted Israelites; as appears by the Words of the
Plea of the Daughters of Zelophehad made in open Court for Inheritance of their
Fathers; which Plea was also Recorded, and continues to this Day. Number. 27.
ver. 1, 2.

Ver. 1. Then came the Daughters of Zelophehad, the Son of Hepher, the Son of
Gilead, the Son of Machir, the Son of Manasses, the Son of Joseph: And these
are the Names of his Danghters, Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and
Tirzah.

And they stood before Moses, and Eliazar the Priest, (for Aaron was then Dead)
and before the Princes, and all the Congregation, by the Door of the Tabernacle
of the Congregation saying,

Our Father Died in the Wilderness, and he was not in the Company of them that
gathered themselves together against the Lord, in the Company of Corah; but
died in his own Sin, and had no Sons.

4, Why then should the Name of our Father be done away from amongst his
Family, because he has no Son; give unto us therefore a Possession amongst the
Brethren of our Fathers.

5. And Moses brought their Cause before the Lord, and the Lord spoke unto
Moses, saying,

6. The Daughters of Zelophehad, speak right, thou shall surely give them a
Possession of an Inheritance amongst their Fathers Brethreu; and thou shall
cause the Inheritance of their Father to pass unto them. By the Contents of
which Record, it is evident, that the Remembrance of these Men's Doings, was
Odious to Posterity; more Instances we have, as in Simeon, and Levi, Simon
Magus, Thudas, Judas of Gallilee, Nicolitans. etc.

Reason 3. Is because the Breath of such Men's Doctrine, is infectious to a
sound Judgment; the Sons of Men are as really snbject to Spiritual Infection,
as the Body is to that which is Carnal; the Body is not more liable to the
Infection of the Plague of Pestilence, than the Judgments of the Sons and
Daughters of Men, are to the Plague of Spiritual Delusions.

And this my Assertion, I ground upon Reason, drawn from the Testimonies of
Sacred Writ; besides Woeful and Daily Experience.

There are three Diseases amongst Men, notably Infectious above others, ( viz)
the Leprosy, the Pestilence, and the Cancer, all whieh three Diseases of the
Body, do parallel the three grand Infectious Diseases of the Soul, viz.
Disobedience, Heresy and Scisme.

The first whereof is Epidemical, and has Infected all Mankind with the
Leprosy of Original Sin. The second is more Secret and indiscernable, falling
upon sound Constitutions, when they think least on it, even whilst they are
Talking and Drinking with their Friend; and concerning this Disease, it is
observable that the Party Infected, has a desire to Infect others, though never
so near and dear to them; the like desire have all Scismaticks.

The third Infectious Disease, viz. the Cancer, has its Residence for the most
part in the Mouth or Tongue; that they who drink of the same Cup with them, are
in danger of Infection.

For Confirmation of this Assertion, I shall give you a Precedent and Precept,
from the Sacred Scriptures.

The Precedent is double, and of Lamentable Memory, because the Sin appeared in
the Punishment of those that Committed it.

The Precept is alone, yet worthy of a serious notice, because it was
Transmitted, by an Epistle, from an Universal Apostle, to a Bishop of a
particular Charge 2 Timothy 16. 17. 18.

The first Precedent or Example is Recorded in Numb. 12. where two prime
Servants of God are found Tardy in their Obedience to him, which showed it felf
in the Malignant Humor of Miriam and Aarons Murmuring against Moses, who though
their own Brother, yet under God their Supreme Governor; nevertheless, they
could say, Has the Lord indeed only spoken by Moses? has he not spoken also
by us?

Here was Envy and Emulation at the Government, entrusted by God, in the Hands
of Moses. Disobedience would undoubtedly have followed; the Leprosi* of
Original Sin, d^d cleave so fast to their Loins, that although they were Saints
upon Earth, yet they were not quite free from stumbling upon the Threshould o^
Original Corruption; true Children o^ Disobedi^nt Parents; Adam and Eve, our
first Parents would set up for themselves and be as Gods. Miriam and Aaron will
Rule and Govern as well as Moses: Has the Lord indeed (say they) spoken only
by Moses? Has he not spoken also by us? No wonder Moses was not angry with his
Brother and Sister, for aspiring to share with him in a piece of Earthly
Government; when he knew that his own first Parents aspired to an Heavenly
Throne, by endeavoring to be as Gods. Nay, Aaron in another sinful Act of his
outdid his Progenitors; for they presumed to be but as Gods, to know Good and
Evil; but Aaron presumed to make a God; nay, to make many Gods; Make us Gods,
(says sinful Israel) that may go before us. Bring your Ear rings, says Aaron,
and I Will make you some.

Original Sin* like a Snow ball, gathers by rolling from place to place.

The same Serpent that persuaded our first Parents to conceit themselves Gods,
has prevailed with Aaron, not to conceit himself to be one, but take upon him
the Employment of making a God, and so to be greater than God. For as he that
makes a King, is said to be greater then a King; so he that makes a God, may
conceit himself greater than the God he has made. O^ the horrible Contagion,
and Infection of Original Sin, which like a foul Leprosy, has spread it self
into the whole Mass of Mankind.

And as thus the Leprosy of Original Sin, had spread it self into the several
Faculties of Miriams and Aarons Soul; so the Lord Plag^ed Miriam, with a soul
Leprosy, in several parts of her Body; a Punishment suitable to her Sin.

If it should here be asked why Aaron guilty of the same Sin with his Sister
Miriam, was not Plagued with the same Punishment of Leprosy, as she was,
according to the rule of Justice, the same Sin, the same Punishment: I answer,
it is true, the Lord might in Justice have smitten Aaron with the Plague of
Leprosy, as he did Miriam, but he did not; he spared Aaron, and Punished
Miriam, and that for several good and weighty Reasons, as I humbly conceive.

1. That the Church, and all the World may know, that he has two Hands as well
as two Eyes, the one to lay on the stroke of Justice, and the other, to extend
Grace and Mercy; that he is Mercy as well as Justice; and Judgment as well as
Mercy.

2. That the Sons of Men may know, that God is a free Agent, and may do with
his own what he pleases; that he can have Mercy upon whom he will have Mercy,
and Punish others for the Iniquity of their Transgressions; and leave them to
the hardness of their own Hearts.

3. The Sin was greater in Miriam, then in Aaron; Aaron might have a seeming
color for what he said, having formerly been Moses's Speaker for God, to
Pharaoh: but for Miriam to assume the Privilege of a Speaker, was neither
proper to her Sex, nor ever an Office in the Church for a Woman to Execute. I
permit not a Woman (says St. Paul) to Speak in the Church.

4. Aarons Office might excuse him, and speak something for him, being by a
special Decree and Ordinance of God, Anointed with Holy Oil, High Priest, to
offer Sacrifice for the Sins of all Israel, and no Leper was to Officiate in
that calling, nor stand at Gods Altar; so that the Purity of his Office, freed
him from that foul and lothsom Punishment of the Plague of Leprosy; God's
Altar was nor a fit place for a Deformed Person to stand at, to offer
Sacrifices, therefore, for the Glory of his Name, and the Holiness of his
Altar, he exempted the Sacrificer from the Punishment of so loathsome a Disease;
although he went not Scot-free, for for this, and other failings; he was debarred
both of the sight and entrance into the Land of Canaan; the Land of Promise.

5. It might probable be, that Aaron was not Principal, but Accessory to this
Sin, for Miriam is first named in the Text, Numb. 12. And Miriam, and Aaron,
spoke against Moses, because of the Ethiopian Woman, whom he had Married. If
she had not been Principal in the Sin, its very likely, she had not been named
first in the Indictment: And it is very likely, that the Quarrel began betwixt
the two Sisters In-law Ziporah and Miriam, about what I know not; but be it
what it will, Miriam has engaged her Brother Aaron in the Quarrel; and both of
them knew, that Moses was so Just, and so good a Man, that if the matter on
Ziporah's part, were not a Breach of God's Sacred Law, he was bound by the
Sacred Tie of Marriage, to Vindicate her, against them both; they resolve
therefore to bring him in for a Party, and make him Faulty for fuch a Choice,
and so begin a Quarrel with him; who it may be knew nothing of their
Discontents.

Dr. Hall, late Bishop of Norwich, that English Seneca, that Painful, Pious
Prelate, in his Contemplations, on the Holy Story, has an excellent Passage
upon this Place. Lib. 6 Page 196. in Oct.

Miriam and Aaron, are in Mutiny against Moses. Who is so Holy that Sins not?
What Sin is so unnatural, that the best can avoid without God's preventing
Grace,

Who can but grieve to see Aaron at the end of so many Sins: Of late I saw him
Carving the Molten Image; and Consecrating an Altar to a False God; now I see
him seconding an uukind Mutiny, against his Brother; both find him Accessory,
neither Principal, in the first Sin of Mankind, the Servent, who was Principal
in it, found no Mercy nor Grace: Whereas Adam and his Wife who were but
Accessarie^, had upon their Repentance, the offer of both, and therefore.

6. A fixth R^son, ^hy Aaron escaped the Punishment inflicte upon Miriam, was
because o^ his speedy Repentance; for no sooner did he perceive the Leprosy
upon Miriams Face, he knew there was but one way to escape that, or a greater
punishment, viz. a Con^ssion (...) in, and a speedy Repentance. And therefore,
having offended his Brother Moses; he first asks him Forgiveness, saying,
Alas, my Lord, lay not this Sin upon us; wherein we have done Foolishly, and
wherein we have Sinned. The universal Ant dote against all Gods Judgments, is
Unfeign^d and speedy Repentance.

Had Miriam Repented at the Word of the Lord to her, as Aaron did, at the Hand
of the Lord upon her* it is very likly that she had e^caped the Leprosy, as
well as he; for that God, who is rich in Mercy to one, is rich in Mercy to all
that Unfeignedly call upon him for it, as Aaron here did; but as for Miriam,
she neither Confessed her Sin, nor showed any Sorrow for it, but stubb rnly
persisted in it: For notwithstanding, God Arraigned her himself, and sat
himself as judge in Moses's Cause, and asked her, why she was not afraid to
speak against his Servant Moses; she made no Reply, by an humble Plea for
Mercy, but stood as a sullen Mute, and so God recorded her, and left her to
Judgment, and departs from her in great Fury. Number. 12. 9.

2. The second Infectious Disease, is the Pestilence, which prevails mightily
by Infection, killing Thousands in a short time. So does the Plague of
Spiritual Delusions Infect and Destroy many Thousands of Souls in a very few
Days.

And that these Men's Principles (in my Text) had the same Effect, it was too
apparent, in their Punishment, and one may read their Sin in their Punishment.
And that there was a Spiritual Plague fore broken, and running upon these Men's
Spirits. It is evident by the Injunction, which God laid upon the rest of the
People, to depart from them, and not to come near them, nor touch any thing of
theirs, least their Sin should Infect them, and they perish with them in their
Sins.

And so Infectio^s, was it to many Thousands in Israel, that it brake forth
upon them on the Morrow, and in a Congregated Assembly, Murmured against Moses,
and told him, he had Killed the People of the Lord.

How nearly does Heresy in the Soul, resemble the Pestilence in the Body; for
as fast as that lothsom Disease cleaves to the Body, so fast does Heresy stick
in the Soul and Heart of a Man. For as it is a very difficult thing, and almost
Impossible for a Phisttian to heal the Plague of Pestilence in the Body.

So it is a very hard and difficult thing, for the best Majestrate, or the best
Minister in the World, to reclaim any Man or Woman from the Error of their way,
that have forsaken the Public Service of God, the Highway of Salvation, and
betook themselves to the Bypath of a Pestilential Conventicle one Year. Hence
it is that the Apostle St. Paul, Exhorts Titus to Reject A Man that is an
Heretic, after the first and second Admonition. And subjoyns this Reason,
Knowing that he that is such, is subverted and Sins, being Condemned of
himself. Titus. 3. 10, 11.

Now you may happily ask what an Heretic is. I Answer.

A Heretic, is one that obstinately Defends and Maintains an Opinion contrary
to the Faith, Practice, and Profession of the truly Ancient, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church.

But ye may happily say, why does the Apostle Exhort Titus to be so quick, and
brief, in Admonishing such an one, and upon a second Contempt, imediately to
reject him. I Answer.

Answer. Because they have refused the way of Truth, and chosen and pr^fer'd an
Erroneous Opinion be ore it, and obstinately re^use to return again

This ass^ion i^ verified by the Testimony of the Prophet Jerem^ Chap. 6. ver.
16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the old
Paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find Rest for your
Souls. This was the first Admonition, the Prophet gave them after their Revolt,
unto which, they obstinately answered, We will not walk therein. The second
word of Admonition is in ver. 17 Also I set Watchmen over you, saying, Hearken
to the sound of the Trumpet. Unto which, they made this stubbora Answer, We
will not Hearken. Upon this their refusal after their second Admonition to
return to the ancient ways of God, the Prophet proceeds in the name of the
Lord, to give Judgment upon them in ver. 18. 19.

Therefore hear, ye Nations, and know, O Congr^gation, what is among them.
Hear, O Earth, behold I w^ll bring Evil upon this People, even the Fruit of
their Thoughts; because they have not hearkened unto my Words, nor to my Law,
but rejected it.

Twice did those Men in my Text, return a stubborn An^wer to Moses, that they
would not return to their former Conformity, but de^perately resolved to stick
close to their former Remonstrance; for when Moses sent for Dathan, and Abiram,
the Sons of Eliab, to come to him, (doubtless to persuade and advise with them,
to forbear the further Prosecution of their wicked Designs and to consider the
manifold mischiefs, that would unavoidably follow such wicked enterprises, as
they were now beginning to prosecute then they returned this resolute Answer, We
will not come up; and aggravated it with this Expostulation.

Is it a small thing that thou have brought us up out of a Land that flows
with Milk and Honey, to kill us in the Wilderness except thou make thy self
altogether a Prince over us? ver. 13. and then in ver. 14. They follow their
blow, with a Moreover, thou have not brought us into a Land that flows with
Milk and Honey, or given us Inheritance of Fields, and Vineyards: Will thou put
out the Eyes of these Men? We will not come up.

Upon this second Repulse of theirs to Moses's Admonition, he utterly Rejects
them, and now will have no more to do with them; but turns his Prayer directly
against them. And in the Indignation of his Spirit, said unto the Lord, Respect
not thou their Offering.

And what the Effect of such a Prayer was like to be, may be easily read in the
Judgment that followed; for the Earth opened her Mouth, and swallowed them up,
with all that appertained to them, and I wish with all my Heart, that these
Men's Principles had sunck into the Ground with them, and never appeared again
upon the face of Earth, but vae mihi.

3. A third Infectious Disease in the Body of Man, is the Cancer, a sore
fretting Disease, very small in the beginning, dangerous in growth and
pernicious in the end.

Such is all Scismatical and false Doctrine, in the beginning scarcely
discerned, but by degrees it eats so far into the Soul, that it destroys both
Faith and Practice.

We have this confirmed by the Apostle St. Paul, in an Epistle of his to the
chief Pastor of the Church of Ephes^s 2. Tim. 2. Cap. 16. 17. 18. ver. But shun
profane Bablings, for they will increase unto more Ungodliness. And their Word
will eat as does a Canker; of whom is Hymeneus, and Philetus. Who concerning
the truth have erred, saying, That the Resurrection is past already; and
overthrow the Faith of some.

O Lord, for thy Mercy sake, save and deliver thy Church and People, in the
Kingdoms of England, and Ireland; and the Religion Established by Law therein,
from the fly insinuating, creeping, Soul-infectious, Diseases of Sediton, Privy
Conspiracy, and Rebellion, false Doctrine, Heresy and Scisme; and work in us
such a Reformation in all our Lives, that our Conversations before God and Man,
may be such, as may beautify, and adorn our most Holy Faith, and demonstrate
to the World, that we are living Members of Christ's Body.

I have now finished my third Rational Proof, of the danger, hazard, and
Jeapardy, which unstable Souls incur, by gladding from their Mothers House, to
enquire after strange Novelties; and to exchange a good old Way, for a
deceitful By-path; and I have insisted the longer upon it, out of Duty to my
Mother (the Church of England) and the Testimony of a good Conscience toward
my Brethren, whose Feet yet stand fast in the Highway of Salvation, to keep
them steady, and fast therein; and out of Love, and Pity to my Brethren, and
Friends that have made an unkind Separation from us: if possible to recover
them back again, that they may be as formerly, they have been Ornaments of
Grace, to our Assemblies; and let them think of me what they (...), I still
retain an unfeigned Love, and Respect for their Immortal and Precious Souls.

^ Reason 4.) Such Men's Principles, do lead Souls into a state of Rebellion,
not only against Man, but even against God himself; and under pretense of
taking faster hold o^ Religion, and getting nearer unto God, do throw
themselves into the Pit of Error, and shake hands with their Allegia^ce to
their Lawful Governors, as these pretended Saints did; for which, the Lord
himself gives them the Title, and Epithet of ^ebell* ^7 Chap. 10 ver. And the
Lord s^id unto Moses, Bring Aarons Rod again before the Testimony, to be kept
for a token against the Rebels.

These were once a People conformable to the Word and Will of God, walking in
all the Laws and Ordinances of the Lord, and th^n God called them his People,
and owned them for his Church, Testified by the word of the Lord to Moses,
E^od. 3. 7, 8, 9. And the Lord said, I have surely seen the Affliction of my
People which are in Egypt, and have heard their or, by reason of their Task
masters; for I know their Sorrows.

And I am come down to d^liver them out of the Hands of the Egy^tians. Now
therefore behold, the cry of the Children of Israel is come unto me; and I have
seen the Opr^ssion werewith the Egyptians Oppress them.

Come now therefore, and I will send thee unto Ph^raoh, that thou may bring
forth my People, the Children of Israel out of Egypt.

H^re ye see, he owns them for his People, and calls them Children of Israel,
the Seed of Jacob his chosen.

And afterward commends them, for acknowledging his Rule and Government over
them, by the Hand and Word of Moses, when they spoke thus to him at the Foot of
Mount Sinai. Goye near, (say they) and hear all that the Lord our God shall
say, and speak thou unto us all, that the Lord our God, shall Speak unto thee,
and we will ^ear it, and do it.

And the Lord heard the Voice of your words, ( says Moses) when ^e spoke unto
me, and the Lord said unto me, I have heard the Voice of the Words of the
People, which they have spoken unto thee, they have well spoken. Deuteronomy. 5. 27,
28.

Thrice besides this time, had they made the like Protestation in Exo. 19. 2.

They departed from Rephidim, and were come to the Desert of Sinai, and
encamped before the Mount.

And Moses went up unto God, and the Lord called unto him out of the Mountain,
saying, Thus shall thou say unto the House of Jacob, and tell the Children of
Israel; Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bare you on
Eagles Wings, and brought you unto my self.

Now therefore, if ye will Obey my Voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye
shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all People; for all the Earth is
mine.

And ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests and an holy Nation. These are the
words which thou shall speak unto the Children of Israel.

And Moses came and called for the Elders of the People; and laid before their
Faces all these words which the Lord commanded him.

And all the People answered together, and said, All that the Lord has spoken
that will we do. and Moses returned the Words of the People unto the Lord.

And at another time Exodus 24. 3.

Moses came and told the People all the words of the Lords, and all the
Judgments; and all the People answered with one Voice, and said, All the Words
which the Lord has said, will we do.

And again at ver. 7. Moses took the Book of the Covenant, and Read in the
Audience of the People, and they said, All that the Lord has said, will we do,
and be Obedient.

Now who would ever have thought, that these Men, after such Solemn Vows,
Promises, and Protestations, made in the hearing of God, Angels and Men, would
so soon after, as they did utterly renounce and deny them; and wipe their
Mouths with a clean Handkerchief of pretended Holiness, as if they had never
promised any such thing at all.

To day they promise to obey him in all things, and in a short time after, in
an assaulting manner, tell him to his Face, That he took too much upon him, to
lift up himself above them, to exercise Authority in Commanding them, or
showing them their Duty; and this so unexpectedly to Moses, that with
astonishment and wonder, he fell upon his Face, and admires that such formerly
so good Subjects, should now turn Rebels: For he only is a Rebel which was a
good Subject, and afterward Revolts from his obedience,

O that I could say, that that subtle insi^uating Beast, that old ^erpe^t,
which is called the Devil and Satan, had not in our Days put into practice,
and acted upon the Stage o^ the World, the like, nay worse things by many
Degrees, if worse may be against a Faithful, Pious, Prudent Prince to his
Subjects, as ever Moses was to the People under him, all Circumstances
considered, I mean King Charles I. of Blessed Memory.

For who would have believed? Or who would have thought that those English
Patrio's, Seir-named the Long Parliament? Legally Elected, to sit there for the
Service of God, their King* and Country* after they had at the beginning of
their Session taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and within a while
after formed, and took a Solemn Protestation, explaining the sense and meaning
of them both, and in such a form of dreadful Words, which I would not here
incert, did Inot sear from many Symptoms ap^arent, that there are yet some Men
alive, sick of the same Disease; and are still sitting to hatch the Cockatrice
Egg, the Fruit whereof may (if God in Mercy prevent it not) prove a fiery
flying Serpent.

The Protesta^ion generally ord^red to be taken, Die Mercu. 5 May, 1641.
I A. B Do in the Presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest to
maintain, and def^nd, as far as Lawfully I may, with my Life, Power, and
Estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion, express^d in the Doctrine of the
Church of England; against all Popery, and Popish Innovations, within this
Realm, co-trary to the same; and according to the Duty of my Allegiance to His
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate,; as also the Power, and Privileges
of Parliament, the Lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject; and every
Person, that makes this Protestation in whatsoever, he shall do in the Lawful
pursuance of the same. And to my Power as far as Lawfully I may, I will oppose,
and by all good ways and means, endeavor to bring to Conaigne Punishment all
such as shall either by Force, Practice, Councils, Plots, Conspiracies, or
otherwise, do anyth^ng to the contrary of any thing in this present
Protestation contained. And further that I shall in all Just and Honorable
ways, ende^vour to prese^ve the Union and Peace between the Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland and neither for Fear, Hope, nor other Respect,
shall Relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Protestation.

Now what could be more said to Testify and declare Loyalty, and Allegiance
then these Men did, in this their Protestation, and who ever performed less?
For in a short time after, they violated every Branch of it, and like mad Men
tore it all to pieces; so that in them was fulfilled the word of the Lord, by
the Prophet Hosea, The Spiritual Man is mad. Nay, like worse than Bedlams, who
violate themselves no farther then their Garments, and the Hair of their Heads;
but these Men stripped not the Body only (which are all the Kings Subjects, the
whole Commonwealth, of their Garments of Justice, Equity, and Right, Law, and
Property, Reason, and Religion, but the Head of all its Hair, that is, the King
of his Militia; and proceeded yet further in their Madness, as to tear their
own Head, the Head of their own King) from their own Body, the Body of the
Commonwealth.

All which the Engine of Rebellion Completed, for so that Blessed Mar^yr
Styles it* and compares the creeping Insinuations of it, to an Instrument with
Screws, which moves, and Screws Men on (1) to question the Lawful Commands of
Superiors; then (2) to dislike them. (3) then to disobey them (4) then to
resist them. (5) after that to assault them. (7) and at last to embrew their
Hands in the Sacred Blood of their Prince.

Not much unlike to this Comparison of Rebellion to an Engine with Screws, does
the Prophet Samuel compare Rebellion to Whitchcraft: Now Whitchcraft, is a
deceitful Cheat, and has these seven Devils Heads growing upon its Shoulders.

1. To be that in appearance, which in Substance it is not.

2. To promise what it never performs.

3. To envy the happy Estate of others.

4. To Bless and Curse with one Breath.

5. To pretend that what it Acts, is done by the Power of God, and good Prayers.

6. To please it self in doing Mischief.

7. To be hardened with Impenitency.

Now what smart proficients, these Men in my Text, were in this Cursed Act,
their Life and Death plainly showed.

1. They were Saints in their Words, but in their Actions wicked M^n.

2. They promise that Obedience, which they never performed.

3. They envy the happiness of Moses and Aaron, Psalm. 106. 16. They envyed
Moses also in the Camp, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord.

4. They call Moses, their Lord to day, and cry him down for an Usurp^r
tomorrow. Deliver their Sacr^fices into Aar^ns H^nds today, and wrest the
Offi^e of a Sacrificer, out of his Hands on the morrow. H^nce Moses charged
them with this presumption, ver. 10, 1. And seek ye the Priesthood also, and
for which Cause, both thou^and all thy Compa^y are gathered against the Lord.

5. That they pretend^d the Power of God amongst them; it has been already
proved out o^ their own Mouths, ver. 3.

6. That they did delight in Mischief, their gathering the People together
against the Rulers, which God had placed over them, was a clear Evidence.

7. And that they dyed (under the Charms of Spiritual Whitchcraft) Impenitent
Rebels, the just Judgment of God did plainly show.

Reason 5. Such Men's Principles if hearkened to, and followed, will lead unstable
Souls into a State of Reprobation.

And indeed, there is little or no difference betwixt a Rebel, and a Reprobate:
If ye call a Man a Rebel, ye call him a Reprobate, and if he be really the one,
he is certainly the other.

They are inseparable Companions; for he only is a Reprobate, that has once
known the Truth, and in some measure professed it, and at last withdraws his
Affection from it; and gives himself up to follow the Dictates of his own
^nstable Heart.

Here comes in Reprobation in its right place, for he is not a Reprobate, that
dies in the State of natural blindness, and ignorance of God and his Ways; but
he that has known both, and revolts from them, this Man is a right Reprobate.

Five times in the Sacred Scriptures, is the word Reprobate mentioned, and in
every one of them the word bears the same Sense.

The Prophet Jeremiah, is the first that mentions it, Chap. 6. 30. (he was a
Prophet Ordained of God before he was born, to be a Teacher to the Nations, and
Sanctified from his Mothers Womb; to show them the true and right way to
eternal Happiness; and therefore perfectly knew what Epithet, to give to every
one of them, in their several Degrees and Stations; and he has given the
unstable and Revolting Israelites, the Epithet of Reprobate, Chap. 6. 30.

Reprobate Silver* shall Men call them, because the Lord has rejected them.

The Latin Translation renders it thus,

Argentum reprobum vocantur illi, quia Reprobat Jehova* illos.

So that by the Latin Translation, and our English Translation compared, the
Words Reprobate and Reject have one Signification.

And why did the Lord Reject and call them Reprobates? Why verily the Prophet
himself, has showed it unto us in such large Characters, that he that runs may
read it, except he wilfully shuts his Eyes, and resolves not to see it; it is
set down in ver. 16, 17, 18, 19.

Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for the old Paths,
where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your Souls;
but they said. We will not walk therein.

Also I set Watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of the Trumpet; but
they said, We will not hearken.

Therefore hear, ye Nations, and know O Congregation, what is among them.

H^ar, O Earth, behold, I will bring Evil upon this People, even the Fruit of
their thoughts, because they have not hearkened unto my Word, nor to my Law, but
Rejected it.

From hence it is evident, that by their first Revolting from their ancient
Paths, and good old Ways, which God had bounded out for them, by the Ministry
of his Word, and Authority of those Watchmen, or Overseers, whom he had set
over them; and their Contumatious Refusal to return to them again, they
Reprobated themselves, and so God Rejected them, and calls them grievious
Revolters, walking with Slanderers, out-faceing with brazen Impudency, the
Commands of their Governors, ver. 28. (and at last Proclaims them by the Mouth
of the Prophet) Reprobate Silver shall Men call them, because the Lord has
rejected them.

2. The second, that mentions it, is the Apostle St. Paul, Romans 1. 28. God
gave them over to a Reprobate Mind, the Reason for it, he gives in the former
part of the ver. in these words, And even as they did not like to retain God in
their Knowledge, So God gave them over to a Reprobate mind.

The next place is likewise a Testimony of the same Author 2. Cor. 13. 5

Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove your own selves: know ye
not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates?

Now that many of this Church, to whom he thus writes, were Revol^ing from the
Truth, (which they had formerly embraced) and Scismatically going off from the
Body of the Church; of which by an outward Profession, they had for a long time
been Members, its evident from several passages in both his Epistles to them.

1. He calls them the Church of God at Corinth. 1. Cor. 1. 2.

2. Thanks God for them, that they were enriched with all Utterance and
Knowledge; and that they came behind in no Gift, 1. 1. 4, 7.

3. Persuades them to unity of Judgment, and avoiding of Divisions, yea,
beseeches them in these Words, 1. Cor. 1. 10. I Beseech you, Brethren, by the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, (that is, in the Name of our Anointed Savior)
that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions among you; but
that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same Judgment.

4. Checks them, for entertaining several Errors, as the eating of Meat offered
to Idols, contrary to the Apostolical Decree at Jerusalem, which he brought
from thence in his own Person, and delivered to them with his own Hands, Chap.
8.

5. Reproves them, for Praying in the Church with their Heads covered, Chap. 11.

6. For Profaning the Lords Supper, by their undecent carriage at the
Communion thereof, Chap. II.

7. Sharply Rebukes them, for denying the Resurrection of the Dead, Chap. 15.

All which Errors, being directly contrary to their former Faith, and
Profession of the Gospel, which they received and embraced at his first
Preaching of the Gospel to them; he earnestly exhorts them to a serious
Examination of their present and former State, and so to make a speedy return
to their first love of the Truth, from which, they were now falling into a
State of Reprobation,

The fourth place where the word Reprobate is mentioned, is in Paul's second
Epistle to Timothy, 3. 8. 13, 14,

As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the Truth: Men
of corrupt minds, Reprobate concerning the Faith.

But evil Men, and Saducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being
deceived.

But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and has been assured
of, knowing of whom thou have learned them.

These Men, whom he here calls Reprobates, must needs have Relation to them,
whom he names in the first Chap. of his two Epistles to Timothy, the first
Bishop of the Church of Ephesus.

In the 1 Timothy 1. 20. He names Hymeneus and Alexander, whom, he there says, he
had delivered up to Satan, for making a Shipwreck of Faith, and a good
Conscience, ver. 19.

Now I am apt to think that this Hymeneus, whom he mentions here, is the same
whom he mentions in his second Epistle* Chap, 2. ver. 17. And their word will
eat as does a Canker: of whom are Hymeneus and Philerus.

Who concerning the Truth have erred, saying, That the Resurrection is past
already, and overthrow the Faith of some: That is, throw them into a State of
Reprobation.

Two others he names, in 2 Timothy 1. 15. This thou know, that all they which
are in Asia are turned away from me; (that is are turned Reprobates, and have
forsaken their first love to the Truth) of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.

Hold fast the form of sound Words, which thou have heard of me, ver. 13. And I
am apt to believe that the former mentioned Alexander, is the same he bids
Timothy beware of, 2 Timothy 4. 14, 15. Alexander the Copper-smith did me much
evil; the Lord Reward him according to his Works.

Of whom be thou aware also; for he has greatly withstood our Words.

There can be no greater Enemies to the Truth, then those that once professed it,
and at last revolt from it.

I am further apt to think, that this Alexander, is the same that took Paul's
part in the uproare at Ephesus) against the Priests of Diana's Temple, Acts 19.
33. And they drew Alexander out of the Multitude, the Jews putting him forward.
And Alexander beckoned with his hand, and would have made his defense unto the
People.

But when they knew that he was a Jew, all with one Voice, about the space of
two Hours, cried out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians.

But whither it where the same, or some other of that name, he made himself a
Reprobate to his Faith, and Profession of the Gospel.

And thus much briefly to the fifth Reason, to prove it dangerous and unsafe
for Christians to Congregate themselves with any such People, though never so
full of Knowledge and seeming Holiness; that do deny Conformity to such Laws,
and Ordinances, which God has given to them, by the Hands of faithful
Governors.

2. I am come now to the second thing considered in the Explication, and
therein to show you what some of the Preposterous and unlucky Dispositions of
these Men's Spirits were, under such spetious Pretenses, and first,

It did manifestly appear, that they were of a proud Spirit, Pride had overcome
their Wits, (as we usually say of an haughty Person) they were proud of their
ex^raordinary Gifts and parts, by which they had gotten a Name amongst the
discontented Israelites, and a sedit^o^s party amongst them, I mean among that
party of them, that were so; for many of them stood fast to God, and his
Servant Moses, in observing the Rules of that Religion, which contained a
prescript Form of Laws and Ordinances, cemented, with harmless and inoffensive
Ceremonies, as ye have already heard, and which they, themselves once promised
to observe and keep.

But now their spiritual Pride was such, and their Minds so estranged from that
their Promise and Profession, that they dare tell him to his Face, That he took
too much upon him, to lift up himself above them.

This one Fly of spiritual Pride, had utterly marred their whole Box of Sacred
Ointment, (manifest in their former Submission and Obedience) and engaged the
Lord to oppose them.

Had not spiritual Pride been the Root of their Sin, the Lord had not set
himself against them, for the humble and poor in Spirit, are his joy and
Delight: but the proud and haughty in Spirit, are the Objects of his hatred and
contempt.

The Princely Psalmist affirms it, Psalm. 138. 6. Though the Lord be high, yet
has he respect unto the lowly; but the proud he knows afar off. And another
Scripture says, God resists the proud, but gives Grace to the Humble. James
4. 6.

But the Apostle St. Peter, is much larger in this point, 1 Pet. 5. 5. Likewise
ye Younger, submit your selves unto the Elder; yea, all of you be subject one
to another, and be Clothed with Humility* for God resists the proud, and
gives Grace to the humble.

Both of these Apostles have their Quotation from Solomon, who in the Original
is larger then both, Proverbs 3. 33. 34. 35.

The Curse of the Lord, is in the House of the Wicked: But he blesses the
Habitation of the Just.

Surely he scorneth the Scorners; but he gives Grace unto the lowly.

The Wise shall inherit Glory, but shame shall be the promotion of Fools.

Spiritual Pride, tho'it be an horrible Sin, yet it is very hard to be
discerned.

The Apostle St. Paul, was very near falling into this Sin, and very likly he
was for it, as he Testifies himself, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Least I should be exalted
above measure through the abundance of Revelations, there was given to me a
Thorn in the Flesh, the Messenger of Satan to buffet me. The pricking Briers,
of Hunger, Cold, Nakedness, Reproaches, Necessities, Distresses for Christ,
ver. 9, 10.

O my Friends, with Grief I speak it, it was spiritual Pride, that laid the
Cornerstone of England's late and Lamentable Miseries, Acted by a Company of
Pretended Saints, who never left exalting themselves till they had trod upon
the Crown, and Dignity of the Lords Anointed, (and at that time, with him, the
true Protestant Religion, and all the Devout and Sincere Professors thereof)
and at last Murdered him, at the Gates of his own Palace, and trampled his
Sacred Blood under their base and dirty Feet.

All this the Pride of their Spirit carried them forth, to Enact against, as
sweetly qualified, and as bravely an accomplished Prince, as ever breathed upon
the face of the of the Earth, (still I say) Jesus Christ excepted.

Nor is it to be doubted, but these spiritual proud Men in my Text, had not
God, by a sudden overthrow prevented them, would have served Moses, and Aaron
with the same Sauce, having already drawn up a Charge against them as
implacable Enemies, to the Liberty they aimed at, and Murdering so many of the
People of the Lord. (as they called themselves) although they were Eye Witnesses,
that it was the immediate Hand of God, that struck some of them Dead with Fire;
and that the Earth of her own accord, opened her Mouth, and swallowed up the
rest.

O Lord, for thy Mercies sake, save us for the time to come, from such evil
proud Spirits. And I beseech you, my Brethren, and Friends, hear and receive
King Solomon's advice, Prove. 25. 21. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King,
and meddle not with them, that are given to change, for their Calamity shall
rise suddenly,

For every one that is proud in Heart, is an abomination to the Lord; though hand
join in hand, he shall not go unpunished.

The Lord will destroy the House of the proud. Prove. 16.

And elsewhere he says, A Man's pride shall bring him low; but honor shall
uphold the humble in Spirit. Prove. 29. 23.

There is a Day of Account coming, and it draws very near; it is called, The
Day of the Lord of Hosts. And the Prophet Isa. says, That the Day of the Lord
of Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and they shall be
brought low.

And again in Chap. 28. 1. he cries out against this Sin, in denouncing a Woe
against it, saying,

Woe to the Crown of Pride, the Crown of Pride shall be trodden under Foot. We
cannot read of proud Persons in the Scripture, but we shall read of their
downfall.

2. They were of a self-conceited Spirit, they thought none better, nor Holyer
then themselves, for if they would have given the preference to any, they would
surely have given it to Moses, whom the Son of God thought worthy to keep him
Company forty Days, and forty Nights at one time. And afterward on the
Mount, at his Transfiguration. Mat. 17.

And this, they knew full well, as the Sacred Record assures us, in Exo. 24. 1.
2. 3.

And he said unto Moses, come up unto the Lord, thou and Aaron, Nadab and
Abihu, and seventy of the Elders of Israel; and Worship ye afar off.

And Moses alone shall come near the Lord; but they shall not come nigh,
neither shall the People go up with him.

And Moses came and told the People all the Words of the Lord, and all the
Judgments; and all the People answered with one Voice, and said, All the Words
which the Lord has said, will we do.

It does not appear that at this time, there was one Dissenter, or
Nonconformist amongst them.

And yet within a little time after, afew seditious Israelites, whereof Corah
was chief; had so seduced the Church of God in Israel, that if God had not
appeared himself, with a mighty Hand, and stretched out Arm of Heavenly Power,
they would not only have denied Moses the Supremacy over them, but have brought
his Neck to the Block, or otherwise have ended his Days by some violent Death,
for they often spoke of Stoning him.

Thus you see, that for all their pretended Holiness, they shut their Eyes, and
will not see, nor open their Ears to Hearken to God, nor the Rulers of his
Church.

For Instance, take the Word of God Number. 12. 5. And the Lord came down in the
Pillar of the Cloud, and stood in the Door of the Tabernacle, and called Aaron
and Miriam; and they both came forth.

And he said, Hear now my Words; if there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord
will make my self known unto him in a Vision, and will speak unto him in a
Dream.

My Servant Moses is not so, who is Faithful in all my House.

With him will I speak Mouth to Mouth, even apparently, and not in dark
Speeches; and the Similitude of the Lord shall he behold, wherefore then were
ye not afraid to speak against my Servant Moses.

And the Anger of the Lord was kindled against them, and he departed.

There are seven things to be enquired into, from this Proof.

1. Which of the three Persons in the Godhead, it was, that came down from
Heaven in the Pillat of the Cloud; the Son of God it was, no doubt.

2. What his business was, that he came about, viz. to Examine two Criminals, to
Arraign, and Judge them.

3. What their Crime was, viz. Speaking against Moses.

4. Aarons Penitency, and the benefit of his Clergy.

5. Miriams Impenitency, and Punishment. 6. Moses's Pity, and Prayer for her,
which voided the perpetuity of the Sentence.

7. The fairness of the Trial, he stood in the Door of the Tabernacle, that all
Israel might hear, and see, and take warning.

God might have spoken so loud, that Heaven and Earth should have heard it, so
as they should not have need to come forth for Audience; but now he calls them
out to the Bar, (that they may be seen) it did not content him, to chide them
within Doors; the shame of their Fault had been lesser, in a private Rebuke,
but the Scandal of it, required open Reproof.

From these seven Considerations, I have Collected these Observations.

1. That God, is the God of Order, Rule, and Government; their Repining was
public; and where the Sin is not afraid of the Light, God loves not the
Reproof should be smothered.

2. That it is a greater Sin, than Men are aware of, to speak against the Rule,
and Order of Government, either in Church, or State.

3. That in the end, God will severely punish all such Dispisers, of such Rule,
Order, and Government.

There are two Evangelical Witnesses to these three Points Peter, and Jude,
both of them Apostles to Christ.

Peter's Testimony, is Recorded in his first Epistle, 2 Chap. 13, 14. Ver.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lords sake; whether it be
to the King as Supreme.

Or unto Governors, as unto them, that are sent of him, for the Punishment of
Evil Doers, and for the praise of them that do well.

And to this he adds, 2. Epistle, 2. to assure us that, Such there are, and
have been, as do speak Evil of Government, and shall not go unpunished.

Ver. 9, 10. The Lord, knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptation; and to
reserve the Unjust, unto the Day of Judgment, to be Punished.

But chiefly them that walk after the Flesh, and despise Government,
Presumptious are they, Self-willed, they are not afraid to speak Evil of
Dignities. The Apostle Jude, Harps on the same String; and particularizeth
these Men in my Text, at ver. 11. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way
of Cain, and ran greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward, and Perish in
the gainsaying of Corah.

And then at ver. 19. gives a Mark, how to know them, saying, These are they,
which separate tbemselves, sensual, not having the Spirit; though they said they
had.

3. They were of a self confident Spirit, they were confident in themselves,
that God would own them in their design.

For when Moses Summoned them to Appear before the Lord, to answer to their
Seditious Words; they accepted the Challenge, and undertook to dispute it
before the Lord in a Religious Duty, too manifest in ver. 19, 17, 18, 19. in
these Words,

And Moses said unto Corah, be thou, and all thy Company, before the Lord, thou
and they, and Aaron to Morrow.

And take every Man his Censer, and put Incense thereon; and bring ye before
the Lord, every Man his Censer, two Hundred and Fifty Censers, thou also, and
Aaron, each one his Censer.

And they took every Man his Censer, and put Fire in them, and laid Incense
thereon, and stood in the Door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, with
Moses and Aaron, Cheek by Jole with them.

And Corah, gathered all the Congregation against them, ( either by some Solemn
League, and Covenant, or some Engagement or other) unto the Door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, and the Glory of the Lord appeared.

There never was such a Challenge made in the Church of God upon Earth, before
or since; never such apparent Confidence in a Seditious Party, to accept of,
and answer it, known, or heard of, although some People of our times, have
shreudly immitated them.

Nor did ever such a Stickler appear in a Quarrel; for God himself appeared on
Moses and Aarons side; and at his first entrance on the Stage, which was the
Tabernacle, he gave the Spectators a glimps of his Glory; and made bare his
Arm, and uttered with his Lips, these dreadful Words, ver. 21.

Separate your selves from among this Congregation, that I may consume them in
a Moment.

As if God had said, Moses, and Aaron, stand ye by, and let me alone to deal
with these Seditious Rebels, they will be to hard for you; let me lift up my
Hand against them, the Quarrel is mine, as well as yours.

For I have whet my glittering Sword, and my Hand shall take hold on Vengeance;
and I will abate their Pride, assuage their Envy, discover their Design, and
overthrow their Devices.

That all the Earth may know, that I hate, and abhor all Pretenses to Religion,
that are acted, and done in Disobedience, and Rebellion, to my Commands; and
contrary to the Rule, and Order of Government, that I have Established in my
Church.

And at the first Blow, he made at Corah, and his Two Hundred and Fifty
Confidents, he struck their Censers out of their Hands, and with a flash of
Fire Consumed them to Ashes.

As if the Lord had said, What have you to do to handle Censers; to meddle with
Public Matters of Religion; seeing ye do it in Spite, and Contempt of the
Government, (Established by Law) for Strife, and Debate, and in Disobedience,
and Rebellion against the Governors, that I have set over you.

For in very deed, Envy at the Established Government in the Church, was the
seed Plot of Corah's Sin, and Dathan, and Abirams Conspiracy.

And therefore, it was high time, for God to put to his helping Hand, to
Vindicate Moses, and Aaron; for they were but God's Servants, employed by him,
to lead them in the right way to Happiness, and to Govern them therein, by a
Sacred Platform of good and wholesome Laws, and Ordinances.

As it is written Psalm. 77. 20. Thou leadest thy People, like a Flock, by the
Hand of Moses, and Aaron, ( i. e.) Magistracy, and Ministry. It Is true, Christ
Jesus, is the Supreme Governor, and Lord of all things in Heaven, and in
Earth; but he does not Govern in either place, by his own and immediate Power.

But by Angels, and Men, Deligated by him, to bear Rule for him, over their
fellow Creatures; and from them, expects an Account of their Steward-ship, in
such their places of Trust.

The Sacred Text, is my Voucher, for this Assertion, Prove. 8; 15, 16. By me
Kings Reign, and Princes Decree Justice.

By me, Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the Judges of the Earth.

And elsewhere, in Psalm. 78. 70, 71, 72. He chose David also, his Servant, and
took him from the Sheepfold.

From following the Ews great with Young; he brought him to feed Jacob his
People, and Israel his Inheritance.

So he fed them, according to the Integrity of his Heart, and guided them by
the skilfulness of his Hands.

Our Church Translation of the Psalms, reads it thus, So he fed them, with a
Faithful, and a true Heart, and Ruled them Prudently with all his Power.

This of the Psalmist, is an Extract of that Message, which God sent by the
Prophet Nathan, to King David, 2 Samuel 7, 8, 9.

Now therefore, so shall thou say unto my Servant David, Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, I took thee from the Sheep-fould, from following the Sheep, to be Ruler
over my People Israel.

And I was with thee whither soever thou wentest, and have cut off all thine
Enemies out of thy sight; and have made thee a great name, like unto the name
of the great Men, that are in the Earth.

Now when the Spirit of Sedition shall possess the Minds of Men, and prompt
them not only to dislike, but speak Evil of such Dignities, and those that
enjoy them; and to assemble in Companies, to Assault their Governors, as these
Men in my Text, did Moses, and Aaron, whom they knew God had set over them, and
frequently acknowledged it.

No wonder, the Psalmist, in Psalm. 119. 126. said, It was time for God to work,
when Men went about to undermine the Laws of God, to make them void.

The Translation of our Church Psalms, reads it thus, It is time for the Lord,
to lay to thy Hand, for they have destroyed thy Law.

When these Men in my Text, had gathered the Congregation together, against
Moses, and Aaron, what to do? Why to cut them off, and Subvert the Government,
both of Church and State.

It was high time for God to appear in flaming Fire, to take Vengeance upon
them; and pluck of the Crown of spiritual Pride, from their haughty Heads.

Which he did, as you have heard, and so rejected their Confidences, and
blasted their intended Proceedings.

4. They were of an envious Spirit, they envied the State and Dignity, which
God had conferred upon Moses, and Aaron, in Constituting them, their Governors
in the Church.

This ill Quality, Cooperated with the rest, to provoke them to a Commotion,
and civil Discord, amongst themselves.

And that the old Serpent, had shed the Spawn of Envy, into their Spirits; the
Kingly Propet affirms it, with a sad Memento, 106. 16. 17, 18. They envied
Moses in the Camp, and Aaron, the Saint of the Lord.

The Earth opened, and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the Congregation of
Abiram.

And a Fire, was kindled in their Company; the Flame burnt up the ungodly.

By the last words in ver. 17. viz. The Congregation of Abiram. It is very
probable, that Abiram had a gathered Church which some of our Modern
Dissenters, call the Congregational, or Independent way of gathering Churches.

And if so, as it is very likly, then he was the first, that ever I read of,
who gathered a false Church out of a true one.

And so by the Text, it is clear, that whilst Corah, and his Confederates were
affronting Moses, and Aaron in public, Dathan, and Abiram were at a private
Meeting, in their Tents, Praying for their good Success, or waiting for a Watch
word from them, when they should rush forth with Weapons, to Assault their
Rulers,

For when Moses, gave a charge to the rest of the People to come away from
their Tents, they came forth, and stood in their Tent-doores, with their Wives,
and Children, with brazen faced Impudency, as if they would outface God, and
all just Authority.

I did not know, till after more than Forty times reading this Ancient Record
of Holy Writ, and an exact Inspection into the Design of the Seditious Party,
with a deligent Observation of their prerended Holiness grounded upon false
Principles.

Their gathering the Common People, like Herds of Goats, in a Tumultuous
manner, against their Rulers, their crying them down, to get into their places.

I say, till I had diligently consulted the Record of this lamentable History,
I did not know that Presbiter^, and Independency, were of so long a standing in
the World. For Chorah, an inferior Levite,, contends with Aaron, to level the
Office of an High Priest, to that of a Levite; and flatly tells him, that he
takes too much upon him, to lift up himself above them, being all of one Tribe,
he sawnoreason, there should be any difference in Dignity, and therefore he
resolves to Conform no longer, but set up for himself, and have.

Elders under him, of his own choosing.

And as for Dathan, and Abiram, they defi^ all Superintendency, for it were
they, as well as Corah, that told Moses and Aaron, That they took too much upon
them, to lift up themselves above them.

They were able of themselves to give Laws, and Orders, to their Congregated
Proselites, without their Lordly ^urisdiction; and in this State of
Independency, they died Impenitently. How fitly may we apply the Words of
Solomon, to the Former, and Latter Troubles of the Church, Eccle. 1. 9, 10.

The thing that has been, is that, which shall be; and that which is done, is
that which shall bedone; and there is no new thing under the Sun.

Is there any thing, whereof it may be said, see this is new? It has been of
old time before us.

And whence is it, but from the Envy, and Malice of the old Serpenr, who is
called the Devil, and Satan? Who as our Savior says, John 8. 44.

Was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth. And so became
an Enemy to all Government above himself, which Practice he continues still in
the World, by seducing the Sons of Men, into his old Principles of Disobedience.

It Is true, indeed this old Serpent does often renew his Shape, but never
alters his ill Qualities* he often changes his Habit, but not his Disposition,
alters his name, but not his Nature* shifts places, but retains still his old
Principles.

I will conclude this Branch, with the Sacred Caution of the Apostle St. Peter,
1. Ephesians. 3. 17, 18.

Therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware, least ye being
lead away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own Stedfastness.

But grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
to whom be Glory both now, and for ever, Amen.

5. They were of a sullen, selfwill'd Spirit, nothing would please them, but
what proceeded from their own Wills.

They answered Moses, as some of their Successors did the Prophet Jeremy,
Chap. 19. 11. Return ye from the Evil of your ways. They said,

Ver. 19 There is no hope, but we will walk after our own devices, and we will
every one do the Imagination of his evil Heart.

Yea, when they were in Captivity in Babylon, they would not be Reclaimed from
their own Wills; but they made him this desperate Answer, As for the Word,
which thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken to
thee, but we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes out of our own Mouth.
Jer. 44. 14.

Spiritual Wickedness, does not only blind, but bind the Spirits of unstable
Men, with strong Cords of selfwill'dness.

It is a hard thing to recover any one out of any Error, that has laid the
Reins of his own will; into the neck of his own Judgment.

Sic volo, sic Jubeo, stat proratione voluntas, His own Will, is the Rule he
resolves to walk by, and to any other Persuasion, he is like the deaf Adder,
that stops her Ear at the Voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely.

One of the sorest Plagues, that God can inflict on any Man, is to leave him to
his own Will, and the Councils of his own Heart, which must needs destroy him.

Some do think, that Liberty of Conscience, is the only way to propogate the
Gospel, and the surest way to Enthrone Christ in the Hearts of the Sons and
Daughters of Men.

And, I say the contrary, and will prove, that there is no such thing in
Religion, as Liberty of Conscience; such a Liberty of Conscience I mean, as for
every Man to serve God after what way, and manner, pleases him best.

It is easier to keep Sin out of the Conscience, than to cast it out when it is
in.

If that Light, which is within us, naturally (for God has lighted up a Candle
in every Man's Conscience) be darkened with Spiritual Errors, how great must that
Darkness needs be?

The Devil, is the Prince of Darkness, but he can Transform himself into an
Angel of Light. He is a fiery flying Serpent; and if he can but get in his
Head, he will quickly wind in his whole Body.

How many Virgin Professors, have lost their Spiritual Chastity in an hour, by
gadding abroad, to trim their way, by thinking to go in a cleaner Path, than
the Highway of Salvation is, and so in a trice, deprived themselves of that
Peace of Conscience, which they have not recovered again whilst they have
lived.

O take heed, then of being Humorsom, and Selfwill'd under your Profession of
Religion, and Pray, that the Lord will not leave you to your own Wills, nor to
the Councils of your own Hearts, nor to the Wisdom of your own Spirits, nor to
the Nerves of your own Strength, nor to the Steps of your own ways, nor to the
course of your own Natures, nor to the Liberty of your own Consciences, for if
he should, ye are in the Highway to eternal Destruction.

FINIS.
A POSTSCRIPT To all sorts of Dissenters From the Church of ENGLAND, As it is
now Established by Law.
COme, my Brethren, and Friends, let us Reason together; and as the Lord of
Hosts, the Lord Jesus, by Haggai the Prophet, has commanded, Consider our
Ways. Chap 1. 7. And that, which I humbly conceive, may be most advantageous
for us all in this Affair, will be by comparing our ways, wherein we walk, with
those Ancient Paths, wherein the Servants of God did walk in, of Old.

My Reason for this Conception, is grounded upon the Word of the Lord* by the
Mouth of the Prophet Jeremiah, Chapter 6, ver. 16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in
the Ways, and see, and ask for the old Paths; where is the good way, and walk
therein, and ye shall find Rest for your Souls.

Now, I beseech you, my Brethren, consider that this Prophet, was not sent only
to the Jews, but also to the rest of the Nations; and therefore the Words of
his Prophecy belong to us, as well as to them; for when he wrote this Prophecy,
he inserts his Commission, which runs thus, Chap. 1. ver. 4. 5, 6, 7. Then the
Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Before I Formed thee in the Belly, I
knew thee, and before thou came out of the Womb, I Sanctified thee, and
Ordained thee a Prophet to the Nations.

Then said I, ah, Lord God, behold, I cannot speak, for I am a Child.

But the Lord said unto me, say not I am a Child, for thou shall go to all that
I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee, thou shall speak.

Then the Lord put forth his Hand, and touched my Mouth, and the Lord said unto
me, behold, I have put my Words into thy Mouth.

See, I have this Day set thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root
out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, and to build, and to
plant.

I have read the Book of this Prophet, very frequently in my daily Course of
reading the Holy Scriptures, and have taken diligent notice of the Measures he
took in delivering it, which I humbly conceive, to consist mainly in these Six
Heads.

1. He gives them a Breviate of his Call, and Commission from God, to his Place
and Office.

2. Gives them a Draught of his Charge against them, for their manifold Sins,
Iniquities and Transgressions, which with gries of Heart, and with Checks
bedewed with Tears, he frequentlyrepeats.

3. A Demonstration, of God's just Judgment against them, for such their
Tran^gressions.

4. Exhortations, and Admonitions, Tears, and Entreaties, to for sake their own
evil Ways, and so prevent the Execution of those Judgments, which he Denounced
against them.

5. The Way and Method he took, to persuade them there unto.

6. The nature of the Punishment to be inflicted on them, in case they did not
return, and leave their ill Courses.

Now it is very remarkable, that before he charge them with any gross
Polutions of the Flesh, or Profane Debaucheries, he begins with their Faults
of Spiritual Wickedness; and amongst the many Particulars these following are
some.

1. He charge them with their unkindness, and indiscretion, in forsaking
their first Love, to the first Principles of their Profession of Religion,
Chap. 2. 1. 2. in these words,

Moreover, the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying,

Go and Cry in the Streets of Jerusalem, and say, Thus says the Lord, I
remember thee, the Kindness of thy Youth, the Love of thine espousals, when
thou wentest after me in the Wilderness.

But now they were no such People, they knew better things, or at leastwise,
were resolved so to do, they were now for some Novelties, they must have
Quails, to their Manna, which put the Lord to this Expostulation, Ver. 5.

What Iniquities, have your Fathers found in me that they are gone far from me?
As if the Lord had said, what Evil, do ye find in the Law, and in the
Ordinances thereof, which I set before you, as a Rule to walk by.

2. He charges them with their Delight and Pleasure in changes. Aarons Bells,
made no Music in their Ears, except they Rung the Changes, Chap. 2. 11.

Has a Nation changed their Gods, which are no Gods? But my People have
changed their Glory, for that which does not profit.

Except they might have Alterations and Amendments in the Highway of
Salvation, agreeable to their own Humors, they resolve not to walk in them any
longer.

This made the Lord Expostulate with them again, after this manner, Chap. 2. 31.

O Generations, see ye the Word of the Lord, have I been a Wilderness unto
Israel? A Land of Darkness. Wherefore say my People, we are Lords, we will come
no more unto thee: That is, we are our own Masters, and at our own liberty, to
serve God how, and when we please; and as for the Ancient ways of God, we will
know them no more, so as to walk in them any longer.

And further, at Ver. 33. the Prophet asks them this Question, Why trimmest
thou thy way to seek Love? Therefore, have thou also taught the wicked ones thy
Ways, (i. e.) to forsake the Highway of Salvation.

And then at Ver. 36. He reinforceth this charge, saying Why gaddest thou about
so much, to change thy ways.

Hence it is very remarkable, that in this 2. Chap. the Prophet gives the
unstable Israelites, the reproachful Epithites of Trimmers, Gadders, and
Changlings, as the Product of discontented Spirits, that did not know when they
were well, or at leastwise, would not.

And then in Chap. 6. he follows his Charge and Reproves them.

1. For a stubborn Refusal, to walk in the Ancient ways of the Church.

2. For Revolting from them, by a perpetual Backsliding. Ver. 28.

3. For being no better than Reprobate Silver.

And in Chap. 18, He calls upon them to Return from the Evil of their own new
Ways, to walk in the Ancient and true ways of God, from which they were
(without any just Cause) ungratfully, and unkindly departed. But instead of
harkening to him, they gave him this resolute Answer at ver. 12, There is no
Hope, but we will walk after our own Devices, and we will every one do the
Imaginations of his own Heart. To which dreadful Answer of theirs, the Prophet
makes this lamentable Reply, ver. 13.

Therefore, thus says the Lord, Ask ye now amongst the Heathen, who has heard
such things; the Virgin of Israel has done a very horrible thing. And again,
at ver. 15. he pronounces a dreadful Sentence against them, in the Name of the
Lord, in this Form of Words.

Because my People have forgotten me, and have burnt Incense to Vanity; and
they have caused them to stumble in their ways, from the Ancient Paths, to walk
in Paths, in a way not cast up.

I must confess, I have had great searching of Heart, what the meaning of the
Peoples words might be, in the first Part of their Answer, ( viz.) There is no
Hope. Certainly it could not be, There is no Hope of Salvation. For the close
of their Answer imports the contrary; for they said, We will walk after our own
Devices, and we will every one do the Imaginations of his own Heart. It seems
by this Answer, that they did intend to serve God, some way or other, but it
must be in such a way as pleased them, and in no other way did they intend to
walk.

So that I understand by these Words of theirs, There is no hope, they mean
that the Prophet had no hope of Reclaiming them from following their own ways,
that he might as well hold his Peace and say nothing, as to persuade them to
return from their new Practice, that they had taken up, to Repair to the
Ancient ways of God; and so eager and to earnest, and so intent and resolute
were they to make good their seditious Words, that they were making ready to
run a way from him, and get out of the hearing of him; and this is clear, if we
consider the words of the Prophet, in Chap. 2. 25. His Words There, are these,
Wi^h hold thy Foot from being unshod, and thy Throat from thirst; but thou
said, there is no Hope, no, for I have loved Strangers, and after them will I
go.

They were putting off their Shoes, to run in their Vamps, with more speed and
have to get out of his sight and hearing; and such a thirsty desire had they
after strange Novelties that they could not stay so long with the Prophet as to
give him the hearing of what it was, that he had further to say to them: For he
would willingly have Reasoned with them, butthey were in such have, that they
would not stay to hear the sound of his Trumpet sound a retreat to them, to
return to the good old way, that they had cast behind their Backs; and at last
by their frequent refusing to hear him, and the snapishanswer that they gave
him: He calls Heaven and Earth to bear Witness against them, in such Words as
these,

Be astonished, O ye Heavens at this! And be horribly afraid. Chap. 2 12. And
then with bitter Sighs, calls to the Earth, O! Earth, Earth, Earth, Hear the
Words of the Lord. Chap. 22. 19. and elsewhere, Chap. 6. 17, 18, 19, 20. Where
after he has spoken these Words, I set Watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to
the sound of the Trumpet. But they said, We will not hearken: He then proceeds
in his Appeal, to his former Evidence.

Therefore, here ye Nations, and know O Congregation, what is amongst them.

Hear O Earth, behold, I will bring Evil upon this People, even the Fruit of
their thoughts; because they have not hearkened unto my Word, but Rejected it.

To what purpose comes there to me Incense from Sheba, and the sweet Cane from
a far Country: Your Offerings are not acceptable, nor your Sacrifices sweet
unto me.

From whence, you may observe, if ye will, that the true God accepts of no kind
of Service done to him, that has not the stamp of his ancient High way upon it.

Enquire of all the Prophets, and you will not find one of them, that does not
sharply reprove and inveigh against all sorts of Scismaticks, that have
forsaken the plain Highwayes of Salvation, to follow the Dictates of their own
Hearts, and devise to themselves, new ways of Worshipping God, and that every
one of them did put the Trumpet to his Mouth, and sound a Retreat to them, to
return to the Highway of Salvation, wherein God had formerly led them.

I Confess, we are under a Cloud of God's Anger, and the Rod of his displeasure
is upon us, especially in our Divisions, about Sacred things; for if Unity,
Peace and Concord in a Kingdom, owning Christ for our Lord and Savior, be one
of the choice Blessings that we can wish for, under Heaven, then certainly (by
the rule of Contraries) Divisions, Discords and Dissentions, are one of the
greatest Plagues and Curses, that can possibly ^all upon such a Kingdom, and
People upon Earth.

If Divisions bring Desolations to a well settled Commonwealth, so will
Divisions in the Church, at last, bring ruin and desolation to Religion, and
make us worse than the Heathen: For a People, so divided are in the High way,
to all sorts of Miseries, as Christ has assured, and experience taught us. If
any one beneath Christ, had asserted such a thing, I might have mistrusted his
Prediction, but when the only begotten Son of God, who is truth it self, and
therefore can not possibly lie, for he is his Fathers true and faithful Witness
of all things past, present, and to come. And was not this the Voice of the
Eternal Father from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,
hear ye him. And is not this his saying, A Kingdom divided against it self,
cannot stand, but is brought to desolation, that is, puts the Kingdom where
such Divisions are, into the direct way of Desolation and Destruction.

Now, I say, that since the Son of God has spoken the Word, I dare not give
him the lie, by thinking that a Nation divided in it self, can possibly stand
in a state of security. Therefore, did he give this Advice and Charge to his
Disciples, to have Salt in themselves, and to be at Peace one with another.
Certainly, it was the same thing that the Prophet Jenemiah aimed at, in that
Word of Advice, which with grief of Heart he gave to Jerusalem a little befere
they were carried away Captive into Babylon. Chap. 6. 8.

Be thou Instructed O Jerusalem! Least my Soul depart from thee; least I make
thee Desolate, a Land not Inhabited.

It Is true, that such Offenses will come, but woe be to them, by whom they do
come: o ye think that Christ (the Prince of Peace) will Patronize your
Divisions. Will ye lay the Burden of Spiritual Wickedness upon his Back, and
by force of strange Arguments, compel him to bear another Cross? This would be
one way to Crucify him afresh, and to press him down, as a Cart is pressed
with Sheaves. Are the Divisions of Christians, pleasing to God? Do ye think
that Christ takes it well at your Hands, to Foment so many Divisions, as ye
have crumbled your selves into, since ye have left our Church? Is the Study of
Divisions, the visible mark of Christianity? Is this to do the Will of God on
Earth, as it is done in Heaven? Are there any sort of Diss^nters there? No.

The, Angels were never known since the Fall, to fall out amongst themselves,
either in Heaven above, or in any Service that they have been employed in for
Christ upon Earth. There is no Strife or Contention amongst them, they serve
Christ with one Consent, and Praise him with one Voice; they all Glorify his
name in one Form of sound Words, and Perseverance in the same. Those two
Servants of Christ, the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, and the great Evangelist
St. John, do both agree in their Testimonies concerning this thing. The
Testimony of the Prophet, is written in Chap. 6. 3. And one Cried unto another,
and said, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth, is full of
his Glory. The Testimony of the Evangelist, is written in the Book of the
Revelation Chap. 4. 8. And they Rest not Day and Night, saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

You may plainly perceive by these Sacred Records, that there are no Dissenters
in Heaven; that the Angels do serve Christ in Unity of Spirit, and in
Uniformity of Words. So that we may easily gess, who were the first Dissenters,
even the fallen Angels; and therefore the name of a Dissenter, can be no Glory
to the Professors of the Christian Religion.

But that the fallen Angels, were the first Dissenters from the way of Truth.
The Blessed Jesus, in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom, and Knowledge,
has put the Question out of Doubt, in his Discourse with the Pharisees in John
8. 44. Where after they had told Christ, that Abraham, was their Father, and
that God was their Father; Christ tells them plainly, that they were Related to
neither, but that they were of their Father the Devil; and the Lusts of your
Father will ye do; for he was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in
the Truth.

From these Words of our Savior, we may understaud what the Devils Sin is, for
which they are Reserved in Chains of Darkness unto the Judgment of the great
Day. Also

From Christ's Words here, it is evident, that the fallen Angels did know the
Truth, and by their Unbelief fell from it, and of pure and upright Angels,
became, unclean Spirits and Devils. For as no Man can be blamed for not abiding
in a House wherein he never was, neither would Christ have blamed the Devils
for not abiding in the Truth, if they had not known it, and been Instructed in
it. Wherefore did Christ call Judas, Devil? Have I not chosen Twelve, and one
of you is a Devil? Was it not because he knew the Truth, and Preached the
Truth, and afterward became an Enemy to it? and betrayed his Lord and Master,
that had taught and Instructed him in it, as by his Confession, before he
Hanged himself, it was too manifest.

A Christians Eternal Happiness, consists chiefly in two things.

A true Faith, and an Holy Life. A Judgment rightly informed in matters of
Faith, and a Conversation rightly ordered in the Practical Duties of true
Holiness.

Those Men and Women, whose Lives and Conversations are Holy, are Baptized with
the Holy Ghost; and they that are truly Zealous for the Honor of God's Holy
Name, are Baptized with Fire; so that to be Holy in our Lives, and Zealous in
our Spirits for the Glory of the Holy God, is an outward Testimony of the
inward Baptism of the Holy Ghost and with Fire, precedent to which, is the
Baptism of Water, the Gate of Entrance into an outward Profession of the
Gospel.

Now both these Pillars of the Christian Religion, are apparently to be seen in
the Doctrine and Prayers of our Church, to all that have not shut their Eyes
against it, nor turned their Back upon it.

I am bold therefore to say, that the Service of God in our Church, is Holy,
because it is Founded in the Holy Scriptures, Composed of Precepts, Examples,
or Commands, Collected out of the Holy Scriptures: Therefore many of our
Prayers are called by the Name of Collests, because they are Collected out of
those Portions of Holy Scripture, that are Appointed to be Read that Day that
they are used.

All the Hymns that we use, both at Morning* and Evening Prayer, are the very
Words of the Holy Scriptures, or clearly deduced from them.

Those that Composed it, and set it in that Sacred Order, as it is now
Established by Law. were Dr. Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury. Dr. Ridly,
Bishop of London. Dr. Hooper, Bishop of Gloucester. Dr. Latimer, Bishop of
Worcester. Dr. Thirlby, Bishop of Ely. Dr. Day. Dean of Chichester. Dr. Tailor.
and Dr. Cox, Almoner to King Edward 6 th. with diverse other Pious, Learned,
Holy, and Faithful Men, who out of a Godly Zeal, and Sacred purpo^e to advance
the Glory of God, the Gospel of Christ' and the Salvation of Souls, Formed
these Prayers for the Service of Almighty God, that his Hou^e might be called
(as Christ, and the Prophets foretold) An House of Prayer for all People;
suitable to the State and Condition of all sorts of the Sons and Daughters of
Men, High and Low, Rich and Poor, Bond and Free, Wise and Foolish, Learned and
Unlearned, Saints and Sinners, and all that Profess the Gospel of Christ, may
in one pure Language, and Form of sound Words, call upon the name of the Lord,
to serve him with one consent, for the only Wise God, has promised it by the
Mouth of the Prophet Zephaniah, Chap. 3. Ver 8, 9.

Therefore wait ye upon me, says the Lord, until the Day that I rise up to the
Prey, for my Determination, is to gather the Nations, that I may assemble the
Kingdoms, to pour upon them mine Indignation, even all my fierce Anger, for all
the Earth, shall be devoured with the Fire of my Jealoucy.

For then will I turn to the People a pure Language, that they may all call
upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one Consent.

If all Scripture, given by Inspiration, is profitable for Doctrine, what may
we then learn from this sacred Oracle of God's Revealed Will? Why, I humbly
conceive, they teach us these Three things.

1. That Uniformity of Prayer in the Public Worship of God, is the best way
and manner of waiting upon God

2. That such Public Worship of God, comes nearest to the Heavenly, of any
other upon Earth, and therefore most suitable to his Nature, and most agreeable
to his Mind and Will.

3. That such Uniformity, is the absolute Determination of his Divine Will, and
shall be the standing Rule, and Practice of his Church and People, in the midst
of all their Enemies.

Those People then, that reject, despise, vilify, and reproach, with
opprobrious words, and scurrilous Language, such a Form of Prayer, and such a
Method of Serving God, which is Beautified, and Adorned, and Seasoned with the
Salt of God's Holy Word, are one sort of Anti-Scripturians.

But though there be too many that do so, yet it is never the worse, for their
dirty Language, no more than the Heavenly Manna was, because some seditious
Israelites, gave it the scurrilous name of Light Bread. The Holy and Heavenly
Angels continued feeding on that Food, which proud and haughty Men trampled
under their Feet, and gave it no better Commendation that Light and Lothsom
Bread. I do not therefore much admire at the contempt which some have taken up
against the Prayers of our Church, when Israel, God's chosen People, and the
Seed of Abraham, grew weary of Heavenly Manna, the Food of Angels.

But what shall we say to these things? For since the chief of the fallen
Angels, in the shape of a Serpent, Poisoned our Nature with the Venom of his
own Sin, no Age has been free from some Appearances of it, among the Sons of
Men, nor ever will be, till Satan be confined to the Bottomless Pit.

I am sure in the time of the Prophet Ezekiel, the Church was pestered with
such sort of Cattle, as he calls them, Chap. 34. 18, 19, 20.

Seems a it small thing unto you, to have eaten up the good Pasture, but ye
must tread down with your Feet the residue of your Pastures? And to have drunk
of the deep Waters, but ye must foul the residue with your Feet.

As for my Flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with your Feet; and they
drink that which ye have fou^ed with your Feet.

Therefore thus says the Lord God unto them, Behold, I, even I will Judge
between the Fat Cattle, and between the Lean Cattle,

Because ye have thrust with Side and with Shoulder, and pusht all the Diseased
with your Horns, till ye have scattered them abroad.

Therefore will I save my Flock, and they shall no more be a Pray; and I will
Judge between Cattle and Cattle*

Hence it is Evident, the Lord will one Day Judge between the Holy Martyrs,
that Composed the Prayers of our Church for us, and afterward Sealed it with
their Blood in Flames of Fire. Whither they did well in so doing, or whither
they do wickedly, who think their Tongues their own, to vilify and scornfully
reproach it, at their own Pleasure, and with out all control, for who is Lord
over them?

Come, my Brethen, be not angry with me, nor account me an Enemy, because I
tell you the truth, and I will ask you a few Questions.

I. What good thing there is, that any of you* ask in your Extempore Prayers,
that we do not ask in a well-set Form of sound Words.

II. Whither there be any one Petition in the Daily Prayers of our Church, that
does contradict the least Branch of God's Revealed Will, that savours of
Impiety, or that can be truly said to hinder the work of Grace in the Heart of
any Sinner.

III. Whither there be any thing wanting that may make a miserable Man happy,
even in this Life, if he can obtain the things he Prays for.

IV. Whither the things we pray for therein, if granted, be not of force to
make the worst of Sinners to become one of the better sort of Saints upon Earth.

V. Whither there be any thing that is requisite or necessary for Soul or Body,
to make our Lives comfortable here, and our Souls eternally Happy hereafter,
that is omitted or left out in the Prayers of our Church.

VI. Whither the matter contained in the Book of Common Prayer, be not a
constant acknowledgment, and Vindication of the Faith, which was once delivered
to the Saints? And whither we are not Exhorted earnestly to contend for it?

VII. Whither there be any thing that may savingly inform the Judgments of Men
in mattrrs of Faith, or enlighten the Understanding in the Mystery of Man's
Salvation, or that may encourage Sinners to turn from Darkness to Light; and
from the power of Satan unto God, which are not to be found in the Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of England.

And now I beseech you my Friends, ask your selves this one Question.

Whither it savours of Wisdom in any that profess the Name of Christ, or own
themselves to be his Servants, to question the truth of his Word. Who as a
Prophet has foretold, the desolation of Kingdoms, to proceed from their
Divisions.

Has not Moses, that Man of God, told Israel of old, that God would raise them
up a Prophet like to himself, and that God the Father would put words into his
Mouth; and that whosoever, would not give heed thereto, God would require it of
him? And does not the Apostle St. Peter, tell us, Acts 3. That Christ was that
Prophet, and that whosoever would not hear him should be destroyed from amongst
the People. And has not Christ, by virtue of his Prophetical Office told us,
That a Kingdom divided cannot stand, but is brought to desolation.

O let us not Tempt Christ by our divisions! to try whether he will, or can
save us from Desolation, contradictory to his own word.

I think therefore, and I do Appeal to the Conscience of any unbiassed Man,
that professes the Christian Faith, whither it be not better for you to return
to the Highway of Salvation again then by your Divisions to continue rambling
from one by-path to another, till ye know not which way to take, and leave the
Breach open for our Enemies to break in upon us, and lay our Land Desolate.

Do ye not hear what the Son of God said? Mat. 24. 15. When ye therefore shall
(...) the Abomination of Desolation, stand in the Holy Place: Standing where it
ought not, so St. Mark reads it: And has he not told us elsewhere, that The
Divisions of a Kingdom, will bring it to Desolation. Shall we then call our
selves Believers, and give no credit to his Word in so weighty a concern, as
the Preservation of a Kingdom from Ruin and Destruction?

May we not safely conclude from the Words of our Savior, that Divisions and
Dissentions amongst Professed Christians, is an Abomination unto the Lord? And
that Scism is a provoking Sin. Did not Christ weep for the Divisions of
Jerusalem? And shall we rejoice and glory in ours?

O take heed of writing contrary to the Copy that Christ has set you! Did God
destroy the Jerusalemites by their Divisions? And do ye think that he will save
us by ours? Surely, No: For if Jesus Christ, be the same yesterday and to day,
and for ever, as certainly he is; and he is a Devi^ incarnate that denis it.
How then can we shelter our selves for safety under the shadow of his Wings,
that are at variance amongst our selves?

O take heed of entering into Judgment with Christ, or holding an Argument
against any thing that he has spoken! Are ye wiser and stronger then he is? Is
not he a consuming Fire, and your selves but dry stuble? Will ye contend with
him ^or Mastery? Can ye speak more for your Divisions, then Christ has already
declared against them?

Do ye not hear what the Lord says by the Mouth of the Prophet? I say, Chap.
27. 4. Who would set the Briers and Thorns against me in Battle? I would go
through them, I would burn them together.

Did Christ ever exercise his Prophetical Office in vain? Did his Words ever
fall to the Ground without effect? Did he not Prophecy that Judas would betray
him, and Peter deny him? Did he not Prophecy that false Christ's and false
Prophets would arise, and deceive many? And are not his Sayings fulfilled? Did
he not Prophecy, (with Tears running down his Sacred Cheeks) that Jerusalem
would be utterly destroyed, and the manner how? For are not these his Words?
Luke 19. 43, 44. For the Days shall come upon thee, that thine Enemies shall
cast a Trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every
side.

And shall lay thee even with the Ground, and thy Children within thee, and
they shall not leave in thee one Stone upon another, because thou knew not
the time of thy Visitation.

And were not these Prophetical Words of his, fulfilled by the Roman Soldiers?
Did he not likewise fore-tel the spoiling of the Temple, in these Words? Mat.
24. 2,

And Jesus said unto them, ( i. e.) his Disciples) Se ye not all these things?
Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left one Stone upon another, that
shall not be thrown down.

Was not this saying of Christ, also sulfilled, and verified at the same time
that Titus Vespatianus took the City, and the Soldiers burnt the Temple,
notwithstanding, himself in Person, entreated the Soldiers to quench the Fire
newly begun in the Temple, and used all means that possibly he could, to
preseave it, b^t all to no pur^ose? The Prophecy of Christ must be fulfilled,
and therefore it was in vain for Titus to endeavor the quenching of those
Flames, which by a sure Word of Prophecy, were kinded and fomented by the civil
Discords, Divisions and Dissentions of the S^ditious Jews.

If God take away Peace from us, who shall hinder the breaking ^orth of War
amongst us? If God whet the glittering Sword of War, who shall let it rust in
the Sheath? If he takes away Kings from their Thrones, who shall hinder him? It
was the Son of God, that put that word into Balaam's Mouth. Number. 23. 19.

God, is not a Man, that he should Lie; neither the Son of Man, that he should
Repent. Has he said, and shall he not do it? Or has he spoken, and shall he
not make it good? and may not we say, Has not the Son of God, the Lord Jesus
Christ (into whose Hands, the Order, Rule and Government of all things in
Heaven, and in Earth, and in the Sea, and in all places, is given by an eternal
Decree of his Father) said, That a Kingdom divided, is brought to Desolation?
And will he not make good his Word? Yea, certainly he will, There is not one
jot or tittle of his Words shall fall to the Ground, till all of them are
fulfilled,

Did ye never read, and consider, that word of the Lord, by the Mouth of the
Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 66, 15, 16.

Behold, the Lord will come with Fire, and with his Chariots like a Whirlwind,
to render his Anger with Fury, and his Rebuke, with Flames of Fire.

For by Fire and by his Sword, will the Lord plead with all Flesh: And the
slain of the Lord shall be many.

The Prophet means, that all sorts of carnal Men, shall feel the smart Rod of
God's Anger, when he comes forth of his place to punish the Inhabitants of the
Earth, for their Iniquities.

Now our blessed Savior tells us, that every Tr^e is known by its Fruit; nor
has the Holy Ghost left us without a Testimony, of what the Particular Fruits
of the Flesh are, whereby a Carnal Man may be discerned from one that is truly
Spiritual.

The Test, is written in the Epistle of St. Paul, to the Galatians* Cap. 5. 19,
20, 21.

Now the works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Las^^viousness.

Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Staife, Seditions,
Heresies.

Envying, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like; of the whach I tell
you before, as I have told you in time past, that they which do such things,
shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God.

But the Fruit of the Spirit, is, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-Suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith.

Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no Law.

Hence we are informed that Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife,
Seditio^s, Herisies, Envyings, and Murders, are works of the Flesh, as well as
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Drunkenness, Revellings, and the former more perniclous to the Soul, than the
later. The great Phisician of Souls has put this Question out of doubt, in two
several Discourses, that he had with the Scribes and Pharisees. The first in
Mat 21. 31, 32.

Verily I say unto you, that the Publicans and the Harlots go into the Kingdom
of God before you.

For John came unto you in the way of Righteousness, and ye believed him not;
but the Publicans, and the Harlots believed him. And ye, when ye had seen it,
Repented not afterward that ye might believe him.

And in Chap. 23. 15. He pronounces a Woe against them, saying, Woe unto you
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye compass Sea and Land to make one
Proselite, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the Child of Hell then
your selves.

Ask the Apostle St. Paul, and he will give you a further account who is a
Carnal Man. 1 Cor. 31, 2, 3, 4.

And I, Brethren, could not speak unto you, as unto Spiritual, but as unto
Carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ.

I have fed you with Milk, and not with Meat, for hitherto ye were not able to
bear it, neither yet now are ye able.

For ye are yet Carnal; for whereas there are among you Envying and Strife, and
Divisions are ye not Carnal, and walk as Men?

For while one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo; are ye not
Carnal?

Consult likewise and consider what the Apostle St. James has written to this
purpose. Chap. 3. 13.

Who is a wife Man, and endued with Knowledge among you? Let him show out of a
good Conversation, his Works with Meekness of Wisdom.

But if ye have bitter Envying and Strife in your Hearts, glory not, and lie
not against the truth.

This Wisdom descends not from above, but is Earthly, sensual Devilish.

For where Envying and Strife is, there is Confusion, and every evil work.

But the Wisdom that is from above, is first Pure, then Peaceable, then gentle
and easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality,
(or wrangling* and the Fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace of them that
make peace.

Do ye not know that the Church of God is built upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, whereof Christ Jesus the anointed Savior, was the
corner stone? And do ye not know that all of them, have from time to time
declaimed against all sorts of false Doctrine, Heresy and Scism, and declared
for Unity, Peace and Concord amongst all that pro^ess the Christian Religion?
If ye have forgotten these things, be not angry with me, if I bring to your
Remembrance the Testimonies of some of the Prophets, who have given their
suffrage to this Assertion.

The first, is that of the Prophent Isaiah, Chap. 35. 8.

And an Highway shall be there, and it shall be called the way of Holiness.

Now thus much I am bold to say, in Vindication of the Public Service of our
Church, that it is not only Formally an Highway, but really a Way of true
Holiness and Righteousnuss, if we can but frame our Lives and Conversations
thereunto, and obediently answer God in the things we pray for; without which,
no one can walk in the Light of God's Countenance upon Earth, nor ever see his
Face in the Kingdom of Heaven.

The next is the Prophet Jeremiah* chap. 31. 9.

I will cause them to walk by the Rivers of water, in a straight way, wherein
they shall not stumble. And then at ver. 21. he explains his meaning in this
ver. saying, Set thee up Marks, make the high heaps, set thine Heart toward the
Highway, even the way which thou wentest; turn again, O Virgin of Israel!

It seems by these Words of this Prophet, that the People did formerly walk in
the common Highway of Salvation, but now they had forsaken it, and drawn away
many after them, and caused them to stumble into their ways, from the ancient
Paths, to walk in Paths in a way not cast up, ( i. e.) to make a Profession of
such a Religion which had neither Fence nor Bounds, nor Form nor Method, and so
at last to make their Land desolate. chap. 18. ver. 15, 16.

I could instance the Testimonies of several other Prophets, but two such
Witnesses as these two Prophets were, and such great Sufferers as they were for
witnessing against the Scism that was raised against the Church of God in the
time of their Prophesying, may be sufficient to convince any unbiast Person,
that the increase and continuance of Scism in a Kingdom are sure Harbingers to
the Ruin and De^truction of it: They that will not believe this, will not
believe Moses and the Prophets; and they that will not believe them, neither
will they believe though one should arise from the Dead, with the Flames of
Hellfire about him.

But happily some one or other, may ask this Question, what is the Foundation of
Scism, or whence does it arise? Why truly the question is worth asking, and the
Answer if I rightly apprehend it, may do some good to the Church of God for the
time to come; however, (under Correction) I will give my Judgment upon it, and
if it can plainly appear that I am mistaken in my Judgment, I shall ingeniously
confess that I am a Man, and not God, and therefore may err. The Question is,
whence Scism arises.

I Answer, Scism arises from hence, when a Man of Knowledge and deep
Understanding in the Mystery of Godliness, which he had attained unto by his
constant attendance on the the publick^ Ministry of the Word, and Service of
the Church, at length begins to grow weary of serving God in the Highway of
Salvation, and to think in himself that he knows as much, or more than his own
Minister can teach him, and that he can make better, and longer Prayers, than
the common Prayers of the Church are; he is not at rest, till he has found out
a creeping hole of ^islike at something or other, though it be but some harm^ess
Ceremony; and so having once disgusted it, he resolves to dissert the Communion
of the Church, and then is at a Stand in himself what to do, or what Society of
Men to associate with* just like a Man that has variety of Business with
diverse Men, in several Places, and not yet resolved whither to go first, takes
his Staff in his Hand, and at the door sets it as upright as possibly he can,
and that way that his Staff falls, that way he steers his Course.

So likewise do those knowing Men, that for little or no cause forsake the
public Assemblies of our Church, set up the Staff of Conscience, and toward
what Society of Men it falls, thither they trudge.

Such a Similitude as this does that smart Prophet Hosea U^e, when he reproved
the humersom, and Headstrong Tribe of Ephraim, and the unstable Tribe of Juda,
for their easy Compliance with new-fashion'd Altars, and making a new
Covenant, and for taking new Measures of Divine Worship, and justling out that
which was before established b^ the Law of God. Now this similitude of the
Prophet is written in the 4th. Chapter of his Prophecy, Ver. 12, 13.

My People ask council of their stocks, i. e. their stock of knowledge, and
their staff declares unto them: for the spirit of whoredoms (that is, of
Spiritual Whoredoms) has caused them to err, and they have gone a whoring from
under their God. They sacrifice upon the tops of the Mountains, and burn
Incense upon the Hills, under Oaks, and Poplars, and Elms.

Thus Scism sprung up like Hemlock amongst the Backsliding Israelites, and thus
it sprang up amongst the English:

Deus and dabit his quoque finem. The Lord in Mercy put an end to our
Divisions, for they are very many, great, and very destructive; for,

A Kingdom divided cannot stand well.

A Parliament divided cannot make Laws well.

A Church divided cannot pray well.

A Clergy divided cannot all preach well.

A University divided cannot study well.

An Army divided cannot fight well.

A Fleet of Ships divided cannot sail well.

A Chamber of Aldermen divided cannot Rule well.

A House divided cannot thrive well.

A Man divided in himself does seldom think well; and,

A Vestry divided will never do well, either to Church or Poor.

So that by all these Experiments it is too evident that where Strise and
Divisions are, there will be certainly Confusion, and every evil work will
follow.

But where Unity, Peace and Concord are, there are the choicest of God's
Blessings attending, yea there God commands a Blessing, even Life for evermore.

To conclude this Postscript, I do once again pray and beseech you for the Lord
Jesus's sake, (who is verily, and indeed the true Prince of Peace, and the
Covenant that he sealed with his precious Blood, for the present Comfort, and
Eternal Happiness of the Sons and Daughters of Men, is a Covenant of Peace)
that ye will return to the high way of Salvation again, and be as heretofore,
good Examples to those that have not yet attained to those large Measures of
Knowledge and Practice as you had, before ye left us, you have given us a
grievous wound, by leaving us, and ye may give us an healing Plaster by your
return to us again. What a joyful sight would it be to the choicest Members of
our Church to see you take your own Places, and possesses your own Seats again!

Do ye not yet know that Satan's Masterpiece of Malice, whereby he endeavors
to work Mischief to the Church of God, is, to sow the Tare-seed of Divisions
amongst them? For if he can but start a question from the unstable Heart of any
one of them, that may beget a doubtful Disputation amongst them, he has his
ends; and though it may seem to increase Knowledge; yet if it will but make the
least rent he has as much as he looks for; he knows that there will be some
Standers-by, that will blow at the Coal.

Nothing can harm the Church of Christ but the Divisions of her own Children;
to avoid which, a true Believer will deny himself, and be silent in many things
of Circumstance, rather than he will maintain a dispute, that may in the least
be prejudicial to the Church's Peace.

Abraham had cause enough to have held a dispute with Lot, when their Herdsmen
fell out (about what I know not) and doubtless might have had the better of it,
but he will not; he had rather be silent, and so quench the Coals of Strife,
than to increase the Flame, by contention, he wisely foresaw the Mischief that
was likely to follow the Strife and Contention that was begun betwixt them; so
that he presently endeavors to put out the Fire before it was too much
kindled, by refusing to contend at all.

Let there be no Strife I pray thee (says he to Lot) betwixt me and thee, and
betwixt my Herdsmen, and thy Herdsmen, for we be Brethren.

All true Believers are the Children of faithful Abraham, and therefore I could
wish with all my Heart that these Words were written in Characters of Gold,
upon the fleshly Tables of the Hearts of all the Servants of Christ, whom the
Doctrine of the Gospel has united by Articles of a true Faith, how sweet would
Peace, and how bitter would Divisions be to them?

It is a remarkable thing, and worth our notice, that all the Miseries that the
subtle Serpent has brought upon all Mankind, had its Rise and Beginning from a
doubtful Disputation betwixt himself and our first Parents; and thus he began
with a soft, smooth, oily Language; yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of
every tree of the garden.

And the Woman said unto the Serpent, we may eat of the fruit of the trees of
the garden. But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden,
God has said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
And the serpent said unto the woman, ye shall not surely die. For God does know
that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be
as gods, knowing good, and evil; as if the Serpent had said, you talk of dying,
if ye eat, why surely ye shall not die. God has kept that Secret from you,
which I will reveal to you; I am an Angel of Light, I came down from Heaven,
and therefore must needs know the Mind and Will of God better than you do. Ye
say, that if ye eat of the Tree in the midst of the Garden, you shall die; but
I tell you, that God knows, that in the very day ye eat thereof your Eyes shall
be opened, your Understanding's enlightened, your Knowledge increased, and ye
shall be as Gods, perfectly knowing Good and Evil. Will ye then be limited by a
Law, when ye may have perfect Freedom? Will ye be tied to the Observation of an
Ordinance, when ye may live above all Ordinances; will ye be such Enemies to
your own Good? Will ye stand so much in your own Light? Will ye continue blind,
when ye may have your Eyes opened? It Is but stepping a little beyond the bounds
of your usual walk, and ye shall enjoy such unspeakable Privileges, which God
never yet discovered to you. In this doubtful Disputation did the Dragon, that
old Serpent, (which is called the Devil, and Satan) lay the foundation of the
mystery of Iniquity; which, we may plainly perceive, was not wrought by a
temptation to Carnal Infirmities, but by a crafty Delusion to Spiritual
Wickedness; and if you will but consult the sacred Scriptures, as Christ has
commanded, Joh. 5. 39. and take diligent notice of the things ye read; ye will
easily perceive that Spiritual Wickedness has had the greatest share in those
Sins that have provoked the Lord to pour forth the Vials of his Wrath upon his
Church and People in all Ages of the World.

And being assured by so sacred a Testimony as the Word of God is, that the
Divisions of a Kingdom do portend its Desolation, let us follow those things
that make for Peace, and let us take the advice which the Apostle St. Paul
gives us, Ephesians. 4. 30, 31, 32.

Grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to the day of
redemption.

Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking, be
put away from you, with all malice.

And be kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

And now once more I pray, and beseech you, that if ye have any bowels of Pity
or Compassion upon your native Country, if ye do not desire to see the Kingdom
wherein ye were born to be made an Akeldama, or Field of Blood. If ye do not
desire to see your Relations and Neighbors wallow in their Blood, and
sheathing their Swords in each others Breasts? that ye will return in time from
the causes of it. Do ye think it will be a pleasant sight to see a Company of
Bloody Soldiers ^orcibly entri^g your Houses, with drawn Swords in their Hands,
with Fire in their Eyes, Death in their Looks, their Mouths full of cursed
Oaths, and devilish Execrations, will the noise and lamentable screeches and
outcries of your Wives and Children be pleasing to you, when ye shall see them
kicked and beaten like Dogs in your presence, and otherwise barbarously used
before your Eyes; your Houses plundered and spoiled of their best Furniture;
your Chambers and Chests broken up, and emptied of your choicest Treasures? Can
it be any pleasure to you to see so populous, so famous, and so ancient a City
as Bristoll is, on a light Flame? Your Hands bound with Cords, and your selves
hall'd along the Streets like Fellons, and delivered into the Custody of cruel
and hard-hearted Men with infinite more mischievous and unknown Miseries that
attend Wars, whither civil among our selves, or Foreign, by Invasion of
Strangers; Are there none of you left alive in this City that can testify what
the unspeakable Miseries were which this distracted Kingdom endured in the time
of that Scism that so grievously wounded, and disturbed the Peace of the Church
in the Reign of that pious Prince King Charles the I. if there are, as
doubtless there are many, ask them, and they will tell you what horrible
Confusions there were, both in Church and State, and the Government of both
utterly subverted, till God in Mercy restored them to us again, and will
continue so, till the same Spirit of Faction and Scism do (for our Sins) give
us another overturn.

Oh England, England! once the Mistress of Islands, if a true list, and number
of those thy Natives, which most cruelly slew one another in thy late civil
Wars, should be brought to thy view!

And if all the Christian Blood, then shed to satisfy the Factious Humors of
some Men, had been exhall'd by airy Vapors, and now shour'd down upon thy
fertile Fields, and populous flourishing Towns and Cities, thou would see
strange and prodigious Sights.

If those deep Sighs and Groans, which thousands of excellent and virtuous
Ladies and Gentlewomen uttered from their afflicted Souls, and standing with
Petitions in their Hands at the doors of a company of Thieves, that called
themselves Committees, praying from day to day, from week to week, and from
month, tomonth, to buy their own Estates, their lovely Cheeks bedewed with a
flux of brinish Tears from their tender Eyes,

If such things as these can be pleasing to any sort of professed Christians,
surely they are void of a right Understanding; they are led, not by Reason, but
by a Spirit of Madness, which has very little fence in what it acts. Consider
these things (my Brethren) in time, lest ye repent it, when it is too late.

And now lastly, I pray you, seriously to consider, that there are no greater
Enemies to the service of God in our Church Assemblies, than the Apostate
Church of Rome, consisting of Monks, Friars, Jesuits, and Mass-Priests. Can ye
then do them a greater pleasure, than to join with them in Hatred and Contempt
of it? Did they not burn both the Book it self, and the choicest Persons of
those that composed it, and will ye throw their Ashes into the River; they tied
them to Stakes, and will ye shoot at their Hearts with bitter words?

Next unto the sacred Scriptures, (I am bold to say) that our Common Prayer
Book is the surest visible Bulwark, to keep out Popery from ever being
established by Law in this Kingdom any more for ever; and will ye persevere in
throwing down such a Fortification? and so let in again the Antichristian
Beast of Rome to ruin and destroy us, and to make us and your selves an
everlasting Reproach, and a perpetual shame.

O do not rob those Martyrs of that Honor which they purchased at so dear a
rate, for the Benefit and Good of their surviving Brethren and Friends that
then were, or thereafter should be made Members of the Body of Christ.

O do not disgrace their Labors by blotting and staining them with scurilous
Language, and thereby expose the Protestant Faith to the Scorn and laughter of
a cruel Adversary; for over your Shoulders do the Blood-thirsty Papists shoot
at our Hearts.

O that ye were wise, that ye would consider these things, and return to the
high way of Salvation again! What joy would there be in our Churches? What
loving Embraces? What mutual Society? What Gladness of Heart? What inward
Comfort and Consolation to our Immortal Souls? What reviving of Spirits? How
sweet would such Unity Peace and Concord, be to the whole Kingdom? How
mediately-secure should we be, not only from all fears of a Foreign Invasion,
but from all doubts of a Civil War amongst our selves? Then should we offer our
daily Sacrifices of Praise and Thanksgiving, and call upon the name of the
Lord, to serve him with one Shoulder, and one Consent.

Thus have I discharged my duty to all that profess the name of Christ in this
Kingdom, wherein I was born. What the effect of it may be God knows, for I do
not; I leave the issue of it to the only wise Savior of the World, in whom are
hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, whose poor, weak, and unworthy
Servant I am, and hope to persevere therein.

Dum Spiritus hos Regit ortus. And lest any Reader should here and there meet
with a word or two in this Postscript, which he may happily think has a tang
of Acerbity; I have thoroughly seasoned, and sweetened it with the judgment of a
Martyred Monarch, a Steadfast and Faithful Defender of the truly ancient,
Catholic, and Apostolic Faith.

Upon the Ordinance against the Common Prayer Book.
IT is no News to have all Innovations usher`d in with the name of Reformations
in Church and State, by those, who seeking to gain Reputation with the Vulgar
for their extraordinary Parts and Piety, must needs undo whatever was formerly
settled never so well and wisely.

So hard can the pride of those that study Novelties, allow former times any
share or degree of Wisdom or Godliness.

And because matter of Prayer and Devotion to God justly bears a great part in
Religion, (being the Souls more immediate converse with the Divine Majesty)
nothing could be more plausible to the People then to tell them, They served
God amiss in that Point.

Hence our public Liturgy, or Forms of constant Prayers must be (not amended,
in what upon free and public advice might seem to sober Men inconvenient for
matter or manner, to which I should easily consent, but) wholly cashiered and
abolished, and after many popular Contempts offered to the Book, and those that
used it according to their Consciences, and the Laws in force, it must be
crucified by an Ordinance, the better to please either those Men, who gloried
in their extemporary Vein and Fluency; or others, who conscious to their own
formality in the use of it, thought they fully expiated their Sin of not using
it aright, by laying all the blame upon it, and a total rejection of it as a
dead letter, thereby to excuse the deadness of their Hearts.

As for the Matter contained in the Book, sober and learned Men have
sufficiently vindicated it against the Cavils and Exceptions of those, who
thought it a part of Piety to make what profane objections they could against
it, especially for Popery and Superstition; whereas no doubt the Liturgy was
exactly conformed to the Doctrine of the Church of England; and this by all
Reformed Churches is confessed to be most sound and Orthodox.

For the matter of using Set and Prescribed Forms, there is no doubt, but that
wholesome words, being known, and fitted to Men's Vnderstand^ngs, are soonest
received into their Hearts, and aptest to excite and carry along with them
judicious and fervent Affections.

Nor do I see any reason why Christians should be weary of a well-composed
Liturgy, (as I hold this to be) more then of all other things, wherein the
Constancy abates nothing of the Excellency and Usefulness.

I could never see any reason why any Christian should abhor, or be forbidden
to use the same Forms of Prayer, since he prays to the same God, believes in
the same Savior, professes the same Truths, reads the same Scriptures, has
the same Duties upon him, and feels the same daily wants for the most part,
both inward and outward, which are common to the whole Church.

Sure we may as well beforehand know what we pray, as to whom we pray, and in
what words, as to what sense; when we desire the same things, what hinders we
may not use the same words? Our Appetite and Digestion too may be good when we
use, as when we pray for, our daily Bread.

Some Men, I hear, are so impatient not to use in all their d^votions their own
Invention and Gifts, that they not only disuse (as too many) but wholly cast
away and contemn the Lord's Prayer; whose great guilt is, that it is the
warrant and original pattern of all set Liturgies in the Christian Church.

I ever thought that the proud Ostentation of Men's Abilities for Invention,
and the vain affectations of variety for Expressions, or in Public Prayer, or
in any sacred Administrations, merits a greater brand of Sin, than that which
they call Coldness and Barrenness; nor are Men in those novelties less subject
to formal and superficial tempers (as to their hearts) than in the constant
Forms, where not the words, but Men's Hearts are to blame.

I make no doubt but a Man may be very formal in the most extemporary variety,
and very fervently devout in the most wonted Expressions: Nor is God more a God
of Variety than of Constancy: Nor are constant Forms of Prayers more likely to
flat and hinder the Spirit of Prayer, and Devotion, than un-premeditated and
confused variety to distract and lose it.

Wherein Men must be strangely impudent, and flatterers of themselves, not to
have an infinite shame of what they so do and say, in things of so sacred a
nature before God and the Church, after so ridiculous, and indeed, profane a
manner.

Nor can it be expected, but that in duties of frequent performance, as
Sacramental Administrations, and the like, which are still the same: Ministers
must either come to use their own Forms constantly, which are not like to be so
sound, or comprehensive of the nature of the duty, as Forms of Public
Composure; or else they must every time affect new Expressions, when the
Subject is the same; which can hardly be presumed in any Man's greatest
Suffitiencies not to want (many times) much of that compleatness, o^der, and
gravity, becoming those duties; which by this means are exposed at every
Celebration to every Minister's private Infirmities, Indispositions, Errors,
Disorders, and Defects, both for Judgment and Expression.

A serious sense of which inconvenience in the Church unavoidably following
every Man's several manner of officiating, no doubt, first occasioned the
Wisdom and Piety of the ancient Churches, to remedy th^se mischiefs, by the use
of constant Liturgies of Public Composure.

The want of which I believe this Church will sufficiently feel, when the
unhappy Fruits of many Men's ungoverned Ignorance, and confident defects, shall
be discovered in more Errors, Schism; Disorders, and uncharitable Distractions
in Religion, which are already but too many, the more is the pity.

However, if violence must needs bring in, and abett those Innovations, (that
Men may not seem to have nothing to do) which Law, Reason and Religion forbids,
at least to be so obtruded, as wholly to justle out the Public Liturgy.

Yet nothing can excuse that most unjust and partial severity of those Men, who
either lately had subscribed to, used, and maintained the Service Book, or
refused to ^se it, cried out of the rigor of Laws and Bishops, which suffered
them not to use the Liberty of their Conscience in not using it.

That these Men (I say) should so suddenly change the Liturgy into a Directory,
as if the Spirit needed help for invention, though not for Expressions, or as if
matter prescribed did not as much stint and obstruct the Spirit, as if it were
clothed in, and confined to fit words: So slight and easy is that
Legerdemain, which will serve to delude the Vulgar.

That further, they should use such severity as not to suffer without Penalty,
any to use the Common Prayer Book publicly, altho` their Consciences bind them
to it, as a duty of Piety to God, and Obedience to the Laws.

Thus I see, no Men are prone to be greater Tyrants, and more rigorous exacters
upon others to conform to their illegal novelties, than such, whose pride was
formerly least disposed to the obedience of lawful Constitutions; and whose
licentious humors most pretended Conscientious Liberties; which freedom, with
much regret they now allow to Me, and My Chaplains, when they may have leave to
serve Me, whose Abilities, even in their extemporary way comes not short of the
others, but their modesty, and learning far exceeds the most of them.

But this matter is of so popular a nature, as some Men knew it would not bear
learned and sober Debates, lest being convinced by the evidence of Reason, as
well as by Laws, they should have been driven either to sin more against their
knowledge, by taking away the Liturgy, or to displease some Faction of the
People, by continuing the use of it.

Though I believe they have offended more considerable Men; not only for their
numbers and Estates, but for their weighty and judicious piety, than those are,
whose weakness or giddiness they sought to gratify, by taking it away.

One of the greatest faults some Men found with the Common Prayer Book, I
believe, was this, That it taught them to pray so often for Me; to which
Petitions they had not Loyalty enough to say Amen, nor yet Charity enough to
forbear Reproaches, and even Cursings of Me in their own Forms, instead of
praying for Me.

I wish their Repentance may be their only punishment; that seeing the
mischiefs which the difuse of Public Liturgies has already produced, they may
restore that Credit, Use, and Reverence to them, which by the ancient Ch^rches
were given to Set Forms of sound and wholesome words.

The Memory of the Just is Blessed.

Who when a King on Earth, no King beside,
That lived more just; That more unjustly died.
FINIS.

