An ACCOUNT OF VIRTUE: OR, Dr. Henry More's ABRIDGMENT OF MORALS, Put into
English.

Cicero Tusc. Quaest. O vitae Philosophia Dux! O Virtutum Indagatrix,
Expultrixque Vitiorum; Unus Dies been, and ex Preceptis tuis, actus, peccanti
Immortalitati est anteponendus.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, MDCXC.

EXTRACT OF Dr. More's EPISTLE TO HIS READER.
Setting forth,
THAT he was with difficulty persuaded by his Friends to a Work of this Nature;
as having first a very mean Opinion of those Systems for Moral Philosophy,
which pretend to overthrow Iniquity by Definitions and Divisions. He thought it
was Virtue alone was fit to enter the List; and such Virtue as could no where
be found, but by Faith in God, and a Reverence to his Holy Scriptures. That in
them the Sense and Meaning was wholly Divine, and that he who so believed, and
did not willingly abuse his knowledge therein; would come easily to discern,
what in all things was the Good, and what the Evil. But tha^ if a Man had no
such feeling, and knew not how to put himself under the Discipline of
Self-denial, let him be never so versed in Definitions and distributions of
Virtue, he ever would be destitute both of Virtue it self, and of all the
Fruits and Consequences of it. Here the Doctor laments to see the World so
abound with Monsters who even deride this Blessing of Virtue, and upon all
occasions expose i^ for a mere Imaginary Thing.

That his Friends, even from these Motives and Obstructions, increased their
Importunity; Urging on him the greater need of such a Work, as might not only
bear down Opposition by some new Advantage in the Method, but in carrying
Proofs for every Precept, and Conviction for ^vry Rule. They plainly showed,
That the Age was grown so captious, that nothing would pass, or look ^inding on
the Mind of Man, but what Right Reason did irresistibly ^ompel him unto. That
therefore, if a Treatise of this happy Texture might ^e obtained, it would not
only gratify ^he Good, but perhaps even kindle and engender some Divine Sparks
toward Virtue in the Bad.

However, and notwithstanding all ^hese Instigations, he at first utterly
Dissented, as being then plunged in Studies of a different kind, which did not
only entertain, but even ravish his Mind with Delight. Yet having but for one
Night revolved the Arguments laid before him, and comparing in his Thoughts the
difference between Self-Content, and the Hopes of a Public Good; (such was the
Instability of Human resolution) he even started from the Work he had i^ hand,
and purposed with Ardor to pursue the New. Indeed the hints o^ Conscience, and
the Preference due to a higher Good, grew so much upon him; that the more he
had inclined to the first Work, and shown Averseness to this latter; the more
he resolved to conquer himself in both and to make herein some Experiment of
his own Sincerity.

He owns he had this farther provocation, that having long ago employed his
Talent, in demonstrating, from the foundations of Natural Theology, that there
was a God; and that the Soul of Man was Immortal; he thought it not incongruous
to add now some third Treatise concerning Life and good Manners; such as might
lead Men on to the knowledge, and to the fruition of the rest.

Hereupon he says, that as soon as he Scheme and Platform of his Work was but
settled in his Thoughts (...) which was very soon done) he then ^ent his whole
Mind to it, and pur^'d it with one continued Heat, till (...) was all
accomplished.

The Doctor then sets forth, how the true Design of all, who write of Morals,
is, or ought to be, for amendment of Life. That it was not to Ca^il or to
Dispute, or make ostentation of Science; but that the Work in Hand, was an
honest Intention to ex^ite the Minds of Men unto Virtue. And that by Reading
and Meditating on the Precepts thereof, every Man might pursue and attain such
Bles^ing, and complete his Felicity by it. That this was the whole Scope and
the true Motive, of this Manual. But ^f, in the handling thereof, he had not
trod in the path which others had taken; he had Hopes however when the whole
Mould and Spirit o^ it was considered, it might not displease the Reader. For
as to poin^ of Order, he had always put that i^ the first place, which was most
clear and that behind which was more obscure; This being the utmost aim o^ what
all good Method pretends unto He does acknowledge to have left ou^ (since
Prudence did so advise it) (...) great heap of Rules and Admonitions which
others talk of. But having selected those of most Concern, a comprehending in
them the Life an^ Power of the rest; and having eve^ dived for this purpose
into the intimate Recesses of his own Soul an^ Experience, to furnish those,
which might most inflame or conjure Me^ unto Virtue; He hopes this will no^
pass for less, than had he barely transcribed from Books, and from the
Authorities that went before him.

However he owns, that as to one Branch herein, he had chiefly conformed to
what Descartes in his Definitions of the Passions had done before him; which
yet being but a matter of mere Speculation, is therefore subject to the less
Exceptions.

And although, as to the rest, his chief intention was, To pour forth the Sense
and Emanations of his own Mind upon this Subject; Yet that he very often, and
most respectfully, had concurred with many of the Ancients: And had even
produced their very Words and Sentences, that it might the more appear, how by
comparing and fortifying them with his own, he had not so much affected
Singularity in this Undertaking, as a restitution of Morals to their pristin
State.

But if, after all, he shall be censured as over-doing this Matter in too
Numerous a Citation of such Ancient Authors; he freely owns that herein also,
he did purposely meditate how to expose, to the Eyes of the Christian World,
What a holy and sanctified sense of Virtue even the Heathens had; and how, in
their frequent Writings, they had so Divinely expressed it, That we Christians
might be ashamed to consider, how few of us either Live so well, or Speak so
wisely as they did. For (alas) we of this Age, scorn to be subject, either to
the Name or Exercise of Virtue! We disown and vilify it, as fit only for the
more barbarous and unpollished Nations of the World, such as are not
enlightened, and whom we think despicably of; while in this very presumption we
do not so much undervalue their Ignorance, as we discover our own. What
Rational Creature is there, but must acknowledge, That Virtue has a
participation with the Divine Nature? And what else could make it, as it is, so
great a part of our Christian Religion? For howbeit those three Names, which
among Men so often occur, of Virtue, Grace, and the Divine Life, may seem
distinct; Yet, if rightly pondered, they are all but one and the same Thing.
For to affirm that the Perfection of Man's Mind makes up the Divine Life,
inasmuch as the Image of God is represented in it; This surely is no slight
Notion of Virtue, but rather a strong and comprehensive Representation thereof.
The same we might say of Grace also, as it is God's Munificence toward Man;
and of Virtue no less, as it is a powerful Faculty of the Soul, whereby the
Passions are so subdued, as in every Case to be able to prosecute that which is
the most perfect Good. This is the Definition, the Dr. has chosen to bestow on
Virtue in his following Tract; Designing thereby to rebuke the folly of those
Men, who think they can live a Divine Life, without tying themselves up to the
Rules of Morality; and who lay aside Virtue, while they fanatically pretend
unto Grace.

Advertisement.
IF among many other Faults in this Translation, the Reader finds it not always
strict to the Latin; It was hard, where the Quotations were Numerous, and in
such different Styles, to keep to that Rule, but at the hazard of a much
better; Namely, That every Translation should look like an Original. Which is
somewhat attempted in this Essay.

K. W.
September. 1688.
The Heads of the following Chapters.
Chap. I. WHat Ethics or Morals are? Page 1 Chap. II. Of the parts of Ethics,
and of Happiness, Page 3 Chap. III. Of Virtue in General, and of Right Reason,
Page 11 Chap. IV. Certain Axioms, or Intellectual Principles, into which all
the Reasons of Morality maj be reduced, Page 20 Chap. V. As there is something
good simply, and of its own Nature; so also to show by what Faculties the same
is found and understood, Page 28 Chap. VI. Of the Passions in general, and of
the Helps they afford, Page 33 Chap. VII. Of Passions properly so called,
according to their kinds, Page 43 Chap. VIII. The Use and Interpretation of the
Passions; and first of Admiration, with all in that Classis: And of the other
five Primitive Passions, Page 54 Chap. IX. The Use and Interpretation of Love
and Hatred, which are in the Second Classis, Page 61 Chap. X. The Use and
Interpretation of the Passions of the Third Classis, which fall under the Head
of Cupidity, Page 65 Chap. XI. The Interpretation and Use of Joy and Grief,
which constitute the Fourth Classis, Page 69 Chap. XII. That all Passions
(properly so called) are in themselves Good; And that from a Right
Interpretation of them, it is manifest there is something Good and Bad in its
own Nature. And lastly, to show what such Nature or Essence, of Good and Bad
can be, Page 78 Chap. XIII. Of other Passions or Bodily Impressions, Page 84
In the Second Book.
Chap. I. OF the Number of the Primitive Virtues, Page 92 Chap. II. Of
Prudence, the first Primitive Virtue, Page 98 Chap. III. Of the other two
Primitive Virtues, Sincerity and Patience. Page 104 Chap. IV. Of Justice in
general, which is the first of the three principal Virtues, which are termed
Derivative, Page 111 Chap. V. Of Piety, Page 117 Chap. VI. Of Probity, or of
Justice properly so called, Page 123 Chap. VII. Of the other two principal
Derivative Virtues, Fortitude and Temperance, Page 130 Chap. VIII. Of the
Reductive Virtues, Page 134 Chap. IX. Of that Mediocrity, in which Virtue does
consist; And of the true measure of such Mediocrity, Page 146 Chap. X. Of Good
Things, which are External, Page 160
In the Third book.
Chap. I. OF Free Will, Page 172 Chap. II. Two principal Objections against
Free Will Proposed and Answered, Page 181 Chap. III. Theorems, which are of
general Use in the Acquiring of Virtues, Page 191 Chap. IV. Things which
contribute to the attaining of the Primitive Virtues, Page 208 Chap. V. How the
three principal Derivative Virtues may be Acquired, Page 213 Chap. VI. Of
Acquiring the Reductive Virtues; And first of those which refer to Justice,
Page 224 Chap. VII. Of Acquiring those Virtues, which refer to Fortitude, Page
230 Chap. VIII. Of Acquiring those Virtues, which refer to Temperance, and
about exciting the Divine Love, Page 235 Chap. IX. Of the Acquisition of
External Good, Page 242 Chap. X. Of the Good which is External; and of that
which is Supreme and Eternal, according to the Mind of the Philosophers. Page
255
ERRATA.
PAge 104. line 13. read from motives of. p. 107. l. 17. r. as not to be. p.
110. l. 3. dele which. p. 118. l. 30. r. is herein. p. 132. l. 5. r. with
being, p. 133. l. 22. r. inferior Creatures. p. 151. l. 6. r. chooser. p. 157.
l. 17. r. to this. p. 179. l. 11. r. of acting. p. 215. l. 16. r. has been p.
218. l. 8. r. drives him.

AN ACCOUNT OF VIRTUE.
CHAP. I. What Ethics or Morals are.
ETHICS are defined to be the Art of Living well and happily.

I. WE understand in this place, by Art, a methodical Knowledge of such
Precepts as are consentaneous one to another. And therefore, since Ethics are
that Art we design to treat of, our Precepts must all partake thereof, and all
conduce thereunto; for else they would not be consentaneous. So that you are
not to expect Precepts how to dispute, but how to live, and how to be happy.

The Reason why in the Definition above we call it, The Art of Living both well
and happily, is, because a Man may live well, and yet not altogether so
happily; which two differing kinds of Life the Pythagoreans did rightly
distinguish; for by their Doctrine, it is one thing to be perfect according to
Nature, another according to Life.

II. NOW such men, are by nature perfect, who are adorned with Virtue. For, by
the Definition of those Philosophers, Virtue is the top and perfection of every
Nature. They term these men good only, and not happy or blessed. But such men are
said to be perfect according to life, who are not only good, but also happy.
For they define happiness to be the Perfection of human Life; and they define
human life to be a Collection or Chronicle of human Actions. Wherefore, seeing
the Event and Success of such Actions depend on Fortune, no man can, without
the Benefits of Fortune, enjoy a perfect State. The wise Hippodamus Thurius
observed, That it was Virtue and Fortune together that made Actions perfect;
Virtue as to the Practice, and Fortune as to the Success.

III. THE Definition of Felicity given by Archytas, is consonant to what we
have said, namely, That it was the practice of Virtue joined with good Fortune.
And last of all, Euthephemus has well illustrated the matter in this threefold
Similitude: Just as a General (says he) overcomes by Valor and good Success;
and as the Pilot gains his Port by true steering, and a favorable Gale; and as
the Eye beholds by the Power of Vision, and Help of Light: so is our Life then
best, when accompanied with Virtue and good Fortune. We might add unto all, the
Authority of Aristotle himself, who requires external Goods to the completing
of Happiness. Now although the good Things of Fortune, which we here recommend,
cannot absolutely be said to be within our Power; yet we presume to say, that
forasmuch as the Precepts, laid down by Ethics, Vide in this Book, L. 3. c.
10. 13.
do admirably steer a man to their acquisition (as in due place it will appear)
we must conclude, that such Externals are by good title referrable to Ethics.
For although they are sometimes missed of, and not always attained: yet this is
only as it happens with Physicians and Pilots; who, tho they often miscarry,
yet no man infers from thence, but that there are such Arts in the World, as
Physic and Navigation too.

CHAP. II. Of the Parts of Ethics, and of Happiness.
I. ETHICS are divided into two Parts, The Knowledge of Happiness, and the
Acquisition of it. The Knowledge contains the Doctrine of its Nature, and of
such things as the Nature of Happiness does, in some sort, either comprehend,
or else refer unto. Whence in this first Part we shall principally treat of the
Virtues, and of the Passions: and in the last Part add somewhat about the
external Supports of life.

II. HAPPINESS is that pleasure which the mind takes in from a Sense of Virtue,
and a Conscience of Well-doing; and of conforming in all things to the Rules of
both. Wherefore we say, that external Comforts, or some moderate proportion of
them, do much conduce to the making happiness complete. Here we call Happiness
a Pleasure of the Mind rather than an Operation of it, since all men allow it
to be the best and greatest of human Fruitions. But as that cannot be the
greatest which is subservient to another, so the Operation of the mind cannot
be said to be its greatest good, since it is but in order to Pleasure. And it
is upon this Account, Ethic. E^d. lib. 1. cap. 7.
as Aristotle observes, that we often heighten and raise our Operations; not
that we are pleased with the Operation it self, but because we expect a
pleasure from it, which we highly value, and which we look upon as an effect
thereof.

III. FURTHERMORE, to come closer to the Mark, this Pleasure by which we define
Happiness, is here considered as the Flower and Masterpiece of that very
Operation, in the ways of Virtue, which makes up the Excellency of Life. For,
in every Action we go about, it is Pleasure that makes the Operation complete;
it is as the Soul of the Work which cannot be wanting. And so Aristotle says,
That it gives Perfection to all our Works, Eth. Nic lib. 10. c. 4
and ^ven to Life it self.

It is plain, that each Creature has its own ^articular Pleasure, which is
construed to be ^s supreme Happiness. Whence we may in^er, That human Happiness
does also consist ^n human Pleasure; but such, I mean, as a^iseth from the
Sense of Virtue.

IV. NEXT we say, that all sorts of Men, not the Fools only, but the
Philosophers, ^ave placed Happiness in Pleasure. Aristotle ^ath noted in the
following Words: Magn. Moral l. 2. c. 7.
That ^ll People accounted Happiness to be a Pleasure, and desired to live
therein, or at least ^ot without it. And again elsewhere he says: That no man
can rationally think, Eud. l. 7. c. 5.
^ut he that is truly happy lives very pleasantly. And again in his Rhetoric:
Rhet. l. 1. c. 15.
That Happiness is that way of Life which is most pleasant with Security. So
even our own Divines are wont to describe the Celestial Happiness, by an
uninterrupted Joy.

V. IN the fifth place it appears, by Aristotle's own Definition of Pleasure,
Magn. Moral. l. 2. c. 7.
that Happiness is of the same Affinity. For he defines Pleasure to be, A
Restitution of every Creature from a state imperfect, or preternatural, unto
its own proper Nature. Now a true Feeling and Possession of Virtue, is also the
conversion or bringing a man about, from what is contrary to his Nature, to
that which is conformable to it. For tho all Depravity be, according to
Trismegistus, inbred, and connatural to Brutes, Marcus Imperator, lib. 7. cap.
11.
yet in Reality the same is quite contrary to human Nature. For (as the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius observes) to act according to Nature or according to Reason, is
in a rational Creature the same thing. Wherefore all pravity is repugnant to
human Nature. But that Virtue is natural to human Nature, and born as a Twin
therewith, is manifest, as well because Man's Soul is a rational Being, as
because Righteousness or perfect Virtue (as we are told by Divine Revelation)
is immortal; and that it was Sin only that brought Death into the World. For
since the State of Innocence was to have been eternal, this plainly shows, that
such a state was most perfect and most natural. And therefore that Restitution
unto such a State must be the most intrinsic and peculiar Pleasure.

V. LASTLY, it must be agreed, that the Desires of the Soul fly not to their
Object, as it is intelligible, but as it is good or congruous, or grateful, or
at least tending to these ends; and so filling the mind with all the Joys and
Pleasure it can comprehend. Hence it is plain, that supreme Happiness is not
barely to be placed in the Intellect; but her proper Seat must be called the
Boniform Faculty of the Soul: Vide in this Book, L. 3 c. 9. 14, 15, 16.
namely, a Faculty of that divine Composition, and supernatural Texture, as
enables us to distinguish not only what is simply and absolutely the best, but
to relish it, and to have pleasure in that alone. Which Faculty much resembles
that part of the Will which moves toward that which we judge to be absolutely
the best, when, as it were with an unquenchable thirst and affection it is
hurried on toward so pleasing an Object; and being in possession of it, is
swallowed up in satisfaction that cannot be expressed.

VI. HE therefore who acts according to this Faculty, conforms to the best and
divinest thing that is in us. And this, as Aristotle notes, is necessary unto
Happiness. Ethic. Nicom. l. 10. c. 7.
For whether (says he) it be the very mind of man, or something else that,
according to Nature, seems to govern and preside within us, as having knowledge
of what is most Lovely and Divine; or whether it be God himself that
immediately operates; or else those Gifts which we derive from above: this is
plain, that such inward Working and Conformity to Virtue's Law, is that which
denominates true Happiness. Here the Philosopher seems doubtful whether it be
the Intellect, or any other Faculty (which yet bears Impression of things
lovely and divine) in whose Operation true Happiness does consist. Yet
afterward he takes part with the Intellect, and places Happiness in
Contemplation. But we presume to say, this can be no moral Happiness; since it
would be confined to a few speculative Men and Philosophers, and so shut out
the Bulk of Mankind, who could never be partakers thereof.

VII. WHEREFORE, we think, Happiness should be seated rather in that Boniform
Faculty we have spoke of; since it is the most elevated and most divine Faculty
of the Soul, and seems to supply the same place in it, as the essential Good of
the Platonicks, is said to do in the Deity. As also because the Study and
Improvement of it is common to all men. For it is not above the Talent of the
meanest, to love God, and his Neigbour very heartily. And, if this be done with
Prudence and Purity of Life, it is the Completion of this Happiness, and the
very natural Fruit of this exalted Faculty.

And let no man think meanly thereof, since we are free to aver, that nothing
of greater Benediction can betide us, either in the present, or in the future
life, than such a testimony of the Divine Love. But we shall elsewhere speak
more freely thereof.

VIII. WE do therefore mention in our Definition of Happiness, the pleasure
which the mind enjoys from a sense of Virtue; because there are some kinds of
allowable pleasure, such as Aristotle calls pure and generous, Nicom. lib. 10.
c. 6. Magn. Moral. lib. 2. c. 7.
and laughs at those who think otherwise. For such (says he) as will not allow
that any Pleasure can be honest, are like those Companions, who, not
comprehending what Nectar is, do fancy that the Gods drink Wine; inasmuch as
they themselves know nothing better.

IX. NOW I affirm this pleasure to arise from a Sense of Virtue; and it is
erroneous to think the Fruit of Virtue should consist in such imaginary
knowledge as is gotten by bare Definitions of Virtue: for this amounts to no
^ore, than if a man would pretend to know ^he Nature of Fire from the bare
Picture of Fire, which can afford no Heat. All kind of Vital Goods (as I may
take the liberty to call them) are by our Life and Senses to be judged of, and
enjoyed. And Virtue is in it self an ^nward life, not an outward shape, or to
be discovered by the Eye. According to that ^memorable Saying of Plotinus: Vide
in this Book, L. 2. c. 2. 5. etc. 3. 1.
If you ever were the thing it self, you may then be said to have seen it. But
being once transformed into this life of Virtue, then indeed you behold the
Beauties, and taste the Pleasures thereof; then you grow enamoured, and your
Soul is taken up with Joys that cannot be uttered. However till you shall
attain this State, and while this Blessed Disposition of the Soul is not as yet
awakened in you, it is fit you credit those who are in the Fruition of it. Nor
can that Saying of Aristotle be ever more opportunely urged than in this Case,
That Learners must believe. For should you venture to make judgment of the
Pleasure that is in Virtue, being as yet void of all Experience, it were to be
feared, you would prosecute it so faintly, as never to obtain it, but be left
to expiate your incredulity in this Life, by a too lasting punishment in the
other.

X. AS to the preceding Words that are annexed to the Definition of Happiness:
Namely, That it was made perfect by external Comforts: How could this otherwise
be? For since Happiness consists in that Pleasure, which good men take in the
Sense of Virtue, and a Conscience of Well-doing; no man can possess this
Happiness, if any pain be so intense upon him, as to distract the Mind, and
extinguish all present Sense of Pleasure. Whence it plainly follows, that we
must not lie under acute Diseases, or want the Food that is needful. For the
want of a Sufficiency for Nature; or a State of Captivity; or any Degree of
Vassalage; are able to depress, as well as distract, the Mind by Cares and
Anxiety. They hinder Happiness from being in its Perfection, nor can Heroical
Virtue produce so full a Crop. Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi --


XI. Magn. Moral. lib. 2. c. 8.
WHEREFORE (as Aristotle says) while we are Men, and carry about us the
Frailties we are born to, we shall ever be wanting of external Prosperity. For
complete Happiness cannot be without those two Ingredients, which the
Pythagoreans termed Praise and Comfort; Moral. Nicom. lib. 10. c. 9.
meaning Praise that results from Virtue, and Comfort from good Fortune. This
we sufficiently noted before to be the Pythagoreans Doctrine. Magn. Moral.
And Aristotle, in his great Morals, strikes again upon the same Note;
affirming, That without external Comforts, it was impossible to be happy.

XII. HOWEVER he inclines much to a Mediocrity herein, and quotes Solon for it:
That a Man may do all things that are fit for him, out of a moderate Estate.
For as to Excess of Wealth, it rather choaks up the Way to Virtue, than mends
the Path. Archytas compares Wealth unto Wine, and to Light; saying, that one
blinded the Eyes, and the other turned the Brains, of very good Men, when they
were in excess. Whence Aristotle, when he interprets the Answer of Anaxagoras,
does not make his happy Man to be either a Potentate, or a Man of overgrown
Riches; Moral. Eudem. lib. 1. c. 4.
But the Man that was full of Innocence, free from Pain, and who had some share
of Divine Contemplation. This was his happy Man.

CHAP. III. Of Virtue in general: and of Right Reason.
I. VIRTUE is an intellectual Power of the Soul, by which it overrules the
animal Impressions or bodily Passions; so as in every Action it easily pursues
what is absolutely and simply the best.

Here it seems fit, in the Definition, L. 3. c. 1. 3.
to call Virtue rather a Power than a Habit. First, because the word Virtue
implies as much, and signifies the same thing as Fortitude. And next because an
Habit is not essential to Virtue. For if a Man had this intellectual Power born
in him, he would doubtless be virtuous, tho it came not to him in the way of
repeated Actions, such as constitute a Habit. For it is not the external
Causes, but the internal, which make the essence of a thing. Besides it is this
Idea of Virtue which elevates and inclines the mind to love her, and tread in
her ways, and which argues Virtue to be a quick and vigorous heat, by which the
mind is easily and irresistibly moved to do things which are good and
honorable. So that we esteem this very Notion of Virtue able to rowze up men
from Sloth and Lethargy, and make those ashamed, who on a few moderate
Performances think to set up for Men of Virtue.

II. WE term this a Power intellectual, not only because of its situation,
which is in the intellectual part of the Soul (and not in the animal part of
it, where that Power resides which governs the Members) but also because it is
always excited by some Principle which is intellectual or rational. By animal
Impressions we understand every motion of the Body, which being obtruded with
any sort of Violence on the Soul, brings danger of Sin and Error, if not
carefully watched.

Therefore all such Delusions and Imaginations, as strongly assault the Mind,
may fitly be referred to this Head. By Actions, I mean all Motions made by the
Soul upon deliberation, which is to say, all such as may properly be termed
human Actions; whether ^hey be such as the Schoolmen call Elicitae or
Imperatae: that is, whether they do imme^iately proceed from the Soul it self;
or whether they are occasioned from any outward Impressions made upon the Soul.
Under which Heads we may rightly compre^end the accepting or refusing any
Philosophical Opinion, whether Physical or Metaphysical. And so of any thing
else.

III. AS to the Pursuit of the Soul, we spoke of; this was to set off, and more
openly express ^he intellectual Power: for if it had not that ^orce to pursue,
it would not be Virtue, but only a Disposition toward it. So Thedges the
Pythagorean has it: That Reason does not beget in us a Continency and
Forbearance, but by putting a forcible Restraint upon Lust and Anger. And that
when the Passions do overcome, and put the same forcible restraint upon Reason,
she then gives place to Incontinency and a softness of mind which receives all
Impressions; when as bare Dispositions without such a forcible restraint, can
only produce imperfect Virtues, and imperfect Vices.

Wherefore the Philosopher makes these interchangeable Conflicts, and
Dispositions of the Soul, to be but Virtues half perfect, as also the Vices but
half inveterate.

And whoreas we say, the Soul pursues what was absolutely and simply the best,
this was to manifest that famous distinction of a twofold Good; one General,
which was absolut^ good, or absolutely better. The other Particul^ and which in
respect of some single Inclinati^ of any particular person, was good or better:
the is to say, either grateful, or more gratef^ But what we hold to be the
absolute Good, (...) better thing, is that which proves grateful, (...) more
grateful, to the Boniform Faculty of (...) Soul, which we have already
pronounced (...) be a Thing Divine.

IV. Moral. Nicom. l. 6. c. 13.
ARISTOTLE seems to me, in his Ethic^ to Nicomachus, to point at this very
Facul^ saying, That what is best, in whatever Subject it be; is not apparent,
but to a good Man By which he means, that men do discov^ that which is best in
every Subject (I me^ really and simply best) not as they (...) knowing, but as
they are Good. So that m^ thinks he had spoken more correctly had (...) styled
this Faculty, The very Eye of the S^ than to call it that sort of Natural
Industry which seems too much bordering upon Cros^ But forasmuch as no man can
feel the Mo^tives and Dictates of this Divine Faculty, b^ one who has attained
to it by diligent application, we must have recourse to some middle. Principle
to serve as Mercury did of old, an^ be an Interpreter between God and Man^ And
for this we shall constitute that which we call Right Reason. Wherefore that
certainly is absolutely and simply the best, which according to the
Circumstances of the Case in question, comes up closest to Right Reason, or
(...) rather consentaneous with it.

V. FOR Right Reason, which is in Man, is a sort of Copy or Transcript of that
Reason or Law eternal which is registered in the Mind Divine. However this Law
is not by Nature made otherwise known unto us, than as it is communicated and
reflected on our Minds by the same Right Reason, and so shines forth. But by
how much it shines forth, by so much does it oblige the Conscience, even as a
Law Divine inscribed in our Hearts. To this very Sense the Pythagoreans
pronounced of Virtue: Tha it was the Habit of doing what ought to be done. They
did not barely intend, The doing what was equal, and in a Mean, or doing what
needed neither Addition nor Substraction, as being already what it ought to be:
But the doing that which was obligatory, and of Duty, and according to a Law
which was immutable. And so also did Epictetus famously pronounce, What ever
appears to be best, let that be your inviolable Law.

VI. THE height of Virtue is this, constantly to pursue that which to Right
Reason seems best. For indeed she her self is even absolutely and simply that
best, not only as she is so consonant to Divine Reason, which does nothing
partially for the sake of this or that particular: but as she generously
dictates, like to a common Parent, such Laws as tend, in their own Nature, to
the Happiness of all Mankind. Hence Aristotle calls God, the Law eternal, as
regarding every way with equal Benignity. De Mundo, cap. 6.
So also, as well among the Pythagoreans as the Stoics, it was held, That to
follow God, or (...) follow Nature, was just the same thing as (...) follow
Right Reason. For this alone is tha^ which constitutes our Nature, and
distinguishe^ a Man from a Beast.

VII. YET after all, as Aristotle himself (...) fain often to confess, tho it
be easy to agree this Best to be that which to Right Reason i^ consonant; yet
what this Right Reason is, (...) what is the measure of it, seems a most
difficult matter truly to resolve. Magn. Moral. lib. 2. c. 10.
The Philosophe having (in his great Morals) brought in one who demands, what
Right Reason was, and where to be found? The Answer is but darkly thus, That
unless a Man have within himself a Sense of things of this Nature, there is
nothing to be done. It was indeed the Answer which a Physician gave to one who
asked him, how he should distinguish, which was the paleness that argued a man
to be ill of an Ague. But the same Philosopher presently subjoins, That it was
the like Case, as (...) make (...) Judgment of the Passions; namely, That by
some Sense and Feeling of them, the ^onjecture was to be made. So that in short
the final Judgment upon this matter, is all referred to inward Sense, which I
confess, I should rather have called, Magn. Moral. lib. 2. c. 8.
The Boniform Faculty of the Soul. However, as Aristotle somewhere notes, of
Men who by a sort of Violence, and without Reason, L. 3. c. 1.. 2.
are hurried on to good, I must own, that whoever is so affected, differs but
little from them who are inspired. And certainly this Principle which I call
the Boniform Faculty, is the most divine thing within us, but has nothing in
it that favors of Fanaticism.

VIII. THE Philosopher, in another place, defines Right Reason thus, Moral.
Eudem. l. 5. c. 13.
That such Reason was right, as was conformable to Prudence. Now whereas
Prudence it self is nothing but that natural Sagacity, or well cultivated
Diligence of the Mind; which he elsewhere calls, The very Eye of the Soul: This
only brings back the same answer as before; resolving right Reason rather into
an inward Sense, or an inward Faculty of Divination; than into any certain and
distinct Principles, by which a Man might judge of that which in every thing
were the best.

IX. HOWEVER, the same Philosopher is at last, toward the end of his
Eudemicks, Moral. Eudem. l. 7. c. 15.
very clear and very apposite in this Matter. For when he brings the same
question on the stage, the Resolution is as follows, ' That we are in this, as
in other Occasions, to regulate our Lives by the Dictates of our internal
Regent; that we must aspire to such habits, as may enable us to imitate the
high Character of such a Regent, and to conform thereto in all things. Which
amounts to this, that our Consciences must be kept pure and immaculate. For he
adds, That as human Nature does consist of two parts, the one to command, the
other to obey: so by institution in all Governments, the inferiors are tied to
be subject to the Rulers. That also this Government is of a double sort. For
just as Physic requires one thing, and Health another, and that the first is
but in order to the latter; even so it fares in contemplating the Ways of God.
He, as the high and supreme Governor, first sends his Edicts forth; but the end
and designation of them is to beget prudence in the heart of Man: and then the
work of prudence is to distinguish what in human affairs i^ best. Now as to
God, he already is all-sufficient, and wants nothing; wherefore we may infer,
that whatever choice, or whatever acquisition of natural Gifts we have, which
may most contribute to annex the Soul to God by contemplation; this surely is
the best, and this the noblest Measure for all our Deliberations. As on the
other side, whatever is so deficient, or so redundant as to interrupt our
Contemplation of God, or of the Homage we owe him, this of all things is the
vilest.

This was the Answer given, which, for Truth and Divinity, savours not so much
of the Philosopher, as of an Oracle.

X. YET let us add what he writes, to the same effect, Lib. 10. c. 8.
unto Nicomachus. He says, That as to the Gods, their whole Being was a
continued Series of Happiness; but as to Man, that he had nothing of it
farther, than as he held resemblance with his Divine Original. Now he should
have remembered, that the Divine Life was not a matter of Sapience only, but
was principally to consist in Love, Benignity, and in Beneficence or
Well-doing. For these are the Fruits of that Celestial Particle of the Soul,
which we term the Boniform; and by which, above any other Accessions, we are
made most like unto Almighty God.

XI. PYTHAGORAS, Var. Hist. l. 12. c. 50.
according to what Elian said of him, made a happy Conjunction of these two
things, saying, The Gods had been bountiful to Mortals in two eminent
Blessings, namely, to speak the truth, and, to act righteously: for that both
of these bore resemblance unto the Works of the immortal Gods. Which is to say,
that the Perfection of Divine Life is made up of Truth and Well-doing.
Wherefore, if men will abide by the Judgment of Aristotle or Pythagoras, or
others of the most celebrated, they must own that the Measure of Right Reason
is to imitate the Divine Wisdom, and the Divine Goodness, with all our Might.
To which also we may refer, and so expound, that saying of Theages the
Pythagorean: That the source, cause and measure of human Felicity, does consist
in the knowledge of such things as are most excellent, and most divine.

CHAP. IV. Certain Axioms or Intellectual Principles; into which almost all the
Reasons of Morality may be reduced.
I. BUT since there is a Race of Men in the World, who are quite seared up as
to God, and all that is Divine; who allow no such thing as Superiority in the
Faculties, but assert Obedience to that Passion in particular, which shall
happen to usurp above the rest, and make it the top of human Felicity to
fulfill the desires thereof: To such as these, who would injuriously pass for
men, which they are not; we must proceed by other steps than what are already
set down. For we must not talk of our Boniform Faculty, as the measure of Right
Reason, and flowing from the divine part of the Soul, but merely insist with
them upon what refers to the Intellect: Moral. Eudem. l. 5. c. 8.
since, as Aristotle notes, some things are intelligible, tho men know not the
reason why.

II. FROM this Magazine therefore let us draw forth a stock of such Principles,
as being immediately and irresistibly true, need no proof; such, I mean, as all
Moral Reason may in a sort have reference unto; even as all Mathematical
Demonstrations are found in some first undeniable Axioms. And because these
Principles arise out of that Faculty, which the Greeks call Nu^s, that
signifies the Mind or Intellect; and that the Words Noema and Noemata derive
therefrom, and properly signify Rules intellectual: we do not therefore
improperly style the Rules that hereafter follow, Moral Noema's. But, lest any
should fancy them to be morose and unpracticable, I must here affirm, they
propose nothing for good, which at the same time is not grateful also, and
attended with delight.

NOEMA I.
Good is that which is grateful, pleasant, and congruous to any Being, which
has Life and Perception, or that contributes in any degree to the preservation
of it.

NOEMA II.
But, on the other side, whatever is ungrateful, unpleasant, or any ways
incongruous to any Being which has Life and Perception, is evil. And if it
finally tend to the destruction of that being, it is the worst of evils.

As for example-sake, if any thing should not only offend your Eyes or Ears,
but bring also blindness and deafness upon you; this were the worst that could
happen. But if the sight and hearing were but only impaired thereby, this were
but an inferior Evil. And the Reason holds the same in the other Faculties.

NOEMA III.
Among the several kinds or degrees of sensible Beings which are in the world,
some are better and more excellent than others.

NOEMA IV.
One Good may excel another in Quality, or Duration, or in both.

This is self-evident: yet it may be illustrated from this absurdity, that
otherwise one Life would not be better, nor one sort of Happiness greater than
another: so as Gods, Angels, Men, Horses, and the vilest Worm, would be happy
alike; which none but a mad man can fancy. And as to Duration there is no
scruple thereof.

NOEMA V.
What is good is to be chosen; what is evil to be avoided: but the more
excellent Good is preferable to the less excellent: and a less Evil is to be
born, that we may avoid a greater.

NOEMA VI.
In things of which we have no experience, we must believe those who profess
themselves to have experience. Provided always that there be no suspicion of
fraud or worldly contrivance, but that there be a Conformity between their
Professions and their Lives.

NOEMA VII.
It Is more eligible to want a Good, which for weight and duration is very
great, than to bear an Evil of the same proportion. And by how much any Evil
shall in weight and duration exceed the Good, by so much the more willingly can
we be without such Good.

NOEMA VIII.
That which must certainly come to pass, ought to be reputed as present;
inasmuch as the future will one day come upon us. And herein some proportion of
Reason holds in things future, which are very probable.

NOEMA IX.
Good things, which excel less, are distinguished by Weight and Duration, from
those things which excel more.

NOEMA X.
A present Good is to be rejected or moderated, if there be a future Good of
infinite more value, as to weight and duration to be but probably expected: and
much more therefore if such expectation be certain.

NOEMA XI.
A present Evil is to be born, if there be (...) probable future Evil
infinitely more dangerous as to weight and duration, to be avoided thereby and
this is much more strongly incumbent, if the future evil be certain.

NOEMA XII.
A mind which is free from the prejudices that attend passion, judges more
uprightly than a mind which by such passions, or any other corporeal
Impressions is solicited or disturbed. For even as a cloudy Sky, and turbulent
Sea will neither transmit or reflect any Light; so a disturbed mind admits no
Reason, tho it come never so plain and clear.

Boethius sets this forth in very elegant Verse, which thus begins, Nubibus
atris Condita nullum
Fundere possunt Sydera Lumen, etc,
The Stars, tho of themselves so bright,
When bid in Clouds can give no light.


III. AND these are those Rules or Noemata, which almost suffice to engender in
the Soul that Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude which regard the Duties we
owe our selves. Those which follow regard what we owe unto others; as to God,
to Man, and to Virtue it self. And therefore they are the Rules and Principles
of Sincerity, Justice, Gratitude, Mercy and Piety. For I account Piety among
^he Moral Virtues, inasmuch as God may by ^he Light of Nature be known.

NOEMA XIII.
We must pursue the greatest and most perfect Good with the greatest zeal, and
lesser Goods with a zeal proportionably less. Nor must we subordinate greater
Goods to less, but less to greater.

NOEMA XIV.
The Good, which in any case in question, you would have another man do unto
you; the same you are bound in the like case, to do unto him; So far forth as
it may be done without prejudice ^o a Third.

NOEMA XV.
The Evil you would not have done to your self, you must abstain from doing the
same to another, as far as may be done without prejudice to a Third.

NOEMA XVI.
Return good for good, and not evil for good.

NOEMA XVII.
It Is good for a man to have wherewithal live well and happily.

NOEMA XVIII.
If it be good for one man to have wherewith to be happy; it evidently follows,
it is twice a good for two men to be happy, thrice for three, thousand times for
a thousand; and so of the rest.

NOEMA XIX.
It Is better that one man be disabled from living voluptuously, than that
another should live in wa^ and calamity.

NOEMA XX.
It Is good to obey the Magistrate in things i^ different, even where there is
no penalty to disobey.

NOEMA XXI.
It Is better to obey God than Men, or even our own Appetites.

NOEMA XXII.
It Is good and just to give every man what is his due, as also the use and
possession thereof without any trouble.

NOEMA XXIII.
However it is manifest, that a man may so be^ave himself, as that what was his
own by ac^uisition or donation, may of right cease to be ^is own.

IV. THESE and such like Sayings may ^ustly be called Moral Axioms or Noemas:
for they are so clear and evident of themselves, that, if men consider
impartially, they need ^o manner of Deduction or Argument, but are agreed to as
soon as heard. And thus we are prepared, as with so many Touchstones, to let
the inquisitive know what Right Reason is. For in short, it is that which by
certain and necessary Consequences, is ^at length resolved into some
intellectual Principle which is immediately true.

And if any ask after Examples in this kind, that are suited to Morality, they
may have recourse to such as are above recited.

CHAP. V. To show which are the Faculties whereby we do find and understand
what is simply, and in its own nature good.
I. IT is now manifest, there is something which is simply and absolutely good,
which in all human Actions is to be sought for. That it is Nature, Essence, and
Truth are to be judged of by Right Reason; but that the relish and delectation
thereof, is to be taken in by the Boniform Faculty. Also that all Moral Good,
properly so called, is Intellectual and Divine: Intellectual, as the Truth and
Essence of it is defined and comprehended by the Intellect: and Divine, as the
Savor and Complacency thereof, is most effectually tasted through that high
Faculty, by which we are lifted up and cleave unto God, (that Almighty One, who
is the most pure and absolute Good, and who never wills any thing but what is
transcendently the Best.) So that for a man thus to know, and thus to ascend,
is not only the highest Wisdom, but the highest Folicity. And it is by this
Gradation toward things divine, or by this Flower and Perfection of the Soul,
that we atttain to a sort of Coalition with what is perfectly the Best. So it
was said of old; Objectum quoddam est quod mentis flore prebendas.


II. NOW as to those men who shall either ^shly or advisedly reject the Truth
of our ^oema's, it is easy to guess by this disrelish, that are the Faculties
they consult. Nay, ^is plain they set up for the animal Appetite; ^d openly
declare, that what pleases them ^ost, is only the best. But tho we may here
^enture to call this a poor brutal delusion, yet ^ese things are most properly
referred unto, (...) the Chapter of Temperance.

III. IN the mean time, for what relates even to justice, the Sentiments of
those Gentlemen ^e nothing better. They will not allow for ^e chiefest Good
that which is absolutely and in its own nature just; but that which to
^emselves looks well, without any regard to ^eir Neighbors. And if you enquire
into the ^ate of this Good they so indulge, and so ^ursue, they make it no
secret to tell you ^ainly, it is what affords best entertainment (...) their
Senses. Alas, how deplorable is it, that ^an should ever value himself upon
such an ^ffinity with the Beast! Nay, in human shape (...) become the very
Beast! Whereas he has Title to think higher of himself, and to be ^ne and the
same with what is most eminent within him; or what in Dignity stands next
^hereto: which is doubtless his Intellect and Right Reason.

IV. FOR as in Numeration the Sum Total is accounted from the last Unite, so is
it in other matters; the last and most perfect essential difference makes a
Thing to be what it is, and does distinguish it from all Thi^ else. Wherefore,
if any man shall make sole good to be that, which to himself grateful, as
insisting wholly on the delectati^ of his animal Appetite, he plainly publish
himself for a Brute. But if he means and ^tends such grateful thing, as to the
Intelle^ or Right Reason, or to the Boniform Facu^ is suitable: This indeed (as
Plotinus says is the Object of a perfect Man, I mean of a intellectual Man,
and for such you may p^nounce him.

V. FOR this is the plain Character of t^ intellectual Life, that as in the
search of Tru^ it is not inquired what may seem true to a^ one Body of Men, tho
ever so numerous much less to any man in particular, but wh^ is simply and
absolutely the Truth: so neith^ does it set up that for good, which to any o^
man, or to any number of men, appears (...) such; but that which really and
absolutely so; and which, in like Circumstances eve^ intellectual Creature is
bound to elect, b^ the animal Nature never so averse. Now (...) it happens in
specious Arithmetic, that ever^ signal Operation stands afterward for (...)
Theorem or Conclusion: so in Morals le^ such preference and election, as we
have mentioned, stand for an eternal President, (...) guide our actions in all
like cases, when ci^cumstances are the same. And let us acquies^ therein, and
acknowledge the Truth there of, tho it prove never so ungrateful to ou^
Appetites, and seem quite contrary to our ^xternal sense.

VI. WHEREFORE as it is an Error in ^he Intellect, to resign it self so far to
the ^magination, or to the Sense, as but to waver ^n the pursuit of Truth: So
doubtless is it an ^rror in the Will, to be so captivated, as to ^esign it self
to the animal Appetite, and to ^orsake what is absolutely good. For if the Will
may want at some seasons that relish of good which it ought to have; this is
merely the Will's neglect, in not exciting that divine Faculty, by which we not
only know what is best, but are elevated, and even ravished when we enjoy it.
For it is plain, that when we open our Eyes, such are the Charms of this Joy,
that a man would rather venture a thousand deaths, than by any base
prevarication to hazard his portion in a state of life, which is so desirable
and so divine.

VII. WHEREFORE as it is now plain, that something there is, which of its own
nature, and incontestably is true: so is there somewhat which of its own nature
is simply good. Also that as the former is comprehended by the Intellect, so
the sweetness and delight of the latter is relished by the Boniform Faculty.
Wherefore as to those who pronounce every thing good, so far as at any rate it
can be grateful, and so establish it for the standard of human Actions; this is
Madness it self, inasmuch as hereby they rank the Wise, the Fools, and the
Madmen, all in the same state. Nay, perhaps they here^ prefer the Fools and
Mad men before t^ Wise; since these are the most likely to pesist against all
Sense and Reason, and to sti^ by that which is grateful, let it be never (...)
destructive, vile or ridiculous.

VIII. SOME there are, I confess, who spea^ a little more cautiously in this
Matter, an^ would have the man they call wise, have Sel^ preservation still in
his eye, how inordinate so ever they allow him in all the rest. By which they
show, that if their Fool or Madman ca^ but here be shot-free; they little
consider (...) Immortality, or the Fruits of solid Wisdom However it is plain
to every man of Sense that a bare self-preservation is not a desirable thing;
for such may be the Scorns and Scourge of this Life, that none but a stupid
Creature would in such Circumstances desire to live.

But lastly, if according to them, Life and Conservation be so valuable, it
must also follow, that the more durable these are, they are so much the better,
and that the most durable is best of all. Furthermore, if such
self-conservation of one man be really good, it is doubly so to preserve two
men, Noema 18.
and thrice as much to save three, and so forward. Whence by the Light of
Nature, it is manifest, that every intellectual Creature stands bound to
provide, both in present and in future, for his own, and his Neighbor's
Preservation, so far forth as in him lies, and as it may consist without doing
prejudice to a third. This is what certainly fulfils not ^nly a great part of
Justice, but of empe^ance, and indeed of every other Virtue.

CHAP. VI. Of the Passions in general, and of the Helps they afford.
^. WHAT Virtue is in the general we have already fixed. And now before we
descend to the several sorts or Species ^hereof, it will not be amiss to
premise somewhat of the Passions, about which such Virtues are conversant; so
as to explain their Nature, their Use, or their Disadvantage: and thereby
prepare the Mind to take in such an Idea of Virtue, as may be full and adequate.

II. BUT by Passions I do not barely understand such as are commonly handled in
Moral Philosophy, but every other corporeal Impression, which has force enough
to blind ^he Mind, or abuse the Judgment, in discerning what in every case were
the best. Wherefore I add hereunto all sorts of fantastic Notions and false
Impressions that are grown pertinacious, and which either by ill custom, ^r the
Power of Education, or by internal Proclivity, so seize upon the Mind, as to
lead us unto any apparent Error. For Virtue ought to reach (...) her Authority
to the weeding (...) even (...) these remote Evils, lest the Mind b^ shaken
when it should judge; or perverted in the Prosecution of that which is simply
the best.

Yet first we shall treat of those Passions which are properly so called; such
as are Love, Hatred, Anger, and the rest of that kind. Concerning all which we
must maintain (...) against the Stoics, that of their own Nature they are
good; and that the Intendments of Divine Providence are not less understood by
their Use, Vide in this Book, L. 1. c. 6. 2.
than by the Structure of those Organs, which compose every animal Body.

III. THE Use and Utility of them may in the general be even illustrated thus;
that when Passions happen to be joined with a more venement agitation of the
Spirits, they seem to perform in a Man (whom some call the little World) what
the Winds do in the greater. For as these purge and purify the Air, so those
cleanse and defecate the Blood, and suffer it not by stagnation to corrupt.

IV. A^S o^ these Passions play upon the Soul in a thousand shapes, and the
Scenes of Fancy are so charming, and so variously obtruded, that they often
tempt, and even combat with the Understanding. Yet as we get experience, and
are made stronger by this Warfare; so is there a new Joy excited in us to see,
that notwithstanding all such assaults or the insolence of those Delusions, yet
we are sensible of a divine Principle within us, which we call the Mind, (that
Heavenly Spark, which holds steady in the midst of all such Commotions) by
which we bear up and maintain the same sense, L. 1. c. 6. 8.
stability and judgment we had; and finally and inseparably adhere to that
which is simply the best.

V. BESIDES, from such Conflict and such Victory, it is plain, there is a
certain Government or Empire acknowledged to be in the Soul; and that the
intellectual part has something which it does teach and instruct, as a Father
does his Son; or which it breeds and trains up, as in a lower instance, a
Huntsman does his Dogs. Ethic. Nicom. lib. 1. c. 13.
Aristotle intimates something to this purpose, when he makes two parts in the
Soul, which do in a manner both partake of Reason: The one properly of it self,
and in its own right; the other as it were a Son obeying his Father. And here
he understands that part of the Soul which exciteth toward Concupiscence and
Appetite. For he says, That the vegetative part partakes not at all of Reason;
but that the concupiscible part, and (more universally) the appetitive part of
the Soul, does in a sort partake of Reason: inasmuch as it hearkens to what
Reason inculcates, and is subjected to the Commands thereof. And yet, with
favor from so great a Man, it is not plain, but that the very Plastic Part of
the Soul (I mean the seminal, or formative part) which he here calls the
Vegetative, does also in some degree submit to Reason For that all those
natural Appetites and Eruptions, which we observe, are not so much the Fruits
and Effects of the Perceptive Part, as of the Plastic.

VI. DOUBTLESS the Source and Fountain of these is in the Plastic Part, whose
chief Seat is in the Heart; but the sense and feeling of them is in the
perceptive part, whose Seat is in the Brain. And whereas both these Parts are
essentially, vitally, and inseparably the same; it is no wonder if the
perceptive part be solicited and wrought upon, and even hurried away by the
Passions. It is true these Passions, are of themselves, but as blind Instincts
of Nature, such as perhaps are found in the very Plants; unto whom Youth and
and Old Age do also agree. But they are conspicuous in living Creatures, as in
Birds, when they build their Nests, or hatch their young Ones. Also in Men
these Instincts are not only seen, but are, by distinct and teflex Operation of
the Mind, known to proceed from some other Cause: as either from the Plastic
Part of the Soul alone; L. 1. c. 8. 1. L. 1. c. 12. 2.
or else as it is in conjunction with that universal Plastic Principle, which
by us is termed the Spirit of Nature. And perhaps the same is pointed at by
Aristotle himself in that Axiom which he so often repeats, That Nature does
nothing in vain.

VII. FOR as there is a formative or seminal Principle of all Plants, and the
like of all animal Bodies; into which Nature has infused, and then excited,
such Operations and Instincts, as tend to the continuance of every ^ndividual
production; so more especially are those Instincts fixed, which tend to the
sup^ort and preservation of the Species; as (...) namely) the act of
Generating, and that also of a passionate Concern in every Creature ^owards
their young. The power of this ^atter is wonderfully seen in the dissection of
a living Bitch with Whelps: for if you but hurt any of the young ones in her
sight, she barks, and is greatly disquieted; but if you reach them toward her
mouth, she forgets her own condition, and falls with a tender kind^ess to the
licking of them in the midst of all her Torments. This strange sight is
reported by Realdus Columbus, De re anatomica, lib. 14.
to have been often exposed by him in the public Theater at his Anatomical
Dissections.

VIII. HENCE it appears, L. 1. c. 12. 8.
that all the animal Instincts and Impulses do belong to the Region of Nature,
and are but imperfect Shadows and Footsteps of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness,
which vouchsafes as in this manner to glimmer in the dark. And these are those
Rudiments and Primordials, against which, by the help of a more pure and
celestial Light, we do contend, as often as they invade the Limits of the
superior Law. That is to say, the Intellectual Part of the Soul strives with
the Plastic; which, tho fiercely abetted and incited by the Spirit of Nature in
some certain Desires and Appetites; yet on the other side, a Divine Power is at
hand, urging resistance against all such incantatio^ and still asserting a
preference to what is (...) honorable, L. 1. c. 6. 4.
and simply the best.

IX. THERE is a witty conceit, tho insufficiently grounded, as if the Soul
should be fa^ penned up in a certain glandulous part of the Brain, called the
Conarion. That this gland^lous part being thus animated and defended b^ the
Soul on the one hand (as in its proper Ga^ rison) should on the other be
attacked by the darts and assaults of the Spirits (even as it were some Pigmy
that with a Feather or a Twi^ were employed in beating of the Winds) and that
herein should consist that hostility of the inferior part of the Soul with the
superior (...) which the Divines call, The War between the Flesh and the Spirit.

X. HOWEVER, thus much is manifest, that there is within us a certain
Principality o^ Empire, and that our mind is not a mere solitary Inspector; L
1. c. 8. 2.
but rather as a Regent, which (...) attended and fortified with numerous
Guards; and does not barely command over its own Passions, but over the Spirit
of Nature; so as by a diviner Magic not only to repel, but even vanquish the
Temptations and Sorceries thereof.

XI FROM all which it is further plain, that by the service of the Passions,
our Life and our Senses are more dilated, L. 1. c. 8. 3. L. 1. c. 12. 11.
and also quickened: even as Plato noted in his Phaedrus, That the Affections
were as the Wings and the Charits of the Mind.

XII. DES CARTS also says very happi^y, that the Passions seem to be a most
certain and solid Treasure of the Soul. For although (says he) we are apt to be
deceived by the many other ways of Perception, and cannot be certain if things
be the same as they are represented; yet as to the Passions, there is not room
for Deception in them, since they are so annexed to the Soul, that it were
impossible to feel them, if they were not; L. 2. c. 9. 12.
and that they must needs have a Being, inasmuch as they are felt. Hence, by a
sense of Virtue arises a wonderful Peace and Tranquillity to the Mind; a
permanent sweetness and complacency which is never to be repented of. It
surmounts not only all those Pleasures which conclude with Repe^ance, and
Bitterness of the Soul; but excels all Opinions and Philosophical Speculations
whatsoever. This certainly upon many other accounts is so, besides that main
one, that in those matters a man may almost ever be doubting. But in this,
which is Passion, and not Opinion, there can be no room for doubt.

XIII. LAST of all, besides this Use of the Passions (which is almost common to
all of them) that they strike, or rather ingrave the Soul with a more lively
Impression of the Object; there is another use of them deserving notice; as
namely, the rating of things that are laudable and just according as we find
our Passions excited by them, or as they are felt and relished by a sort of
Connection with our Souls. For passionate affecting is the mo^ intimate and
immediate Fruit of Life; an^ tho we may adorn the best of things with
superficial and imaginary approbation, ye^ our-Souls are not able, without such
Passion^ to wed the Object, and, as it were, to intermix it with our Sense and
Life. Nay, we know not how by any other ways to discover the Union there is
between our Souls and those Objects, unless we have an equal antipathy against
things vise and ignoble, whether in our selve or others. For this is the nature
of true Virtue, to love the best things, and hate the worst, even to
abhorrence, in whomsoever they appear. Evil in one man is evil in another, and
is detestable as being such. And it is the most perfect state of Life, to love
good things, and to hate the bad, at least; to bear them with indignation,
whenever they are obtruded upon us. For this gives testimony, that the inferior
part of the Soul submits, and is overawed by the superior; and that the whole
man is as it were in the fiery Chariot of his Affections, Elias-like, carried up
toward God and Heaven.

XIV. BUT if any man shall, under a pretended affectation of Peace, Prudence,
or Tranquillity, set up for submitting to any lewd usurpation over the common
Rights of Mankind, and the eternal Laws of Virtue; and yet, upon every trivial
affront to himself, she out and even burn with indignation and wrath; this were
Hypocrisy in such a degree, as not barely to deserve Scorn, but Detestation.

XV. PASSIONS therefore are not only good, but singularly needful to the
perfecting of human life. Yet must they be with these two Conditions. First
that our Desires steer toward a proper Object, which may be called, The true
Impulse: For those who offend herein are the worst of sinners; such as are the
malicious, and those that delight in Blood and Tortures, and others of that
strain.

The second Rule is, That the Desires be adequate to the Object, or the End;
and that (according to the thirteenth Noema) the best and greatest things be
pursued with our chiefest Passion; the middle things with less; and the lowest
with the least. But this also in such sort, as never to allow any such violence
in the Desire, as may either eclipse the Light of Reason, or obstruct that end
to which Nature aspires, by the help of those Affections wherewith she has
endowed our Souls. So that this Rule we may call, A moderate Impulse of the
Passions.

XVI. BUT if any man should propose the rooting up of all Desires, L. 1. c. 12.
9.
in order to free the Soul from Discord; and to end all strife and combustion
which the Passions maintain against the Soul, or among themselves: This to me
would sound no better, than as if one, to prevent Discord on the Harp, should
let down all the Strings; or than as if another should with Drugs set all the
Humors of his Body in a Ferment, for fear of falling sick. Wherefore Theages
the Pythagorean said very elegantly; That it was not the part of Virtue to
discharge the Passions of the Soul, such as Pleasure and Pain; but to temper
them aright. He also after this extends himself in that double similitude we
have mentioned, about a due mixture in the Humors of the Body, and a right
Harmony in the tuning of the Strings, which we need not here repeat.

XVII. BUT what is now to be the Rule and Measure by which the Desires are to
be tempered and rectified, the two Conditions aforementioned do set forth. And
to one of these, that famous Declaration of the Orator may be referred. Quaest.
Tuscul. lib. 4.
He therefore (says Tully) whoever it be that by Constancy and Moderation is of
a quiet Mind, and at peace with himself; who is neither wasted with Troubles,
or distracted with Fears, nor burnt up with Thirst of any inordinate Passion,
or undoing himself with vain and trivial Delights: This is the wise man whom we
long to behold. And he also is the happy Man, to whom nothing can arrive in
human Affairs so intolerable, as to depress his mind, or yet so joyful as to
transport him. But on the other side, when we see a Man inflamed with Lust, and
mad with Ambition, catching at all things with insatiable Avarice, and that the
more his Wealth pours in, or his Pleasures abounded, the more ravenous he
became: This (says Tully) is he whom a wise Man would not scruple to pronounce
the most unhappy, and the most perverted of all Men.

CHAP. VII. Of Passions properly so called, according to their kinds.
I. FORASMUCH as no Man has, in my Opinion, more accurately summed up, or
distinctly defined, the several kinds or species of Passions, than the renowned
Philosopher Des Carts; I will tread, for the most part, in his Footsteps,
unless upon great Motives to the contrary. But it is not amiss, in the first
place, to lay down a larger Definition of Passions, and to apply the same to
the kinds thereof, which follow.

II. PASSION then is a vehement Senfation of the Soul, which refers especially
to the Soul it self, and is accompanied with an unwonted motion of the Spirits.

Here, I say, Passion is rightly called Sensation, since in Passion the Soul is
sensible that it suffers; and with Vehemence, because it vehemently suffers.
That the Soul it self is said, in this Sensation, especially to suffer, is to
distinguish it from other Sensations; whether of Odors, Sounds and Colors, etc.
which refer to external Objects; or of Hunger, Thirst, and Pain, etc. which
regard our Bodies. Next, I say, that this Sensation is accompanied with the
Motion of the Spirits, rather than to say that it results therefrom; inasmuch
as the former evermore happens; but this not always, or very seldom, if you but
exclude such Motion as results from Eating, Drinking, or the Change of Air. For
in external Objects; which agitate the Sense or Imagination, it is the Soul
moves the Spirits, and not the Spirits the Soul.

III. De Passion. animae, part. 2. Art. 69.
DES CARTS brings all the Passions of the Soul under six principal and
primitive kinds: Namely, Admiration, Love, Hatred, Cupidity, Joy, and Grief.
And that they fall naturally into this Order and Distinction does thus appear;
For as soon as a new Object, or an old one under new Circumstances, occurs unto
us, it stops and entertains our Faculty of Considering: it strains up the
Attention beyond its wonted pitch, and this is called Admiration. Now because
this may so happen, before we comprehend whether such Object will prove
grateful or ungrateful to us, it may deservedly be called the very first
Passion.

IV. YET after this, when the Soul comes to consider the Object as grateful or
ungrateful, (which is the same almost as good or evil) then one of them excites
Love, and the other Hatred. But if this Good or Evil be considered by us as
remote and future, they kindle in us Cupidity; namely, to join with, and enjoy
the first, and to avoid or repel the latter. Both which are by the Schools very
properly called Desiderium and Fuga. But lastly, if this Good and Evil be
looked upon as present, the first begets Joy, and the other Grief.

V. I WILL not deny but that Des Carts ^ad his Reasons thus to enumerate the
Passions; however I think I have as sufficient Motives to contract them; L. 2.
c. 1.. 1.
and that into the ^hree first, of Admiration, Love and Hatred. For what is
Desire but Love, extending it self ^owards future Good? And what is Flight but
Hatred, in turning away from the evil at ^and, or at least in fortifying
against it? What is Joy but Love, which triumphs in possessing the thing
beloved? And what is Grief but Hatred, to be involved and harassed by the
present Evil? So that in all these Cases, it is manifest, that either Love or
Hatred lies still at the Root.

VI. HENCE it is plain, that the Scholastic Reduction of the Passions to the
two Heads, of Irascible and Concupiscible, which the very ^est of the old
Philosophers made use of, deserves not to be so contemptuously exploded, if but
interpreted aright. Yet here I speak ^ut of those Passions which are properly
seated in the Heart, and not in the Brain; where Admiration only (as Des Carts
has it) does reside. As to the rest they may, in my opi^nion, be justly enough
referred to those words of Pythagoras, which answer to the Schoolmens Irascible
and Concupiscible; which, in proper Terms are Concupiscence and Indignation.
And this latter is that Emotion of the Soul, by which it testifies wrath
against every appearance of what is either evil or ungrateful. Now if herein
there be no consideration either of present or future, then it is simple Hatre;
if the Evil be impending it is Fight, or else a Cupidity either to resist, or
by any expedient to evade it: But if it be actually present, then it is Sorrow,
Grief, or Sickness of the Mind; which is nothing else but Indignation to
suffer, and to stoop under the Tyranny of an Evil, which cannot be shaken off.

VII. THE Reason of Concupiscence is the same: which if it be fairly
accompanied with the appearance of what is good or grateful, and nothing of
Time respected, it is called pure and simple Love. If the Good be looked on as
future, it is Cupidity, or else Concupiscence properly so called; but if it be
present, then it is Joy or Gladness.

Yet we must think that it cease to be Concupiscence. For unless somewhat
that is nauseous and over-cloying supervenes, the Love we mention is naturally
prone to a continuation in its own Estate; so as some Ingredient of
Concupiscence will still remain.

VIII. WHEREFORE it is possible there may only be two principal and primitive
Passions, which have their proper Residence in the Heart. They are called by
Des Carts Love and Hatred; by the Schools Irascible and Concupiscible: and by
Pythagoras, Lust and Anger; which is somewhat remarkable, as from the Use
thereof we may have cause to note.

IX. HOWEVER, at present, and for a more extended Notion of the Passions, I
will follow Des Carts in his own Order and Distinction, as to the six general
kinds abovementioned. I will therefore first define them, and then subjoin the
respective Species unto each.

Admiration is the first; The first Rank of the Passions.
And it is a Passion of the Soul, which is struck with the Novelty of any
Object, and attentively engaged in the Contemplaiton thereof.

Admiration is twofold; the one of Esteem, the other of Despising. Esteem is
the admiring of the Magnitude or Value of any Object. But Despising is a
contrary Admiration at the Littleness or Despicableness of any Object.

Hence it is understood what is Esteem, or Disesteem of a Man's self; Namely,
when a Man dwells affectedly in the Contemplation of his own Dignity, or is
fixed with some Resentment on his own Meanness or Disgrace. The Reason is the
same either as to Disesteem, or else Regard, for others: The first of which is
called Scorning, and the last Veneration. Now Veneration is the Value we set
upon a free Agent, that can, as we believe, do us either good or harm; and
joined with a desire we have of putting our selves in subjection to it. But
Scorn is a disesteem we put upon a free Agent, which tho capable of doing us
either good or hurt, yet we judge so meanly of such Agent, as not to be able to
put in execution either the one or the other.

X. IN the second Rank come Love and Hatred.

Love is a Passion of the Soul, The second Rank of the Passions.
by which it is excited willingly to join it self unto Objects which seem
grateful thereunto. Yet here by the words. To join it self willingly, is not
meant to covet its being joined; for that appertains to Lust: but it is meant
with some emotion to acknowledge the thing to be either good or grateful.

Hatred is a Passion of the Soul, whereby it is incited willingly to separate
it self from Objects which seem ungrateful or hurtful thereunto. When he that
loves, esteems the Object lesser than himself, it is called simple Inclination,
or good Will; where equal to himself, then is it Friendship; and where greater,
then Devotion. Love which tends singly toward good things, is called Love;
when toward beautiful things, then Complacency.

Also Hatred, which refers simply to evil things, is called Hatred; if to
deformed things, then Aversion or Horror.

Nor ought we here to forget that noble and natural sort of Love, which the
Greeks termed Storge, and which we may call natural Affection; or that of
Hatred, called Antipathy.

XI. The third Rank of the Passions.
THE third Classis is Cupidity, with all its Tribe or Offspring.

Cupidity is a Passion of the Soul, by which it is carried toward good as it
is future. And therefore as the Absence of Evil, and the Presence of Good, are
both of them good, Cupidity may so far extend to either as they are future. But
if any man thinks it more proper, that Cupidity about the last Object should be
called Desire, and about the first Flight, I am indifferent. Only this is
plain, from what is gone before, that among the sorts of Cupidity, those of
them excel which spring up either from Horror, or from Complacency. For nothing
kindles Desire so much as Pulchritude or Beauty; and nothing puts sooner to
flight, than any horrid Deformity. And the thing which commonly is thought most
horrible, is Death.

XII. TO this Passion of Cupidity, there may first be reduced Hope, Fear,
Jealousy, Security and Despair. Then in the next place, Irresolution,
Animosity, Boldness, Emulation, Cowardice, and Consternation. The first Set of
these agree in this, that the Object of them all presents it self in the shape
of what is easy or difficult; yet without any Dependency of the Event upon our
selves.

The latter Set agree in this that the Object of all seems to depend upon our
selves; yet either with difficulty in the choice of Means, whence comes
Irresolution; or else in the execution, unto which all the rest refer.

XIII. HOPE is a Passion of the Soul, by which it is disposed to believe the
Event which it desires.

And Fear is a Passion, by which it is disposed to believe, that what it
desires will not happen.

When Hope excludes all Fear, it is called Security, or Presumption; and Fear,
when it shuts out all Hope, Despair. Jealousy is Fear of losing a Good we
highly esteem, but grounded upon trivial Canses.

XIV. IRRESOLUTION is a Fear of erring in the choice of those Means, which are
proper to any certain end.

Animosity is a Passion which disposes the Mind to act manfully, in the
execution of whatever it sets about. And if this happen in things that are
attended with much danger, it is called Boldness or Daring; if it spring from
the Example of what success others have had, then Emulation. But Cowardice is
opposed to Animosity, as Consternation is to Daring or Boldness. For Cowardice
is a certain feeble cold Passion of the Soul, that hinders her from doing those
things, which it were otherwise in her Power to do. Consternation is Cowardice,
or Timorousness, accompanied with Trouble and Amazement, which disables the
Soul from resisting an Impending Evil.

XV. The 4th. Rank of the Passions.
THE Fourth Classis is Joy and Grief, which have respect to the Good or Evil
that is present.

The Passions, which refer to this Head, are chiefly distinguished by these
Circumstances First barely, in respect to our selves, or unto others: For
present Good, as it regards our selves, begets Joy, even as present Evil does
Grief: And if Evil betides another, who has deserved it, it causes Laughter,
but, if he has not deserved it, then Commiseration. If Good happens to an
unworthy Man, there follows Envy; but Good happening to another, and which
redounds any way to our Benefit, produces Congratulation.

XVI. MOREOVER Good and Evil are considered, in the first place, in respect of
the Cause, whether as to our selves, or unto others: For Good, done by our
selves, begets Satisfaction or Tranquillity of Mind; Evil begets Repentance;
but the doing a thing which we doubt whether it be good or evil, begets Remorse
of Conscience. However Good, performed by others, begets Favor, although not done
to our selves; but if to our selves, then Gratitude. So Evil, committed by
others, if not done against our selves, begets Indignation only, but if it
touches us, then Anger.

Again, in respect of the Opinion of others; as the Good, which we enjoy,
exciteth Glory in us; so does Evil, Shame.

Lastly, in respect of Time. As the Duration of Good begets Satiety, or a
Loathing; so the Duration of Evil lessens Grief: but from Good that is past,
there arises what is properly called Desire, viz. to enjoy it again; as from
Evil that is past, Mirth.

XVII. JOY is a pleasant Commotion of the Soul; or, a Passion, in which does
consist the Fruition of Good; which she regards as her own.

Grief is an ungrateful Passion of the Soul, in which does consist the
Inconvenience of Evil, or of some Deficiency, which she sensibly regards as her
own.

Derision is a Joy, begotten on any slight Mischief happening to one, who is
thought to have deserved it. If this be upon very great Grounds, and
accompanied with Intentions of open Contempt, it is called Insulting.

Envy is Grief which arises, when Good happens to any that are unworthy of it.

Commiseration is Grief, when Evil happens to any one who has not deserved it.

Congratulation is Joy, arising by Good that happens to another, in which we
think we are some way concerned.

Acquiescing, or Self-satisfaction, is of all Joys the most pleasing: and it
arises from the Opinion of some good Work we have lately performed.

Repentance is Grief, and the bitterest that can happen, as arising from the
Conviction of some Evil committed by us.

Remorse of Conscience is Grief that arises upon doubting, whether what we
have done be good or not: For it is the effect of Rashness, to attempt any Work,
before all Hesitation, or Wavering of the Mind, be quieted.

XVIII. FAVOR is a sort of cheerful Good Will or Benevolence toward those,
with whose Well-doing we are delighted.

Gratitude is a kind of pleasing desire to do good to them, who have done good
unto us.

Indignation is Grief, that is kindled against those who have done some ill
thing.

Anger is Indignation against those who have done us hurt, and for which we
have purpose of Revenge.

Glory is Joy, which arises from Opinion, or from Hope of Praise among Men.

Shame is Grief that arises from the Opinion, or Fear, of Reproach.

Satiety is Grief that arises from the same Cause, from whence Joy did before
proceed.

Desire, properly so called, is Grief upon the Loss of Good, that is never to
be recovered.

Mirth is Joy from the Remembrance of past Evil.

XIX. THIS is almost the same Enumeration of the Passions that Des Carts has
given us; as well of those which are the primitive ones, as of such as are
derivative from them, or else complicated with them: together with the
Definitions of all, as near as we could approach unto that eminent Philosopher.

As to the Complication it self of those Passions that issue from the
Primitive, I here omit it for Brevity's sake; as intending elsewhere, and more
opportunely, to speak very soon thereunto.

But for those deep and Natural Causes of such Passions, which lie abstruse and
remote; as relating either to the Conarion (before spoken of) or to the Brain;
or to certain Motions of the Blood or Spirits; or to the Orifices of the Heart
(which are sometimes more dilated, or more contracted;) or else to the Nerves
of the Bowels and Stomach; or to the Spleen and Liver; or, finally, to the
Heart it self. I do willingly and knowingly pass them all-by; as well for other
Reasons, as chiefly, that they rather belong to Natu^ Philosophy, than to
Moral. Yet far be it from me to say, that the Effects, the Uses, and (...) Ends
of Passions do not appertain to Ethics For I should rather affirm, that the
knowledge of those things is a very choice and estimable part thereof.

CHAP. VIII. The Use and Interpretation of the Possions; and first of
Admiration, with all in that Classis: and of the other five Primitive Passions.
I. AS to what concerns the Ends and Uses of the Passions, it will not be amiss
to pursue them a little larger, and faithfully to interpret the Voice of Nature
in them all, as far as we are able. For it is not of small moment toward
knowing how Passions are rightly to be moderated and used (which surely in
Virtue is the greatest part) if we observe the end unto which Nature, or rather
God, who is the Parent of Nature, has destined each of them: as also at what
Rate he himself esteems his Works, L. 1. c. 6. 6. L. 1. c. 12. 12.
or would have them esteemed by others. For these Natural and Radical
Affections, are not from our selves, as being the result of free Thinking or
Speculation; nor are they to be acquired by Methods, L. 1. c. 6. 6.
but are really in us antecedent to all Notion and Cogitation whatever. For
they are, by God, whom we call Nature's Parent, given and implanted in us, as
early as Life it self: such I mean, as are in particular the pleasure of Eating
and Drinking; which Nature, doubtless, bestowed upon all living Creatures, not
only for the Conservation of Life, and Continuance of Health, but as a grateful
Exercise of the Faculties of Life. Whence it clearly follows, that nothing
should rashly or causelessly be killed; nor should we so far indulge the
Pleasure of Eating and Drinking, as to lose the end of that Pleasure, and bring
upon our selves Diseases and Death.

II. AND this is the very thing the Pythagoreans advised; Namely, To terminate
what is undetermined. For what they called undetermined, or unbounded, they
placed in the Passions; and it was in Virtue and Reason that they placed their
Boundaries or Determination. Thus Nature has been the more liberal in bestowing
such sort of Affections on us, that Reason might be trusted with a Power to
lessen, L. 1. c. 6. 10.
moderate, and circumscribe, all that is superfluous. And perhaps the Soul, it
self, is not so wholly intent on her proper intellectual Pleasure, as totally
to neglect the animal Life. From whence we see, it is a kind of serious and
settled design of Nature, that this animal Station should never be abandoned by
the Mind of Man. However these Touches are but here by the By, as to those
Affection which relate to the Body. Wherefore we shall turn back to the
Passions properly ^called, and consider their Ends and Uses, i^ that order
which we before proposed.

III. FIRST then as to Admiration, it is plain, Lib. 1. c. 6. 11.
that it more vigorously imprints in our Memories the observation of new things
and Idea's; whereby, the Soul being enriched by such Acquisition, we may attain
the Knowledge of most Beneficial Truths. And hence it follows, that if any Man
be taken up with the Contemplation of new Things, for no other end than for
Admiration-sake; he plainly loses the end of this Passion, and becomes a mere
Admirer. For seeing Nature has given us the Power and Inclination to esteem, or
to despise; it appears thereby that all things are not to be placed by us in
the same Rank. And as in the kinds of every thing, there is a better and a
worse: so certainly is there something which is the very best of all; and which
by the Dictates of Nature, we are bound to aspire unto.

IV. THE Esteem of a Man's self is a Passion, mixed of Admiration, Joy, and
Love, of his own Condition: But the Disesteem of a Man's self is from
Admiration, Grief, and Self-love, which is mixed with Hatred for his own
Defects. Each of these Passions make out, that every Man either is, or ought to
be, of some Consideration; nay, so to be reputed of, as to be above all Injury
and Contempt. For seeing we are so easily led to think well of our selves, when
perhaps we have very small Advantage of our Neighbors; certainly it is but just
that we carry some Esteem also toward others, so as to treat them with all
Officiousness and Candor. Wherefore even Nature points out, by these Passions
of Esteem and Disesteem, how we are to exercise Humanity and good Breeding
toward others; as well as Diligence and Application in getting what is most
beneficial to our selves.

V. As to that sort of valuing a Man's self, which Des Carts calls Generosity,
whereby a Man does, in the Freedom and Sincerity of his Judgment, so account of
himself as, while he steadily aims at virtuous things, L. 1. c. 11. 10.
and wants no Courage to enterprise what Reason dictates, he will endure no
sort of Contempt. Doubtless the Use of this Passion (so implanted by Nature) is
of highest Pre-eminence, as it proves a Spur to the procurement of the highest
Felicity. For who can be more corroborated against the Scorns of Men, or the
Shocks of Fortune, than he who has Conscience on his side, that his Actions
have been sincere.

VI. VENERATION is a Passion complicated of Admiration and Fear. The Utility
thereof is referable to Politic Bodies and Religious Societies: it implies
that Obedience is due to Magistrates; and that there is such a Being as God,
and such a Government as the Divine Providence.

Disdaining is made up of Admiration, and of Security, or Confidence. This
Passion is not altogether unprofitable to the Peace and Acquiescence of the
Mind, inasmuch as it suffers not Virtue or Truth to be abandoned, either on the
Threats, or on the Temptations of impotent Men. Such was the Contempt of
Socrates toward Anytus and Melitus, when he let them know, That although they had
Power to kill, they had not the Power to hurt him.

VII. FOR what concerns the five following Primitive Passions, as Love, Hatred,
Joy, Grief, and Cupidity. The Use of these is most manifest. And the first four
end always in the Fifth; for whatever falls out grateful, excites Joy or
Pleasure; and Pleasure, when felt, draws Love toward that which excited it:
And, last of all, Love makes Cupidity, for the increasing, continuing, and
sometimes repeating, of the same Delight.

It Is in like sort, when any thing happens that is ungrateful, it begets
Sadness and Grief; and this Grief again begets Hatred for that which was the
Cause thereof; and that Hatred a Cupidity to get free from such Cause. And it is
in these things alone that the Safety and Preservation of all living Creatures
does in a manner consist. Also it is worthy of Note, that these Passions which
are the most ungrateful, such as Grief and Hatred, do not perform less of this
Duty than the most grateful: for that our Life is no less harassed by the Evils
that lie upon us, than from the Want of those Benefits which should advantage
us.

VIII. IT is plain, that Nature seems more solicitous to drive away Evil, than
to partake of Pleasure. And this appears in those efficacious sorts of
Eloquence, she has bestowed on so many of the Creatures when they are
oppressed, for the drawing of Compassion toward them. Such is the querulous
and lamenting tone of the Voice, the dejection of the Eyes and Countenance,
Groaning, Howling, Sighs, and Tears, and the like. For all these have Power to
incline the Mind to Compassion, whether it be to quicken out Help, or to retard
the Mischiefs we intended.

IX. NOR is Nature wanting altogether in that part, which concerns the
procuring of Pleasure. For every motion of the Eyes and Countenance, when we
are pleased, is much more welcome and agreeable to the Lookers on: And even
this small Effect of our Joy is by Nature instituted, as a Bait or Allurement,
to draw on mutual Complacency, and to create a desire toward the Contentation
of each other. Just as those former Effects of Sorrow were to dehort us from
afflicting any, who deserved it not, but rather to melt us, and push us on, to
a timely succor of all who are oppressed.

But forasmuch as excessive Joy does sometimes bring on what they call Ecstasy,
and even swooning away: I know not if Nature does not hint hereby, that our
Souls are capable of greater Pleasure, as well as Felicity, than our present
corporeal and terrestrial State can bear, or is able to support.

Wherefore as to Love and Hatred, Grief and Joy, the Interpretation of them is
this, That we do, as much as in us lies, purchase Good to our selves and
others; Next, that we hurt no Man, but on the contrary drive away Evil most
industriously and affectionately from others as well as our selves.

X. ALL Diligence is animated by Cupidity, which is the most Mercurial and
awakened Passion, and which agitates the Heart with more violence than any
other Affection. It sends up a greater quantity of Spirits to the Brain, which
diffusing themselves again into the Members of the Body; not only render it
more active and more vigorous, but the Soul also is hereby drawn in, and
concurs in a grateful and cheerful Vivacity. For the Soul, if it want suitable
Entertainment or Objects that are worthy of it, is but too apt to rust, and
grow Lethargick; even as the Lord Bacon has somewhere truly admonished, That
the Life of Man, without a proposed End, is altogether loose or languishing.

However if we would rightly govern, and make use of, this Cupidity to good
purpose; let us beware, that it fly not to Objects that are without our reach,
or more impetuously to those within it, than our Health and the Frailty of our
Condition can bear. For to make more have after things within our Power, than
will consist with our Strength or Ability, is but attempting things that are
plainly impossible. So that such unadvised Cupidity would end rather in Sorrow
and Vexation, than in Contentment.

Lastly, since it is so manifest, what the end of Cupidity is; Namely, to excite
Vigor in the Execution of our Purposes: this Passion must wholly be laid by,
till we are just on the Borders of acting what by Counsel we have resolved. For
else this Ardor (and especially in weak Constitutions) would not only be
useless, but by inflaming the Spirits, would exhaust our strength, dry the
whole Body, and overthrow our Health.

CHAP. IX. The Use and Interpretation of Love and Hatred; which are in the
Second Classis.
I. AMONG the Sorts or Species of Love, there is principally to be considered;
not only Devotion and Complacency, but what the Greeks call Storge (which is
that strong Intercourse of Filial Parental Sympathy, that is founded in the
Bowels of Nature.) So likewise, in the sorts of Hatred, there is to be observed
Horror and Antipathy.

By Devotion we are taught, as by a lo^ Exhortation of Nature, to believe that
ther^ is something which ought to be more dear (...) us than our selves, and
for which we should not scruple to lay down our Lives. The Us^ therefore of
this Passion refers chiefly to P^ lity and Religion; neither of which can b^
without Virtue. So that for the true Use o^ this Passion we are accountable to
our Prince our Country, and to our Religion: That i^ to say, unto God and true
Virtue. Whence it follows, that those, who place the highe^ Wisdom in Self
preservation, and as preferable at all times to all other things, do sin
against the Light of Nature.

II. BY Complacency, and by Horror, we are admonished, that there are some
things Bea^tiful, and some Deformed; much contrary to the sordid Opinion of
those, who laugh at all Distinctions. Nay, their Raillery extends to the
placing of this Indifferency, even in Vice and Virtue: Whereas Virtue, for the
most part, is but a mere Symmetry of the Passions, in reference to their
Degrees and Objects. Just as Beauty it self is made up from a due proportion in
the external Parts; and then animated by a Decorum in the Motion and Direction
of the whole. Which, in a manner, is the same thing that Tully noted in the
Fourth Book of his Tusculane Questions. Lib. 4.
For as in the Body, (says he) there is a certain apt Figuration of the
Members, with a sweetness of Color. All which we call Beauty; so in the Mind,
an equability and constancy in our Opinions and Judgments, joined to such a
firmity and settledness in them, as we make to be the consequence of, or even
the substance of Virtue, this also is declared beautiful.

Wherefore this Natural Complacency, and Natural Horror, ought to spur us on to
the Love of Virtue, and an Aversation to Vice: For one is the most charming, as
the oath the most deformed thing in the World.

III. BUT the more peculiar Intent of that Complacency, which is commonly
called Love, refers to the Propagation of Children. Which Passion, if it be
more importunate than the rest, it shows the Care and Anxiety of Nature to
preserve and continue the Race of Mankind. And Nature is herein so solicitous,
so artificial, and uses such clandestine Feats of Negromancy and Prearication,
as if she would rather pass for an Inchantress, or even a Mountebank, than want
sufficient Allurements to that end. But forasmuch as the Intention of this
Ardor is made so conspicuous (as before) we are thereby admonished how far to
restrain it, and with what Circumspection to put all due Boundaries thereunto.

IV. WHEREFORE as this Love has reference to Propagation; so Storge, or Natural
Tendirness, refers chiefly to Children that are begot. And if more of the
Storge appear in Parents, than what is reciprocal; it shows, this Passion is
implanted by Nature, a others, to a greater Degree, or a less, suitable to the
Use or Want there may be thereon. For there is greater Utility and Need of the
Parents Affection toward their Children than of the Childrens toward the
Parent; so these excel the other in good Counsel and o^ther Aids; and it more
rarely happens tha^ Parents stand in need of their Children, the Children of
their Parents. From hence a (...) we may take Instruction how to govern an^
attemperate this Passion; so as neither by e^cess of Indulgence to hurt the
Living, or (...) unprofitable Lamentations to over-bewail the Dead.

V. IN the last place, Antipathy (which (...) a sort of Hatred, tho from Causes
more o^ cult) is thus far of Use, that we are, by some private Sentinel,
admonished to stand off where Nature has planted between us and an^ other, an
unaccountable Dissension. But if the happen to be exercised against a good Man
we are then to suspect our selves, and the the Evil lies at our own Door. In
which Case, we are to contend, if possible, to mak^ him our Friend, as
venturing or losing nothing by it, unless some defect or infirmity of our own.

CHAP. X. The Use and Interpretation of the Passions of the Third Classis,
which fall under the Head of Cupidity.
I. THE Kinds and Species of Cupidity are, in the First Rank, Hope, Fear,
Jealousy, Security, and Despair: In the next are Irresolution, Animosity,
Courage, Emulation, Cowardice, and Consternation.

II. HOPE is compounded of Joy and Cupidity; Fear of Cupidity, and somewhat of
Grief: For Imagination is, according to Aristotle, a sort of a feeble Sense;
but it is a sense of things present, even as Grief and Joy. For Events are
present to the Mind, although really not yet happened: And therefore they are both
present and absent, and may be as well the Objects of Joy, or of Grief, as of
Cupidity.

The Use of Hope is to have Delight in acting; and of Fear to proceed with
Circumspection and Diligence.

III. BUT there is a more especial Use of this last Passion, which refers to
Political Matters: For, seeing the greatest part of Men are wicked; scarce any
City could stand, if, by the Dread of Punishment, they were not kept in aw.

IV. JEALOUSY is compounded of C^pidity, Sorrow, and Estimation. It Is prope^
Use is found in the Care and Defense o^ Things, which are of greatest Account.
Wherefore to make show of it upon trivial Occasions, is but mean and ridiculous.

V. IT appears plain, from what has been said, which are the Passions that
enter into the Composition of Security and Despan^ since Security is nothing
else but Hope discharged of all Fear, and Despair is Fear destitute of all
Hope. The Use of the First is against all Care and Diligence that is
superfluous. And the Use of the latter to withdraw the Mind from Designs
unlikely to succeed, unto those which are more auspicious, and of easy success.

VI. IRRESOLUTION is compounded of Cupidity and Grief: The Use whereof^ to
avoid Error in our Choice. For the Vexation, which naturally attends it, does
plain^ prove, how one thing is much preferable (...) another; how we are to be
extreme watchful in discovering what is the best, and what tends most to the
obtaining, and the retaishing thereof: and finally, that we propos^ some such
settled Rules and Determination for the conduct of Life, as are never to be
departed from.

VII. ANIMOSITY, and Courage are both of them compounded out of Cupidity, Joy
and Grief: yet herein the Joy does much exceed the Grief; for that Grief, which
arises from danger in the Object, is trampled down by some excellency in the
Object, which outweight the Danger; and Joy takes place, from an assurance of
gaining the end. The principal Use of this Passion is, in desending oun Prince
and Country from their Enemies; (...) hearing testimony to Truth with the
atmost had ai^ of this mortal State: that so we may ^ap either immor^tal Glory,
or Life eternal.

VIII. EMULATION is compounded of Cupidity, Joy and Esteem. The Use and Force
hereof is seen in famous Examples of Virtue, unto whose Imitation Nature does
by this Passion invite us.

Cowardisei or Pusillanimity, seems to be a compound of Cupidity, Hope, Fear
and Esteem, but of the so in a very low degree. The principal use of this
refers to Objects which (...) sin truth but of a poor Account, whatever some
others may think to the contrary.

Consternation is made up from a vast Admiration, Cupidity and Sorrow. And it
seems to be a sort of Schooling or Reprehension cast on us by Nature, for
abandoning that presence of Mind, with which we ought always to be girded,
against the Surprises and Incursions of all Fortune. The use and signification
hereof is much the same with that of Irresolution; that, by well casting of all
things beforehand, we may be in full account what is to be done, and what to
be suffered, in every case, and how to maintain our selves within the just
limits of both.

IX. IT seems further more to intimate an^ admonish us, that there is in Nature
so^ horrid and stupendous danger, lying hid, and to be expected; which is the
proper Object of this Passion, and against which we ought always to be
provided. But whether this may be every Man's particular Death, or the
Dissolution of the Universe (of which the wisest Men and Philosophers have
spoken, as well as Poets,) Si fractus illabatur Orbis
Impavidos feriant ruinae.
Were the World's Frame in Ruins laid,
They Would be oppressed, but not afraid.


It Is probable, that none will be so well prepared against these Shocks, as
those, unto whom Nature her self owes a reward for their true Sincerity and
Innocence.

And thus much for the Passions of the Third Classis.

CHAP. XI. The Interpretation and Use of Joy and Grief, which constitute the
Fourth Classis.
^. THE Passions of this Rank are first, Derision, Commiseration, Envy,
Congraulation; Next, Satisfaction, Repentance, Renorse of Conscience; as also,
Favor, Gratitude, ^ndignation, Anger: Thirdly, Glory, and ^hame: Lastly,
Loathing, Desire, and Mirth.

II. THE Use of Derision is chiefly applied ^o the Correction of smaller Faults
in the ill Manners and Absurdities of human Life.

From this Fountain sprung up Satirical Poetry, even as from the Effects of
Love and Courage, came the Epic and the Tragic. Nor ^oes Satyr so much pursue
Vice it self, as it ^oes the Circumstances thereof, which are the most
ridiculous.

Derision is compounded of Joy and Hatred; and if the Evil, which is the Object
of it, happen on asudden, it produces Laughter. But ^he Object of Laughter, as
Aristotle somewhere observes, must be such a kind of Evil ^s is not deadly, or
destructive. And therefore this may frequently happen where there ^s no
intention of Hatred: For it may fall out ^o be only a Congratulation, or sort
of Gladness, that the Evil was not great; (...) that it also was quickly, as
well as dextero^ overcome.

III. IN such Cases the Object of Derision (...) good; and in some measure even
where (...) Evil is not overcome. That is to say, where (...) thing cannot be
put into the same state aga^ and provided that the damage be not very
co^siderable; For a light Evil may pass for a G^ For seeing there is such
frailty and muta^lity in matter, and such a propensity there^ to great aund
unfortunate mutations: La^ter seems but as the Voice of Nature, congtulating
with it self, that Evils which mi^ have been so heavy have by the Providen^ of
God, proved to be but light and tolerab^ Inconveniences. So this being judged a
D^liverance, it cannot but end in Mirth. Ho^ever as to some sad Objects; as to
those (...) Fools and mad Folks; if there be any Man that can please himself
with their Absurdity and Ravings, it is to be doubted, (and it draw Jealousy
on him) he has not reverence (...) nough for a sound Mind. For else such (...)
Spectacle should disquiet him no less, that i^ he saw the Carcass of any dead
Man miserably rent in pieces before him.

IV. COMMISERATION is made up o^ Love and Sorrow. The Use hereof is in
soccoring the distressed, and defending him tha^ has right. For to take away
the Life of a^ innocent Man, is so monstrous a Crime, a^ tears the very Bowels
of Nature, and force sighs from the Breasts of all Men.

Envy is compounded of Sorrow and Hatred. And the Use thereof refers chiefly to
a right Distribution of Rewards and of Honors. For this Passion is not that ill
Vice, which all Men so justly reprove; but an excellent Disposition of the Mind
given by God. And Aristotle calls it Nemesis, on the account of a Just
Distribution to every Man. And in his Rhetoric he says, As it is the proper
Office of a good Man to compassionate those who suffer unjustly; so is he to
envy, and to disdain such as prosper without a cause. He adds, Whatever exceeds
Merit, is unjust; Lib. 2. c. 9.
whence Indignation, in this behalf, is even attributed to the Gods. But this,
and that Envy which we speak of, is but the same Passion. So that from these
two of Commiseration and Envy, we are admonished, as by the Voice of Nature,
that there is a just and an unjust, a right and a wrong; and that the first is
to be taken, and the other left.

V. CONGRATULATION is composed of Love and Joy. And it may serve as a Spur unto
common Beneficence. For to him, who is frequent in this Virtue, there is due
from all Men a Congratulation of his Prosperity.

Satisfaction, or Self-contentedness, as also Repentance, and Remorse of
Conscience, do all plainly contribute to the preserving a good Conscience. They
also manifestly show, that there is a difference between the Works of good and
evil Doers, and that Men are endowed with Free Will. For this Satisfaction and
Acquiescing, is tantamount to a joyful Applause, or Acclamation of the Soul,
from (...) Conscience of Well-doing. And certain^ such Passion would be
altogether vain, a^ misplaced, if there were not really a right way and a
wrong. Tho we must confe^ that most Men are most grossly mistaken about the
Object of this Passion; and in valuing themselves upon those very Works, for
which in Justice they deserve to be defamed.

VI. OF this Madness there is not a greater instance than what Des Carts
himself lay^ in our view, De Pass. Anim. part. 3. Art. 119.
of certain superstitious Hypocrites, who, because they go often to Church,
repeat many Prayers, shave their Heads, abstain from some Meats, give Alms, and
the like; take themselves to be so very perfect, that whatever is suggested to
them by their Passion, sounds like the Voice of Heaven. So that if this Passion
suggest the betraying of Towns, killing of Princes, and rooting out whole
Nations; they think they have Call enough for it, and even Ground sufficient
for such Executions and such Passions, if other Men but differ from them in
Matters of mere Opinion.

VII. NOW for what relates to Repentance. If it were so, that all things are
done by Necessity, then all Grief upon inward conviction of Sin, would look as
ridiculous, as if a Clown should repent that he was not born Noble; or if a
Woman should be afflicted that she was not born a Man. The same Reason holds as
to Remorse of Conscience, which plainly shows, that, if we err in our Election,
it is our own fault, and that it was in our power to have chosen better.

Favor also, and Indignation, signify almost the same: For these Passions grow
up in us, as we regard the Actions of Men, some doing right, and some doing
wrong.

VIII. BUT Gratitude seems to be a natural or essential part of commutative
Justice; even as Commiseration, Envy, Favor and Indignation, may be reputed the
natural parts of distributive Justice: But Anger may take place in this Rank
above the rest. For Revenge is a high part of that Justice, which calls for
Chastisement: and Aristotle says, that the Pythagoreans did chiefly place this
in Retaliation. For Anger contributes as much toward Fortitude, as either
Boldness or Animosity. And it was the saying of Theages, That Anger, and
covetous Desire, were so intended for the service of the Soul, as if the first
were to be it is Guard, and a sort of Sentinel to the Body; the other a fit
Caterer or Steward for things that were of use. He also compares this latter to
a Providore, and the other to a Soldier. For that Anger is a Passion composed
of Hatred, of Cupidity, and of Self-love; and so is directly opposite to
Gratitude, just as Indignation unto Favor. And Des Carts observes, that Anger
exceeds the other three; as the Desire of Repelling what is noxious, and the
taking of Revenge, is more vehement upon us than any other thing.

IX. NOR ought we to dread this Passion the more, because it is mixed with
Hatred^ For all the Passions which belong to the Iras^ble Faculty of the Soul
are very useful and necessary; L. 1. c. 6. 8.
seeing it does more concern us to resist Evil, than to enjoy unnecessary Good.
Wherefore he who disposes himself to obey the Motions of the concupiscible
part of h^ Mind, out of a specious pretense of Peace and of a charitable
sweetness which we ow^ to others, let him have a care, lest at the same time he
betrays not the Piety which he owes to God, to his Country, and to the rest of
Mankind. For he who altogether lays aside this Irascibility, is either false or
effeminate, and can never deserve the Character of being what Theages calls An
able Guard, and a faithful Champion of Virtue.

As to Glory, and Modesty, or Shame, they are things of excellent use: For the
first spu^ on to high Attempts, and the latter so dete^ us from what is vile,
that it may pass as it were for a Citadel or Bulwark to Virtue. Glory is made
up of Joy, and Self-estimation; Modesty, or Shame, of Sorrow, and Self-love,
yet also mixed with Self-distrust: so as this Passion does not belong either to
the best or worst sort of Men. L. 1. c. 8. 5.
For whoever is conscious that he does, with a generous Free Will, devote
himself to laudable things, knows also that he deserves not for so doing to
fall into Contempt: And therefore if the Revilers shoot at him, he has
Fortitude of Mind to scorn a^ them again. But, on the other side, when wicked
Men grow shameless, and become scandal-proof, Tusculan. Quaest. l. 4.
then are they perfectly dangerous: For Tully observed, That to bear Ignominy
without sorrow, was even to arrogate a Commission to do evil.

XI. WHEREFORE these two Passions of Shame and Glory are easily understood: For
both of them make out, that we must rather abide by the common Opinion of
others, than by our own. And this contributes not a little, as well to good
Manners, as to our civil Obedience: for we are instructed by this Instinct of
Nature, that no particular Man is to violate the Laws, Rhetor. l. 1. cap. 1.
or oppose his single Judgment to the public. Aristotle says, in his
Rhetoric; That Law is the public Sense, and Opinion of the whole People, and
made for instruction in all Cases and Events. And Cicero, speaking also of
Modesty, appeals to that very Shame, which some Pleasures are naturally
attended withal: Which, plainly detecting their Vileness, shows that they
should be rejected and contemned by Men, who are born to nobler things.

XII. BUT seeing we are still thus governed by these two Instincts of Shame and
Glory; and yet behold the whole Bulk of the World, how they magnify that which
is debauched and vile: we may from thence presume a time will come, in which
Mankind shall live to better purposes, that is, more regularly and correct.

However as things now go, let us contend that neither Shame on the one hand,
or pop^lar Fame on the other, seduce or drive us from what is substantially
just: For this would utterly subvert the Intention of those Gists. And
therefore in all Actions, let your Appeal be to the Judgment Seat of a good
Conscience; and if we are but well attested from thence, let the Sparks of the
World railly on; and the whole Crowd reproach us: For, in such case, it is
perfect Heroism to despise them both. Furthermore let those take Shame upon
them that deserve it; not the Well-doers, nor such as are even content to
suffer for doing well. For Virtue (as Tully says) Tusculan. Quaest. l. 2.
Tusculan. Quaest. l. 4.
and even Philosophy her self, must be contented with a few Judges. The Mobile
was ever spiteful and invidious to both, and therefore both have industriously
declined all Appeals unto them. Let us therefore, as he advises us, despise all
the Follies of Men, and place the force of living well, in the strength and
greatness of our Minds, and in the Contempt of this World: and in a word let us
believe it to consist in Truth and Virtue, notwithstanding the vain and
mistaken Opinions of a great part of Mankind.

XIII. LASTLY, as to what concerns Loathing, Mirth, and Desire. The Benefit of
Loathing has Reference unto Temperance; for we usually loath that which we take
in excess: And we take notice how much a repeated Use of all corporeal things,
turns into loathing at last. Hence we may be admonished to raise up our Minds
to things intellectual, and to place our thoughts upon God.

As for Mirth, the Use thereof refers to Patience: For we ought to suffer
Hardships the more willingly, as they will at length be compensated with
greater Joy. So Aeneas cheared up his Friends in Distress, Durate, and vosmet
rebus servate secundis.
-- Bear up, and patiently endure,
In time our better Fate will bring the Cure.


XIV. DESIRE is compounded of Sorrow, Love, Despairir, and Cupidity. The Use
and Benefit hereof is, to give an edge to our Diligence, in preserving what we
have, since the loss thereof would turn to our Vexation. The Force of this
Passion is chiefly felt in the ^oss of Friends; the Death of those who excel in
Beauty, or in the Talents of the Mind, or who have eminently served in their
Generation. So Horace, Horat. l. 1. Ode 24.
Quis desiderio sit Pudor aut Modus
Tom chari Capitis? Praecipe lugubres
Cantus, Melpomene, cui liquidam Pater
Vocem cum Cithara dedit.
-- Sound out, Melpomene,
And tune thy doleful Melody.
Come, let our Sorrows boundless be,
'Twere shame to think of Modesty,
When we must weep, great Man, for thee.


XV. IT was this Passion that, world upon mournful and tender Minds, ^structed
them in the ways of Fun^ Pomp; and by Songs of Lamentation, ^gies, and
Orations, to pepetuate the Mem^ of the Dead. Nay, it brought things to (...)
pitch of Madness at last (worse than M^tality it self) that Temples, Altars,
and eve^ Prayers, were consecrated to the Dead: (...) if those, who but just
now ceased to be M^ were presently transformed into Gods. T^ have they branded,
by vile Superstition (...) Idolatry, our mortal State; which was (...) utmost
Abuse this Passion was capable of, (...) could be employed unto.

CHAP. XII. That all Passions (properly so called) (...) in themselves Good;
and that from right Interpretation of them, it is ma^fest, there is something
Good and (...) in its own Nature. And lastly, to (...) what such Nature or
Essence of Good a^ Bad can be.
I. IT appears by what has been said, the not only the Passions we have spoke
of, but all the rest of them, which are properly so called, are Good. Also that
inwa^ Propensity, and strong Inclinations, are not things of Deliberation and
Choice; But, as The^ges says) the very Strokes and Prints of Nature, where
Virtue is implanted in us by a sort of Impulse or Enthusiasm. Magn. Moral. l.
2. cap. 8.
And Aristotle notes, That the way of Enthusiasm is to be hurried (...) to
action, without any motives of Reason. Wherefore seeing such Propensities are
antecedent to a^ll Choice or Deliberation, it is manifest they are from Nature
and from God; and that therefore whatever they ^ictate as Good and Just, is
really Good and Just: and we are bound to embrace and prosecute the same, not
only toward our selves, but toward others; I mean as far as may consist
without any injury to a third.

II. FOR this Law of Nature, which bears sway in the animal Region, L. 1. c. 6.
6, 8.
is a sort of confused Muttering, or Whisper of a Divine Law: but indeed the
Voice of it is more clear and audible in the intellectual State. And whereas in
that inferior Region, the Case is often so uncertain, and so undecided, as to
resemble what the Civilians call Casus omissus; therefore are we obliged
frequently to appeal to the Tribunal of Reason, and to consult about Time,
Place, and Proportion, and such other Circumstances as our Actions are
subjected unto. For Reason has this pre-eminence, that it does not only more
distinctly judge, but more abstractedly, than what the Animal Light, or any Law
of the Passions, can pretend to. It Is more distinct, as it can penetrate and
examine into the Original an^ Circumstances of Things; whereas Pass^ is only a
blind and determinate Impulse, (...) do so or so, without knowing any Motive
(...) it. Also it is more abstracted, and by Nature separate: For Reason does
not dicto^ what may be Good for this or that particula^ Person, but what simply
is good or better and what in such and such Circumstance ought to be more or
less preferable.

III. FOR this is thetrue Character of every intellectual Faculty (as was noted
before that it cannot stoop, and as it were cringe to particular Cases; but
speaks boldly an^ definitively what is true and good unto all And hence it is
plain, that whatever is Intelectual and truly Moral, is also Divine, and
partakes of God. And this made Arist^th style the Divinity, A Law that looked
round and had the same uniform Aspect toward every side.

IV. HOW unadvised therefore have some been to say, every thing was lawful,
that Passion did persuade; and to style this a sort of Divine and Intellectual
Document, and while taken abstractedly, and in the general to contend for it,
as a very principal Rule of human Actions: whereas none, but such as are mere
Slaves unto Passion, can ever think at this Rate. This has been hatched under
the Wings of Appetite, not of Reason: For to establish such a Doctrine of human
Actions, as must subvert all Actions, is quite irrational.

V. WOULD it not from such a Principle follow, that every Man might, at his
Pleasure, not only fire his own House in the Night, but the Town also? Might he
not poison the common Well, or maim and destroy his Wife and Children, if it
were lawful to sacrifice to his own Passion? So that this Foundation being
against Nature, and utterly pernicious, it plainly follows, that no Man's
private Inclinations are the Measures of Good and Evil; but that the
Inclinations themselves are to be circumscribed by some Principle which is
superior to them.

VI. NOW the next Principle, unto which Passion is subjected, and which knows
what in every Case is good and bad, is right Reason: And therefore that which
to Right Reason appears good or bad, ought certainly to be reputed as such in
its own Nature. For what a rectified Mind takes in, is really the Essence of
the thing it self, painted in the Understanding: and so a Triangle, in its own
Nature, is nothing else but what Right Reason conceives to be such.

VII. HENCE it plainly follows, that there are some unchangeable Ideas or
Impressions of Good and Evil, even as of Figures in the Mathematics; and that
the Mind judges of those, as much as Sense does of these: Yet Reason and the
Intellect have Jurisdiction over both. For as those are made up by the
Concurrence of several Lines; so are these made up of various and often
contrary Circumstances; which therefore denominate some things to be Good, and
some things to be Evil. And this confirms what has been said, that the
Principle, whereby to judge what is either morally good or evil, is an
Intellectual Principle, and in some sort Divine.

VIII. THIS hinders not, but that we must allow there is something also, L. 1.
c. 6. 8.
little less than Divine, which presides in the Animal Law (for this Law has
also its Source from Nature, and from God the Parent of Nature) so that we may
evermore follow the Indications and Dictates of that Law; unless in such Cases,
where Reason admonishes that something may be done, that is better and more
advantageous. And if this one point be but granted (which no reasonable Man
will deny) you will presently find numberless Instances of those things, which
in their own Nature may be termed just or unjust, vile or honest; which, by
reflecting on those principal signs of the Passions already mentioned, will
occur unto you. For surely those things are, in their own Nature just, or
unjust, vile or honest, which the Voice of God in Nature has declared to be
such. And this Corollary is of high value in human Life; and able to trample
upon the Impudence o^ those, who cry up all things for lawful, which they
themselves think fit.

IX. L. 1. c. 6. 2. L. 1. c. 6. 16.
NEVERTHELESS we do not pretend, in the least, to have the Passions of the Mind
exterminated. We rather account of them (which before was noted) as of the very
Organs of the Body, and as distinctly useful: since they are not only the
occasion of several Virtues, but the true Characters and Images of Virtue, L.
1. c. 6. 11.
are made the more resplendent by them. Wherefore if we can but skill our
Passions aright, They are as Lamps or Beacons, to conduct and excite us to our
Journey's end. For tho Reason may cry aloud; yet we walk without Legs, and fly
without Wings, if we are not quickened by their Instigations. Hence we may
reflect, that Theages was not so much out of the way in saying, That Virtue had
its original from the Passions, and did associate with them, and was preserved
by them. For the principal part of Virtue is placed in their due Commixture; So
as no man (he says) ought either to be void of Passion, or too highly excited
by it. For as Insensibility lays a damp on that Torrent and Enthusiasm of the
Soul, by which it is pushed forward toward things which are noble and great: so
too much emotion discomposes the Mind; and the Understanding is damnified by it.

X. WHEREFORE let us close all with the Counsel of Archytas the Pythagorean.
Contend (says he) to procure the Use of your Passions in such Moderation, as
you may equally shun to appear insensible, or in too high an Agitation: for
this often leads to prouder Attempts than our weak Nature can support. Surely
this Temperament sounds better than what the Stoics, and even some Platonists,
do present us with. And let it never be forgot, that we are no longer to retain
our Passions, than as they administer to those ends, for which by Nature they
are intended.

And thus much of the Passions, which are properly styled such.

CHAP. XIII. Of the other Passions, or Bodily Impressions.
I. FOR what concerns the Residue of Corporeal Impressions, the kinds thereof
may, in a manner, be referred to these two Classes. Namely, to 1. Sensation,
Imagination, the particular Temperament of the Body, and to Custom. 2. Or to
Education, to a singular Genius, or to a particular Fancy.


The Impressions of the first Classis agree in this, that they appear without
any Appetite properly so called. But those of the second are attended with some
proper Appetite.

By Sensation is here meant, not the very Act of Feeling, which is the true
meaning of the Word; but rather a Stain, or that perverse Bias and Propensity
to error, which it imprints on the Soul. And so almost of all the rest.

II. WHEREFORE Sensation is defined, To be a certain corporeal Impression, by
which the Soul is prevailed on to believe, that things are such in their own
Natures, as they appear to our external Senses. As if a man, finding somewhat
that was grateful to his own Taste, should straight conclude, that the same
Pleasure and Sweetness were in the thing it self; and therefore that it must
equally gratify the Taste of all other Creatures. We see the same Fallacy
obtruded in the Objects of Sight; when a Man shall conclude, that the Light and
Colors, which are taken in by the Eye, are also in the things themselves: which
is no more true than that Stones feel pain, which wound the bare Feet of those
that run over them; or that, when a Man's Hand is burnt by a Coal, that the
Coal also should have sense of such Burning. For it is plain, that Heat is no
more in the Coal, or in any such Subject, than us the very Pain; but both arise
from the Agitation and Concussion of Particles: So as if this be very moderate,
we feel Heat without any Pain; whereas if our Senses are immoderately struck,
then follows Perception both of Heat and Pain together. Wherefore Heat and Pain
are things which differ only in degree; and we our selves are the Subject in
which they meet, and wherein their Force and Vigor is exerted. And the like we
may pronounce of other the Objects of our external Senses.

III. IMAGINATION is a corporeal Impression, which inclines the Soul to
believe, that such things are, or else may be; which yet never are, nor can
ever be.

As Sensation is apt to misguide the Soul, touching the Nature of Things,
unless care be taken: so Imagination does the like as to their Existence,
whether present, or to come. F^ as the vigor of our Sense throws us (...)
Security, as to the real presence and existence of any thing; so the torrent of
Imagination which seems to equal, or at least to imitate Sense it self, does
easily impose a false Aff^rance on the Soul, that such thing is true, o^ may be
true; tho there be no other Foundation for it, but that it has been vehemently
(...) imagined. How these insolent Phantas^ and such idle Dreams, of Men who
sleep not may be detected and dispelled, we have taught at large in our Book of
Enthusiasm: Sect. 51, 52, 53, etc.
to which the Reader is referred.

IV. AS to the peculiar Temperament and Constitution; we define it to be, A
corporeal Impression that results from the whole natural Mass, by which the
Soul is obstructed and perverted from the Contemplation of some peculiar
Things. Of this corporeal Frailty there might be many Instances given. We have
seen how happy; and even famous, some have been at the Mathematics; who, when
you turn them to thing Theological, or into the Metaphysics, they are quite
lame, and stumble at every step. They will avow they perfectly comprehend
whatever concerns the Nature of a Body, but as to that of a Spirit, they cannot
figure to themselves the least Notion or Signification of it On the other side,
you have others, who are so full of their Notion about Spirits, that they
believe not a corner of the World to be void or destitute of them. They think
they are present at every Thunder and every Rain; and they have mustered and
regimented them into such Brigades; that it would make a Man sweat to
comprehend the Government and Intrigues that they impute unto this invisible
Race.

V. I KNOW not well how otherwise to judge of this Disease in the Art of
Thinking, than that it grows from a particular Texture of Parts or a prevalent
Bias in the Frame and Constitution of the Body. In some the Spirits are more
stiff, gross and tenacious; in others more volatile, unequal, and even
turbulent. So that if a Man had it in his Power (in the Language of the
Chemists) to fix the volatile, and to volatilize the fixed, (by which they
promise themselves Golden Mountains.) I mean if he could bring his Spirits to a
just proportion of Delicacy and Agility, and could then so totally control
their Motion, as to fix and settle them in the Contemplation of any particular
Object, he were then certainly Master of the greatest Secret in the World,
toward the Knowledge and Contemplation of all Things.

VI. CUSTOM is a corpercal Impression, by which the Soul is extremely bent to
judge of things, as true, good, or amiable; for no other Motive, but because it
has been accustomed so to judge, and so to act. There is an Instance of this
Depravity in the Cannibals, who eat Man's Flesh without any Ceremony or sort of
Qualm whatever. And the Power of Custom is so very strong (as Tully observes it
from Aristotle) that it becomes a second Natural Hence it is, that some
inveterate Opinions usurp among Mankind the Name of Principles, or common
Notions; and a very (...) Custom of the Country, passes for a Law of Nature.
How pernicious a Fate therefore is it, when young Men happen to be that
handled? How cautious ought all to be of any false or immoral Custom? And how
much does it import us to fly the Society of those, who are over run with any
Habit, either of ill Notions, or ill Manners? It Is not to be imagined how a
little Familiarity and Conversation with an ingenious Libertine, will
insensibly steal away that Sense of Hon^, and of Virtue, which one first
brought with i^, when we fell into his acquantance.

VII. EDUCATION a Custom, with some remarkable Affections annexed. For commonly
Teachers do instill their own Notions also, into the Esteem of their Disciples,
as if it highly imported them to the perfecting of their Education. And so it
comes often to pass, that the Scholars will not afterward endure the
Correction of some Insufferable Errors, but persist and die in them. Happy had
it been for such, had they never had any other Tutor than bare Nature: for then
the Sparks of Virtue, and of Truth, which were in their tender Minds, had not
been (as now by the Perfidy of an ill Master) extinguished. Tully takes
occasion (in his Tusculan Questions) highly to exclaim hereat; affirming,
Tuscul. Quaest. l. 3.
That we are been with such Elements of Virtue as if they were not depressed,
even Nature is self would instigate us to a happy life. Whereas now we are
perverted as soon as born; and our Minds so scribled over with crooked
Sentiments, as ^f they had been even mingled with our Milk. But this Misfortune
is so little rectified in riper time by Instructors and Teachers, that Truth ^s
laughed out of Countenance, vulgar Errors take place; and even Nature is
subdued by Opinion.

VIII. AS Education has Reference unto Custom: so a peculiar Genius or
Inclination has reference to a particular temperament of the Body, and is a
corporcal Impression by which a Man is so endowed, and so appropriated to
certain ends, that he conceives all human Happiness and Perfection to consist
therein; and that all are either miserable, or ^mith to be pityed, who are
defective in that particular. Thus it comes to pass, that whether in Oratory,
or in Music, or in War, Politics, Poetry, Philosophy, Geometry, or Languages,
he that lays hold by a peculiar Genius on ^one of them alone, shall be so
intoxicated, as to despise every Man that is addicted to any of the rest. But
this surely is a Sickness of the Mind, and wholly Pedantick; since every other
Genius is equally happy, in the different Objects that delight and entertain
him.

IX. WHEREFORE we ought to applaud (...) every Man what is either useful, or
but (...) nestly pleasant. And, as to our selves, (...) not any Excellency we
attain to, lead us (...) despise other excellent things: for this world be as a
Judgment on us; and to be imprison (...) as it were, in our own Tower; when by
(...) degree of Knowledge we are blinded and excluded from all the rest. There
is no M^ can truly be happy, but he that has attained (...) share in that,
which must make every M^ happy. So that this does not properly a po^tain to the
Genius we speak of; unless a (...) be so fortunately born, as to have his (...)
set wholly upon Virtue. But if this be (...) Case, then indeed it is no more a
Con^ment or Captivity, but the most amiable, (...) the most extended Liberty in
the World.

X. There are also Inclinations of this (...) peculiar as well to the different
Ages of M^ kind, as to the different Objects of (...) and wherein Men bewray
the impoten^ the Mind; but they are too many to (...) here numbered up.

XI. PECULIAR Fancy is a corporeal (...) pression, whereby the Mind is carried
to lov^ hate, to value or despise any Thing, or any (...) son, for some
external and very trivial Cir^stances.

This is not such a Preference, or Rejection as comes from any antecedent
Passion; (...) rather a Consequence, and that which from such Impression does
ensue. It Is not that (...) hereby tax the Wisdom of those Ancients, and of the
Pythagoreans in particular; who (as Gellius relates) did from the Mien, Noctes
Atticae, l. ib. 1. c. 9.
Gesture, and whole Air of the Body, penetrate into the Manners of Men: For
this is no idle Speculation, since few Men can conceal their ^natural
Propensities from a curious and diligent Inspector. But the Fault we accuse,
is, when Men run headlong to love, or hate, such a thing or such a person, not
for any natural Perfection or Imperfection; but so slightly and superficially;
that often, upon the bare sound of a Name, we see some passionately inclined to
one Man more than to another; so that as well Persons as Things are often, upon
no better Arguments, either valued or despised. But alas, how much is the
Frailty, the Mutability, and the impotent temper of Man's Soul detected hereby?

XII. SOME will say, that these Observations are too minute; but if they
contribute to the making a better Judgment on all things, and such as a good
and prudent Man is bound to do, I think the Labor will not be wholly lost.

THE SECOND BOOK
CHAP. I. Of the Number of the Primitive Virtues.
I. WE have hitherto sooken of V^tue in general; of the Passion and of the rest
of the Cerp^ real Impressions.

Now follow the Virtues in their kinds; and these are even, as was said of the
Passion, some of them Primitive, and others by Denvation. Of the first sort
there are these three Prudence, Sincerity, and Patience; which (...) in some
sort, answer and succeed to the the Primitive Passions, so as either to perfect
(...) to correct them: Thus Prudence stands (...) balance to Admiration;
Sincerity to Con^piscence, and Patience to Fury.

And that it may not appear we have cafually fallen into this Triplicity of
Virtue but that Nature and Right Reason have in structed us therein, 'twill not
be amiss to e^pose how far the Ancients have beaten the same Path. They have
frequently pointed (...) this very Summary of Duties, or of Virtues, ^ho
perhaps not in the very Terms: Yet, while ^hey concur in the Substance, it goes
a great way to show, that this threefold Division is according to Nature.

II. METOPUS, the Pythagorean, intimates ^hree Virtues from the three parts of
the Mind: the first Rational; the next Irascible: Which he makes as a Buckler
or Defense against ^ose things, which may more nearly hurt us. The third he
calls the Appetitive, or Concu^scible. And his Words in the beginning of that
Fragment, are thus, All Virtue must have ^ese three things: First, Reason.
Secondly, ^trength or Vigor. And thirdly, Appetite or Election. Reason to judge
by; Vigor to resist and ^vercome; and Appetite for Love and Enjoyment. ^o these
three do plainly conform to our said ^rimitive Virtues.

III. THEAGES also divides them into the ^me parts. And adds, That Prudence is
a Vir^e of the rational part of the Soul, as Fortitude (...) of the Irascible.
For the Habit of Resisting, (...) of submitting to Evil, depends on this
latter. And therefore we term this Patience, which is a ^irtue that sustains
and conforms to whatever is ^ievous or ungrateful. But instead of Tempe^ence,
which is a Virtue derivative, and but ^rticular, we substitute Sincerity; as
being a ^ure and original Virtue, and of the Appeti^ve Soul; such as by whose
Power we are led (...) that which is simply and absolutely the ^est, and that
purely for its own Considera^on.

IV. So what Theages says elsewhere, h^ more evident reference hereto. As name^
That the Principles of all Virtue were Knowledge Power, and Appetition: That by
Knowledge (...) consider things and determine; that Power enable us by bodily
Force to bear up and sustain our sel^ in all Accidents that happen; and that
Appetition was as the Hand of the Soul, which is thr^ cut to catch at this or
that Object as occasion ser^ To which triple Use of the Faculties, (...)
Triumvirate of Virtues; namely, Prude^ Sincerity, and Patience, do most exactly
(...) form.

V. So again Marcus Aurelius makes frequently the same Enumeration, and says
(...) his Meditations; That Philosophy consists of the three Virtues: Namely,
first to preserve the (...) (which he calls our Domestic God) clear (...)
unspotted from all carnal Temptations, Marcus Anton. l. 2. 17.
so as (...) there to be subdued by Pleasure, nor by Pains. A^ this is that true
Patience which comprehen^ both Continence and Long suffering. Next (...)
advises, That nothing be rashly done: Which the plain Office of Prudence. And
lastly, (...) be free from all Hypocrisy and Dissimulation Which is the part
of Sincerity.

VI. AGAIN, in his seventh Book, That it (...) a fundamental Duty to bear an
innate Love to M^kind, Sect. 55.
that is, to relish whatever contributed to (...) more regular Administration
of the World: Which as he often shows, is nothing else than fran^ and entirely
to pursue, not what refers to Man's private Interest, but what tends most (...)
^he general Laws of Nature, and of Reason, and what is purely and eminently the
best. For this temper of Mind (as he has it elsewhere) ^s the true giving up a
Man's self in Sacrifice ^o Reason, and to God; which is the Height of
Sincerity. Next he requires, That we never ^ield to corporeal Affections; and
this takes in Patience. Lastly, Not to precipitate our selves ^n any thing,
lest Error ensue; which is the Dictate of Prudence. Lib. 8. 26.
The same Philosopher has much more, up and down, to the like effect.

VII. BUT particularly in his tenth Book he recommends three things, which much
concern the Virtues in hand. As namely, Intention of Mind, which answers
Prudence: Sect. 8.
Con^entment and Extension of the Mind, which refer to Sincerity and Patience.
For to say, the Mind is intent, is to say, it dwells sedately on its Object,
and accurately sifts into every part thereof: which is the Business of
Prudence. And for Sincerity and Patience, how can they better be set off than
by placing the Mind in a state of Content? For this testifies a thankful,
humble Acceptance of what Nature, in her common Distribution, has given,
whatever the Portion be. And thus to acquiesce in Nature's common Law, is, in
the Judgment of that wisest Philosopher, To obey the common Reason, that is in
God; nay, which is little less than God himself. For he is the living Law,
Marcus Anton. lib. 10. 25.
in whose Administration the whole Universe remains; and he who bestows on
every Man, what he, in his Wisdom thinks fit and competent for him.

VIII. So then he that cheerfully acc^ and values, not what to his Sense or Fa^
might be more complacent, but what Predence thinks fit to order and impose (as
(...) deed some things are sent, which, although (...) altogether unwholsom, yet
unto Flesh (...) Blood their Taste is extreme bitter) this (...) is, L. 8. 52.
by Antoninus cried up, As one that (...) cerely cooperates with that
intellectual Pow^ which guides and comprebends all things. (...) adds, L. 7. 9.
That the World is one and the same (...) every part; that God is every where
the same (...) that there is but one Essence, and one Law, (...) is the common
standard and measure of all (...) lectual Beings; that there is one Truth, as
(...) one Perfection of all Animals of the same (...) and but one and the same
Reason among all (...) Creatures that partake thereof.

IX. THUS it is plainly his Sense, that (...) common Rule and Constitution runs
throu^ every intellectual Substance; and that ran^ nal Creatures are, in this
way, made a s^of Fellow-Citizens with God; L. 2. c. 4. 4.
and that nothing can degrade them, but a perverse Will against that Bond and
Sanction, by which they ho^ this State. Whereas if they resign to every thing
which the Divine Law, and imm^table Reasons, lays on them; and do not (...)
much as covet that things should be otherwise than as they are: Such (says he)
are not (...) reputed as bare Conformers, Marcus Antonin. l. 12. 23
who submit and (...) content, but as Men who are drawn, if (...) caught up, by
God himself. For they (...) (...) he would have them, and they have no other
Will, but the Will of their Creator. This therefore is the supremest Degree of
Sincerity: For this is not only the pursuit of what is eminently the best, but
a thirsting and panting after it for it is own sake, and for it is intrinsic
worth.

X. LASTLY, he advises, L. 10. 8. 10.
That we corroborate (...) Minds to such a degree, as to repel not only the
charming, but the rugged Assaults ^f the Flesh; also to be above Vainglory,
and even Death it self. This surely is enough, whereby to know what Patience
is: and it is by this Virtue of Patience, that we surmount the Temptations of
either Hand, whether they be soft or harsh. Now if it come to this; that
neither Infamy nor Death can otherwise be ^hun'd, than in submitting to what is
vile and contrary to the Laws of Reason; we must stand our ground, and with
Patience congra^ulate them both. Upon the whole matter, we did not
inconsiderately set down Prudence, Sincerity, and Patience, to be the first
Fountains of all other Virtues. And this will be further manifest, when we
shall, with a little more Accuracy, consider and define the Nature of each.

CHAP. II. Of Prudence, the first Primitive Virtue
I. PRUDENCE therefore is a Virtue, by which the Soul has such Dominion over
the Pissions properly so called, as well as over all sorts of corporeal
Impressions, that the mind can receiv^ no Impediment thereby, in rightly
observing, and successfully judging of what is absolutely (...) simply the best.

The Demonstration of this Virtue is ma^e out by Noema the Twelfth. Hence
therefore it is that Prudence is attended and furrounded by Knowledge,
Diligence, good Counsel, (...) Determination, judicious Conjecture, Presence
(...) Mind, Sense, and the Limits of Right Reas^ Of which in particular. For

II. KNOWLEDGE, or Intelligence, is the Companion of Prudence; because knowing
is nothing else but a right comprehension (...) those things, whereof we are by
others (...) monished. Eudem. l. 5. c. 10.
So Aristotle observes, That it is (...) Prudence we apprehend, but by Knowledge
that (...) judge and determine: so Men are called intel^ gent, only from their
Facility of being taught. Wherefore we may agree, that prudent (...) are also
the most intellegent: For as they (...) keep an open Ear to good Counsel, and
(...) not given up to the Prejudice of any Passion of corporeal Impression; so
are they qualified by this Temperament, still to embrace Truth where ever they
find it.

III. Ethic. Nicom. l. 6. c. 13.
DILIGENCE (as is noted by Aristotle) shines most in the finding out of fit
Mediums, and of applying them to the Mark: But if the Design be ill, then is a
Man not termed diligent, but shrewd or busy. Wherefore it seems there is some
Sagacity and Subtilty of the Wit, required in Diligence, which the prudent Man
can scarce ever want: For, having both Mind and Body purified, as he has, from
the stains of Passion or Impression, he has also a stock of subtle and lively
Spirits always attending him.

Where this Diligence presides, there happy Counsel can never be wanting:
Ethic. Eudem. l. 5. c. 9. and ad Nicom l. 6. c. 10.
For as the Philosopher places Rectitude of Counsel in advising that which is
good; so the Essentials herein are, that the Ends be honest, that the Means be
lawful, and that the Consultation be neither slow nor precipitate. And all
these things meet in a prudent Man; as by the Definition of Prudence is
manifest. So also Antoninus observes, That the prudent Man, being Master of his
Affections, will never rashly break out: That, being assisted by a Purity in
his Blood and Spirits, he has no Motions that are either sluggish or violent
(for it is observed, that the Fluency and Purification of the Spi^its does not a
little conduce both to their Gentleness and Moderation:) Much less (says he)
will such a prudent Man attempt either things dishonest, or even the most
honest ones, if the Means be dishonorable. For nothing of this sort can happen,
but where Passion and Appetite carry all before them.

IV. EQUAL Determination is very close of kin to Prudence; and is as the
sentence given upon Pleadings of Right: Ethic. Nicom. l. 6. c. 11.
For who can better be qualified to determine about what is Right, and what is
Good, than he who is not only above Passion, but superior to every Impression
and to every Custom (how inveterate soever) that were but capable to misguide
him.

For what concerns Rectitude of Conjecture, it is plain, that, since Aristotle
makes Moral Virtue nothing else but, A fit Habit of pointing or aiming at that
just Medium which, in acting and in suffering, Ethic. Nicom. 1. l. 2. c. 9.
is to be wished for: Who but the prudent can rightly calculate that Point? For
he is Lord of his Passions, and his Spirits are so pruged and defecated from
the Lee, Eudem. l. 5. c. 9.
as he not only gets Presence of Mind thereby, but even a sort of Divination.
It Is the same Philosopher notes, that Right Conjecture is such an Eruption of
the Wit, and flies so suddenly to the Mark, as there is neither Deliberation or
Reason employed therein. But where any gross Passions happen to intervene, they
make a perfect Gulf between the Mind and Truth: And therefore this Pitch of
Sagacity is not attainable, but by the prudent Man. It Is likewise as true of
those who are imprudent, that for what concerns the Sense of Discrimination
they have it not.

V. THE Philosopher, speaking about the Rectitude of Conjecture, styles it
Sense; Inasmuch as whatever Judgment we make, Ethic. Nicom. l. 2. c. 9.
it is collected from Particulars, and from Sense: As he asserts in the Case of
Anger, Grief, and the rest.

The same he also repeats in his Great Morals (which before was hinted) saying,
L. 1. c. 2. 9.
That, if you have not within your self a Sense and Feeling of these Matters,
all your Labor after them is but in vain. Iamblici, protrept. c. 2.
This the Pythagorea^ also called quick and perfect Sensation; saying, There
was a sort of Feeling in our practical Intellect, by which it came to pass that
we were neither deceived in the sense of what we suffered, nor imposed on by
ill reasoning in what we were to act.

Thus therefore, by subjecting of our Passions, and the purifying of our Bodies
and Souls, there springs up to us, as it were, a new Sensibility in the Mind or
Spirit, which is only the Portion of the prudent Man. For in the Power thereof
he finds out, and ascertains that Golden Mean which we have hitherto so
recommended. That which in every Action is so valuable, and whereof the
indiscreet or the impure Man can never have any Feeling.

VI. LASTLY, the limiting and defining of Right Reason is every where left, by
Aristotle, to the prudent Man's Determination. For whenever the Question is
started by him, what this Right Reason should be; he ever refers it thus, Prout
vir prudens definiverit; It Is even what a prudent Man shall judge fit. And
surely this is not said in vain, if but applied to the Man we speak of. For how
can there be Right Reason at all, if not found within the reach of that
Prudence which already we have defined? And therefore if neither the
Pythagoreans, the Platonists, or Aristotle himself, have taken much care in the
defining of Right Reason, it is because they finally referred it to the
Arbitrament of this our Rectified and Prudent Man. For they all presumed that
the Mind of Man, when effectually purged from the Stains of Prejudice and
Passion, did as naturally discern of things which were just and true, as an
unblemished Eye does rightfully distinguish of Colors. So that Aristotle was
well advised in pronouncing Right Reason to be that which was conformable to
Prudence; Ethic. Eudem. l. 5. c. 13.
taking Prudence in that Latitude we have already set forth.

VII. FROM all that is now said, two things deserve Observation. First, how
haughtily, and yet very impertinently, do some Men carry it, who while they are
destitute of all Capacity to judge (as being unacquainted with this Moral
Prudence) yet are they so far from subscribing to what the wise and prudent
Men, of all Ages, and of every Nation, have established for true and just, that
they impudently contend there is nothing in its own Nature is either the one or
the other, nothing right and nothing wrong. But surely, this is not less
absurd, than if a blind Man should deny all distinction of Colors, when he
ought rather to enquire before all other things, what were good for his Eyes.

VIII. NEXT we may note, that Prudence is not any particular Science of
external things, but rather somewhat above all Science. It Is a Skill or
Sagacity in the Soul, whereby she steers so clear from those Rocks, which
corporeal Passions and Impressions throw commonly in the way, as never to fail
of making a true and substantial Judgment in all things. And this is the Gift
and Excellency which is peculiar unto Prudence, and which attends her in all
her ways. But as to the knowledge and sense of things, all this and what
appertains thereto we derive it from other Fountains; as either from
Experience, or Natural Philosophy, or from Skill in War, or in the Laws, and
the like. And hereunto Aristotle somewhere refers, in saying, Ethic. Eudem. l.
5. c. 5. Ad Nicom. l. 6. c. 5.
That the prudent Man had not regard to this or that particular thing, but to
those which, in a more general way, appertained to the Good of Life. So that
Prudence is a sort of general Perfection of the rational part of the Soul, even
as Sincerity is of the Appetitive: which from the Pythagorean Fragments we had
noted before.

CHAP. III. Of the other two Primitive Virtues, Sincerity and Patience.
I. SINCERITY is a Virtue of the Soul, by which the Will is entirely and
sincerely carried on to that which the Mind judges to be absolutely and simply
the best. When I say entirely and sincerely, I mean perfectly and adequately.
For what is done perfectly is (according to Antoninus) done with the whole
Soul, Lib. 12. 29.
as well in acting justly, as in speaking of truth. And the Meaning of Adequate
is that no By-consideration, whether of Profit or of Fame, must ever incline
us. For the Soul ought so to be tempered and inflamed to that which is simply
the best, as neither from Hurt or Ignominy to be diverted from it. For to be
oppressed in a good Cause, is better than base Exemption. As Tully does assert.

The Nature of this Virtue is explained in Noema the third, fourth, fifth, and
so on to the thirteenth: But the true Beauty and Perfection thereof can hardly
enter into the Imagination of any Man, who is not already affected and
acquainted with it. L. 1. c. 2. 9.
And it is to a Soul thus rectified, that we may apply that of Aristotle, That
neither the Evening or the Morning Star is half so charming. There can be no
exterior Light half so bright, or so desirable, as this of the Soul, which is
pu^e, and perfect, and even Divine.

II. To this State of Simplicity or Sincerity in the Soul, is referable that of
Antoninus, where he thus expostulates with himself -- O my beloved Soul, when
will thou be naked, simple, L. 10. 1.
and entirely one? And again he gives himself the Rule, -- Do not discompose
thy Mind, or excite the Dregs; L. 4. 26.
but purify thy self to the utmost that is possible.

For this Sincerity is a Fountain that runs clear, and is perennial; it pours
in Consolation, and fills the Life with internal Joy. This is the state of that
Peace, which is so constant and ineffable, that no Cares, no Crosses, or so
much as Jealousies, can distract it. For in that which is single, and but one,
there can be no. Diversity: it is all Union, profound Love, and perfect Rest.
Wherefore it was not without cause, that the Pythagorean called those blessed,
who could by this happy Analysis, Jamblicus Protrept, c. 4.
resolve all things into one and the same Principle; which they plainly mean^
to be the Unity of God: and did accordingly bind themselves both to follow and
to obey him.

III. BUT to follow God constantly and sincerely, is to follow that which is
eminently the best; tho not that which is most grateful to our Appetites. For
who, as a mere Creature, can sincerely and constantly prosecute that which is
best? This must be the Gift of God, and the Effect of a Divine Sense or Spirit.
That Perfection does not originally appertain to any created Being, but to God
the Creator: He, who is the common Father of us all, and the Legislator of the
whole World: He, whom Zeno in Laertius styles, Right Reason penetrating all
things; even the same Reason which is in Jove himself, the Captain and chief
Pilot in the Administration of the Universe.

IV. L. 8. 54.
HERETO refers that Exhortation of Antoninus, That we should not any longer
perplex our selves barely about the circumambient Air; but rather join and
combine with that intellectual Power, which comprehends the Universe. Which
saying amounts to this, That we ought to be drawn into one and the same mind
with God. This is the Passion that can only make a Man Divine; Tusculan.
Quaest. l. 5.
For such the Man is, as his Affections and Inclinations make him. It Is not
here enough to have simple Intellection; no, it rather calls up and summons the
Boniform Faculty, which is replenished with that Divine Sense and Relish, which
affords the highest Pleasure, the chiefest Beauty, and the utmost Perfection to
the Soul. It Is by this supreme Faculty that we pant after God, that we adhere
unto him, and that (as far as our Nature does admit) we are even like unto him:
he, who is Goodness it self, perfect Purity, and the most exalted Simplicity;
he is that pattern whom in these Attributes we are to imitate; and this is that
state of Sincerity we are to aspire to, as far as Humanity will permit. And as
in doing hereof the highest Perfection of Man's Will is best expressed; so in
the state of Patience is there exercised that great Faculty, which the
Pythagoreans have styled, The Strength and Bulwark of the Soul.

V. PATIENCE is a Virtue of the Soul, whereby it is enabled, for the sake of
that which is simply and absolutely the best, to undergo all things; even that
which, to the animal Nature, is totally harsh and ungrateful.

We do not by Patience understand a bare passive and stupid Indolence; but a
vigorous and positive Firmity of the Mind: such as was before noted from
Metopus the Pythagorean; And such as shrinks not from rugged and dangerous
occasions, but bears up boldly and invincibly against all; so as it is not in
the power of any Mortification whatever to turn the Will from the pursuit of
that which is best.

VI. OF Patience there are two Parts or Species, which are Continence, and
Long-suffering. We mean hereby, not those Demi Virtues, which are spoken of in
the Schools of Pythagoras and Aristotle, but Virtues that are complete.
Continence therefore is that part or species of Patience, whereby the Soul
does, on account of that which is simply the best, both easily and constantly
endure whatever Grief or Molestation can arise by denying the sensual Appetite
those things, which would otherwise be grateful to it.

Suffering is that species or part of Patience, whereby the Soul does in like
manner, for the sake of that which is simply and absolutely the best, both
easily and constantly endure whatever is harsh and vexatious unto our natural
Life.

VII. THE Demonstration of these Virtues will be found in the Noemas, fifth,
sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh: But the use of them is of
such extent, as to reach to almost all Virtues. Wherefore Aristotle every where
speaks to the same effect, saying, Ethic. Nicom. l. 1. c. 2. Magn. Moral. l. 1.
c. 6.
That all Moral Virtue has reference either to pleasure or to pain; that it is
for pleasure we commit what is vile, and for fear of pain withdraw our selves
from things that are honest. So that Epictetus thought all Moral Philosophy was
summed up in this short Precept, Sustine and abstine: As one part thereof
referred to Suffering, the other to Continence.

VIII. HENCE it appears that Continence, and Suffering, are not barely Virtues,
but such as are of a high account. For they both, in their Derivation, have
reference to that Force and Power which is in the Soul, either to excite
motion, or procure its rest. And to this Faculty refers what Antoninus
advises, That we cleanse the Imagination, L. 7. 29.
and stop all Motions of the Sense. Which takes in both the Duty of Continence,
and of Suffering.

IX. BUT although we have here said enough of the Primitive Virtues; yet we may
further inculcate, that they are so much the true Parents or Patriarchs of all
the rest, that in them alone all the Force and Essence of every other Virtue
seems to be comprehended. Nor can any Man, that is possessed of these, find
difficulty in acquiring the rest. This we choose to notify lest the Mind should
be distracted after many things, when these very few Objects are sufficient not
only for its Exercise, but to satisfy the most zealous search and anxiety
after Virtue, and for attaining that Felicity which alone can attend it.

X. WE only add, that it is impossible, if a Man wants these, he should have any
Real Virtue, whatever he may show of what is counterfeit or casual. For Virtue
must not be encumbered with Error, nor can it live but under the Regency of that
Prudence we have already described. Yet if a Man shall by adventure, and
without that Prudence, light upon the doing of some brave Action, it is not
Virtue, but Fortune, that must be applauded for such happy chance.

XI. Nor can Sincerity, or Simplicity, be wanting unto Virtue: For without
these, it is not Virtue, but a shadow and pretended Image thereof. And therefore
if it shall appear even in things well done, that they scarce had either been
begun or perfected, without some extrinsecal and adventitious end; it is plain,
those events, how prosperous soever, lose both the Name and Nature of Virtues.
For this was not the prosecuting what was absolutely and simply the best; but
that which to the Man himself, and to his Appetite, was most inviting. This is
not Virtue's Office, but the Contrivance or Heat of some animal Design. Offic.
l. 1.
It Is what is true, simple, and sincere is unto human Nature, as well as to
Right Reason, most agreeable. Which, as Tully in his Offices has explained.

XII. BUT lastly, as for Patience, a good Man can less be without it than any
of the rest: since there can be no security of the rest without this. For how
can the effeminate Man, the ambitious, or he that is a mere Slave to his
Appetite, be faithful either to his Prince, his Country, Religion, Friend, or
himself. No, he will abandon God above, he will betray all if a Storm arise,
and to exempt himself from the Difficulties that affright him, he will not
scruple to expose and sell Mankind.

These are the Monsters and reproach of their Race, Men that know not
Friendship or Justice, or have any sense of human Society. Offic. l. 2.
For the same Tully affirms, That no man can be just, who fears Death, Pain,
Banishment, or Want; or who prefers before Justice the things which are
contrary to these Evils. Of such Power is Patience for the support and
vindication of Honesty.

XIII. THE same excellent Philosopher, as well as Orator, refers to the like
Points, when again, in his Offices, he says, -- That to think meanly of those
things which others exalt, and even to spurn at them upon a steady and rational
account, was the part of a great Mind. And, on the other side, to bear
patiently things that are calamitons, so as not to lose the Decorum of Nature,
or the Dignity of a wise Man, was the Mark of a generous Soul, and of an
unshaken Mind. The first part of this Sentence points toward Continence, and
the latter to Suffering. But he adds at last -- That to see a Man bid defiance
to all Fears, yet be melted down by his own Desires; to see him invincible
against all Labor, and yet to be overcome with his Lusts: this was a most
deplorable state. In this also we have a more plain intimation of those two
Branches of Patience, namely, Continence and Suffering. And let this in short
be sufficient for the three Primitive Virtues.

CHAP. IV. Of Justice in general: which is the first of the three principal
Virtues, which are termed Derivative.
I. THE principal Derivative Virtues are also three, as Justice, Fortitude, and
Temperance.

Justice is well defined, by the Lawyers, to be, Constans and perpetua Voluntas
suum cuique tribuendi, A constant and perpetual Will to give every man his own.
Ethic. Nicom. l. 5. c. 10.
And to this Sense Aristotle also conforms. So that this Virtue looks chiefly
abroad, and is therefore properly called by the same Philosopher, The Good of
another: and especially if you regard that Branch of it which comprehends our
Duty toward our Neighbor. But there is a part hereof, which takes in what we
owe to God; although we are as unable to advantage him by our Offerings, as we are
to diminish or damnifie his blessed State by our Demerits. The Principles of
Justice are to be found in Noema the thirteenth, fourteenth, etc. on to the
twenty third.

II. THAT which, in this Definition, is called Suum, or a Man's own; is also
frequently termed by the Lawyers, Jus or Right: and they say every thing is
truly so styled, which by a sort of Fit, and congruous Habitude (that is, by
Custom, Sanction, or Constitution) appertains to any Man. Now this Habitude, or
Title of Property, takes its Rise from somewhat founded in the person, to whom
such Right is owing or accrews; whether it be by some Quality, or Action, or
even any Passion, as understood in the largest Sense. For the Man, who falls
into Poverty, but yet is Honest, has a sort of Right or Title to receive Alms:
and he, who has gotten any thing by Lawful Industry, has Right to keep it; and
the same, if it come to him by Donation: And so of the rest.

III. BUT although all Right is founded in, and arises from things themselves (as
they are the Object or Subject matter of personal Right) yet is not such Right
always clear or intelligible, without reference to some Law, which must explain
it. So Andronicus Rhodius, Lib. 5. c. 9.
in his Commentary upon Aristotle, says, -- In those things the Right is
placed, in which the Law is also placed: For Law and Judgment is that which
separates and discriminates Right from Wrong, and Just from Unjust. However, as
all Law is not of one and the same Nature, so neither all Right: For there is
Right Natural, and Right Legal; and there is also Law Natural, and Law
Positive. The first produces those Sanctions, which are immovable and
perinanent; as from the latter come such as are temporary or mutable. These
last do not obtain in every place; since they were made and fitted to those
places only that stood in need of them.

IV. As to this Law of Nature, Cicero does in very apt, tho lofty, Terms, set
it off in his First Book de L^gibus -- Let us (says he) for determining and
constituting of Right, take ou^ beginning from the supreme Law, which did in
all Ages subsist both before any Law wa^ written, or any City or Society of Men
were in being. But afterward when he prescribes, that whatever partakes of
Divine Nature (as he plainly owns our Souls to do) should be governed and
directed by the Nature of God, by his Reason, Mind, Power, and Influence; in
this he discovers, and reveals unto us, the Fountain and Original from whence
proceeds the best and the most perfect Law of all.

For what (says he) either among Men below, or in Heaven above, or in Earth,
can be diviner than Reason? This is the Faculty, which, being matur'd and come
to its Perfection, is by a more exalted Name called true Sapience. Wherefore
(says he) since nothing is preferable to this Reason, which is conspicuous in
man, as well as is God; we may conclude, it was Reason that made the first Bond
of Society between God and Man. And this Bond being a Law, Lib. 2. c. 1. 9.
we may presume that Men are consociated to the Gods by Law. By which he
plainly intimates, that this supreme Law, which was equally referable to Gods
and Men, was Right Reason: and from thence inculcates a similitude of Man with
God.

V. AGAIN in his second Book, where he describes this natural Law, Lib. 2. c.
4. 3.
he calls it, Reason which resulteth from the nature of things; and which did
not (as he says) then begin to be a Law, when first it was written, but when it
first had being; and that such Being it had from Eternity in the Divine Will.
So that Law, which is eminent and truly such, fit to command, and fit to
restrain, is the Right Reason of Jupiter himself. Cap. 3. 3. Cap. 1. 7, 8, 9.
(This Sentence corresponds with what was cited before from Zeno, and from
Antoninus.)

VI. The truth is, all Men do agree, that the supreme Law is Right Reason: and
this Reason, being also a Divine Thing, is therefore immutable, always constant
and like unto it self. But as it is placed in so mutable a Subject, as is human
Nature, we see sometimes how this Reason is not so much altered, as even
destroyed and extinguished: But in God, and among the number of Blessed Spirits
(which are, by Antoninus, called immortal Gods) the same Reason flourishes
everlastingly. This seems also to be the very mind of Andronicus, that best
Interpreter of Aristotle. L. 5. c. 10
For although (says he) among Men all Laws were mutable; yet it is of necessity,
that with the Gods they should be immutable, and that Right should therefore be
some natural Thing. Nay even among Men who are of sound mind, and under any
constitution, there is that immutable Law which is called Natural. For it does
not much import, that Men of depraved minds do not comprehend what is just:
since Honey is still sweet, tho to the sick, who have lost their relish, it may
appear otherwise.

There is therefore a Law, which is eternal and immutable, and in some sort
common both to God and Men; namely Right Reason: which although it enters not into
the minds of Men wholly vitiated and profligate, yet still is present, Cap. 2.
1, 6, 7.
and always manifest to the sound and prudent; which we have sufficiently
exposed before.

VII. Now it is from this immutable and supreme Law, that all other Laws and
Ordinances are drawn; even those which are termed mutable, and which would have
no validity in them, unless by virtue of that high and eternal Law. And of this
kind, the keeping of Faith in Contracts is a principal part. So Virgil, Virgil.
Aeneid. l. 8.
-- At it is dictis, Albane, maneres.


Wherefore, inasmuch as every man is bound to stand to his Promise or Compact;
he is tied to those Ordinances, which are not such by Nature, but by Law. Nay,
Law it self is but a Compact, and, as such, must bind, where nothing is enacted
by it against the supreme and immutable Law: But against this there is no
Compact or Authority big enough to make any thing binding. For what is unjust
in (...) own Nature, cannot by any external Confideration be made just. On
which occasion Cicar^ says remarkably thus -- If Laws were only to be
constituted by the Command of the People, De Legibus, lib. 1.
by the Decrees of the Prince, or by the Senten^ of the Judges; it might be
lawful to rob, to commit Adulteries, and to forge Wills, by procuring the Votes
and Suffrage of the Multitude thereunto. And if such and so great a Power,
could reside it the Voices of unruly Men, so as to alter the very Nature of
things; it is strange to me how they forbear enacting, that the most pernicious
things be not presently made both laudable and just. This is the Raillery
wherewith that great Man treated so weak and so fantastic a Paradox.

VIII. THUS it appears; That, as from the Supreme Law, which is termed Right
Reason, all perfect Knowledge of Right takes its original: so from the
Observation of Right proceeds all Exercise of Justice.

CHAP. V. Of Piety.
I. JUSTICE comprehends the two parts of Piety and Probity. For Piety it self
is a sort of Justice, by which we render to God the thing which is God's; that
is to say, the thing which of Right appertains to him. And this Right of
God's is very commonly termed Worship: Which principally consists in this, that
we press vehemently to know him truly, as the infallible Means to love and
honor him entirely. For as we are sprung from him, and wholly depend upon his
Will, so ought we to consecrate all the Faculties of Soul and Body to his good
Pleasure, and to have our affiance in his Providence. And as to his holy
Commands, whether those that are writ in Books, or inscribed inwardly in our
Hearts; we must so fervently hearken and adhere thereto, as rather to bear all
Infamy, Poverty, Oppression, and even Death it self, than quit our Integrity,
or violate a good Conscience. These are God's Rights; and he that dares to
derogate from them, or to infringe them, does as much as in him lies defraud
and injure God himself.

II. IT IS very obvious, that in these sorts of things, the true Worship of God
does consist, seeing all Men do by Worship, understand the Honor which is paid
to God. Now it is plain, that those, of all others, do pay most Hono^ to God,
who (knowing the excellency of the Divine Nature, and also what Affinity the
Mind of Man holds therewith) do most ardently contend to have that part of the
Soul, which is so allied, preserve its similitude to the great Original; and do
renounce all things, even life it self, rather than to damnifie that holy
Resemblance.

III. THERE can be no proof so convincing as this, of the Love, Honor, and
Esteem we pay to God. For while we reverence that poor Extract we bear of him;
to the degree of spurning, not only the Pleasures of Life, but even Life it
self, in comparison of those Consolations, which in true Virtue and Right
Reason can only be found: We do therein openly avow, that as God is infinitely
more excellent than his poor Image; so is he by infinite Degrees both honored
and valued by us above our selves. And to do otherwise, or to be negligent and
languishing in his holy Worship, were either to be ignorant of a God, or else
not to know that Reverence, which the Divine Nature both deserves and demands
from us.

IV. NOW that Virtue is a thing Divine, and God's true Image, is therein
manifest, that it is defined to be not what is most grateful to the Animal Life,
but that which is absolutely and simply the best. It was in this high sense the
ancient Philosophers understood it: where Plato (teaching that Miseries would
then have an end, when we fled from this mortal state unto the Gods) he says,
-- That such Flight was our Translation into the similitude of God, and that
such similitude (so far as it was possible) did consist in our being holy,
just, and prudent.

V. HE adds in another place, that the Divine Nature was the Law and Boundary
to all temperate Men For (says he) to the honest, and to the prudent, God is
the Law; but to the unadvised, there was no Law, but their Appetites. And again
he adds, -- That God was the true Measure of all things, and not Man a Measure
to himself. And again, -- That whoever was wise and honest was God's Friend, as
being like unto him. By all which Plato inculcates, how divine a thing Virtue
was, and how much allied, and resembling unto God himself.

VI. HENCE it is that Cicero in his Tusculan Questions, Tusculan: Quaest. 6. l.
5.
has such magnificent Words touching human Souls; -- As if, says he, the mind
of man were but extracted from the mind divine; and to be compared with no
other but God himself, if it were not arrogance so to speak. And then
explaining, in his first Book de Legibus, that saying from the Delphick Oracle
of Nosce teipsum,; he adds, De Legib.
-- That whoever knows himself, must presently feel within him something which
is divine; That he must conclude the Understanding given him, ought to be but
as some Image dedicated to God; and that he stands bound both to say and act
such things as an worthy of so Heavenly a Gift.

VII. Lib. 12. 19.
Consonant hereto are the frequent Sayings of Marcus Antoninus, --.That we
(...) confess we have somewhat within us more extellent and divine than what
submits to the Controlment of our Passions, or than can be agitated by them as
it were a mere Puppet. He adds a little after, -- That every Man's Mind is a
God, and had its Original from him. Sect. 2.
And again, -- Why seek we farther than the immediate business of a Creature
intellectual? One that loves Society, and partakes in those Laws which are
common to God? It were endless to name all he says: Sect. 22.
yet, where he teaches in brief what it was to be conversant with the Gods, he
says thus, That every Man lives with the Gods, who does what is dictated by
that God, which Jupiter has given him for his Captain and Director. Meaning
hereby, That every Man's own Reason, and his Intellect, was that Director or
inferior God. Nay, so allied he thinks the Soul unto God, as to call it a
dismembered Parcel of him: although herein he spoke but little as a Philosopher.

VIII. SINCE therefore there is so much of Divinity interwoven in a virtuous
Mind; it is plain, that if we cultivate Virtue, as it has reference to God, and
as it is his most visible Image, we manifestly worship the great God himself.
And whereas other Rituals have been subject to Mutation, and shall not be
lasting; this one Right of Adoration, which is God's Right, must be immutable
and everlasting.

Wherefore the Sum of all natural Religion seems to consist in that Precept of
Antoninus, To remember God, Lib. 10. Lib. 6. 7.
and to know that he abhors all Hypocrisy, and will not be served but with
what is rational and like to himself. Or, as he elsewhere speaks, That a Man
should not rejoice, or acquiesce in any thing, but in passing from one good
action to another; such as had reference to God's Glory, and to the public
Good. For God's most immovable and immutable Right is this, that we love him
for his wonderful Perfections, and then imitate him as much as we can.

IX. THIS however is not said to the exclusion of other Rights; which have
either been revealed by holy Oracles, or enjoined by the Decree of the supreme
Magistrate. For there may be various Ceremonies, and other Circumstances of
Divine Worship, which, in Virtue of a Law, may be established as of Divine
Right, and such as may not be violated, till by Legal Authority they are
revoked. But still these must have no Repugnancy in them, either to the Oracles
of God, or to the supreme Laws of Virtue.

X. Now from all that has been said, it is easy to comprehend what Piety is;
For according to Plato's Definition, Holiness is a part of Justice; and so
Andronicus Rhodius (almost to the same sense) defines it to be, A Science that
makes us faithful and obedient unto the Laws Divine. Whence it is manifest what
Impiety must be: and how fitly it may be divided into these several kinds,
namely, Superstition, Profaneness, Enthusiasm, and Rituality.

XI. Now Superstition is a sort or mode of Impiety, in fastening upon God (by
way of Worship) those things which are contumelious to him: which is plainly to
be injurious to the Deity. Wherefore, Superstition is that Impiety, by which a
man considers God to be so light, or so passionate, as with trivial things
either to be appeased, or else moved to wrath.

Profaneness also is that Impiety, by which a Man does with Impudence and
Imprudence violate all Divine Rights, whether temporary, or immutable. And this
Disease does sometimes ripen into downright Atheism; than which no state of the
Soul can be more sad and deplorable.

XII. ENTHUSIASM is that Impiety, by which a Man does boldly violate, and kick
under foot, all external Rights; while yet he drives on, with Heat and Ardor of
Mind, to some internal and spiritual Worship of God.

But Rituality is that Impiety, by which a Man, while he is observing those
exterior Rights of God, and adheres with a sort of Conscience to things
ceremonial; does in the mean time freeze, as to any spiritual Feeling, or
internal Worship of God.

XIII. THESE in a manner are those Offenses in Religion, which are most
obvious: but if others increase the number, I shall not gainsay it. I confess
it was our intention to treat rather of the Virtues than of the Vices: But, as
Aristotle says, De Anima, l. 1. c. 5.
the one may be known by comparison with the other. And the Rule or Law is
Judge unto both.

However the Demonstration of the present Virtue of Piety is particularly
explained in Noema the thirteenth, sixteenth, and twenty first: As also in the
fifth, eighth, tenth, etc. For as to the Being of a God, and that our Souls are
immortal; we have sufficiently proved these in our Writings against Atheism,
and of the Souls immortality: unto which we therefore refer.

CHAP. VI. Of Probity: Or of Justice, properly so called.
I. THE other part of Justice is Probity, by which we give to every Man what is
his own. And this may be divided into three parts, Political, Oeconomical, and
Moral.

The first contains the Offices of the Magistrate toward the People, and of
the People to the Magistrate.

The second refers to the Duties of a Father toward Children, Wife, and
Family; and of each of these toward their Master, Father, and Husband.

The third refers to the Duties of private Men, or at least of equals, each to
other. Of all which to speak in particular would be too tedious.

II. BUT this in short may be said, that it is not the part of a Magistrate to
act against Reason, or to be swayed by his own passion, but in all things to
adhere to what is prescribed by Law and by Right Reason. For as Aristotle calls
the Magistrate, Ethic. Nicom. l. 5.
The very Soul and Spirit of the Law; so Tully on the other hand holds, That a
Magistrate should not only be directed, De Legibus, lib. 3.
but even animated by the Laws. This (says he) is the Power and Duty of a
Magistrate who presides, that he direct things profitable and just, and such as
hold conformity with the Laws. For as the Magistrate is above the People, so
are the Laws above the Magistrate. Now the Peoples Duty is, to obey the
Magistrate, to contribute cheerfully and liberally to the public Charge; not
to contend about things indifferent, such as have by Custom passed into Right,
but to preserve Peace, Society and good Order.

III. THE Father of a Family should be careful, to look about; to provide all
things necessary; to treat with Gentleness his Wife, Children, and Servants:
Above all, to avoid either giving pernicious example, or permitting it in
others, but rather early to suppress, or expel it from the House. On the other
hand, it is the Duty of each of these respectively, to give the other all fit
Observance; and, tho he should at times be out of humor, or a little in the
wrong, yet were it not wise or proper hastily to contend or dispute with him.
For as Pittacus advised, It Is not seemly to be wrangling with your Parents,
although what you speak be the right. And indeed this Rule may well take place in
respect of Magistrates, and even all that are superior to us, either in Age or
in Relation: And, even to our Uncles in particular, whom the Ancients called
Parents.

IV. LASTLY, the Duty of private Men toward their Equals, and indeed toward
all, is, ever to be aiding either in Help or Counsel, when it is in our power
to do it. Much more are we tied to observe all our Compacts and Promises; but
never to seek our own Benefit by another Man's Hurt.

V. NOW as to that celebrated Division of Justice into Distributive and
Corrective, it has chiefly reference to the Politics. And in that Division it
is where Aristotle's Observation takes place, namely, that Justice was a sort
of Equality. But the Equality whereto Justice inclines, and which it seems to
affect, is of that sort which shows it self in the ways of Proportion. For
Proportion is a Rationum Aequalitas, which Ratio (in the Language of Geometry)
is that Relative Correspondence which one Quantity or Number has to another; or
by which it appears, how often one Quantity or Number does comprehend, or is
comprehended in another.

VI. BUT as to Proportion or Analogy, this is either Geometrical or
Arithmetical.

The Geometrical Proportion is when four Magnitudes, or four Numbers are so
compared, namely, 2, 6; 4, 12; or 6, 2; 12, 4; As that the third (namely 12) in
this latter Example, does as often contain the Fourth (which is 4,) as the
first (namely 6) does contain the second (which is 2;) And that the third in
the first Example (namely 4) is as often contained in the fourth (which is 12)
as is the first (namely 2) in the second (which is 6.)

This is the Proportion that refers to Distributive Justice. For as one person
is to another, suppose Ajax to Achilles, so also, in judicial Determinations,
ought there to be had a due consideration of Honor to Honor. This is that which
is called the Equality of Proportion. For if the Merits of several Men shall
happen to have the same Circumstances and Reasons of Equality; it is fit that
not only in Reason, but even in Magnitude, their Rewards should be also equal.

VII. As for Arithmetical Proportion it is when four Numbers, or Magnitudes, are
so compared, as in 5, 7: 9, 11. That the same Excess or Defect attends the two
first each to other, as is in one of the latter to the other. Namely, that in
each of them there be the same Equality, both of Excess, and of Defect, as in
the Numbers above. And this has reference to Corrective Justice.

But here we must ingenuously confess, that it seems hard to find in the
Measures of Corrective Justice any sufficient or competent Image of such
Arithmetical Proportion as in this Distinction of the said four Terms is
expressed. For whatever Andronicus thought to the contrary, it is plain, that
the Excesses and Defects which arise from the Terms before enumerated, are not
equal. It Is true, that two and two, as to the Ratio are equal. But to take two
from seven, and but two from eleven, is as to Proportion unequal. So also to
add two to seven, and but two to five is not equal. Lib. 5. c. 5.
Wherefore if we should humor Andronicus in his own way, and venture to
suppose or invent a Case of four Terms, it would seem fit to make the two first
of them to be (as for example) the Party who bears the Injury, and then the
Party who gave it, which however is so to be understood, that as yet no Appeal
is made to any Judge, or Sentence given against the Wrongdoer. But when
afterward the offended Party takes on him the Name of Plaintiff, and the
offending Party that of Defendant; here two other new Terms are started up, and
then it follows, after Sentence given by the Judge; that the Excess or
Difference, which before appeared between him that did the wrong, and him that
bore it, is quite inverted. For what the Doer or Defendant injuriously took, is
now by Sentence commanded back; and by how much he first overcame the Sufferer
or Plaintiff by what he took away; by so much is he now pulled back; and
damnified by what he is forced to refund. And this is true Arithmetical
Proportion.

VIII. L. 5. c. 5.
THE same Andronicus seems to level at the like thing in what he thus adds,
That as is the Wrong-doer to the Sufferer, so is the Judge to the Wrong-doer:
For what this Man did against the other, the Judge does the same against him;
and so makes them equal. And this ought to refer as well to the Defect, as to
the Excess, of what is equal; for Injuries, whether great or small, ought to
have proportionable Reparation. But he that is curious after such Nicetias as
these, may, if he think fit, consult that Anthor, who dwells (as we conceive)
too long on this Piece of Subtilty. For it is plainly our Opinion, that a Man
may very well administer Corrective Justice, tho he never heard, in his life,
the Meaning of Arithmetical Proportion.

IX. IT would make more to our purpose, if as well that Distinction, as that
Relation, between Justice and Equity, were observed, which Andronicus notes in
these words; L. 5. c. 16.
That (says he) which we call equal, is just; and is some Cases more excellent
than what is only just. Not that Equity excels Justice; or that it is of
another kind, and so more excellent in its nature; but only by being of a
greater extent. For (as he adds) Equity is that which supplies the Defects of
the Law; And, since all Events could not be particularly foreseen, Equity not
only corrects Errors, but superadds Restrictions and Limitations, which were
omitted at the making of the Law.

X. Now it seems worth our while to reflect on this Definition of Equity, as it
plainly fastifies there is something, which in its own Nature is just. For if
nothing were just, (...) in virtue of some written Law; what need then would
there be of Emendation; seeing the Law (whatever it were) made every thing
just? But it is the part and Province of Equity, to overruled and correct the
very Law (even as the Intellect does the Will;) and, as Aristotle says, Ethic.
Nicom. l. 5. c. 14.
To establish such things in such Cases, as the Legislator himself bad not
failed to have provided for, had he but fweseen the event. But this Saying of
his had been very ridiculous, if the Nature of Just and Unjust, L. 2. c. 4.. 3.
had not been grounded on the Nature of things, and the various Circumstances
that attend them; but depended merely on the Will and Pleasure of a Legislator.

And thus much of Justice.

CHAP. VII. Of the other two principal Derivati^ Virtues, Fortitude and
Temperance.
I. FORTITUDE and Temperance herein agree, that they relate more immedately to
our selves: yet the Benefit of these as of every other Virtue, redounds some w^
unto our Neighbor; and hence we style (...) Universal Justice. So Rhodius the
Paraphrast has it: L. 5. c. 1.
This is Justice, when we turn every Virtue to the Use and Advantage of
another. So (...) abstain from another Man's Wife is Justice as well as
Temperance; and to repel the Enemies of our Country, is Justice and Fortitude
both; for as this is a Debt we owe our Country, so without Fortitude we could
not discharge it.

II. BUT what Fortitude is, both Tully and Aristotle inform us, in their
Descriptions of a c^ragious Man. De Officiis, l. 1.
The first tells us; That the Man of a steady and courageous mind, is not to be
shaken at cross events; he must not fall from his Character, and show
Confusion; he must have presence of mind to direct what stands with Reason: and
it is the mark of a high Capacity to foresee all that may fall out, and to
provide accordingly for it. Herein consists the chief Renown, to overcome by
Prudence and good Advice: f^ to rush headlong into a Battle, or to fall to
hand^ blows with an Enemy, this alone is a poor and brutal thing. It Is true,
when the time is come, and that necessity requires it, then we must strike
servile, and prefer death before any thing that is servile or base. But as we
must not pass for Cowards by an industrious shunning of Dangers; so it is not
necessary, and it were even ridiculous, to expose our selves, when there is no
Cause that requires it.

III. YET Andronicus, in Conformity with his Aristotle, makes it one part of a
valiant Man, L. 3. c. 7.
that he dares intrepidly advance toward any danger: So that his stout Man is
he that fears nothing. And Tully elsewhere says, That the two great Gifts of
Fortitude, are the Contempt of Pain and Death. But Andronicus is more accurate
in Circumstances: adding, that the Dangers attending his Hero should be. L. 3.
c. 8.
Such as allowed him to exert the Power of an inflexible Mind, and the Dint of
his Will; or else to have before him the Contemplation of a noble Death: For
that he was properly valiant, who could frankly submit to any excellent way of
dying.

He has it also elsewhere, That whoever is valiant, moves steadily toward a
glorious Death. But this sort of Death can only be purchased in the Cause and
Quarrel of Virtue. For not those, who passionately rage and lay about them, are
the Men we speak of: they are Fighters indeed, but not valiant. Whence we may
conclude, that Fortitude is a Virtue, by which a Man may, with Constancy of
Mind, bear up against all the Dangers of Life, and even Death it self. And this
either for the Cause of Honesty, or the sake of that which is simply and
absolutely the best.

IV. I mention here Constancy of Mind, and not Indolence or Insensibility. For
as Andr^cus, according to the Mind of Aristotle, has (...) To be gnawed with
sorrow upon cross events, L. 3. c. 9.
is not at all inconsistent which being couragions. For by how much a Man is
oppressed with Grief, and y^ bears up for Virtues sake, by so much the more
deserves he the Reputation of being valiant. But here I also mention a virtuous
Cause: For (...) Mind that is disposed to Dangers, not for common Utility, but
for private Ends, this must rather pass for Boldness than for Fortitude.

V. CICERO says, A Mind that is great and valiant has these two Marks. The
first is a light esteem of outward things; De Offic. l. 1.
for it will plainly appear, that a Man ought neither to admire, (...) wish
for, any thing, but what is just and suitable. Nor ought he ever to submit
servilely to any M^, or be subjected to the Perturbations of Mind (...)
Fortune. The other is, when a Mind is so framed and constituted, as to undergo
great things; I mean, public Services, full of Difficulty, Labor, and Danger:
and particularly with reference to life, and all the Conveniences of living.
This excellent Sentence of Cicero, may serve as a Paraphrase on the Definition
we have mentioned before.

VI. BUT as for the Cause of Honesty or Virtue, the greatest Dangers are to be
undertaken; so on the same account are corporeal Pleasures to be renounced.
Else it were not so much Temperance, as a certain Moroseness or Stupidity of
the Mind. For there can be no Virtue, where the end is other than what is
honest and simply good. Wherefore Temperance may be defined to be, A Virtue, by
which a Man forbids himself corporeal Pleasures; to the end he may enjoy that
Pleasure, which results from a Conscience of well-doing, both more constantly
and more entirely. For to observe great Rules of Temperance merely for Health's
sake, may also be the Virtue of a Beast; This does not mount up to that point,
which makes us Men, but is a thing in common with inferior Animals.

VII. BY bodily Pleasures, I here understand not those thin and purer ones,
which come by Seeing, Hearing, or Smelling; but (as Aristotle notes) those
grosser ones of the Taste, and the Touch; Ethic. Nicom. l. 3. c. 13.
which relate to Sensuality, and to the Companions and Inflamers of it, namely,
to Wine, and high Feeding. Temperance is, almost by all the Writers, confined
to the Boundaries we here set down: Whence it is plain, that it is but a Branch
or Parcel of that Primitive Virtue, which we have called Continence, even as
Fortitude is a Branch of Patience.

The Reasons of Temperance and Fortitude, may be had from Noema the fifth,
sixth, se^enth, eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth. As of Probity,
from the fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth, nineteenth,
twentieth, two and twentieth, and three and twentieth. Which, unto all who
think ^t to examine them will soon appear.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Reductive Virtues.
I. WE have explained the nature of the principal Derivative Virtues; and the
Reasons of them are, from their Noem^ briefly exposed.

To these three Virtues, all that remain may not unfitly be reduced, so as we
venture to call them all Reductive Virtues: And the reason of each will be
found in those Noem^, unto which their Principles are referred.

II. Now such of this kind as are reduci^ unto Justice, are as follow,
Liberality, Magnis^cence, Veracity, Gratitude, Candor, Urban^ Fidelity,
Modesty, Humanity (or a Love (...) Mankind) and Hospitality. Lastly, Friends^
it self, and such others as comprize good Will toward our Neighbors; namely,
Assobility, Courtesy, or Officiousness, which are also Branches of Humanity.
For since the Effects of all these Virtues have reference (...) our Neighbor;
and that all are dictated from right Reason, which has the power of a La^ It Is
but fit to rank them as Parts and Parc^ of Justice.

Unto Fortitude we refer Magnanimity an^ its Dependents; as Generosity, Lenity,
Const^cy, and also Diligence. Andronicus adds unto them Vivacity, Presence of
Mind, Vigor, an^ Manhood.

Lastly, unto Temperance we refer Frugality, H^mility, Modesty, Austerity, and
those other Adherents which Andronicus adds, namely, A sl^nder and uncompounded
Diet, Unblamableness (...) Behavior, and a contented Mind.

These are the Names of the most remarkable of the Reductive Virtues; for we
ravel (...) into every small thing, nor involve our ^ives in their strict and
minute Definitions; since the Nature of such Dependents, may enough be known
from those Principal or ^rimitive Virtues, unto which they refer.

III. HOWEVER, it will not be amiss to touch a little on each of those above,
and especially on such of them as have reference unto Justice, because they are
Branches of that Justice, which Rhodius calls and defines to be Volantary
Justice. For the Probity of every Man is more conspicuous, where no Penalty
compels him, than where he is liable to Law, or else to Defamation, for what he
does.

IV. Andronlcus, l. 4. c. 1.
LIBERALITY has reference to the Use of Money: And there is no other Use
thereof, than spending and bestowing it. So that he who, according to his
Fortune, does cheerfully and willingly spend upon fit Persons, and in things
convenient, and in proper place; he may justly be styled Liberal; he that keeps
no Measures, is a Prodigal; and he that falls short in these, is a Niggard.

V. MAGNIFICENCE has also reference to Expense; but then it must be in things
singular and great, as the Name it self denotes. And here, in like manner,
three C^siderations must enter, of the Person, of Work, and of its End or Use.
For it beho^ not every Man to make large Expense; (...) is he that does it
properly Magnificent, (...) less what he splendidly lays out, is also ded^cated
to some very great End. Ethic. Nicom. l. 4. c. 5.
Wherefo^ Aristotle notes, That things of this Rate a^ denomination, are
commonly for Divine U^ or for the Public.

VI. GRATITUDE is an excellent and cheerful part of Justice; by which he that
^ceives a Benefit, does impatiently, and as soon as possibly he can, repay it
with Advantage.

VII. VERACITY is a Virtue which leach a Man to show, both in word and deed,
what really he is, without Simulation or Dissimulation in any thing. However,
the latter of these two Faults is more excusable, if moderately performed, and
only done to avoid^ show of Vanity or Pride. Nicom. Ethic. l. 4. c. 13.
But, if it exceed Bounds, it savors of Arrogance; just as Aristotle observed
in the Laconic Garment, saying. He that is too affected in his own dimontion,
as well as he who is Pragmatical in his o^ Praises, as guilty of Ostentation.
But tho that of Aristotle's be an elegant Care, in his opposing two Vices to
every Virtue; Lib. 2. c. 9. 1.
yet to (...) it would seem more profitable, if we opposed unto Truth that
single Vice, by which one Man takes on him the Guise of another to conceal his
own; and which we do most significantly term Hypocrisy. This is an Evil in the
World, which is the Mother of much ^ichief; and many are involved in great
^appointments and Tribulations by it, as well as the Hypocrite himself.

VIII. CANDOR is that which guides us to interpret with Benignity the Words and
Actions of all Men: But when they are (...) as cannot well be born; then, with
an honest and decent Liberty, to check and reprehend them. The Opposites to
this Virtue are called Moroseness on the one hand, (...) of Caressing on the
other: But when it ^ds to our Lucre or Advantage, then it is called Cajoling or
Adulation.

IX. URBANITY is when either we pleasantly and inoffensively play upon others,
or bear the like from them: And those, who will agree to neither of these ways,
Ethic. Nicom. l. 4. c. 14.
are by Aristotle called Clowns and Rusticks. But for such as spare none, and
keep neither Bounds nor Decorum in their Jesting, they are termed Scurrilous.

X. FIDELITY is seen, when we stand to our Promises, and in restoring back what
has been deposited with us, where no written Law can compel it.

XI. MODESTY is a constant and perpetual Observance of what belongs to Decorum:
therefore it seems as the very Flower of Justice, or rather somewhat more
delicate, or paramount unto it. For Justice commands us to do Violence to no
Man; but Modesty says, ^o not so much as displease a Man. And in this (says
Cicero) is the Power of Decor^ chiefly seen. De Offic. l. 1.
For he defines it to be, A the which conforms to that Superiority in Man, by
wh^ his Nature has distinguished him from other Cr^tures. And surely this is
enough to admonish (...) against yielding to any thing that is brutal, (...)
against the Dignity of our Composition.

But we are further to know, that, beside general Decorum, there are also some
special Acts therein, which are suited to every Rank, Age, and Condition of
Life: As to the Prince and to the Priest; the Philosopher and the Plebeian; Men
and Women; the Aged and the Young, and the like. But let this be the Rule for
all, That we pay to every one what by custom they may expect; and that which,
by the common Opinion of all Men, is established and approved. Thus we shall
give Disappointment to none, nor despise the Judgment of the Public. But for
any single Man to set up in defiance of all his Companions, and to despise
whatever the Neighborhood shall say of him; this looks not only arrogant, but
as if he were stupid, or growing profligate.

Wherefore to observe a degree of Reverence toward all Men, is part of
Justice* neither should we by ill Gestures, or by immoderate Talking, offend
the Sight, or overlo^ the Hearing of any one.

XII. HUMANITY is a Virtue, which, from the sense of that Excellency that is in
human Nature and the common Affinity we have with all Mankind, leads us to be
offici^s and benevolent to every one.

Hospitality is a Virtue, which moves us to ^e kind to Strangers, not only as
they are Men, but as destitute perhaps, while abroad, of those Conveniences
they had at home.

XIII. CIVILITY is a Virtue that minds us of our Tie to all Men in the common
Link of Humanity; and bids us with such Cheerfulness of Voice, Countenance, and
Gesture, (...) salute whom we meet; as that when we (...) them How they do,
they may think themselves even the better for our asking.

Affability is when we, being met and spoken to by others, do with Gentleness
and good Expressions entertain them.

But Officiousness is where a Man stoops to every little Service toward his
Superiors, or at least his Equals; and is flying to do every small thing that
the Company seems to want.

All these Virtues are fitly referable to Hum^nity.

But hereto is opposed, not only what is plain Inhumanity, but that fond and
affected Humor of some, who will needs pretend to polige the whole World, and
so to caress some Men in particular, as if presently they would adopt them, and
make their Fortunes; while in reality, they mind nothing they say, (...) intend
more by those enormous Civilities, than the pleasure of supposing they are just
credited while they speak.

This we call a manifest Infraction of ^stice, because by such delusion, an
honest He^ is often robbed of his sincerest Affections; thi^ which he has not a
more valuable Treasure (...) bestow, where he is really willing to obli^ or to
be grateful: So that we justly make the no less criminal, than any other Rape
or Felony.

XIV. LASTLY, True Friendship stands in the rank of Virtue. But for that which
is vulgar^ so called, it is, for the most part, nothing else but the Combination
of a few cunning M^ against the rest of their Neighbors, to se^ the Turn of
each other. They award unjustly, and bear false witness; and call this matual
good Will and Friendship among themselves, while they undo the rest. This is
the more vile and abject piece of Injustice, as I is mixed with Hypocrisy: For
they satisfy themselves, in that the Injury is not done with intention to hurt
their Neighbor, but only to gratify a Friend.

But as for that which is real Friendship doubtless, there is nothing more Holy,
or more Divine; it is not less a Virtue, than is Humanity or Hospitality: And
it is only to be found with such as are possessed of all other Virtues. It
comprehends those Du^ which are not only owing to good Men (...) general, but
to those especially, whose lo^ Conversation, whose tried Sincerity, whost
Usefulness and good Turns, have obliged (...) to distinguish and place them
above the rest of Mortals.

However the best Fruit of Friendship is a ^mal Stimulation unto Virtue. Thus
it (...) noted of old among the Pythagoreans: Iamblicus de Vita Pythagorica, c.
33.
(...) (says Iamblicus) they did frequently admo^ each other, never to separate
from him, who ^s one with them in God. For all their application to Friendship,
both in word and deed, tended but to an Union and Communion with God; and that
all might be, as it were, incorporated together into a Divine Life. To which he
presently adds, Than which, nothing better can be found, either in their
Discourses, or in their practice of Living. And I do likewise believe, that it
comprehends all the Duties of true Friendship. Ethic. Nicom. l. 9. c. 8.
Aristotle is not much different from this sense, where he notes, that the
principal Fruit and Pleasure of Friendship, did consist in those things which
are proper to us as Men, namely, as we were rational and discoursive: For the
Society of Men at a Table, was not as the business of Cattle feeding in the
same Pasture, but for Ratiocination and Intercourse of Speech.

And thus much, in short, of those Virtues which are reducible to Justice.

XV. MAGNANIMITY is the first of those Virtues, which have reference to
Fortitude, or rather unto Sufferance. But it is sufficiently understood from
Aristotle's Charaster of one that is Magnanimous. Ethic. Nicom. l. 4. c. 7, 8.
He is one (says he) who strives to do great Things, or what may be for great
Ends, and by which he may acquire great Honor. He is not therefore so apt to
run into frequent Dangers, as into great ones; not prompt for every Turn, but
rather (...) and deliberate; he will not rashly undertake (...) great Matters,
but with Counsel and good C^tion; he is not much taken up with the Care o^
worldly Concerns, as not thinking them either great enough, or of much account.
But Honor (...) in his esteem, as the highest of human-exter^ Benefits,
inasmuch as he observes, it is the high est thing we have to pay, even to the
Gods.

Here we suppose our magnanimous Man to be so perfectly endowed; as that
knowin^ his own Virtue, which is a Heavenly Gift, (...) believes he ought not
to be deprived by M^ of the Honor which should attend it.

Yet if Men shall ungratefully refuse to do their Parts herein, he makes no
Idol of this Honor, or of their popular Incense: For being conscious of his own
single Virtue, he can there sit down as at a Feast. And th^s the Learned
Paraphrast adds to his Character. That he is a Man who has greater considerati^
for Truth, and for his Duty than for Fame. And as Ennius also notes, He is one
that carries Friendship and Enmity in an open Breast. For who need fly to
Corners, or be ashamed of Truth, that being satisfied of his own Goodness, and
ravished with the Joys of such a Blessing, must needs have Contempt for
inferior Matters, and can sooner part with his Life, than renounce Virtue, or
any Branch thereof.

These are the chief Marks and Characters, that Aristotle gives the Magnanimo^.
And it is with good reason that Magna^may is referred to Fortitude, and to
Sufferance: (...) we cannot possibly undertake great things, without much Labor
and great Vexation, and those who voluntarily decline Ho^ and public Office,
do it for the most ^irt upon the score of Ease.

XVI. LENITY also is fitly referred to Forti^de, and to Sufferance; inasmuch as
to bear Injuries is an Act of Patience, and to despise them, the property of a
great Mind: So that from both or either of them, results Lenity; by which, tho
injured, we are not easily provoked to Resentments, at least, we can easily
abstain from Revenge. And hereto refers that excellent Advice of Antoninus:
Lib. 6. Sect. 47.
That it was highly estimable to live benignly, and to prastise Truth and
Justice, even among Men of no Truth, and of no Justice. For indeed nothing does
more naturally try or stir up the Indignation of a generous Mind, than to see
Men given over to Falsehood and Imposture.

XVII. GENEROSITY differs herein from Magnanimity, that it seems to be a more
common Virtue, and is not only restrained to great Honors, or to great
Enterprises, but consists in this, That a Man exercise his own freedom and
liberty of Thinking in the best manner he can; that he rest contented herein;
and as to Fortune, and the World's Opinion, to look on them as things of
indifferency; yet still to regard all Men with Civility, and to suppose them
what they ought to be, till the contrary be made manifest.

XVIII. CONSTANCY is a Virtue, (...) which we are taught to be just and confo^
able to our selves, in all things we do or (...).

Diligence is a Virtue, by which we prose cute indefatigably whatever we had
good cause to undertake.

Vivacity is defined by Andronicus, Lib. de Passionibus.
To he a firm and lively Aptitude in the Soul to perfect whatever is begun.

But Presence of Mind seems to intimate a certain Promptitude of the Soul, to
undertake what it ought, and therein to persist: So that it seems to differ but
little from Diligen^s, He names also Strenuousness, which he makes to be an
Habit that enables us to hold out in the laborious Searches of Virtue.

Lastly, Manhood or Virility, is by him defined to be, A Virtue, by which a Man
carri^ himself stoutly, and with Circumspection through public Affairs. And he
makes the principal. Functions hereof to consist, in being Intrepid as to
Death, Bold in all Dangers, and to prefer an Honorable Exit before Shameful
Living. These indeed are the Parts of Fatitude also.

XIX. THERE now only remain those Virtues, which appertain to Temperance, or
(if you will) to Continence.

Such as Frugality, that is a Virtue, by which a Man, consulting both
Temperances and his own Condition, becomes more sparing in his Expense, yet so
as not to be quite Parsimonious. From which Definition (...) plain, that
Frugality is fitly referred unto Temperance, as is Liberality unto Justice: For
this latter appertains to the Benefit of others, whereas the former has
referenc to our selves.

XX. HUMILITY is a Virtue, by which we easily suppress and extinguish all
inordinate Desires of Honor, Rule, and the Splendo^ of Riches; that so we may
be able to fix our Minds upon better things. This conforms to the Mind of
Marcus the Emperor, Marcus, l. 12.. 27.
who advises a Man, In every Occasion that presents, to demonstrate himself
just, prudent, and a plain follower of God.

XXI. AUSTERITY is defined, by Andronkus Rhodius, to be, An Habit of the Soul
that cannot bear any Lewdness either in Speech or Pleasures. Modesty seems
nearly allied, as being a Virtue in the Soul, which chaseth early away all the
Preparations to Sin; nay it cannot easily bear any thing that looks but
suspiciously naught.

XXII. As to the Slenderness of Diet in point of Quantity, and the plainness of
it in reference to Cost, this seems something stricter than Frugality it self.
Andronicus calls this latter, De Passionibus.
An habit of being content with any thing: And the first, An habit void of
Desire to see Charge, or Preparation in any thing.

For the Inoffensiveness of Gesture, it does consist, in Ordering the Figure
and Motion of the Body, according to Decorum; and this makes it to be a part of
Modesty.

Contentment of Mind is an habit of being ^sily satisfied with the common
Conveniences of Life. For, according to the old Observation, Nature is content
with a very little.

XXIII. THUS have we treated of the Redactive Virtues, with what Brevity we
could. But as we dwelt not long upon them, so we judge it less needful to
enumerate every Vice, since their Natures are known enough from the Doctrine of
those Virtues which they contradict.

However, as we still resolve not to go far, or meddle with every Vice, which
some suppose to be as so many Extremes to Virtue; yet we shall presume to
examine that Meducrity which Aristotle treats of, and in which the Nature of
Virtue is made to consist.

Much Contention is made herein; yet we shall venture to speak our Sense in the
Chapter following.

CHAP. IX. Of that Mediocrity, in which Virtue does consist: And of the true
measure of such Mediocrity.
I. THAT Virtue lies in a Mediocrity is not quite untrue, L. 2. c. 8.. 7.
if rightly understood: Yet as some introduce Virtue attended, on each hand,
with opposite Vices; and just as it were a Rose placed between two Nettles:
This, we do confess, were a pretty Show, but it cannot possibly hold in every
Case.

II. FOR in the Case of Justice, where a Man takes no more than what is of
right his due; this is plainly opposite to that part which is vicious, and
where a Man takes more than what is his due. But here if a Man takes less; this
surely seems no Vice, but rather a sort of Generosity, or Modesty. So again in
the Conferring of Rewards, to bestow less than was agreed for, has as much of
Injustice, as to give according to Proportion is just: Yet to bestow more
largely than was agreed for, is not, on the other hand, Injustice, but rather
Liberality. So also, in the way of Buying and Selling; the over-weight that is
thrown in to get a Customer's good Will, although either in Weight or Measure, it
exceed the Bargain, yet surely this has nothing of Injustice in it.

III. MOREOVER unto Prudence (which doubtless is a Moral Virtue) there is only
Imprudence to be opposed, which is the Defect of Prudence. So to Sincerity is
nothing opposite but Insincerity, or at large Hypocrisy, which exceeds or
falls short of the Perfection of Sincerity. So Patience, Continence, and
Suffering, do only go lame (as we say) on the one side, as namely, by
Impatience, Incontinence, and by Effeminacy: So Temperance by Intemperance. And
therefore to put (which some do) a sort of Insensibility, to answer as an
opposite Vice on the other side, is quite without Reason. F^ (as Andronicus
notes from Aristotle) it is scarce within Reach of Human Nature to be Insersible
to such a Pitch: Lib. 3. Cap. 12.
And if any Man were so, this would look much more like a Disease of the Body,
than a Vice of the Soul.

BUT should it happen, that the Power of the Soul could be so far extended, as
to be able to weigh down, and even extinguish the sense of every Corporeal Pain
and Pleasure; this certainly were so far from being a Defect in the Soul, that
it would rather amount to a wonderful Virtue and Perfection. And to abuse such
Perfection would argue either Insincerity, or Imprudence However, if any Man
will needs call it an Intemperate sort of Temperance, I will not much contend
in the Matter.

IV. As to Fortitude, it seems properly enough placed between Boldness and
Timerousness; Liberality between Niggardize and Pr^digality; Truth between
Arrogance and Dissimulation: Nor do we deny, but that somewhat like to this
Equality, may happen in some few other Virtues. But this we think worthy of
special Notice, That even from the Instances given, it is not very apparent that
Virtue, according to it is most Internal Essence, is a Mediocrity. We rather
suppose that according to the Definition given, it is some Intellectual Power
is the Cause of that Mediocrity, which we observe as well in our Actings as our
Sufferings. For in these Cases such Mediocrity appears: But as to Virtue her
self, she must not pretend to go farther than in what barely is Just.

V. NAY Virtue is rather an Extreme; And this not only as to it is Well-being
and Best Estate (which Aristotle himself consents to) but we call it an Extreme
even as to it is Essence and Definition. For how can Virtue, Ethic. Nicom. l. 2.
c. 6.
as to it is Essence, be a Mediocrity; when Mediocrity, as we said, is only what
we seek for, and adhere to, in those Objects about which Virtue is conversant;
namely, in those Actings and Sufferings which befall us? Wherefore since Virtue
is, according to it is own Nature, the best of Blessings that Mankind is capable
of, and the most excelling Power and Perfection of our Souls; it cannot be
better Defined than in styling it, The very Triumph and Inauguration of Human
Nature; or its Supreme Good. And it is no more than what is due to the Essence
of Virtue, that it should bear this high Pre-eminence: Wherefore it seems
defectively said of Aristotle, That Virtue was only an Extreme as to its
Well-being and Best Estate, but not according to its Essence. For even that
Best Estate must of necessity be Part of Virtues Essence, and both concur to
the Top and Complement of our Natures: Which is no more, than what the
Pythagoreans have every where observed.

VI. Ethic. Nicom. l. 2. c. 9.
WHEREFORE that Philosopher treads much more carefully, where he makes Virtue
to consist in Finding and Electing a Medium, than when he makes Virtue it self
that Medium or Mediocrity. For this is just as if one should call the
Instrument, that is framed to find out two Middle Lines which hold a continued
Proportion, to be the very Lines themselves: Or to say that a Pair of
Compasses, which find or make the Center of a Circle; are the very Middle or
Center it self.

VII. LASTLY, When his Followers declare Virtue to be this Medium, they
understand it in respect of two Things, which are Homogeneous or consonant to
such Medium. For so Aristotle does illustrate it by Examples of Arithmetical
Proportion, as well in Magnitude as Numbers: Although after all, he seems herein
rather to have found the Medium Rei, than the Medium quoad Nos; I mean that
which is rather true in Speculation than in Practice. But his Affecting to make
it Hemogeneous, is hereby manifest, That, while he calls Virtue a certain
Medium, he makes it to partake of either Extreme. Thus Andronicus (his
Paraphrast) calls Virtue, The Middle of the Two Extremes falling short on the
one side and exceeding on the other: Even as it appears in Fortitude, which to
a certain Degree may be termed Confidence.

BUT this can never hold: For while he this turns Confidence into Virtue (which
still is defined to be a Thing absolutely good) if we suppose that such his
Confidence were a Virtue to the Degree of three, it would follow, That such
Confidence would doubly excel, if raised to the degree of six. But by such
Logic, (...) would become better than Virtue; which must never be understood.

Wherefore we suppose, that Virtue is not the Medium it self, but rather the
Finder and the Chuser of such Medium. Nay, we affirm, that such Medium is not
singly discovered by the degrees of more or less, or of Excess or of Defect;
but is also determined by other prudential Circumstances, even as Aristotle
himself declares: namely, That the true Medium in Virtue, Ethic. Nicom. lib. 2.
c. 6.
and that which is its very best, must be ascertained with regard unto Time,
and to Occasions, and to the Persons with whom, or for whose sake we act, and
to the manner of acting. So by this it is plain, that to pursue all Cases under
the notion and fancy of a Mediocrity, were merely superstitious, if not
altogether vain.

VIII. I think it, for my part, sufficient, if what Virtue seeks out and
electeth, be that which is Rectum or Right. It Is very true, that this Right it
self seems also to be a certain middle thing; just as a Line, which is drawn
upon another straight Line at Right Angles, is equally the Medium of all
others, that can be drawn from the same Point, and that unequally vary from
such Line. Wherefore the Pythagoreans were wont to say, Magn. Moral. l. 1. cap.
25. Nicom. l. 2. c. 5.
that Good was Uniform, and Evil Multiform. And Andronicus is positive, That
this Right is something, which is of a Simple and Uniform Nature.

IX. LET us also add, that this Rect^ (which Virtue pursues in all things) is
termed Equal, Andronicus, l. 5. c. 4.
and a thing which holds Congr^ and Proportion. For things congruous are a^
equal, as in Geometry is manifest. So that all these things point at a
Mediocrity: For what i^ greater or less than another, is not congruous. And
therefore that ought to be the Medium, which is neither more or less; and which
i^ also called Equality.

Upon the whole Matter, let us agree how fa^ Virtue consists in a Mediocrity or
Medium. It Is not that she her self is that Medium; but that our Souls do, by
her Aid, elect that which i^ congruous, or in the Middle: For thus only can
that Sentence be true and solid.

X. BUT now the Difficulty remaining will be, to establish something, unto
which this Rectitude and Congruity (which Virtue every where seeks) is to
conform. Ethic. Nicom. l. 6. c. 1.
Aristotle says, That what is congruous to Right Reason is right. And again,
That the Medium, in every thing, is what Right Reason declares to be such. And
so in his Definition of Virtue, Ethic. Nicom. l. 2. c. 6.
That it is bounded with Reason: And he adds also, Even as a prudent Man shall
determine thereof. As if by those Words he would stop any farther Inquiry, what
kind of thing this Right Reason was, by which that which is right and congruous
should be tried.

Now, Ethic. Nicom. l. 6. c. 5.
according to Aristotle, Right Reason is that which is conformable to Prudence.
But then he himself elsewhere defines Prudence, To be a true Habit, exerting it
self in what happens to a Man good or bad, according to Reason. But surely this
sounds very odd, and is no better than a trifling Circle, to define Right
Reason by Prudence, and Prudence again by Right Reason.

XI. HOWEVER, if there be but Recourse had to that Definition of Prudence,
which we before have delivered, the point will be fully resolved: For it will
from thence appear that whoever is prudent is also of a Mind so cleans'd and
defecated, that the Light of Truth is not eclipsed in him, either by Passions,
or any corporeal Impediments. And, for this Cause, let no Man wonder, if Right
Reason be styled, That which is according to Prudence: For if the prudent Man,
as to Life and good Manners, have it not, it can no where be found. Aristotle
(in his Ethics to Nicomachus) is of the same mind. For the good Man (says he)
judges all things aright; and Truth is visible unto him, wherever it be; and
good things appear both proper and pleasant in every shape. And it is very
possible that a good Man grows more excellent, if, while he finds Truth in
others, he has cause to think that he himself was the Rule and Measure thereof.
But as to Plebeians, they tumble into Error for Pleasure-sake, as counting that
real Good, which is really otherwise.

The same Author has other Passages to the like intent: For he makes
Temperance, the only true Guardian and Conservator of Prudence: And that the
sober Man is only wise, in all that concerns Probity of Life. He does not think
that the Motives of Pleasure, or of Pain, can influence or pervert our
Opinions, Eth. Nic. l. 6. c. 5.
as to the Doctrine of a Triangle, and it is having so many Angles as are equal
unto two right ones, or the like: But as to Manners, and the Conduct of our
Life, those Motives have, as he believes strange Influence. Nay, he supposes,
that whoever is led by his Passions, and the Sense only of Pleasure or of Pain,
is led as a blind Man that has lost his Eyes; and in whom the very Principles
for his Direction are extinguished.

XII. LET us therefore here applaud this wise Philosopher, for that Variety of
Truth and of Utility, which redounds from this Advice. For it is plain from
hence, that our Minds, being thus purged from Vanities and Passions, can, as in
an instant, discern not only all that is worthy and valuable in human Affairs,
but what is noxious or of no account. Next, we may gather from it that some
things are valuable and worthy, even in their own Nature: since if they were
not at all, L. 1. c. 6. 12.
and had no Being, they could never be seen. But since they are seen and beheld
by a clear and perspicacious Mind, it is of evidence they are such in their own
nature, as they appear to be.

Lastly, to waste time in disputing, whether any thing be (in its own Nature)
laudable, before we take pains to reform our Minds in the way prescribed, is
not only Labor lost, but a sort of Frenzy. And if we shall conclude that
nothing is of its own nature honest and laudable, when at the same time we live
in Vice and Wickedness, this is to be downright impudent; for we ought first to
try, and then to give our Opinion. We have touched this point before, and
therefore we need not dwell upon it any longer here.

XIII. THERE is now but one thing more, to clear before us all the Difficulty
that remains. For whereas it may sound as if we give up our prudent Man to
Inspirations and to Enthusiasm; while we contend he cannot in any other respect
be wise, than as his Mind is reformed and purged: and that it must also needs
hence ensue, that whatsoever a Man so purged, shall afterward imagine, must
therefore be according to Right Reason, or Right Reason it self, merely because
he thinks so: And that, in short, there must be no other Measure, or Principle;
but that his Imagination shall be as the Standard of Congruity and of Right.

Therefore it is necessary (as Andronicus Rhodius speaks) first to inquire and
find out, What is the Mode and Standard of this Right Reason? And what that
Principle in human Affairs that is just and congruous? For surely that alone is
Right Reason, which to such Standard, Mode, and Principle, can be applied; and
this must be some Primitive Good, which is not only most simple, but most
excellent, and a true Basis, Norma and Standard, for all the rest.

XIV. Now while I am in this high pursuit, I call to witness all that is holy,
L. 1. c. 2. 5, etc.
that in my Sense, there cannot, in the whole compass of Nature, be found a
greater Good than is that Love, which (to free it from all other Imputations)
we call Intellectual. For what can more fill, elevate, and irradiate the Soul
than this intellectual Love? L. 3. c. 8. 8.
Surely nothing is more exalted or Divine, nothing more ravishing, and
complacent, nothing more sharp in distinguishing what in every Case is decorous
and right, or more quick in executing whatsoever is laudable and just.

Since therefore this is the most high and the most simple good; it ought in
preference, to be the Rule and Standard of all the rest; and nothing should
pass, or be accounted, for Right Reason, which from this Divine Source and
Fountain did not take its Birth.

XV. AND what is all this Intellectual Love, we so describe, Vid. Margin. supra.
but an inward Life and Sense, that moves in the Boniform Faculty of the Soul?
It Is by this the Soul relisheth what is simply the best; thither it tends, and
in that alone it has its Joy and Triumph Hence we are instructed how to set God
before our Eyes; to love him above all; to adhere to him as the supremest Good;
to consider him as the Perfection of all Reason, of all Beauty, of all Love;
how all was made by his Power, and that all is upheld by his Providence. Hence
also is the Soul taught how to affect and admire the Creation; and all the
Parcels of it; as they share in that Divine Perfection and Beneficence, which
is dispersed through the whole Mass: So that if any of these Parcels appear
defective or discomposed, the Soul compassionates and brings help, strenuously
endeavoring, as it is able, to restore every thing to that state of Felicity,
which God and Nature intended for it. In short, it turns all its Faculties to
make good Men happy; and all its Care and Discipline is to make bad Men good.

XVI. THEREFORE I say, this most simple and Divine Sense and Feeling in the
Boniform Faculty of the Soul, is that Rule or Boundary, V. Marg. supr.
whereby Reason is examined and approves her self. For if she offers or affirms
any thing that is contrary to the Sense and Feeling, it is spurious and
dishonest; if congruous to it, it is Orthodox, fit, and just. So that we need
not invent any other external Idea of Good; or follow those, who vainly dream
of remoter Objects; when as this inward Life and Sense points singly at that
Idea, which is framed not from exterior things, but from the Relish and
intrinsic Feeling of the Boniform Faculty within. And although this Idea be but
single and alone, yet from thence arise all the Shapes and Modes of Virtue and
of Well-doing: And it is into this again, that all of them may, by a due and
unerring Analysis, be resolved. For as all Numbers arise from Unity, and by
Unites are all measured: so we affirm, that by this Intellectual Love, as from
a Principle the most pure and most abstracted of all others, all the Modes and
Kind of Justice, Fortitude, and even of Temperance it self, are to be measured:
for nothing is so detrimental to lessen and extinguish this Love as is the
Exercise and Infection of sensual Delights.

XVII. Now, in the last place, if any shall object that we have done amiss; and
that all this splendid Fabric of the Virtues is by us laid on a weak and
tottering Foundation: As namely in Passion, such as they may suppose this our
Love to be. Let them for their better Information, know, that this Love is not
more a Passion than is Intellection it self, which surely they cannot but
believe to be very valuable, and very Divine. It Is very true we may as to this
point (with Des Carts) allow, that all Intellection has so much of Passion, as
it is the Perception of something imprinted from without. However, as this
Perception, which is made by Intellection, is not from the Body, but rather
from the Soul, exerting and exciting her self into such Action: So neither is
this Love from the Body; but either from the Soul it self, or else from God
above, who calls and quickens the Soul to such a Divine Effort. And tho this
Perception may, if they please, be termed a sort of Passion, yet 'twill
derogate no more from the Dignity and Excellency of it, than from Intellection
it self: Which, because it is an Act of Perception, may on that account be also
termed a Passion.

XVIII. YET when all is said, perhaps this Love, which we insist upon, may not
so truly be termed a Passion, as acknowledged to be the Peace and Tranquillity
of the Mind: nay a state of such Serenity, as has no other Motions than those
of Benignity and Beneficence. So that this Love may rather be thought a firm
and unshaken Benignity, or Bounty of the Soul; such as has nothing more
perfect, or more approaching to the immortal Gods. I mean hereby that State of
the Blessed Spirits, unto which we ought all to aspire: and surely without this
Love, those very Spirits would not be as Gods, but as a Race of Devils. And
therefore we may conclude this Love, to be the most perfect, and the most
Angelick Thing of all others; far excelling even Intellection it self. And, in
truth, more aptly deserving those lofty Words, which Aristotle bestows upon the
Speculative Intellect; where he says, Ethic. Nicom. l. 10. c. 7.
That according to some Doctors we are not to converse with human things, although
we are Men, nor with things transitory, although we are mere Mortals; but, as much
as is possible, we should affect to live as do the immortal Gods: And this, by
performing every thing in such sort, as conforms to that Principle, which is
the most excellent thing within us. L. 10. c. 9.
Now Andronicus (his Paraphrast) declares, This most excellent thing within us,
to be the Intellect. But I beg leave to call it rather by the Name of
Intellectual Love.

Thus I end a Point, on which some may think I have insisted too long: But the
whole will show our Sense of Virtue; and of its kinds; and how it may be said
to consist in a Mediocrity; and what also is the Norma or Measure of such
Mediocrity. The next Step will be touching Good that is external.

CHAP. X. Of Good Things, which are External.
I. IT IS not only such Things as are placed without a Man, that we call
External Goods; but whatever is placed without in respect to Virtue: I mean
without which Virtue may consist in its Perfection, although such things may
indeed pass as Ornaments to her, and as necessary Complements unto Happiness.
And these are threefold; either in respect of the Soul, of the Body, or of
both. We will touch upon some particulars herein; and see how far they help, or
how short they fall, as to the completing of Happiness.

II. THINGS which relate to the Soul, are the Dexterity or Subtilty of the Wit,
a vast and faithful Memory: Also Science, Art, and Sapience.

To the Body, Strength, Agility, Comeliness, and Health.

To both these, as they constitute Man, Wealth, Liberty, Nobility, Authority:
And lastly the Friendship and Favor of many.

Of all these we may say in short, that they are Good, and more to be desired
than the things that are contrary to them: And yet that several of them are of
such slender Account, that their Absence does no more obstruct the Perfection
and Integrity of Happiness, than Mountains and Valleys do spoil the Roundness
of the Earth, whose Magnitude makes those small Inequalities of no
consideration. Scarce do those things add unto Happiness while present, or
retrench from it when absent; inasmuch as they hold no Proportion with complete
and perfect Virtue.

III. I would fain know what great matter is gotten by Subtilty of Wit; if a
Man be otherwise prudent, if his Mind be firm and unshaken, if he have Love
toward his Neighbor, and Good Will for Mankind?

I find Antoninus the Emperor, when he blamed his Parts for want of sufficient
Activity, could yet console himself with this Reflection, L. 7. 67.
That a happy Life was made up of very few things; and that, although a Man were
neither Logician nor Philosopher, he might yet be generous, modest, a Lover of
his Country, and obedient to God. On the other hand, to hear one lament his
Unhappiness, for want of such high Subtilty, or Dexterity of Wit; is little
other, than if a Man should complain he was not able to walk, because not able,
as some Juglers to dance upon a Rope.

IV. As to a strong and retentive Memory, which holds all fast, how many an
honest Man is there that has it not? For, as Antoninus said before, so
Aristotle also says, That those Noble and Divine Things, wherein Happiness did
consist, were very few. Nay rather that it was but one certain thing, by which
the Discrimination was made of things honest or vile, even as all Variety of
Colors are judged of by the Eye. And hereto may refer that of Plato, That Truth
was contained in a very narrow space. For the good and perfect Man is not so
much actuated by a List of Precepts gotten without Book, as by living inwardly,
and printing in his Mind a single and sincere Sense of Things. From this alone,
he will be able to know whatever Duty lies incumbent on him; just as, by one
Candle, a Man may see all the variety of Objects before him: And as all Colors
of the Rainbow do arise from the Sun, so indeed the Distinction of all Duties
have but the same single Source.

But for exterior things, and such as are not reducible into this Diviner
Sense: Let it suffice, if your Memory be as that of an old Man, who (as they
say) does not easily forget whatever he takes to heart, and lets nothing go
that may much afflict him if it be lost.

V. As to Science, Art, and Sapience; we do not conceive they are so very
essential unto Happiness. For tho Aristotle says, Andronicus, l. 6. c. 8.
That Science is about necessary Matters, and such as are not subject to
Alteration; Yet this our Happiness does not consist in those immutable Things,
but in the single Constancy of Mind, and in a steady Resolution to prosecute,
in all our Actions, that which is simply and absolutely the best. And
therefore, in that admirable Table of Cebes, they who thus pursue Virtue, are
admitted within the second Pale; while others have no admission at all into the
Palace of Safety, neither the Men of Logic, nor of Figures, nor of Geometry,
nor Astrologers, Poets, Orators, or Musicians: But all alike, even as infamous
or useless Fiddlers, are excluded and shut without.

VI. THAT Happiness, which is due to human Nature, is a plainer Thing, and a
more common Good, than to be calculated only for Philosophers and Artists.
Wherefore as Science is not to be counted a part of Happiness, so neither is
that Art, Ethic. Eudem. l. 5. c. 4.
which Aristotle defines to be, A rational fabricating Habit. And by which he
shows, it belongs unto Artists or Artificers.

VII. MUCH less ought Sapience to pass for such an Essential; seeing Her
Objects are Things singular, stupendous, difficult, and even Magical: Such as
Anaxagoras and Thales of old are said to have studied, and which Aristotle
upbraids a^ unprofitable, and little availing to the Happiness of human Life.
But as to Magical Things here spoken of, his Meaning appears by his defining in
that place, Ethic. Nicom. l. 6. c. 7.
Sapience to be the Skill and Understanding of those Things which in Nature
have the chiefest Excellence. And a while after, That there were other things,
which by Nature were far Diviner than Men; as those illustrious and conspicuous
Objects, whereof the World was framed. It Is these therefore are those Magical
Matters, that are called Objects of Sapience, and which are reputed more Divine
and Excellent than Man. But yet for any Science herein, it is so far from being
necessary to Happiness, that Aristotle will scarce allow it to be useful.

VIII. NOW although perfect Happiness, which is that Pleasure that arises from a
Sense of Virtue, and a Conscience of Well-doing, may want Science, Art, and
Sapience; yet we must also affirm, Lib. 6. c. 7.
that such Intelligence as, by Andronicus, is defined, To be the Knowledge of
Principles, can by no means be separate from Happiness. For it is in truth
impossible that a Mind, which is purified and influenced by true Prudence, can
be so blunt or stupify'd, as to admit any Doubt concerning the Principles of
Science.

IX. FOR what concerns Bodily Endowments, we may venture to say that Strength,
and Agility, are more the Happiness of the Bull, and of the Squirrel, than of a
Man. Nay a brawny and robust Habit is so far from adapting Men to Virtue, that
the Sense of refined Things is often dulled and suffocated thereby. And it
would be as unreasonable to expect that all good Men should be Robust and Agil,
as to compel them all to be Racers, or good at Fisty-Cuffs.

X. As to Beauty or Comeliness, the plain Truth is, it has a Charm; for it draws
Favor, and strangely turns the Minds of the Beholders: and even Virtue it self
is indebted to the Ornaments it bestows, Gratior est pulchro veniens de corpore
Virtus.
Beauty, when with Virtue joined,
Gives a luster to the Mind.
Yet after all, it is but a poor Ingredient of solid Happiness. It seems rather
to be another good than our own. If we had not a Looking-Glass, we could know
nothing of it. Whereas internal Beauty needs no such help, the Mind is
satisfied of it self, and it is a continual Feast.

XI. HEALTH, I confess, is one of the chiefest Blessings, and it is certainly
necessary to complete Happiness; at least such a Proportion thereof, as may
exempt the Body from Torture, and the Mind from Rage and Distraction. For
whatsoever shall either extinguish the Operations of the Mind, or compel them
to Evil, and there detain them, must either destroy Happiness, or make it very
imperfect.

XII. AMONG the good Things of Fortune, whether Liberty or Wealth be best, has
been a Doubt. I for my part have still preferred the first; especially since
Wealth implies somewhat of abounding, with which a good Man may well dispense.
Wherefore the Loss of Wealth would in no degree afflict me like that of
Liberty, so as a Competency were but left for Life. And I should think it more
Gentle, as well as more Tolerable, to be deprived of those things which are
superfluous to Happiness, than to be trusted with too much. For if the top of
human Felicity consists in Virtue, it is much if it be not damnified by
Temptations which Plenty draws us into.

In the Cases even of Want and Servitude, they seem nothing dreadful; if they
are but so qualified, as not to hinder the Mind in the Exercise of Virtue, nor
to extinguish the Sense of that Pleasure, L. 2. c. 10. 19.
which a pious Soul takes in submitting to God. For to him, who gives up his
Will and Affections to a Conformity with the Divine Providence, there are
certain Raptures of Joy, which a Sense of that Obedience, and that Resignation
affords him.

XIII. As for Nobility, that this is not needful for Happiness seems herein
evident, that it is but a Shadow of Ancestors Virtue, which is cast upon
Posterity. And if this Shadow be any Thing; how great then is Virtue it self,
which can so gild, and for Ages to come so glorify, a Race of Men by her mere
Reflection? Surely where Virtue her self is present (whose Rays could do so
much) what Blessings will not this great Parent of solid happiness bestow? He
that has Virtue, will stand in want of Nobility no more, than does the Sun of
that Light, which is borrowed from him, I mean, the Light of the Moon.

Wherefore bare Nobility makes but little toward Happiness: But if the Virtue
also of Ancestors shall descend upon their Posterity, then indeed it has equal,
if not a greater Force toward Human Felicity, than if Virtue were destitute of
that Help.

XIV. BUT if Nobility be not necessary to a happy Life, much less is Empire and
Authority. For no Man will hold, that Princes only and Magistrates are happy;
since the Number of them is so few, in respect of other Mortals: since also
they are vexed with Cares, and encompassed about with Dangers.

XV. LASTLY, As to Friendship, it must be confessed, that Favor, and the good
Will of Men, adds a wonderful Complacency to Life, as well as Security. And
indeed Virtue can hardly stand without it; especially if such Friendship be
attended with perfect Sincerity, and with a certain sweetness of Behavior and
Benignity of Mind. Besides all Men of Probity are in a sort confederated; and
being by Virtue, as by a Mark of Distinction put constantly in mind of the
Relation and Consanguinity which ties them together, they look upon themselves
as obliged, to cherish and assist each other.

But if it be a Man's hard Hap, to live and converse only among the wicked, we
must then depend upon the Protection of the Laws. For, as Aristotle rightly
takes notice, Lib. 1. c. 7.
the Rules of Policy and the Doctrines of Morality, do (...) aim at the same
thing. And Andronicus handsomely expounds it, saying, That the same Advantage is
sought for, as well from every single Man, as from the City or Government. So
that a good Man will want but little as to solid Felicity, if he may get what
belongs to him even by Natural Right. Nor does that celebrated Example of Damon
and Pythias seem more to refer to Friendship, than it does to Justice and
Equity.

Wherefore Virtue, and especially among good Men, or in a good Government,
seems not to want, or stand in need of more Favor, than she is able to prevail
for, upon her own Account.

XVI. HOWEVER, that I may disguise Nothing, it is manifest, that Iniquity is
sometimes interwoven in the very Texture of the Laws, and in those more
especially that have regard unto Religion. And it often happens that for the
Cause of Truth and Virtue, we fall into the Displeasure and Hatred of Men: For
vicious Minds can no better endure the Trials of Virtue and of Truth, than
vitiated Eyes can endure the Sun. Of this poor Socrates found sad effects; and
so have innumerable others, as well Christians as Jews. In this Case, it is
certainly more advisable to converse but with a few, and those of the most
approved Integrity. But if there be no faithful Companions of this sort, there
is no other Remedy left, but to withdraw, and embrace Solitude: Which however,
Politicorum, l. 1. c. 2.
(in Aristotle's Opinion) no Man can be contented with, but either he becomes a
God or a Beast. Yet, in my Sentiment, a good Man, even in this State, ceases
not to be joyful, and happy: for tho he be not a God, yet he bears about him
somewhat that is Divine; And, while he can feel and contemplate the Joys
thereof, he can want nothing that is essential to true Happiness.

XVII. BUT if it shall happen that Men will still be malevolent, and by their
ill Nature give Disturbance even to this Peace and Retirement: Here, I confess,
there wants not only the Friendship of Equals, but rather Patronage from the
powerful, which might avert this Malice, and retort the envenomed Darts. Yet if
none of these may be had; let the good Man, filled with the Conscience and
Sense of God, betake himself to the Armor of Patience, Fortitude, and
Magnanimity. Let him revolve on that of Epictetus, Enchiridion. c. 75.
Now begins the Fight, and the Olympicks are now at hand: And let him suffer
every Fortune, and Life it self to be ravished from him, rather than not
persist and overcome.

XVIII. NOW if any Man shall here ask, In what condition is our good Man left,
when fallen from all Felicity, stripped of Friends, and destitute of all
Protection? Let him remember that this Question has not a bare reference to
want of Friends, but involves all Calamities, and the highest Desolation that
Mortals are subjected to. In this Case we may consider what Aristotle has said,
in the Words of his Interpreter Rhodius, L. 1. c. 17.
It Is true, Misfortunes afflict the just Man, and force him to stagger, and
disable him in many of his good Works. However as he bears all with equal
Temper, not stupify'd or insensible, but, with a magnanimous Soul; the very
Splendour of Virtue shines out in the midst of all his Suffering. For since
Happiness has its being in the Operations of Virtue, and that such Operations
do govern the Life of him that is happy; it is impossible that any happy Man can
be made miserable, because he will never engage in what is odious and vile. He
also adds, That the happy Man looks not that all things should flow in
according to his Wish, but he makes the best of his present Fortune. And hence
it is that he can never be made miserable, tho he fall into the greatest
Miseries: For it can only be said of him in respect of Fortune, he will not be
basely happy. But the Words of Aristotle himself are a little more dejected,
Ethic. Nicom. l. 1. c. 10.
where he says, That a Man cannot be called happy, if he falls into the
Calamities of King Priamus. And yet, even in this Estate, he will not allow him
to be called miserable.

XIX. BUT although this more moderate Saying of Aristotle may have place in such
Calamities as do accidentally befall us; yet where we suffer for Virtue's sake,
and by the Iniquity of the wicked, the Reason is far different. For if Man, in
his greatest Sufferings, do not abandon God and Virtue, neither shall he be
abandoned by them. L. 2. c. 10. 12.
The Sharpness of such a Conflict is so far from impairing his Happiness, L. 3.
c. 10. 15.
that it seems rather to augment and carry it higher: For the Operations of
Virtue, in which the very Life of Happiness does consist, are propagated and
exalted by such Conflict. It Is not to be doubted, but where Patience is so
invincible, the Mind is attended and supported by some Motions, which are not
only generous, but plainly Divine. And let us not think of Socrates, that it
was for vain Ostentation, but from his Experience of the World (from clear
Divination, and a solid Fortitude of the Mind) that he pronounced those
undaunted Words in Epictatus; Enchiridion. c. 79.
If the immortal Gods think fit to have it so, even so let it be. And tho my
Accusers, Anytus and Melitus, can deprive me of life, yet can they do me no
hurt.

And this in brief as to External Good.

THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Free Will.
I. WE have hitherto treated about the way to know Happiness, or rather Virtue;
which is the principal part of Happiness, if not its full Perfection: The next
thing is about the way to attain it. And in this part we shall be the rather
brief, since what is hitherto delivered goes far to that End: And we are not
willing to have that swelled which we only call an Epitome. So then we shall
here expose what may look like Heads of Meditation in the Search of Virtue,
rather than any extended Treatise of it.

II. BUT before we can well enter into this Province, there is a thing called
Free Will, of which it is needful previously to speak: since till this be
cleared and asserted, all Exhortation to Virtue seems but in vain.

Aristotle has sometimes proposed a Famous Question, Ethic. Nicom. l. 10. c.
10. Eudem. l. 7. c. 14.
(but Plato in his Menon handles it more largely) and it has affinity with
this our Subject of Free Will; as namely, Whether V^tue gets into Men by
Custom, or by Nature, (...) by some Divine Fate (which is the same as Good
Fortune?) There are some Men extremely scandalized at the Affirmative Part of
this Question; as thinking it a derogation from Humane Nature, to make Men at
this rate necessarily Good, and to deprive them of all Free Will. For they judge
a Thing voluntarily done, to be of far different Merit from what happens by
Compulsion: Which yet (I confess) sounds to me; as if God, who is Good, should
be the less Adorable, because he cannot be Naught. L. 1. c. 3.. 7.
For I will presume that whoever is Good, either by Nature or the Divine Fate,
is also endowed with so true and efficacious a Sense of Honesty, that he can no
more go against this Sense, than that a sober Man should stab himself with a
Dagger.

III. WERE there but a Race of such Men; they were of all others the most
fitted for Heroes; and as deriving Virtue from the Gods: It Is of such that
Homer speaks, -- Nec eum esse putares
Mortali Genitore satum, at Genus esse Deorum.
You Would think a Man of such Heroic frame
Not made below; but that from Heaven he came.


Aristotle quotes this very Verse in his Description of Her^ical Virtue; Ethic.
Nicom. l. 7. c. 1.
and thinks such Virtaid more given from Above, than the product of Human
Industry. My Opinion is, That if all such Force or Power from above were
United; and either by Impression or Inspiration fixed in the Mind at once; yet
it might properly be called Virtue. For, according to our Definition, Virtue is
a Pow^ or Energy, L. 1. c. 3.. 1.
not a Habit. And tho Habit be a sort of Power, asising from Exercise and
Custom; yet this very Way and Circumstance of acquiring Virtue, is nothing
material, as to the true Nature of it. For if this Power or Energy be got
within us, and operates in our Souls as by a Native Spring or Elasticity, what
matter is it, whether it came by repeated Actions, or by Inspiration?

IV. BUT forasmuch as the Blessings of this Kind come rarely (if at all) to the
Lot of any; we need not over labor the difficulty of this Point. We need not
study Admonitions for such sorts of Men, who by Nature or some Divine Fate, are
already so well and so necessarily inclined: but rather press and convince the
necessity of Virtue unto other Mortals; who, while they may exercise the
Liberty of their Wills to either side, should be urged and excited by all that
can be said, to incline their WINS to that side, where Right Reason, and a
Sense of their Duty, calls them.

V. THEY must, above all things, be told of that Excellent, and almost Divine
Pre^inence which they enjoy. For while all other Creatures have their Senses
tied down to the service of the Body, or some particular Delights; they can
mount alo^t, and are enabled by a Liberty in their Wills, to shake off, (...)
gradually destroy those ill Desires, with which they are beset; and, by the
help of Heaven to assert that Liberty, which is most suitable to a Creature
made by God's Image, and a partaker of Divine Sense.

VI. AND as this is a most true Persuasion, and has wonderful Power among Men,
to draw them to Virtue, and also to corroborats their, Minds against the
Allurements or Assaults of Vice; Let those Men be ashamed who have so tampered
with Mankind to persuade the contrary. This (in truth) has been vigo^usly and
studiously attempted by Mr. Hebb^, in his Book, Of Liberty and Necessity; But
we think his principal Arguments are all said low, Lib. 2. Cap. 3.
in our Treatise of the Soul's Immortality, unto which we therefore refer.

VII. IN the mean time; I cannot here for^. That where, among other Motives, he
con^nds to have Man's Will necessarily deter^ to any profligate Action; He
owns, that (...) his Opinion of Necessity takes place a^ng the rest. But
certainly, if that false Opinion have such Force, L. 3. c. 1.. 25.
as to what is Vicious and Bad; it follows, That the true Opinion, ^thing
Liberty to fly from Evil, deserves equal Force at least, as to Virtue and good
Life: And therefore, that a Persuasion, so efficaciously contributing to our
Advantage, should be adhered unto, and strongly contended for by us.

VIII. BUT to make the truth of this Opinion more manifest; Let us take Notice
what this Liberum Arbitrium or Free Will is; and then Demonstrate that there is
really such a Principle within us. First, Liberty of the Will, which the Greeks
call Autexousion, seems almost to imply, The having a Power to Act (...) not
Act within our selves. Now in that Free Will is a Principle of Acting within
one's self, it so far agrees with what the Greeks call Hecousion, which is the
same as Spontaneous: And which (as Andronicus defines it) is that, Whose
Principle of Acting is wholly in the Age^. Lib. 3. Cap. 1.
Yet what he straight subjoins in the same Chapter, saying, That in what a Man
Acts, as moved thereunto by himself, he is Lord and Master of Doing it, or
letting it alone. This I think is not altogether so exact.

For a Man may Act out of his own mere Motion; that is to say, from such inbred
Principles of Virtue, and by so strong and efficacious a sense of Honesty, as
not to be able to act otherwise, or to draw his Will to any different Thing.
For instance, an Honest Man has Power indeed, by his Wit and bodily Force,
treacherously to destroy an Innocent Man, and even one that has well deserved
of him. But can that Honest Man do this Thing? No, God forbid! He dare not let
himself do it. For that vigorous and ^ely sense of what is Honest, and with
which his Mind is tinctured and possessed, can by no means permit him to
execute so horrid a Villainy. Now as such a Person, tho never so much solicited
by Promises and Rewards, starts back, and (in the sense of Antonine) stops all
his Faculties of Motion, and does not resign himself to so base a Fact; this
doubtless is entirely from himself, and none else is the Cause, why that
Advantage is not taken. However, I say, he is not, in this Case, so much Master
of his Forbearance, as that it is in his power not to forbear. I grant (indeed)
that if he would, he were able to commit so wicked a Thing; but that he is able
to Will it, or bring his Will unto it, is what I utterly deny.

IX. WE say therefore there is some Difference between having Free Will, and
being a Voluntary or Spontaneous Agent. The former is more restrained and
particular, and obtains in fewer Cases; the latter is more large and general.
When we say that a Man has liberum Arbitrium or Free Will, we add a particular
Difference to the general Notion of Voluntariness, that is to say, We suppose
he is such a voluntary Agent, as can Act and not Act as he pleases: Whereas to
the being a voluntary Agent, simply or generally speaking, there is no such
Difference required. It is sufficient to denominate any Agent to be such,
Andronicus, Lib. 3. Cap. 2.
whose Principle of Action is in himself, and who understands and takes
cognizance of his own Actions and the Circumstances that relate to them: The,
in the mean time, it may not be in his Power, every time he Acts, to Act
otherwise than he does.

This now being the Notion of Spontaneous or Voluntary; we see plainly what is
the Opposite to it; namely, every thing that proceeds either from Ignorance, or
Outward Force. Whatever Action is done from either of these Principles, must
needs be inspontaneous and involuntary. For in the one Case (that of Force) the
Agent does not act from his own Principles, but is compelled from without: In
the other Case (that of Ignorance) tho he act from his own Principle, yet he
has no Notice of the Moral Circumstances of the Action, which if he had known,
he would not have done that Action.

X. BUT now as to Liberum Arbitrium, or Freedom of the Will; what we call by
that Name is only that sort of Spontaneity or Voluntariness in us; which is so
free and undetermined, that it is in our Power, to Will or Act this way or the
other way, as we please. This (I say) is properly Free Will; and it supposes a
free Election or Choice in our selves: And accordingly A^dronicus (from
Aristotle) defines it to be, Lib. 3. Cap. 4.
A deliberate Wisssing or Appetition of those Things, which are within our
Power. For those things (says he) are the subjects of Deliberation, whereof
every one is Master to do them, or to leave them undone: And these are those
very Things, which he declares to be within our Power.

Now this Power of not Acting, when it regards those things which are Base and
Dishonest, is a great Perfection; But when it has respect to things that are
Noble and Honest, it is a great Imperfection: For it is in the very next Degree
to Acting dishonestly, to be able to incline the Will toward an Action that is
vile.

However, to know we are able, and possessed with a Power to abstain from a
vile Thing (tho possibly we do not abstain) this is a sort of Perfective State,
and of high Consequence for a Man to discover in himself whether he have it or
no.

Now that such a real Power is planted in Man, of being able to abstain from
doing ill, tho he fails at some times to exert that Power, is very plain from
the Instances that follow.

XI. WE need not bring hereunto any other Help, than what was noted before, in
the Chapter about the Interpretation of the Passions. For as we feel the Checks
of Conscience after doing some things which were doubtingly Acted, and without
mature Deliberation: Even from hence it is manifest, that we sometimes. Act so,
as that to have Willed and Acted otherwise, was in our Power. And this Power,
of abstaining from Ill, is that very Thing, which is truly called Free Will.

XII. THE Reason also of Repentance, is close of Relation hereunto. For when we
are captivated by some Appetite, and commit what we know, and are very
sensible, is against the Dictates of Honesty; it is of these things we are
afterward said to Repent. It Is not said, We lament such things as Misfortunes;
which they ought in reason to pass for, if either by Fate, or a necessary Chain
of Causes, we were always destined or irresistibly determined to them, and that
it had never been within our Power or Capacity to have avoided them. Lib. 2.
Cap. 3.
For no Man Repents himself of his Misfortunes, but of his Sins; because these
are committed by his own Crime, when he might have abstained, and done
otherwise. But to Repent of Sins, which were never in our Power to withstand;
is as if a Man should greatly lament his Improbity and Malice, or undertake
some sharp Penance, L. 2. c. 1.. 15.
for not having been Created an Angel, or else born a Prince. As to the like
Effect we have hinted before.

XIII. BUT, in the last place, To what purpose do we reprehend some Men for
what they act, pardon others, and have pity on the rest; if Mankind be
destitute of Free Will; If it be not given him, to turn away from what is Vile,
and to embrace what is Laudable and Just: For we might, in point of Justice,
insist upon it, that if Men are tied to Sin, and do it by Necessity, and cannot
otherwise act; there is both Pardon and Commiseration due unto them: Also by
how much a Man's Sins were crying and flagit^ous, by so much would they become
the more worthy of such Pardon and Moral Pity. But since these things are
repugnant to common Sense, and the inbred Characters of our Mind; it follows of
Necessity, that we must acknowledge some Actions, at least, of Man to be Free:
that is to say, that they spring from such a Principle, as we have out of
Aristotle described, and which we call Free Will. And we hope no Man will doubt
hereof, when we shall have satisfied the Two Principal Objections, wherewith
the Champions of the other side do so loudly, and with such Clamours contend.

CHAP. II. Two Principal Objections against Free Will are Proposed and Answered.
I. THE first Objection arises from God's Fore-knowledg; which (they say) must
take away all Contingency, and, L. 1. c. 11.. 5.
in Consesequence, the Liberty of Man's Will.

The second is taken from the Nature of Good, although but Apparent: For as often
or as long as any thing seems Good or Excellent to any one in the Circumstances
he then is in, his Will is necessarily compelled to embrace it, because there
is no Motive either to diver^ him, or suspend his Assent. For since the Will of
Man is so framed, as to bend this Way or that, according to the Weight and
Importance of the Object; it seems impossible it should not bend, where most
Reason compels, and when nothing is in the other Scale to counterpoise it: Nay,
if something should be in the other Scale, yet still that Good which is most
Apparent will certainly outweigh. For there is no Reason to be rendered, why a
Man should be prevailed on by a lesser Good, more than by no Good at all: Since
if, in the Scale of Reason, that which is Less should weigh down that which is
Greater, then a Less than that, till it came to Nothing, would preponderate;
and also our Reason and Election would thus be moved by Nothing: Both which are
absurd to Believe.

Wherefore the Will evermore inclines to that Good which is most apparent; and
upon that account it is necessarily determined to One Thing: Whence it comes to
pass, that we have no such thing as Free Will in us, and that we could never
have acted otherwise than as we have already done.

II. AS to the first of these Objections, the Answer is not hard. It Is true, we
cannot otherwise think of God's Fore knowledge, but to be every way clear and
perfect, and without possibility of Error, as to those Objects about which he
judges or does pronounce. And firely he does always judge and determine of
things according as they are; that i^ to say, of ^contingent thing, that it is
contingent; and of a necessary thing that it is necessary. Whence is comes to
pass, that those things, which are comingent and proceed from a Free Principle
of Acting, they are allowed to be such by God's Consent. For we ought not to
confine God's Omniscience within narrower Bounds ^n we do his Omnipotence,
which all Men acknowledge to be able to do whatever does not imply a
Contradiction.

And therefore, to disparch this Difficulty in afew words: We say that the
Fore-knowledg of contingent Effects, which proceed from a free Principle of
Acting, does either imply a Contradiction, or it does not. If it does imply a
Contradiction, then such Effects are not the Objects of God's Omniscience, nor
determined by it, or rightly supposed to be determined at all. But if it do not
imply a Contradiction, then we actually confess, that Divine Prescience and
Man's Free Will, are not inconsistent, but that both of them may s^ly stand
with each other. Therefore by neither way, can any sound or convincing Argument
be drawn from God's Fore-knowledg against the Liberty of Man's Will.

III. AS to the other Difficulty, the whole Sense thereof falls within this
Proverbial Saying, Nemo est lubens Malus, aut Beatus invitas; that is, Ethic.
Nicom. l. 3. c. 5.
No Man is willingly Wicked, or Happy against his Will: Or else into that
saying of Socrates, Omnis Improbus ignorant, That no Man was Wicked, but through
Ignorance. Which sounds as if the Will of Man wanted nothing, but the Knowledge
of what was Good and Virtuous, to force him to embrace it: Nay, that the Will
was so framed, as not to be able to resist that Good, which it did but once
understand. Now if this were true, there would not need so much Exhortation to
the love of Virtue, as to the Study of Wisdom; Nor would the Liberty of Man's
Will consist so much in Pre-election, as in Counsels and Deliberations: and
these to be still so Governed, as that nothing should prove repugnant to some
Excellent End.

IV. WHEREFORE inasmuch as we find that Idea of the chief End, which is termed
Beatitude or Happiness, to be but confusedly apprehended by us; it is every
Man's Duty with principal Care to find out, in what this chief Happiness does
consist, and how we may attain it: Yet whether all this be placed within every
Man's Reach, is a very hard thing to determine.

We see, the Bulk of Mankind are like those; who, falling sick of a Disease and
not knowing how to cure themselves, ought to be visited by others that are in
Health, and from them take Remedies and Advice. So the Generality, that see
little of themselves, while they are dazzled by false Lights and the bare
Apparitions of Good, can never discover, What is the Ultimate Good, and what
the most Excellent Object of Human Life. For (as Aristotle observed) all men
seek after Apparent Good; Ethic. Nicom. l. 3. c. 5.
nor are they Masters of their own ^agination; but every Man frames a different
Good to himself, according to his Complexion.

V. IT IS in the Third Book of his Ethics, that the Philosopher proposes this
Question; and yet he does not otherwise clear it, than by granting, That it was
some time or other in the Power of those, who now are Blinded, to have beheld
what was truly Good; and that Men are not less willingly Bad than Good: But
this does not directly satisfy the Objection. Also he is pleased to expose it
with more Words and Ornaments than is usual with him, as in manner following,
That no Man is to himself the Cause of doing Ill, but that such Things are done
by Ignorance of the End, and as Hoping he shall thereby attain what a Best for
him. That the Desire of the End falls not within our Choice: but that it
imports every Man to be so born, as Naturally to See and Discern that what he
chooses is truly Good: And he, who has this Felicity by Birth, is as it were
Inspired, and much obliged to Nature. For he shall possess that High and
Excellent Good, which could never have been had either by Purchase, or by
Instruction, had it not come by Birthright. And thus to be born, and under so
benign a Planet, is the true Perfection of Ingenuity.

VI. SINCE therefore this Natural Talent, or inherent Aptitude, which is so
capable ^f Virtue and the Sense of all Good Things, is antecedent to all our
Industry (as being the Gift of Nature, and not the Reward of our Care and
Diligence) if a Man be destitue hereof, it is manifest that the Duties and
Performances, required by Virtue, are not in his Power; Neither can the
soundest Admonttions find Effect or Obedience with him, (...) less he be
awak'ned by Stripes and Force, or unless he be reformed by something of Miracle
from Above. But whether any are so utterly deprived of this Natural Aptitude,
or by what Fate it befalls them, if they are so; is to me so hard and perplexing
a Question, that I had rather wholly decline it, than invol^e my self within
such Mysteries of Providence.

VII. HOWEVER, as to those, who are so endowed as to have some Native Foretast
of this high and Excellent Good; it seems to be placed within their Power,
either to acquire to themselves a clearer and more extended Knowledge therein,
or else to let that by degrees extinguish which already they have. Into which
Error, if they shall unhappily run; it is with the same reason they may be said
to be Willingly wicked, as of the Intemperate man, that he throws himself
Wilfully into a Distemper. L. 3. c. 6.
And of whom Andronicus speaks in this sort, Before the Man fell sick, it was
in his own Power to have preserved his Health: But when Health is lost by
Incontinence and De^h, it is not in his Power to Recover it. So (...) Man may
throw a Stone to the Bottom of the (...), but being cast thither he cannot
recover it: ^ever the Stone was willingly cast by him, (...) was in his Power,
either to Cast, or to have ^th-held it.

VIII. AS for those Men, who throw off all Distinction of Things Honest and
Vile; who have no other Sense than of the Animal life; who consider only for
themselves, be it ^ght or Wrong; who think that Good is but of one Sort, and
this only referable to Animal Content (or if, perchance, they think Good to be
various, yet still they six and appropriate all to themselves;) In such Men as
these, I (...) confess, their Will is perpetually determined to what is the
most apparent Good. They enjoy no more Liberty than Brutes, whose Appetite is
necessarily tied down to the greater Good: For they have but one single
Principle of Acting, and it is but one (...) of Object that is before their
Senses. And (...) this single Case it is confessed, that the Second Objection
has its Force.

IX. BUT when we consider, how there is a double Principle in the greatest Part
of Mankind; the one Divine, and the other ^mal. L. 1. c. 6.. 4.
How that the Voice and Dictate (...) the Divine Principle, is ever for that
which is simply and absolutely the Best; and Virtue ^pposeth, in every of our
Thoughts or Acti^s, that which is most conforming to the Eternal and immutable
Law of Reason: Which (in Tully's Opinion before mentioned) is the common
Standard both to God and to our selves. When also, on the other side, we
consider that the Animal Principle dictates nothing to Man, but what to himself
is either good, pleasing, or advantageous; that is, what may be grateful to
himself alone, tho it never so much violate that Law, or Universal Reason of
things, before spoken of. L. 1. c. 6.. 4.
I say, that from the Conflict and Opposition of these two Principles, we have
a clear Prospect, what is the Condition, and what the Nature, of that Free Will
whereof we treat.

X. THIS is a thing, which all Men have experience of, that at some times, and
even then when we behold clearly what were best and most consonant to the
Divine Law; yet we do not excite our Minds to it; or put on that Courage, which
we know we have, to pursue so fair and so fit an Object; but yield and go on
wherever the Stream of Pleasure, or of our own Utility, will carry us. But
certainly we have the more to answer for herein; as at the same time we are
inwardly conscious, it is in our Power to overruled all external Motions of the
Body. And that, if we would obey such Power, and abstain from acting, there
would nothing of that Guilt ensue, which for Self-Interest or Concupiscence we
too frequently incur.

XI. IN the mean time, while such Men at these do still go on, and still delude
themselves with Apologies for their Sloth and Imporality (as either trusting to
the Divine ^obdness for Pardon, or else putting off their Amendments to a
further Day) it is manifest, dat although they do persist to satisfy their ill
Defres, and postpone their Repentance to fu(...) time: yet are they convinced,
it were (...) better, if already done; and that it is e^ally now, as well as
hereafter, within their Power to do it. And this is enough to show, ^ow
plainly, even these confess the Liberty of Man's Will.

XII. AND thus is it made evident, that it is not necessary, that Man's Will
should still be carried on to the greater (that is, to the more excellent)
Good. For it may, according to the Liberty it has, desert what is absolutely
the best; and either close with what is most wateful to the Animal Life, or
suffer it self to (...) captived by it, for want of exerting the Power and
Faculties it has.

XIII. AND here I do as freely confess, that were there no other Life or Law in
us, than to relish and pursue what were most for our particular Pleasure, and
not that which is the most simple and most absolute Good, (which assuredly is
some Divine Thing, and by Nature congruous and consonant to that Eternal
Wisdom, which has framed and does preserve the Universe) it would be hard to
prove, that we had any Free Will; or that our Will was not necessarily
determined to some one thing, which, in all Deliberations, appeared to us for
the best.

XIV. BUT, on the other side, it is pla^ and manifest to me, that this Divine
Law is (...) perfectly in us, as the Animal; and that Right Reason is that Law
(and it is a high Gift and Blessing of God unto mortals) by which we are
taught, and stand bound, to prefer public Good before our private, and never
to make our own Pleasure or Utility to be the Measure of human Actions. And
whoever he be, that thinks himself justly discharged from the Obligation of
this Heavenly Law; I am bold to affirm, he deserves to pass for the most vile,
as well as most contemptible, Creature upon Earth.

XV. THUS much of Free Will, and with what Brevity and Perspicuity we are able.
For what concerns the chief Arguments, or rather Sophisms of Mr. Hobbs; we have
sufficiently refuted them in our Treatise Of the Immortality of the Soul: Lib.
2. c. 3.
Whereunto the Reader is already referred. So that we now pass to those Theorems
or Precepts, which are useful in the acquiring of Virtue.

CHAP. III. Theorems, which are of general Use, in the Acquiring of Virtues.
I. THE Theorems or Precepts, which are subservient to the acquiring of Vir^,
are either General or Special.

And the General are reduced to three Heads. 1. To prove that we ought to labor
after ^ue. 2. That it is in our Power to attain it. 3. To add a few officacious
Precepts to that End.


II. THAT we ought to pursue Virtue, and fly (...) Vice, is a thing clearly
manifest to us by (...) S^nse and Dictate of Conscience. More^ that we are
obliged to perform all the ^ies of Virtue, is plain, from that Law of ^eason,
which God has implanted in us: for (...) Intellect, or Right Reason, which is
in (...) is a superior thing; and all other Facul^ are, by Natural Right,
subjected to its Oedience. But the Law of Virtue, and of ^ght Reason, is
altogether the same. For ^tue seeks nothing in every Action, but that is simply
the best, and that which to ^ight Reason is most consonant. And since ^s Law of
Virtue, and Right Reason, is not ^y positive or arbitrary Thing, but of a Name
eternal and immutable; we cannot therefore doubt, but we are bound to obey its
Precepts and Directions by an eternal and indissoluble Obligation.

III. FURTHERMORE all Men are bound, by the common Law of Nature, to do what
appertains unto them; I mean, those things which are consonant to their own
Natures. So that Men should live like Men, and not as Brutes; but certainly if
Life wants the Fruit of Virtue and of Right Reason, it is not manly but merely
brutal.

Whatever is in us, beneath Virtue and Right Reason, must not (as Plotinus
says) be reputed to be of us, but rather as a certain Brutal Addition, savoring
of the Lion or the Bear, which is to be subdued, and made obsequious to the
true Nature of Man. For we only are that thing, which is most eminent in us,
and by which alone we excel other Creatures. So Andronicus Rhodius declares, L.
10. c. 9.
Every Man to be that, which is best and principal in him; and that he who
lived according thereunto, is rightly said, to live unto himself, and to enjoy
m^st his own Life and Being. But he noted a little before, how absurd a thing
it would appear, for any one to reject his own Life, to choose that of another.
This he calls A wild and horrid Choice; and thinks them guilty of it who prefer
Concupiscence unto Virtue: since they exchange thereby the human state, for
that which is low and irrational.

IV. BESIDES, if every Man be a Debtor to himself, and to his Concerns; and is
bound, (...) Foresight, to put off and disappoint all ^at Misfortunes: Surely
we oughtto cultivate and embrace that Virtue, without whose ^id we can neither
avoid the Calamities of this Life, or the Pains of a Future. That Hell, I mean,
which is threatened not only by true Religion, but by the very Philosophy of
Plato, and of others.

V. LASTLY, Although we should not seem tied by Duty, to choose that which was best
for our selves (because no Injury, as they say, can be done to a Willing Man)
Yet seeing we are not born by Chance, but made and created by God above,
doubtless we are his own by Right of Creation. And, he having an ^nlimited
Jurisdiction over us, we are bound in do all those Things, which by his Divine
Laws, he has required of us.

AND surely his Divine Law is no other, than ^erna^d Immutable Reason; which
being Right is evermore one and the same, even as the Figure of a Triangle or
Circle, that changes never. This is what the Almighty has put into us: And, in
the Words of Hierocles, It Is to preside over the Soul, as it were a Do^estic
God. It Is the Judge and Oracle we are to consult in all our Actions. For as
nothing is dictated from thence, but the ^ere Transcripts of the Divine Will:
So the Top of all is this, that we shake off whatever is vicious, and apply our
selves wholly to that which is Virtuous and Good.

VI. IT IS to the like Effect, what the same Hierocles does (in his Comment on
the Golden Verses of Pythagoras) declare: Namely, That God, being not only the
Legislator who makes the Law, but the Judge also whose part it is to Expound
and have it Executed; does not only enact what is Good, but knows how to
eradicate all that is Evil. That the whole Scope of the Law refers to that
which is congruous unto God, and profitable to Man: And that this was to be
effected not only by Weeding and R^oting out of all Vice, but by putting the
Soul under such a Discipline of Justice, as might purge her from contracted
Evils, and restore her to the Use and Exercise of Right Reason. Wherefore since
this Eternal Law of Right Reason has regard to a Judge and Legislator without
us, one so Powerful, and to whom by the Right of Creation also we are
subjected; I affirm that it is not allowed unto us, to be Miserable; But we
stand obliged by Law Inviolable, to aspire unto Virtue, and to true Felicity.

VII. BUT that it lies not only on our Part to aspire unto Virtue, but is
plainly in our Power to attain it, has been before made out: Namely, because we
are endowed with a Free Will, and are told by Natural Conscience, That in what
we have done amiss, it was in our Power to have done otherwise. It Is manifest,
we have it in our Power wonderfully to corroborate and extend this Faculty; and
that either if we abstain from Indifferent things, when they seem greatly to
delight us; or else submit unto others, merely because harsh and unpleasing;
that so, by degrees, we may conquer all our Aversions to them.

For it seems plainly in our Power, either to move, or to restrain, this
External Engine: Although perhaps in those Interior Motions, which old
Philosophers call the first Eruptions of Nature, our Authority is not so
Absolute. but however it be, that Variety of Desires, as well as of Aversions,
creep easily upon us; Yet it is, in a manner, at our own Discretion, either to
turn away from such Objects as are Tempting, or to converse with those that are
less Grateful to us.

Did we but, in Things Indifferent, pursue this Course so far as Health and
Good Manners would allow; It Is strange how soon we should find the increase of
Power in our Free Will, and all things, as it were, in our liberty, and at
Command. And did we not ^er-easily humor our Cupidities and Aver^ons, they
would soon grow faint, and Reason have the Ascendant over them all.

VIII. BUT there are yet other Arguments (...) Evince, That it lies almost
wholly in us, (...) become Men of Probity and Virtue. For it is manifestly in
our Power to be Sincere; ^ce here I mean nothing else, by Sincerity, ^an a
constant purpose of doing all that is (...) our Power to the obtaining of true
Virtue. (...) that we should not be able, to do whatever is in our Power to do,
is not less than a Contradiction: And therefore it is in our Power to be Sincere.

IX. NOW let every Plain and Sincere Man (for his Comfort) know, That he is
fortified, and girt about with a special Degree of Providence; L. 3. c. 10.. 16.
And that even God is at Hand to assist all his Endeavors, just as Hercules (in
the Fable) put his Shoulder to the Wheel, to help the poor laboring Countryman
with all the strength he had. For Nature is every where replenished with Divine
Assistants, and Good Spirits; such, I mean, as seek out proper Objects, on whom
to cast their Eyes of Favor. And being true Champions of undefiled Simplicity,
they delight to be Ministerial to Souls that are Sincere. They do by Good
Offices disintangle such Men from the Snares of this World; and lift them from
the Impurities of Life, to a state of Safety that is unblemished. But for Men
of Wavering and inconstant Minds, those they reject; And pass them over, just
as Artificers do in Work, those Materials, which are either untractable or
unsound. The saying of Hierecles is not only true in respect of Substances,
but also of Qualities: Namely; That the Law of Providence was as Extensive as
all the Being^ of the Universe. But if it be to be taken, in general, of all
other Men, what he spoke but a little before: Namely, That Justice and Order
had, for the Administration of our Affairs, appointed, That the Immortal Gods,
wh^ nolk before us, should Meditate of our Condition, ^d not only cause a
Diminution of our Sins, het think how to recall us again unto themselves. Also
that they regarded us, as Relations that ^ere lapsed, and were even sollicitous
for our ^estoration. How much the more assured then may we be, that God, and
his Holy Angels, will assist the Sincere and Faithful Souls! ^hasmuch as there
is no Bulwark founded ^on Vice, that can resist his Power, without being soon
overthrown, or shattered into Dust.

X. ADD hereunto, That God himself ^ouchsafes, by some Inward Motions, to
communicate and deal benignly with us. Lib. 3. Cap. 10.. 16.
For as soon as we advance to the Knowing what appertains to Virtue, and become
Masters of the Divine Sense, there is a certain Power above all that is Human,
that associates with us and gets into us. But as, when Men yield themselves to
Animal-Complacencies, and are dipped in the Impurities of Nature; L. 1. c. 6.. 8.
they afterward run headlong to every pernicious thing, and seem satally tied
down by some Chains that are Invisible, so as when Remorse prompts them to
return, they cannot arise: So, on the other side, those who, with Sincere
Affections, do even pant and thirst after Virtue, They on the sudden are caught
up by that Intellectual Spirit, which replenishes every Thing; Marcus Antoninus.
They are animated and supported by it, and finally therewith joined in the
strictest aslociation of Love. So that, to conclude in the Words of Plato, They
are as Men rapt up, and inspired by some Divinity; and they are easily and
spontaneously led on to every Good Work.

XI. THIS also is the Sense of what we quoted before, out of Antonine: Namely,
That we stood bound, not only to conspire with the very Air that surrounds us,
but to concur with that Intellectual Power, which comprehends All. L. 8.. 54.
For (says he) this Intellectual Power, was no less dispersed, and even
extended to every Man, who was prepared to Imbibe it, than was the open AIr to
him, who had Lungs, and a Desire to Breath it. It Is plain, we want nothing for
attracting this Power unto us, but that Sincere Love, by which we are taught
the true Relish of Virtuous Things. For it is thus alone we can grow upwards,
and have Conjunction with God himself; Since Virtue, being the Divinest of all
Things, has most Power to assimilate us unto Him. Thus Hierocles pronounces (in
his said Commentary on the Verses of Pythagoras;) That if an Inspired Sense be
but sufficiently fixed and established, it gives us a Conjunction with God: For
it was necessary that a Like Thing should be carried unto its Like.

I would therefore now ask, Whether any thing, in the Duties of Virtue, can be
too hard for us, if we are but United to so Great and Potent an Ally? Or how
can we doubt of God, and his Holy Providence, while his Grace, his Life, his
Energy, are felt sensibly in us? For it is God's Life, rather than our ^n; if
by putting off our Selves, (that is, (...) Animal Affections) we contend and
^nt after that alone, which is eminently Good: and which only belongs to God,
who equally consults the Benefit of the whole Universe. Wherefore we are not to
distrust, (...) that, being assisted by so strong a Principie, and so
prevailing a Guide, we may in the End attain unto the Perfection of Virtue.

XII. WE must not, in the last place, here omit, That there are some Methods
for the more easy accomplishing of this Work: Such as, Seriusly and frequently
to Meditate of our Dissolution; the certain End of this Frail Body; And also of
the Immortality of our Souls. For it is impossible that this should not, in a
large Measure, extinguish all those Desires and Appetites, which center in the
Body; If we but think how soon the Visible Man, and this Corporeal Shape we
carry about us, must ^umble and be shattered into Atoms; how all the present
Furniture of this Fabric, such as Wealth and Honor, and all the Luxuries they
attract, must ever and for ever be snatched away and rifled from it. Who then
would not, in due time, consider how to place a very moderate and indifferent
Value on such perishable Things, and strive to wean himself, by degrees, from
the Dominion and Insolence of this Flesh! This is the only Way to bring the
Soul to those Operations that are Pure, and to those Pleasures that are Divine;
having no Reference or Dependence at all on Carnal Things. And this indeed was
the Top of all Plato's Philosophy, which made him therefore style it, The
Meditation of Death.

XIII. Hist. Not. l. 7. c. 50.
IT IS true, Pliny perversely enough intimates, as if this were, To Die by
Wisdom: But that, which is the most perfect Wisdom, must not be called a
Disease. For who is the Wiser Man? He that forecasts what may hereafter happen;
Or he that, by plunging into Luxury and the Train of Evils attending it, shall
first submit, and then be Oppressed? Let Virtue therefore be that Mark, which
is evermore in our Sight: Since she alone is Immortal, even as the Soul; nor
indeed has the Soul any other proper Ornament or Perfection, but Virtue. Nay,
such is the Affinity between her and the Soul's Immortality; that, for the most
part, there is a kind of Sense and Perception of Immortality engendered in us,
as soon as the Soul grows vittuous.

XIV. IN the Second Place, let us consider, How consummate and even ineffable
that Pleasure is, that fills and possesses the Soul in Virtue. For seeing the
Distemper and Lapse of the Soul, is from a state of Virtue into that of Vice;
it cannot otherwise be, but that, when she is called back to her Primitive
Condition, there must be Raptures of Joy, at such Restitution. For the
Philosophers make Pleasure, in its very Definition to be, The Restitution to a
Natural State.

But surely, the most Natural State of that which partakes of Reason, must be
Virtue: inasmuch as Virtue is nothing else, but a constant Aptitude and
Propensity to the Dictates of Right Reason.

To which we may add what is noted by Aristotle, Andronicus, l. 10. c. 9.
Aristot. cap. 7.
That this Pleasure is ours by a sort of Propriety; and therefore it must be
both Joyful and Excelling: For that which is most appropriate to the Nature of
every Thing, is the truest and most Natural Delight. But unto Man there is
nothing more proper than Right Reason: And therefore that Pleasure, which
arises from a constant Dedication of the Mind thereto, must in many
Considerations excel the rest.

XV. IN the third Place, we may here superadd, That this Life of Virtue, and
this Pleasure resulting from it, is the most Divine of all other Things. For a
Soul, that is got thus far, has nothing farther to wish, unless out of Vanity,
to aim at something which is more persect than even the Deity it self. But
alas, that which is a Creature cannot be God: For all that he can have must be
by Participation, and through the help of Virtue, which (as all confess) is a
sort of Divine Nature and Godlike Life. For the Creature, as he is Animal, can
only follow what is grateful to the Appetite: It Is, as he is the Image of God,
that he prosecutes that which is simply and emimently the Best.

Wherefore as to this Point, Hierocles, while he owns both Life and Pleasure
arising from Virtue, to be perfectly Divine, does dexterously play the
Philosopher in saying, In Aurea Pytagorae Carmina.
Since therefore Life, which conforms to Virtue, and so carries a Divine
Similitude, must needs be Divine; and that which abides in Vice, must needs be
Brutish and Atheistical: It Is manifest, that the Pleasures of a Good Man are
Imitations of Divine Joy, because his Mind is Associating with God; Whereas
that which is styled the Pleasure of a Wicked Wretch, is only a Commotion that
is altogether stupid and Brutal.

And hereto also refers, what the same Philosopher speaks of that Reason, which
is the Rule of Virtue, saying, That to obey Right Reason, and to Obey God, is
the same Thing: For a Rational Being, that sufficiently partakes of Natural
Illumination, Wills and Covets the same Things, which the Divine Law ordains.
And a Soul, that is framed according to God, falls into the same Determinations
with God; and, by contemplating that Light and Majesty which is Divine, does
the same things, which God in like Circumstances would do.

XVII. MANY things of the same Force, occur in ancient Writers, and more
especially in Antoninus and Cicero; which from what has been cited will easily
be believed. We shall therefore add, out of the first Book of Tully de Legibus,
only that short saying, Namely, That Virtue was in Man the same as in God. But
if the Case stand thus, What can be a more Natural, or binding Conjugation
between them, than this is? It Is also referable to the pleasure of Virtue and
of the Divine Life, what the same Cicero says elsewhere, in advising a Man to
consult his own Delphic Oracle, that is, Tusculan. Quaest. l. 5.
The Knowledge of Himself and of his own Soul: For thus the Mind, being made
sensible how exempt it was from Vice, and how conjoined to the Divine Nature;
it might be filled with Joys that were unspeakable.

XVIII. THE truth is, there was little need, thus to heap up, and with the
Authority of the Ancients thus to adorn, what, as we have so often affirmed,
was by the very Nature and Definition of Virtue so sufficiently manifest. For
to prosecute what is Simply the Best, and not what is most grateful to the
Animal Nature, has still been inculcated to be something Divine, and manifestly
elevated above the Animal State. Wherefore we must not ^arely confine our
selves to the Best Principle we find about us, but must live up to that, which
our Nature, at its full improvement, is most capable of; and that which is
truly and really Divine. And this is what ought to be esteemed the Supreme
Pleasure, the Chief Good, and Ultimate End; In which our Soul, as in its
highest Perfection and Felicity, ought only to Acquiesce.

XIX. SUCH Reflections as these, can scarce ever fail to inflame our Minds in
the Study of Virtue. And there are yet some farther things which may
facilitate, and guide us in the same course. Among which the first Rule of
Antoninus, is, That we never meddle with any thing rashly, or without due
Confultation.

XX. ANOTHER is of Epictetus, Never to act any Thing against our own
Conscience; But that, as well in Small Matters as in Great, we preserve it
sound and unshaken. And to this End let another Precept of the same Philosopher
be still before us, Enchiridion, c. 75.
Quicquid videtur Optimum, id Lex esto tibi inviolabilis. Whatever appears unto
you to be Best, let it be unto you as an Inviolable Law; For he that once
learns (tho even with the assent of Conscience) to reject a Greater Good, for
the sake of a Less; it is odds, but in time he may learn, even for the same
Reason, to throw off his small Residue of Good, and so plunge himself totally
into Vice. For that part of Good, which he first refused, was equally as good
as the Remainder, which he may also as easily part withal. Wherefore we must
both early and diligently watch against all sorts of Depravity: For a present
Sin makes way for a Future; and every Sin we commit makes a Link of that
Iron-Chain, by which we are tied down to inextricable Sorrow, and to Darkness
that will have no End.

XXI. THE third Rule is, That whatever Work we set about, let it appear we do
not forget Virtue in the doing of it. There is a double Manner of proceeding in
every Business, not only a Right Way and a Wrong: but a Gentle and a Rough; a
Violent Way and a Moderate. Wherefore it is of no small Moment, in the course of
our Life to hit upon the Best; and that commonly is the Best, which savours
most of Moderation, Grace and Decorum.

XXII. FOURTHIY, That we do by Ardent Prayers contend, that God would pour into
us a sufficiency of strength, for the Acquisition of Virtue. No Mortal ought to
be ashamed to Beg, and to accept from Him so Divine a Gift, from whom he had
also his Being. For we dare Affirm, that whoever pretends to Virtue, without
Imploring it at God's Hand, will only catch the empty Shadow thereof. thereof.
Cicero observed, De Natura Deorum, l. 2.
That no Man could be Great, but as Illuminated by some Ray, or Inspired by
some Breath from Heaven. And if nothing be of a more Heavenly Nature than
Virtue, it is then impossible to have it without the Help of God.

XXIII. NOR must any Man wonder, that we annex Prayers unto Moral Philosophy;
since we have already made Piety an Essential part thereof. Epictetus, Plato,
Antoninus, and other Philosophers, have done the like. And here let us observe
the words of Hierocles, who has in this Part exceeded the rest, It Is not enough
(says he) with Promptitude and Vigor, to enterprise that which is Laudable, In
Aurea Pythagorae Carmina.
as if the success were wholly in our Power, and without need of assistance
from God. No, we must Implore the Divine Aid; and not only Implore it, but
endeavor also to Obtain by our Industry, what we ask in our Prayer. For
otherwise we make Virtue as it were a sharer in Atheism and Hypocrisy; or else
render our own Prayers Ineffectual. The first of which by its Impiety would
take away the very Essence of Virtue, and the latter by Stupidity would
extinguish the Nature of Prayer.

Let us hereunto add that saying out of Socrates mentioned by Xenophon,
Xenophon de Administratione domestica.
That every Undertaking should begin with a Recommendation thereof to the Gods;
and that of Cicero, That the Rise and Source of all our Actions be founded with
the Immortal Gods. Likewise that of Plato in his Timaeus, De Legibus l. 2.
That whatever work we take in hand, be it great or be it small, never to begin
without first Invoking of God. Arrian, Comment. l. 2. c. 18.
And lastly that excellent Saying of Epictetus, as to the Government and
subduing of the Affections; He says, This is in truth a great Conflict, and a
work merely Divine. Wherefore think upon God, and call upon his Holy Aid and
Assistance; just as the poor Mariners do, in a sinking Condition, upon Castor
and Pollux. For what greater Tempest can there be, than what arises from
violent Imaginations, such as toss and distract Reason, and by which it is in
danger of shipwreck? As this Sentence is of moment to the Point in hand; so it
appears how many of the other Philosophers insisted upon fervent Prayer: For we
do not only hereby acknowledge him, who is the Fountain of all Virtue; but we
own, that it is God only, that can Bless, and Crown all our Endeavors for it
with Success.

XXIV. HOWEVER it is not here understood, that those are the most Efficacious
Prayers which are the Longest, or the Loudest, or the most Eloquent; but rather
those short and frequent Ejaculations, which the Soul, after long and
convincing thoughtfulness, sends up to Heaven: Such, I mean, as are attended
with sighs and a vehement Yerning after God and Virtue. For by such pious
Anxiety, we exercise and rarifie the Blood and Spirits; we pour into them new
supplies of pure and hallowed Air; we corroborate and augment our inward
Sentiments of Heaven, and send up our Prayers, as in a Chariot of Light or
Fire. So that as, in these fervent and holy Pantings, we do (in a sort) draw
God into the Soul; we do, in like manner, breath back nothing but that which is
Celestial and Divine.

XXV. THE fifth and last Precept is that of Pythagoras, That we fail not every
Night, before we take Rest, to sum up the Actions of the past Day. Thus if we
have done any thing well, we may give God the thanks and glory of it: But, if
otherwise, then to repent of the Misdoing, and by this means daily fix and
settle in our minds a resolution of acting in every thing according to the most
perfect Rule of Virtue. Mollia nec prius obducat tua Lumina Somnns,
Exacti quam ter reputasti Facta Diei:
Quid lapsus feci? Quid recte? Quid boni omisi?


The observing of this Rule would work a strange Reformation in our Manners;
and kindle in us great Resolutions to Virtue.

CHAP. IV. Things which contribute to the Attaining of the Primitive Virtues.
I. WHat we have hitherto delivered, for acquiring Virtue in the general, is in
Truth, if prosecuted, of that Effect, that it looks superfluous to descend unto
Particulars. And yet we will touch these also, tho in a very few words.

As to the Three Primitive Virtues, this we admonish, if not repeat, That no
sort of Virtue can either be acquired or practiced, or even well thought on
without them. Wherefore the entire possession of these Three First, is
indispensible.

II. PRUDENCE is the First of all; And how this is to be compassed, does by its
Definition and Explication (in the Second Book) sufficiently appear. But as it
reaches and presides, as far as things of Action or Contemplation can go; let
us, in our way, refer to the first of these that saying of Antoninus, Lib. 2.
Sect. 54.
That we Critically examine our present Imaginations, lest any thing creep in,
that is not thoroughly weighed and understood. Lib. 3. Sect. 11.
This he again inculcates by another great Rule; namely, That whatever falls
within our Imagination; we should still frame some Definition, and paint out
the Lineaments thereof. That so we may behold it naked and entire, and what it
is in its whole Essence, and in every Part. And this surely is the great
Business of Prudence. For how else are Men carried away, or come to be
disappointed, in what they should avoid or pursue; but for not looking round,
and not taking into consideration both the Whole and the Parts? They catch
things at first sight, and from some few parts, which Please or Displease,
determine the Fate of all the rest. Thus they become very gross Accountants;
For while they compute and rashly cast up what in bulk or value is but part of
the Thing (as if it were the whole) they are not capable of Judging; and only
discover that Precipitation is the Root of most Mistakes.

It were good therefore, to observe the Advice that Epictetus gave him who was
so very intent to conquer at the Olympic Games: Namely, That he should well
revolve in his Mind, what things were Antecedent, and what Consequent to that
Enterprise; and then stick close to the Work. And to this belongs what he adds
in the following Chapter, O Man, first consider what the Work is, and then thy
own Nature, if thou art able to support it. For if these be not adjusted, we
shall quickly pass as vain Projectors, repenting that we ever set forth, and
sharing in the Contempts and scorns of the Unfortunate.

To this kind of Prudence we may refer that most Excellent Admonition of
Epicharmus, Be thou sober, and remember to Distrust; For these Things are the
very Nerves of Wisdom. And, as consonant hereunto, let us add this Advice of
our own, Never much to believe either Fortune or Men: but to trust in God and
Virtue which can never Change. For Men differ, in a few Days, even from
themselves; and their Wills and Counsels are not to morrow the same.

III. BUT as to the Second Branch, about things Contemplative; let the searcher
of Wisdom take these few Rules.

To suspend his Assent till the Thing be clearly and distinctly understood.

That whatever Things may be, in their own Natures; yet to afford them in our
Reasoning no other place, than as they are manifest to the Faculties of our
Mind.

That the inward and naked Essence of a Thing cannot be known, but only its
Essential Attributes, or its Essential Properties.

That Essential Attributes must immediately be in, and belong to the Subject:
Nor ought any Physical Reason be asked, or can be given, why they are in it.

That the Idea of every Thing, does consist of certain Essential Attributes.

That to the perfect Knowledge of any Thing, such an Idea or Notion thereof is
requisite; as is ^t only clear and distinct, but full and adequae: so as to
comprehend all those inseparable ^ttributes, which appertain unto it. For it is
possible, either by Industry or by Neglect, so ^o think of a Subject, as not to
think of any of those Attributes, which in truth are inseparable from it: And
this, I fancy, Des Carts as done, in his Notion of the Human Soul; while de
Defines it only by Cogitation.

Lastly, To distrust him, whose Mind is ^ot yet refined; To credit no Masters,
or any faculty whatever, except Reason, solid Ex^erience, and the Intellect
(which is the Warrobe of Common Notions.)

IV. As to the Second of these Great Ver^es, which is Sincerity; you may, as to
Men, ^eigh it in this Balance. To observe if you ^eat them in the same manner,
as you would ^e willingly treated by them: And mind still that is said by
Cicero, De Legibus, l. 1.
That there is no one Thing so like or so Equal to another, as are all (...) us
to one another. Whence it is manifest, that, ^hile Circumstances are the same,
we are ^tually obliged in the same manner to treat ^ach other.

But as to God and Virtue, your Sincerity will appear, if you so debase your
self, and all you have, in respect of them; that you even desire to give up
Liberty, Fortune, and Life it self for their sakes. Now, if you feel within you
a Resolution of this Force, you may then conclude you are come to the
perfection of Patience. But for poor wretched Creatures as we are; should we,
on the other hand, prefer and esteem of our selves above God and Virtue; It
were so lewd and so abhorrent a Crime, that this thought alone (if we could but
think it) were enough to constrain us to be Sincere.

V. NOR is the Argument for Patience of less weight. Since the Just, who die
for the Cause of God and of Virtue, are not only Crowned with Immortality, but
their Soul^ adorned with Glory; which is a double Reward. And it will
contribute not a little to this Virtue; if here we take in, what before was
advised for augmenting the power of Free Will; namely, That we set our selves
vigo^ rously to abstain from all those things, which to the Corporeal and to
the Animal Life an^ most grateful: Also that, as far as Health an^ good Manners
will permit, we enure o^ selves resolutely to harsh and unpleasing thing For if
we but firmly maintain these Char^cters, we shall soon find enlargement in o^
Inward Faculties: We shall excite within (...) not only joy, but a new
greatness of Sou^ and feel our selves in a state to enterprise (...) very thing
that is Honorable. We shall not account we have lost, but only changed our
Delights: seeing the Soul, by a sense of Adhering unto and Reverencing the
Precepts of Virtue, shall attain a Joy not Corporeal, but distinct and peculiar
to it self, and be even ravished with the Fruition thereof.

CHAP. V. How the Three Principal Derivative Virtues may be acquired.
I. AS for Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance: We say first, that the principal
part of Justice, which is true Piety, will in the Minds of Candid Men soon take
root, if they but take the Image of Impiety; and see how Rude, how Barbarous,
and how void of all good Nurture it is. For does any Man among us neglect a
Benefactor to his Face? Do we not rather load him with Honors, and make our
Acknowledgments as profound, and as answerable to his Bounties, as we can? How
then shall we put that upon God, which even among Men is not permitted without
Shame? This alone, unto a generous Mind is motive enough, and a sufficient Spur
unto Piety. But for others, let them take warning, lest by Ingratitude they
forfeit all Title to Favor: Let them, in time, consider that Divine Vengeance
will be as diligent to find them out, as they are now drouzy and regardless
toward their Creator. Yet as to the manner of Worship, let this be a Rule to
all, that we so adhere to God's outward and public Service; as not to omit our
inward and private Devotions, which are certainly the dearest Part.

We have already observed, L. 2. c. 2. 5.
That the internal Worship is a true Imitation of God. And this Opinion is not
a little enforced by what the Pythagorean in Hierocles, says, That we then
worship God in the best manner, when we bring our Minds to a Resemblance of
him; Since what a Man loves he endeavors to Imitate. And a little after, That
costly Oblations bring no Honor to God, if they are not offered with a Godly
Mind. That the Sacrifices of the Wicked are but as Stubble to the Fire, and
their Holy Donatives serve only but for Booty to the sacrilegious. And as for
a Temple, he adds this short Description thereof, That there is not on Earth a
fitter place for God, than is a purified Soul. And to this Sense, he brings
Apollo himself, pronouncing the Similitude between Heaven and a Holy Mind.
Aeque Animis sanctis, atque ipso Ego laetor Olympo.
I do not greater pleasure find
In Heaven, than in a holy Mind.


III. BUT, having quoted thus much, let us not omit what the same Author more
elegantly and at large, sets forth: to wit, That the wise Man is the only
Priest; He only is acceptable to God, and He only knows how to pray unto him.
For he only knows how to Worship God aright, who is arrived to Divine
Knowledge; He, I say, that offers himself for a Sacrifice; that converts his
Soul into a Divine Monument; and whose Mind is prepared as a Temple, for the
reception of Heavenly Light. Here it is to be observed that the Man whom
Hierocles calls Wise, Aristotle calls Prudent. But both are in reality the
same, as being endowed with Virtue: For Virtue, which is true and raised up to
Perfection, and which becomes thereby the Image of God, is certainly God's best
Worship. Yet this Inward Gift never contends against those Rites and Forms in
Religion, that are decent and established by Law.

IV. As to the other Branch of Justice, which is Probity; and commonly called
by the Name of Justice, in a stricter Sense: This ought to be much in the care
of all pious Men, as it is a Branch of that Piety, which is a principal part of
Virtue; and which had been demonstrated (in our Second Book) to be the best way
of God's Worship. Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
For Probity is the Bond of Society, and of all Human Concerns; and the whole
World is in a manner so tied together and supported by it, that if this Pillar
were shaken, the ruin of all must follow. Wherefore all Men are bound to defend
it, and to regard it even as an hallowed Thing.

V. BUT if any Man who for barely containing himself within the bounds of Human
Law, shall thereupon pretend unto the Character of Just; we shall venture to
call this rather Dexterity or Artifice, than true Justice. For such an one
feels no Concern as to the Public Good; his thoughts are all about himself;
and Justice (which consults the good of others) has no part in his Meditations;
since they are bounded and limited by Selflove. So that if a Man of this frame
should but live to see the Laws laid by, he would start immediately into
another shape. He, who but yesterday was according to the letter of the Law, a
very precise Elder, turns either Libertine, or as ravenous as an Evening Wolf.
Wherefore let him, who desires to be truly Just, not believe that he is already
so; unless he finds that, if there were no Laws, he could contain himself, and
still be Master of the same Desires.

VI. As to Fortitude and Temperance, we may here repeat what before we offered
concerning Patience. Hierocles calls them all, The Adamantine keepers of the
Soul: In Aurea Pythagorae Carmina.
If you discharge them, she presently is betrayed to all Temptations and
Calamity. But how necessary Fortitude is, will appear by that Excellent saying
of Andronicus: Lib. 3. Cap. 1.
Namely, That some things are so Dishonest, as not to afford the Ill-doer the
least shadow or pretense of Excuse. And therefore that a Man must vigorously
withstand these things, and not only endure Terment on such account, but even
immediate Death.

Wherefore there is no Argument that more helps a Man to study Fortitude, and
how to acquire it; than to consider how miserable we are without it; it is else
in the power of every insolent Superior, either by Threats or by Oppression, to
make the timorous Man as vile and as obsequious as he pleases. And what greater
torment or servitude can there happen to an ingenuous Mind, than (with Guilt
and Confusion) to own, that, as soon as the terror of any great mischief looks
toward him; he shall not only shrink from Truth and Virtue, but even
contribute to betray them both.

VII. As for Intemperance, the very Discredit of that Pleasure were enough to
deter us from it. He that considers the Dignity of Man, and the great things he
is born to, must be astonished to see, at how mean a rate he often sells them
all! The poor Fly is not more easily taken in the Cobweb, or the Fish deluded
by the Bait, or any other Beast fettered in a Toil, than is poor Man, whom
lusts and passions have subdued. Every Libertine calls him away, and every
impure Rascal leads him about; till at last he grows abject and more
contemptible than a Beast. For Pleasure, which feeds and vitiates the Sense,
does also by degrees prey upon the Mind: It puts out the Light, and breaks the
force it had. Nay, when at last nothing but Fortitude is left him (that
Sentinel, or Outguard, without whose vigor and fidelity no virtue can be safe)
even here Pleasure attacks him, and like a raging Strumpet that has had
success, comes on with Impudence, and will not quit her Hold, till she drives
us into utter destruction. So that what Cicero said, is no less true than
common, De Senectute.
That, in the Region of Pleasure, it was impossible for Men to hold any
Commerce with Virtue.

VIII. NOR does Intemperance only benumb and bewitch the Mind; but the Body
also is miserably shaken and obnoxious to many cruel Diseases by it: So that
Abstinence, even on Health's account, deserves our highest Care. It Is not that
here we should assign the Weights and Measures of Temperance, but only speak
of what is relative to Health, and to the good state of the Body and the Mind;
Since we know that in robust Bodies, which are overfed, the faculties of the
Mind are very often encumbered, and oppressed.

IX. L. 2. c. 2.. 3.
WHEREFORE Temperance is so to be cultivated, as more to intend the plenty and
purity of the Animal Spirits, than the extension of the Body. Thus that Oracle
of Zoroaster advised, Let not the Spirit be defiled, nor the superficies be
made gross. Which refers to that of Hierocles, In Aurea Pytagorae Carmina.
who calls this Spirit, by the name of a Thin-Vehicle, and a Body Immaterial.
Adding also this, That we take a vigilant Care of our Organ, and skilfully fit
it to Philosophical purposes.

X. THIS then is true and Philosophical Temperance, if we so far subdue the
bulk and powers of the Body, as that they may not be able to stifle or
extenuate the Sense of excellent Things. And above all, That the Internal
Spirit be not pampered and incrassated, which is what Hierocles calls the
Spiritual Vehicle. His Opinion being, That our Internal Man is composed, and
made up, as well of this, Vehicle as of the Soul. Wherefore the Pythagoreans
made great work about the purifying of the Spirit, or Vehicle, as by the
following words of Hierocles appears: In Aurea Pythagorae Carmina.
We must (says he) by the exercise of Virtue, and the recovery of Truth and
Purity, take care of those things, which appertain to the Luciform Body; which
is, what the Oracles declare to be the Tender or Aerial Vehicle of the Soul.
But the care of this Purification must extend even to Meats and Drinks, and
whatever else concerns these our Mortal Bodies. For the Luciform Spirit resides
therein; it was that which gave Life to this, when it was inanimate, and is the
Conservator of its present Frame. This indeed is that Immaterial Body, which is
Life it self, and which gives and ingenerates material Life; It Is by this that
our Mortal Bodies, which consist of Life Irrational and Body Material, are made
up: And thus an Image is composed of the Internal Man, who is built out of
Rational Substance, and Body Immaterial.

XI. IN all which High Words, he intimates, that in our care concerning the
External Man, which is our Corporeal Frame or Bulk, we must be sure to bring no
Detriment or Contagion to the Internal: But that the regulation and measures of
our Diet as to meat and drink, and what else concerns this Mortal Body, must
refer to the health or safety of the Inward Man. The End being, that this Thin
and Lucid covering of the Soul, which must surely be some Aerial or Ethereal
Vestment, be kept free from all servile Commixtures with our polluted Carcass.
And hereto the same Hierocles adds, That forasmuch as to this our Luciform
Body, there is another Mortal Body congenerate and affixed; We are to preserve
the former in all Purity, and to discharge it (as much as is possible) from all
Intercommoning or Combinations with the Latter.

XII. THE truth is, that all this Doctrine about Cleansing and Purgation even
of the Soul it self (and so the whole Business and Import of Virtue) points but
at this, that there be Cleanliness in the Inward Man, and that the vigor of it
be sustained. For so the same great Interpreter of the Pythagorean Wisdom does
a while after explain the Matter, saying, That the purification of the rational
Soul, was done with concern, and had reference to the Luciform Vehicle; Meaning
that the Vehicle was thereby to be rendered more Lightsom and Elastic, so as it
might not afterward retard the superiou^ flight of the Soul. That the said
Purification was best effected, by divorcing our Thoughts and Meditations from
Terrene Objects, and lifting them by degrees unto things Immaterial. That all
Turpitude was to be suppressed; and that we should prohibit all sordid
Intercourse of the Body Material, for fear the Luciform Body should be
Tarnish'd and contaminated by it. That if there were a Vigilance in these
Particulars, then might this Spiritual Vehicle acquire new Life and Vigor; it
might be endowed with Celestial Vivacity; and at length enter into a
Conjugation with the Intellectual Perfections of the Soul.

All this can Purification do, when but steered and conducted by Virtue; It can
Recollect, Resuscitate, and even inspire with heavenly Energy, that subtle and
attenuated Chariot of our Mind; that inward Organ, which will afterward remain
its Habitacle, and a Consort inseparable to all Eternity.

XIII. I confess, these things sound as lofty Flights, and yet they are the
Documents of the famous Hierocles; by which we are taught, that the greatest
pitch of Philosophical Temperance, is, To preserve this Vehicle in a congruous
temper to the purity of the Soul; that the Inward Man be not defiled by the
Sense of Gross Contentments; Not impotently hurried on to concur with Flesh and
Blood; nor anxious for Joys that have no manner of Foundation. We are rather
admonished by such Temperance, how this Luciform Vehicle, this inhabitable
Lightning, which is also a Body distinct; may be preserved Free, Vigorous, and
Immaculate.

XIV. THIS is the very Doctrine, which the same Author mentions from that
Golden Verse of Pythagoras, -- Tum singula pensa
Aurigam mentem statuens ex part superna.
Which he thus explains, That Pythagoras speaks here first of the Mind as being
a Rational Power; Next he calls it the Driver of the Chariot, as it directs and
governs, not only the Corporeal Body but the Luciform. That this Driver which
is indeed the Soul, does not only with a sharp Eye look out, to distinguish
the way, and keep within the paths of Virtue: but it holds the Reins with
steddiness, both to embrace and to restrain her dear and Luciform Companion;
and all, with Intention to direct its Prospect wholly toward Heaven, and to
make it thereby grow into a Similitude of the Deity. This is an apt and close
Allusion to the most perfect and Philosophical Temperance or Continence, which
allows not that any Corporeal Pleasures should pierce into the Inward Man. For
it represents the Soul, as holding a strict Rein against all Commerce that
might obstruct the Diviner Joys which arise from a Sense of God and Virtue. And
this doubtless is the perfect Scope, the truest Measure, and the highest
Improvement of Temperance.

XV. BUT how far distant from this Perfection such Men are, who wallow in
Glut^ony, Drunkenness, and the impurities of Lust; let them consider, and
compare their Cases, who are accountable herein? Let this ^e their sad Memento,
that while it was in their power to resemble the Gods, they rather those basely
to degenerate into Beasts. How much Happier had they been under any Se^erity of
Life (even that ancient Discipline, that afforded Nature but a bare Rescue or
Support) than by delicious Hours, in Chambering and Luxury to blunt the Sense
of all Su^limer Things! How will they Mourn at last, that, by the treachery of
Vice, they have andermin'd the very Platform of their Souls, and betrayed that
faithful Out-guard, I mean, Fertitude! Which, in all Events, should have been
the bold Champion and Conservator of all their Virtues.

Let thus much serve in Brief, as to the acquisition of the Primitive Virtues;
and those also which are the Principal of the Derivative.

CHAP. VI. Of Acquiring the Reductive Virtues; And first of those, which refer
to Justice.
I. AMong the Virtues called Reductive; those more especially shine out, which
have reference to Justice: As Liberality, Magnificence, Veracity, Gratitude,
Candor, Urbanity, Fidelity, Modesty, Humanity, Hospitality, Friendship,
Civility, Affability, Officiousness.


Liberality is not to be neglected: Since, on the one Hand, we show thereby,
that our Souls are not contracted to the bare admiration of Wealth; Nor our
Minds, on the other hand, so stupid, as not to understand the true Use and Ends
thereof.

Magnificence is praised by its own works; since these bring Benefit to the
Public, Ornament to the World, and Variety to the Histories of the Time.

II. VERACITY must be our constant Inmate and Companion: For it is the worst of
Characters to be a noted Liar. There is no Quicksand, or infected Air, more
frightful to the Traveller, nor any Wizzard more dangerous to be met withal,
than an accomplished Liar. He will lead you, like a Ghost, into dangerous
Paths; and, when you are wandering quite out of your Way, he will be sure to
leave you in the Dark.

However, it is strange to see how the Masters in this Talent, will yet set up
for Men of Prudence. They are indeed wise enough to know that every Vice must
bear a virtuous Name; and that Fraud and Cunning, will never stand alone. It Is
as with Strumpets, who affect to be seen at Church among the Matrons: but as
they are the more abhorred herein for their Impudence, as well as Vice; so
ought it be with these plausible Circumventors. There is even a Sect of these,
who also set up for Wits; they think there can be no greater Excellency than in
the way called Bantering: Surely the Man must be very dull, that cannot
Deceive, if he but resolve to Lie. Yet as he that will deceive when he can,
shows a Mind that is vile and abject: So the truly prudent and generous Man, is
he that will be Honest in the dark: He that will be as just, when it is in his
power to be otherwise, as if it were not. But whoever notes the Events of
things shall see, that Knaves and Hypocrites are exposed to shame, and end
their Lives obscurely; whereas the just and virtuous sort endure, and their
Reputation still shines forth as at the Noonday. Every counterfeit thing must
be short-lived.

Fidelity is much to be cultivated; and how could Human Society consist without
it: since to keep Promises, and to restore what is deposited with us, are the
Top-branches and conspicuous parts of Justice.

Hence also we may be convinced how much it imports us to consider well of
Gratitude. For every good turn done us is, as it were a Pledge deposited in our
trust and keeping: And surely he that repays it not back, as soon as he can, is
guilty of Infidelity. Nay, Gratitude is so remarkable a part of Justice, that
whoever has the heart to violate this Bond, is thought capable (might he do it
with Impunity) of trampling on all the Laws of the World. Now who would incur
this Character, or draw himself under so dismal a Guilt? There is certainly no
Monster that a Man should more abhor, than this Monster of Ingratitude.

III. As to the show and expression of Candor in our Converse with Men, there
are great Motives for it. First, Because the Errors of most Men are Errors of
Ignorance: and yet, even among these Errors, their Minds often labor to bring
forth Truth and good Works; a Birth which indeed we ought kindly to assist, by
interpreting favorably all their Actions, and affording them the very best
appearances we can. For we do, by this soft Temper, help on Peace, and the
cementing of Men's Minds toward a bond of Unity: which is so worthy a part,
that all Men ought to endeavor it.

IV. FOR Urbanity, we must not be so Morose, as not to hear and bear the Jests
of others (and sometimes tart ones too) although we are not good at Jesting our
selves. In truth, he that is dexterous in Raillery, has found a Remedy to laugh
away his Labor, and a very good Sauce against the fatigues of Life. For tho it
was not Nature's Intention, to fit us only for Sport and Pastime; Yet these,
doubtless, are lawful in their seasons, just as sleep, and other Refreshments,
to the Body and the Mind: provided always that things of Moment are not
obstructed by them. It Is to this sense that Cicero speaks in his Offices, That
the ways of Jesting are very different: the one, Sawey, Rustic, Impious, and
Obscene; the other, Elegant, Candid, Ingenuous, and Pleasant. And surely, it is
this last which is recommended to us. However, if something herein should drop,
so quick and pleasing to the Company as to cause Laughter for the smart which
it reflects; he that feels it (being a good Man) will not so much vex to see,
that small defects are insulted over, as have cause to rejoice, that his
greater Virtues are at the same time applauded: For he hears the worst that can
be said of him, since Adversaries are still known to shoot their longest and
sharpest Arrows. And here we refer to what (in our First Book) was said of the
Interpretation of Passions; which may farther illustrate this Point. L. 1. c.
11. 2. 3.
But if some rude and ill-natured Man shall perhaps bear-over-hard upon us, and
both jest and sting together; We must then do what we can, to cure the subject
matter, and draw out that Core, in which his Darts are fixed.

V. MODESTY must attend all our Actions; it is the Flower, L. 2. c. 8.. 11.
the Beauty of Jesutice, and even its chief Perfection: This we have already
set forth, and it needs not be repeated.

But Humanity does challenge a most principal regard among all the other
Virtues. We are all, as it were, linked in one common chain of Equality; nor is
one man to think himself so very preferable to another; when, in things of
Passion and of Reason, in Death and Immortality, we seem all to share alike. He
therefore that contemns another, and forgets that way of Treatment, which
Candor and Humanity demands, he seems to give Sentence against himself. For
'twill be as lawful at another time, and when Circumstances are alike, to
refuse to him those common Perquisites of Human Nature; seeing in his turn he
refused them to others. So that whoever arrogates to himself a great
Pre-eminence above his Fellow Creatures, does but expose his Vanity, and takes
pains to be Ridiculous. Let no man, of how mean a Condition soever, if he be a
good Man, and has not by his Follies lost all Title to the Rights of Human
Nature, be treated with Contumely. It Is the saying of Heraclitus, Enter,
Gentlemen, even here the Gods inhabit: Which may truly be said of the poorest
Man living, so that his Heart be but sound and Just. For (besides that
Prerogative, which is common to Mankind) such an one should be regarded with
Love and Tenderness, and as it were some Creature that were even Holy and
Divine.

VI. FOR Hospitality, it will stand less in need of Recommendation, as it is a
manifest part of Humanity. It seems to be most needful there, where Strangers
are liable to be ill used by the Natives, and where they want the things of
Accommodation they were used to find at Home. These therefore we should strive
to Help and Succor, in all they can need at our Hands: Not forgetting that
even Holy Angels are thus employed, whom we ought to imitate. For they, during
this Earthly pilgrimage of our Souls; do seasonably step in, both to relieve
and succor us, when we are most distressed.

VII. FOR what concerns Friendship and Friends, these are carefully to be
Acquired; and not barely as Ornaments, but as Bulwarks in Human Life. If you
light on such as deserve your fervent Love; place it rather on their Virtues,
than their Persons, which are both mutable and mortal. Let not your Friendship
consist, in soft and unprofitable strains; nor in vehemence of Passion, which
would bring many a storm and disorder to your Mind. But let the Character of it
be Sincere and Constant, and such as fulfills all the Duties appertaining
thereto, with a cheerful and officious Benignity.

VIII. LASTLY, As to Civility, Affability, and Officiousness; these are all to
be regarded, not only as Credentials, which procure us Fame and good Will: but
they very often become the very Essential Knots of that Peace and Friendship
which we enjoy. Therefore let no Man neglect, and much less despise these
smaller Virtues; which often, as smaller Wires, sustain much weight. We do by
them live more pleasantly among our Neighbors; our security becomes the
greater and our Favor and Credit with Men is thereby increased. And who would
not wear such things about him, as make him welcome wherever he comes, and
cost him nothing the Carriage?

CHAP. VII. Of Acquiring those Virtues, which are referable to Fortitude.
I. THESE are the Virtues, which appertain to Fortitude: Magnanimity,
Generosity, Lenity, Constancy, Diligence, Vivacity, Presence of Mind,
Stoutness, Virility or Manhood.


IT IS the praise of Magnanimity, that is does not disquiet the Mind with minute
or numerous Cares; but rather lifts it up to the Ambition of doing great and
excellent things, whereof the number can be but small. They that know the
Dignity of Humane Nature, and what it is capable of, think it loss and
derogation to be engaged in Trifles. So that as nothing is higher or greater
than God and Virtue, it is in the Veneration of these Objects, our Minds and
Wills are by this Virtue confirm^d and underprop'd; And by it we are also
reclaimed, from wandering into things which are but mean and vulgar.

Moreover, what we did before attribute unto Magnificence, is equally
applicable to this Virtue: Namely, that the great Acts and Achievements
hereof, redound to the service of the Public; and adorn both the World and the
Chronicles of the Age.

II. THE benefit and prefection of Generosity, appears in this, that a Man is
not governed herein by popular Applause, or the Itch of common Glory; but
acting sincerely and with Conscience, toward Virtue and true Beatitude, his
Mind is satisfied and corroborated in his Work. Nay, although the Malice and
Clamor of all Mankind were broke loose against him, yet he will stand firm to
Virtue, and maintain Truth with an unshaken Courage.

It Is very true that often, in the pursuit of Virtue; as well the desire of
Fame and Glory, as the fear of Shame and Reproach, have their benefit and
Effects. But when Virtue is once attained, and that we are in the actual
possession thereof, then those things are but as mere Scaffolding, to be
removed or burnt.

III. THIS Virtue is therefore of the more high Account, as it is the true
Guardian and Sentinel upon all the rest. It should especially be cultivated by
young Men, whom either Nature, or an honest Ambition, has excited to excel
their Fellows. For the blundering Men, and the Vicious, make a strong Party in
the World, and they conspire how to scoff the Industrious out of Countenance.
And it comes to pass that many a Good-natured Man is by shame run down, and
laughed into a compliance with those things, which yet he does inwardly detest.
But let such honest Candidates remember, that if this Trick could have
prevailed on all that went before them, never had any Man been Eminent, or
attained to Glory: That as it is stout both to bear, and even scorn at,
Reproach for Virtue's sake; so it is mean and cowardly, to humor those, who
either craftily tempt, or haughtily expect, that you make up part of their
Train in their unlawful ways. There want not, in the World, Companions and
Associates of a better stamp, tho not so numerous, or so easily met with in the
Streets: but they are worth the searching for. And as to the other sort of Men,
who are so Impudent, as to become mere Advocates for things that are Vile:
Remember, in short, the better advice of Pythagoras, -- Sum reverere Teipsum.


IV. LENITY, or a Calmness of Mind, is even in this Regard extremely valuable,
that it is a sort of Buckler against the Scoffs and Injuries of all Men. This
was noted by Marcus Antoninus, in that Famous Saying, Lib. 1.. 18.
That Lenity was an Invincible Thing, provided it were Genuin, and not
Counterfeit, as some grave Scorners make it. No Shield is so availing to the
Mind's Tranquillity, as is this Calmness, and true Lenity: Nor does any thing
require it, or support it more, than to reflect that few Men ever offend us
either in word or deed, but it arises from their Ignorance. Wherefore the
Stoics, and followers of Socrates, were wont of such men to say, Sic ille
opinatur; such is his Opinion. And omnis improbus ignorant, A wicked man knows
not what he does.

V. CONSTANCY we must have; for else we shall seem to act at hazard; and to
have neither Reason nor Virtue for our Guide. -- Semper, qui bonus est, bonus
est.
He who is truly Good, is always Good.


But he that is now Good, and then Bad, is not governed by steady Principles,
but the last Impression governs him.

VI. LASTLY, Diligence is a certain cheerful Servant or Solicitor, that
attends upon all the other Virtues, and must therefore be caressed. We may call
it even the Master and Moderator of all our External Actions; Inasmuch as it
knows how to excite our Bodies, and all the parts thereof, to such Activity, as
the duty and business of our Life requires.

VII. THE Residue of those Virtues, which refer to Fortitude, have so close an
Affinity with these, which we here explain, that it were needless to set them
off with any new Testimonial. For they are as the very Offspring of Diligence,
Constancy, or Magnanimity.

CHAP. VIII. Of Acquiring those Virtues, which refer to Temperance; And about
exciting the Divine Love.
I. THERE are Referable unto Temperance, Frugality, Humility, Austerity,
Modesty. Andronicus also adds Slender and uncompounded Diet, Umblameable
Gesture; and, A Contented Mind.

Of which that about Slender-Diet and Contentment, are as it were the Sorts and
Methods of Frugality: even as that of Gesture is of Modesty.

II. FRUGALITY has this Commendation, that it is the Parent, or at least the
Companion of Sobriety; As also a Cure against Diseases and Poverty. It Is
attended by Consideration and Prudence; lest that, spending profusely and
living beyond our Stocks, we be disabled not only from entertaining our
Friends in a frugal way, but driven to live wholly upon them: which of all
Conditions were the most miserable. So that, in Contemplation hereof, we may
affirm, that true Frugality has an Eye unto Generosity it self; and that there
is an Honest Greatness of the Soul, concerned in the true Conduct of this
Virtue.

III. THE same Reflection is fortified by what Andronicus says of those
bordering Virtues that refer to this. For he, who can content himself with
easy Food, and has no desires of Sauce or Cookery, is much out of Fortune's
reach, and does not easily fall within the Injuries of Men. This Virtue sets
him as in a Tower above others, and he is seldom captivated by any: For as it
is God alone, that needs nothing; so he that is contented with fewest things,
approaches nearest unto him.

IV. IN the next place, Austerity or Gravity, together with Modesty and the
Virtues allied thereto, are to be had in much Regard: For they do not only
adorn our Life and External Behavior, but really preserve the Mind both chaste
and unblemished. The first glimmerings of Vice, and that very shadow that
begins to play in the Imagination, is by those Virtues not only reprehended,
but immediately smothered and suppressed.

V. YET is there no sort of Virtue more to be pursued than Humility: Since
there are no two Plagues so destructive in Human Affairs, as are those of
Ambition and Avarice. Hence arise Treachery to Friends and Country, the
Massacre of Princes, Desertion of Truth and Religion, Frauds (not to be named)
both against God and Virtue; In short, All, that can spawn from Injustice, has
its Original from this Source. Wherefore it may well be doubted, Whether the
fear of torment on a Rack, or of Death it self, have so much power to drive Men
into Impiety, as that inordinate Thirst, which some discover in the pursuit of
Riches, Honor, and Domination? Consequently, whether even Fortitude it self be
so strong a Bulwark as Humility proves? By which we retreat, as into a Harbor,
where the noise and storms of the World fly over us; and where we are neither
tempted, nor distracted with the dazzling vanities thereof.

VI. THE word Humility sounds low, and may seem despicable among the Virtues:
Yet is it so conspicuous a branch of true and substantial Wisdom, that even
Lucretius (who did not much trouble himself in such matters) was not barely
acquainted with it, but has very Elegantly painted it out, in the Verses
following: De rerum natura, lib. 2.
Sed nil dulcius est, been quam munita tenere
Edita doctrina sapientum templa serena;
Despicere unde queas alios, passimque videre
Errare atque viam palantes quaerere vitae,
Certare ingenio, contendere nobilitate,
Noctes atque dies niti praestante labor
Ad summas emergere opes rerumque potiri.
O miseras hominum mentes! O pectora caeca!
Qualibus in tenebris vitae, quantisque periclis,
Degitur hoc aevi quodcunque est! etc.
Which are thus Translated by Mr. Creech: But above all, it is pleasantest, to
get
The Top of high Philosophy, and sit
On the Calm-peaceful-flourishing Head of it: below
Whence we may view Deep, wondrous Deep,
How poor-mistaken Mortals wandering go,
Seeking the Path to Happiness: Some aim
At Learning, Wit, Nobility, or Fame;
Others with Cares and Dangers vex each Hour,
To reach the top of Wealth, and Sovereign Power.
Blind, wretched Man! in what dark paths of strife
We walk this little Journey of our Life, etc.


But I am not ignorant, how Men of this Persuasion, and whose Minds are thus
elevated, are not only slighted, but even laughed at, by most others: They are
counted a sort of Virtuoso's, that live upon Air, and do not comprehend
Substantial things.

VII. YET, under the Correction of these Grandees, I would fain know, What is
it that the High and Mighty do more enjoy than others: who, having Fortune
enough, yet choose to employ but what alone is useful and of Necessity. Do the
Rich or Powerful eat or drink with better Relish, than even that Man that
labors the whole Day, and mixes Temperance with his Sweat? Is their Sleep more
sound, or Health of Mind or Body more robust? If this commonly be otherwise,
why may we not suspect, that such Potentates, and Men of Wealth, are also as
much troubled with vain Imaginations, as Men that are deroted to Virtue, and
the Sciences? If these must be accused for catching at the Air, and feeding on
refined things; What get those others, from their Heaps and Luxuries, but even
Fogs or Vapors that attend them? But whether a thick Air, or a thin, do most
conduce to Health, is a Question we may put off for the present. In the mean
time, take what Herace sings, in short, Si ventri been, si lateri est
pedibusque tuis, nil
Divitiae possunt Regales addere majus.
Is your body sound and clean
From the Colic, Gout and Spleen?
You may be happy tho you're poor,
Greatest Wealth can give no more.


Now if the Rich who abound, and the Poor who have no want, are hitherto equal
a what concerns the Functions of the Body; It Is plain, they only differ in
things of Fancy and Conceit. Horace's Epist. l. 1. Epist. 12.
Wherefore if the Dispute shall be, which of the two Fancies or Conceits are
best, Whether of those who gape after Wealth and Honors (which are
superfluous) or of those who adhere to Virtue and true Wisdom; let the
Bystanders determine and give the Prize.

VIII. LASTLY, That this Exhortation may not be defective in any part, let us,
above all things, L. 2. c. 9.. 14.
recommend the Divine and Intellectual Love, as being the Rule or Measure of
all other Virtues. Let us, as we hope to copy aright, and to keep proportion in
our Ways and Actions, never fail to have this Divine Original before our Eyes.

And as Humility and Temperance are the two Powers of our Soul, that most
contribute to procure and preserve this heavenly Perfection; So, on the other
side, it is bodily Pleasures, and an unbridled Passion for Wealth and Honor,
that extinguishes the Sense and Appetition thereof. For the Soul, in her own
native Constitution, would resemble a bright and Celestial Flame; but these
terrene and sordid Ardors do utterly contract and suffocate her Light. So that,
while she rushes forwards, in paths of Darkness and of worldly Temptations;
it is not possible but Offenses will come, and that she must have much to answer
for, both in reference to Honor and to Justice.

He therefore that will keep alive this Vestal Fire of the Divine Love, in the
Temple of his Heart; let him be Humble and Temperate.

IX. As for those, who with Sorrow bewail, that as yet they cannot feel any
thing of this Ethereal Heat; let them address to God with Prayers and Ardor,
for that he is the Giver of all things. However, as bare words and wishes have
but cold Effect, unless we testify by Life and Conversation, the dignity of
that Internal Life which we pant after and aspire to; So, the better to
accomplish our Wishes herein, let us observe the following Helps.

Let us be watchful, to fly from all the Traps and temptations of Pleasure.

Never to hurt any Man out of Hatred or Malice.

That we help, and administer to the Poor, as we are able.

To suppress our Anger, when Men either injure or revile us.

To despise no Man for being of low Fortune or Degree; but where Honesty and
Poverty meet, there even to show Respect.

To requite Evil with Good, and to turn off sharp and bitter Sayings with
others that are more Benign.

To take no Revenge of our Enemies, even then when we may securely do it.

That no Man's Friendship be so rated by us, at to forsake Truth and Virtue for
it; or to prefer it to the Public Good. That is, That we be not drawn to that
which may please our selves or the dearest Friends whatever, on any sensual
Account; but to consult our Conscience, Whether the matter in Question be
laudable and just, and then to pursue it with Faith and Perseverance.

X. THUS you have, what we judged necessary for acquiring of Virtue, as well in
particular as in the general. Wherefore let us close all with that short
Document of Pythagoras: who advises thus, That we fervently embrace and wed
these Things; That we frequently meditate upon them; That we diligently put
them into practice; For these will at length so establish our Feet in the paths
of Divine Virtue, as never to slide or stumble, and never to deviate, or be
ejected from them. And surely to attain this Perfection in Virtue, is to attain
the most perfect Happiness, that Man's Nature is capable of.

It now only remains, that we speak of Acquiring that Part, which consists
in External Good.

CHAP. IX. Of the Acquisition of External Good.
I. WE have already explained, how very small a proportion of External
Blessings, are absolutely needful to Man's Happiness. It now remains to
inquire, If Happiness can (in any sort) appear more perfect and exalted, by the
addition of all that we have styled External Blessings: Inasmuch as Moral
Virtues may not a little contribute to the Acquisition of them all.

II. WE shall first repeat the chief of them; and then show how some Virtues,
if not all, do help to compass either the very Blessings themselves, Lib. 1.
Cap. 1. Sect. 3.
or at least Things Equivalent to them, and such as perhaps we ought justly to
value beyond them.

III. AS for the first two great Branches herein; namely, the advantages of the
Soul, and of the Body, It Is manifest that Virtue bids fair even to their
particular Acquisition, or at least to their augmenting and conservation. This
appears first in reference to the Soul, as in the Subtilty and Dexterity of
Wit, Fidelity and Vastness of the Memory: Also in Science, Art, and Sapience.

For is there any thing in Nature can more contribute to these Blessings, than
that Philosophical Temperance, we have already described? When, on the other
side, it is as plain, that the sharpest Wit in the World, grows blunt, and is
made even stupid, by Luxury and Excess.

IV. LOOK upon Memory, and observe how strangely it is fortified by Sobriety,
and Temperance! How it is extended by Exercise, which is the fruit of Diligence!
But by Drunkenness, or by Lust, or Drowsiness, or Neglect, it withers, and
comes to nothing.

V. IT IS true, that neither Virtue, nor Morals do promote us in Mechanical
Arts, or indeed in Natural Philosophy, or the Mathematics. But consider, I
pray, how far these contribute toward Wit and Memory! How great the Power of
Diligence is toward every Attempt! And it is manifest that, for getting the
Mathematics, there must be a certain Gentleness and Patience of the Mind, to
adapt a Man to that Study.

VI. BUT the Highest Gift of all Moral Philosophy, must ever be allowed to be
that Prudence, which has been so accurately described already; and which has
certainly a mavelous influence, as well upon all Intellectual Habits, as for
the acquiring of True Wisdom. And her inseparable Consort is that Philosophical
Temperance, we have spoken of before.

Let no Man hope, without these two Virtues, ever to attain the knowledge of
Things Divine, which is the only Sapience or True Wisdom. For, as Plato has it
in his Phaedo, What Pretense can the Impure Man have, to the things that are
Pure. And whereas the Philosopher was there contending, as if no Man could
obtain pure and sincere Virtue, that had not first laid by his Body; What shall
we say of those, who think much to shake off, but the very Filth and Vices of
their Bodies? Men, that think a little Industry, and obstinate perseverance of
the Mind, will find out Truth, without any necessity of parting with their
darling Crimes? But whether this be not the voice of a Fool, or of a mad Man,
is not hard to determine.

VII. WHOEVER can be Faulty in this kind, appears to me, as a Bleer-Ey'd Man;
whom nothing will content, but to be gazing at things distant, and to see them
both clearly and distinctly. He refuses all Remedy for his Eyes, but resolves
by obstinate and peremptory staring to find out the Mark. Thus he goes on,
till, instead of seeing better, he every Day grows more blind: Whereas, if he
consulted the Rules of Prudence and of Temperance, he would know both the
Necessity, and the way, of first curing his Sight.

VIII. Is there any Man living has Self-sufficiency enough to Contemplate God,
the Soul's Immortality, and Divine Providence? Or to consider of these things
solidly and sedately, without some sort of Separation or Abstraction of the
Soul from the Body? That is to say, in Plato's Style, Without such a Meditation
of Death, as seems to divorce us from Corporeal Affections? Or, can any Man,
without some such Translation, be (as it were) rapt up into that State of
Divine Love, which can only fit him for Truth, and expound the Oracles and
Mysteries of things, which are otherwise Inscrutable? For by how much all
Sensual and Corporeal Impressions are extinguished in us, by the application of
that Prudence, and of that Philosophical Temperance we have mentioned; by so
much do we grow Citizens of that Intellectual World, and ascend into the
Regions of Heavenly Light.

Wherefore, Sapience, or the knowledge of Divine Mysteries, is the true
Offspring of that Virtue, which is entire, absolute, and consummated.

IX. As to those Blessings which refer to the Body, such as Strength, Agility,
Health, and Comeliness. It Is true that Strength is not so much the Gift of
Virtue as of Nature; tho it is as true, that the preservation of it is owing to
Virtue. Nay, it is not improbable, but that a Body, in declination of Health,
may, by hardships, exercise, and some Fatigue, become more vigorous and robust.

For Agility: This may not only be as the Pupil, but even the Child of Virtue:
Since Temperance and Diligence, do commonly wear down the bulk and excrescence
of the Body, and rather furnish a Stock of Spirits, than of Flesh. In which
case, Agility must succeed of course.

X. BUT the most high and conspicuous gift of Virtue, is that of Bodily Health;
which as it may be owing in part to every Virtue: so more especially to
Temperance and Piety. I think it was the Chaldean Oracle did thus pronounce; Ad
Pietatis Opus vegetum si extenderis Ignem
Mentis, and hos fluxos sanabis corporis Artus.
Would you the best Physician find
For a crazed Body, or afflicted Mind?
Try what the power of Piety can do,
It heals the Mind, and cures the Body too.
For a purified Mind goes a great way to the purging and purifying of the Body:
it darts upon it some Rays, which have great effect, and which corroborate the
powers thereof. Whereas, if the Soul be taken up by consuming Cares and
Cupidities; If Hatred and Malice make all things ghastly and sour within: How
can it be, but that the Body must also droop, the Health wither, and the Force
decline?

If therefore such Dilapidations can arise from the remote impressions of the
Mind; What will not those more immediate strokes accomplish; I mean, Eating
long, and Drinking deep and daily, and the insolence of an ungovernable Lust?

XI. THE Diseases of the Body are, for the most part, from the Vices of the
Mind; and even the Offspring of sinful Parents do often inherit their
Infirmities, as well as their Acres. But there is no Remedy so powerful, for
such an Encumbrance, as a severe application to Virtue and Piety. For as
Justice had a Being before all the Vices of the Mind; so was Health more
ancient than all the Sicknesses of the Body. Thus is one brought in, by Maximus
Tyrius, to pray, O Health, the most Ancient of all the other Goddesses; What
would I give to enjoy thee, but the little remainder of my days! Certainly, no
Man can better pretend to such a Wish, than he who is sincerely Virtuous and
Devout.

XII. AND as bodily Health is thus gotten and sustained by Virtue; so does
Virtue confer Comeliness and Decorum to all the Parts. For Beauty is but as the
Fruit, or flower of Health, nay, it is very Health it self; just as Virtue is
the very health and beauty of the Soul. For where this presides, the inward
motion of the Spirits throws joy into the Countenance; and such sparkling
through the Eyes, that the Beholders are drawn into love and admiration by it:
Even the whole Body, when actuated by a beautiful Soul, is pleasing in all its
Gestures. Lib. 10. Sect. 15.
Antoninus said, That a good Man could not conceal himself, if he did but open
his Eyes; For his Benignity and Probity broke out, and revealed him to all
Beholders.

XIII. ON the contrary, we may easily observe the Crisis when a Man is falling
from his native Innocence or acquired Virtue, and is warping toward. Vice and
Immorality; He carries a sort of Traitor in his Countenance, who reveals all he
is about. For tho the shape and color of his Face may look the same to vulgar
Eyes, yet a sharper sight will find a fading and declination in all the Finer
Parts: that which once was fresh and florid, is now withering; that which
sparkled, is hardly bright: the Air it self of the countenance, made up of
quick and congruous motions resulting from every part, and as it were darting
Life, is now stupid and irregular. Alas, those inward Spirits, that supported
all, are sick, and their activity is but counterfeit! So that, as now the whole
contrivance of the Mien and Gesture is grown Artificial, it will in a short
time, become also Impudent. But this is not the Face of Virtue, or the Image of
that Moral Beauty, we have hitherto set forth.

XIV. FOR we also affirm, that those, who are contending for Virtue, and who
seriously aspire to the purified state of the Mind; One may even in their Eyes
and Aspects behold a Light and Comeliness growing on, as a Prelibation of what
they seek. Nay, where the Face is pale, and wasted by (perhaps) too fervent a
pursuit of Virtue and true Wisdom; Yet, even in such paleness and Consumption,
the Beholders see a certain Complacency and good Nature which is venerated by
them. Wherefore, we conclude, no Man wants bodily Decoration, where that of the
Soul is not first wanting: for it is the Soul that governs those Inward Spirits,
on whose supply and regularity, all that is exterior depends.

XV. THUS far we have shown, how much Virtue contributes to the getting of such
benefits, as make either for the Mind, or for the Body. It now remains, to find
what help she gives in acquiring the good things that relate to Man, as he is
composed of both: I mean, those Accommodations of Liberty, Riches, Nobility,
Friendship, and such like. Now these being Things of that sort, which are
commonly called the Gifts of Fortune; we are not to expect, that they hold so
close and necessary a Conjunction with Virtue, as what we have already
mentioned. However that even these things also are by Virtue most easily
acquirable, is no hard task to demonstrate.

XVI. FIRST, As to Liberty, it is plain how every Nation ows to their Virtue and
Fortitude, that they are not overrun, but preserved from the slavery of
Invaders. And, even in the state of Prisoners and Captives by War, how many
Instances have we in the Roman Comedies, that, for the Fidelity, Diligence, or
Prudence, found in such Captives, their Lords have afterward made them Free.
How much our Liberty is preserved, by the observation of Laws and Justice, need
no otherwise be expounded, than to observe, how Traitors to their King and
Country, Thieves and Murderers, are put in Chains, Condemned, and dispatched.

XVII. BUT should a worthy Man, and for Virtue's sake, be thrown into a Dungeon
(which yet rarely happens) he must not be thought as totally deprived of
Liberty. It Is true, if there were Power enough, to sequester him from God and
Virtue, this were sufficient to make any Man tremble, and to make every Jail
look horrid. But of this sort none are capable but men of Impiety, and the
Profligate. How vainly therefore do the Oppressors menace the Virtuous, with a
solitary, or even a nasty Jail? Can any Man, that is comforted and assisted by
the Divine Presence, think of his Ill Accommodation? Or he that has the Feast
of a good Conscience, and the Ministration of all the Virtues attending him,
think himself much alone?

XVIII. AFTER all, seeing Liberty is nothing but the power of Doing as you
please: It Is plain, a good Man can be Free, whether in Prison, or in Chains.
For we affirm, that he evermore acts according to his own Will and Pleasure,
who has resigned both to the Divine Providence, and never wishes any other
thing may happen to him, but even that which happens. This conformity of the
Mind, is highly expressed by the Philosopher Antoninus, O thou vast and
Beautiful Universe, Lib. 4. Cap. 23.
created and supported by God, let every thing be delightful to me, that is
pleasing and congruous to thy self.

XIX. As to the bearing of Honor: Who can imagine any one more qualified for
Public Trust, than the Honest Man? Are there not a whole train of Virtues,
that both adorn and support him? As, namely, Justice, Magnanimity, Faith,
Constancy, Munificence, Prudence, Fortitude, Vigilance: And the like.
And is there any part of the World, where Men are chosen to Public Office,
but under these Characters? At least under the pretense and Notion of such: So
as all the Salalaries, the Praises, and the Prostrations, that are paid them,
come in on this Account. Now where (in truth) the Men are even quite otherwise:
yet you may reckon them as the Statues and Images of good Men, and as adorned
with their Names and Inscriptions. And while Worship and Veneration is thus
paid them, we may suppose, that those good Men, whom they personate, receive
it, as it happens in the case of absent and invisible Gods. So that no Man has
more a Title to Honors, than the Man of Probity: For either he, or his
Representative, is universally Honored by all Men.

XX. As to the gathering of Riches, you will say that a Man of Probity is out
of his way. For that Fraud, Rapine, and Treachery, Adulation, or Breach of
Trust, and the like, do chiefly contribute to the Heaping of Wealth, and are
the most compendious ways of procuring it. But we are of Opinion, it is a very
foolish Bargain, to pay for any thing ten times more than it is worth: And we
cannot but think, this is the Case, when a Man shall barter away his Virtue
(even the smallest grains thereof) either for Wealth, or for High Place. There
are, as we think, certain Gifts conferred by Virtue, which (doubtless) have
power enough, to bring in Honest Plenty, and sufficient Wealth: I mean,
Diligence, Fidelity, Frugality, Temperance, and the like. It was Cicero's
Exclamation, O wretched Man, that knows not what an Inheritance it is to be
Frugal!

XXI. As for the Attainment of Nobility: Whoever called in doubt, that there
was any other Source thereof than Virtue? Or that Nobility, and Virtue, were
not evermore the same? But of this, we have spoken more largely before.

XXII. IN the last Place, as to all Friendships; It Is visible, how much they
depend on Virtue: Since no Genuine Love, or sincere Friendship, can be Cemented
without it. The rest is all Spurious; Whether it be a Combination, in order to
fordid Gain, or Companions of Joy, that amuse themselves with light and
transitory things.

It Is Virtue alone that attracts and retains true Friendship: For (as Laelius
speaks Elegantly in Tully) She, when she Exalts her self, when she exposes her
Light, when she beholds and approves the same quality in others, she moves
presently toward it; and, by a sort of Coalition, joins to her self that which
was before in another: And that this is the true Generation of Love and
Friendship. He farther adds, That Friendship is nothing else, but to Love
without Interest or Design. De Natura Deorum, l. 1.
And (in his Book de Natura Deorum) he does a little adorn this Sense, by these
further words: If we turn our Friendship to our own Profit, and not to his,
whom we pretend to love; this will not be Friendship, but merely Traffic on
our own Accounts.

Hence it is plain, that there is not, in this Mortal State, a greater Bulwark
than Virtue: for she carries a Charm with her; drawing Men on to Love and good
Will: And then it is impossible, but all their Assistance, and good Offices,
must attend us.

XXIII. YET here let us observe what comes to pass about Truth: Which, tho it
certainly makes one in Virtue's Quire; yet it is reputed a sort of Foe to
Friendship, and as producing rather Hatred and Ill Will. But to me it has ever
been a sort of Riddle in Human Affairs, and deserving laughter; to see how the
generality of Men hate the voice of that very Judge, unto whom however they
perpetually seem willing to appeal.

Certainly no firm and durable Friendship, can subsist any more without Truth,
than without Faith and Simplicity, which are the Pillars of all true
Friendship. Cicero says, Neither the Double-minded, nor the Changeable
Intriguer must be relied on for Fidelity. And let us add to these, the Men of
Darkness and great Reserve. He that does even molest his Friend with Truth, has
less to answer for; than a flattering Parasite, who is obsequious to every
Vice, and can indulge, or abet his Friend to his utter destruction.

To Men of sincere Virtue, this Truth never comes amiss: for every prudent
Admonition, that is not attended with Scoffs or Contumely, is a Sermon they
hearken to with Wonder and Delight. For, as they grow better by it; so they
have testimony of what is very Rare, namely, perfect Virtue, and perfect
Friendship, together.

XXIV. IT were easy for me, I confess, to be more copious, and dwell longer
upon such Particulars: But these Hints will be enough to inculcate, How much
Virtue imports to the Acquisition of all External Goods: And that, against the
Changes and Chances of this Human Life, there is no other true Sanctuary but
Virtue.

CHAP. X. Of that Good, which is External, Supreme, and Eternal; according to
the Mind of the Philosophers.
I. THERE now only remains one External Good, which also is Eternal. To Heaven
it is that we all Aspire, and to the Society of Blessed Spirits: And there is
no other Path, or Stratagem, can lead hereto, but Virtue. This is set forth in
that of the Oracle, touching the Ghost of Plotinus, and its passing to the
Happy State. -- Ad Coetum jam venis almum
Heroum blandis spirantem leniter auris;
Heic ubi amicitia est, ubi molli front cupido
Laetitia replens, liquida pariterque repletus
Semper ab Ambrosiis foecundo e numine rivis.
Unde serena quies castorum and dulcis amorum
Illecebra, ac placidi suavissima flamina venti.
Which may be Englished thus: And now you're come to the Happy Quire
Of Heroes where, their blessed Souls retire
Where softest Winds, do as soft Joys inspire:
Here dwells chaste Friendship, with so pure a flame,
That Love knows no satiety, or shame,
But gives and takes new Joys, and yet is still the same,
The Ambrosian Fountains with fresh Pleasures spring,
And gentle Zephyrus does new Odours bring.
These gifts for Inoffensive Ease are lent,
And both conspire to make Love Innocent.


II. THAT holy Vow and Profession, which was made by Cato (in Tully's Book de
Senectute) has resemblance with this very Description. Cicero de Senectute.
For he says, I repent me not of having Lived, because I have lived so, as
never to have thought I was born in vain; and I depart this Life, not as from
my House, but as from an Inn. For Nature has not here afforded us an
Habitation, but barely a resting Place. O glorious Day, when I shall hasten to
the great Assembly of blessed Souls, and be delivered from this Crowd, and from
that Dungeon, wherein I live!

III. De Consolatione.
THIS Opinion Cicero (in his Treatise de Consolatione) repeats as his own,
saying, I am none of those, who believe the Soul can die with the Body; and
that so great a Light, kindled by Divine Nature in the Mind, can be
extinguished: but rather, that after some certain space of time, it will return
to Immortality. Now this by him is so expressed, as if our present life were a
sort of a death to the Soul. And the same (in his Somnio Scipionis) is
elegantly affirmed by Africanus, De somnio Scipionis.
when Cornelius asked him, If his dead Friends should live? Yes (says he) they
truly live, who are extricated from the Chains of the Body, as from a Prison:
For your Life, as you so call it, is Death. Many are the passages of this
Force, up and down, in Cicero: Not to speak of what might be found in Plotinus
and Plato.

IV. NOW inasmuch as the hope of Immortality, was so plain and conspicuous of
old, even to mere Pagans: How could we (possibly) exclude it from Moral
Philosophy? For by this it appears, that whatever external vexations innocent
Virtue shall, in this Life, suffer (whether by hidden Fate, or by the Violence,
Envy, or Improbity of wicked Men) there will be a just and most infallible
compensation for it. Wherefore the Good and the Magnanimous, being exalted by
this Hope, look on the World with contempt: They trample upon inferior things;
and cannot regard any human Accidents as culpable, since nothing has regard to
them, but what is of Virtue and Immortality. It Is to this very Sense, that
Cicero does elsewhere magnify the power of Virtue.

V. SOCRATES is memorable for this same Confidence and Hope; since in the
strength thereof, he was enabled to undervalue both his Enemies and his Death.
He, whom the Oracle of Apollo pronounced the wisest Man, would memorably in
this deserve that Character. For, while he doubted of all other things, as to
the Soul's Immortality he was ever fixed. So Laelius testifies of him (in
Tully) That he was now of one Sentiment, and then of another, in most other
things; Yet as to the Point of Immortality, he always affirmed, That the Minds
of Men were Divine; and that, as soon as they departed the Body, there was a
most expeditious return of every just and virtuous Soul into Heaven.

VI. ON this Contemplation, let every Man therefore resolve, that although Virtue
may (in some Cases) appear to be against our Interest in reference to worldly
things; yet are we to stand by it with an unshaken Mind: especially since,
after this span of Life is past, there will redound a vast reward and
gratification to the Just. Nay, let us rather count, that what we suffer in
Externals (as, suppose in Fortune or in Health) is rather to our Advantage:
Since, if we make a wise use of our misfortunes, and understand them for kind
Admonitions (as indeed they are) by how much we are disappointed, or despoiled,
in outward Things; by so much, and more also, will the Mind be sanctified and
enriched.

It Is worth observing, that all Good, which is External, must fade and corrupt
even as the Body it self: while yet the Internal Things are as lasting as the
Soul. So that to think, what we suffer in Body or Goods, to be a detriment or
Curse, when we are likely to gain by it a more ample and perpetual Recompense;
is a strange Error in Accounts.

VII. NAY farther yet. If a Man had bought a thing at ten times less than the
Value; Would it not sound odd, to hear him complain, that the bargain had
undone him? Even so is it with the loss of outward Things: Men murmr at
Divine Providence, while yet they acquire such improvement to the Soul thereby,
as does not only govern the Happiness of this Life, but guide us to a better,
for all Eternity to come. Wherefore let no Man be too froward, when the crosses
and vexations of this World come thick upon him; they are the Gifts and
Blessings of a wise God, who best knows what Physic we need for the Health and
Conduct of our Souls.

By these Trials it is, that we can only find out the strength and authority of
Virtue: These gratings rub off the rust and tarnish of Vice: they engender
Prudence, Fortitude, Sincerity, and all other Virtues: at least they detect our
hypocritical and ridiculous Pretenses unto them. So that we will conclude,
although these Visitations may seem rude and bitter to the taste, yet in operation
they are wholesome, and produce Salutiferous effects.

VIII. BUT now as to such External Evils, which can no otherwise afflict the
Mind, than by Imagination: Enchiridion, c. 10.
Or else, as Epictetus has it, That things themselves did not disquiet Men, but
their own false Opinions of things. I must needs aver, that Men thus afflicted
merely by their Fancies, so as to make things intolerable, are but poor
Proficients in Virtue: It deserves not the name of Virtue, L. 2. c. 10.. 18. L.
3. c. 10.. 16.
which is not able of it self, to lay flat all imaginary Passions. It Is true,
it may reasonably be thought that there are some Sufferings above the force of
Human Nature; such as bodily Pains, which come by Sickness, that neither can be
smothered, nor dissembled; And that some Tortures are so exquisite, as to be
beyond any constancy of the Mind to support.

However, Cicero speaks Excellently hereof (as indeed of every thing else) He
says, That Pain is a sharp Adversary to Virtue; Tusculan. Quaest. l. 5.
It menaces with burning Torches; It insults over Fortitude and Magnanimity;
and ventures to subdue even Patience it self. But thus it would not so
frequently happen, if the fault were not our own: For Nature her self, if
rightly tutored and habituated, would prove a sort of invincible Thing. But we
alas (the more is our shame) have infected our Minds with Sloth, with Shadows,
and Intemperance: Nay, we have so scribled over our Souls with Notions, and odd
Opinions, that no room is left, for inserting one sound, or substantial Truth.

IX. HOWEVER we may observe, that it is not above the compass of Human Nature,
to bear excessive Pains, when they are willingly undertaken. We have strange
Examples what has been suffered for Glory, or by Custom or Superstition: Of
which the very true Relations are almost incredible. As

X. Tusculan. Quaest. l. 2.
THAT of the Spartan Boys (which Tully mentions in his Tusculane) who being
brought to the Altar, could bear beating, not only, till the blood gushed from
their Bowels, but till they actually died: And all this without Crying, or
without a Groan.

That of the Indian Wives, who (being many to every Husband) have contended,
even to the tearing off Hair, which of them should go into the Fire alive, and
burn with the dead Man.

That of the Egyptians, Tusculan. Quaest. l. 5.
who would rather be executed themselves, than kill a Stork, an Asp, a Dog, or
a Cat.

There are also, among the Turks and Americans, amazing Instances of
spontaneous Suffering; Some on superstitious Accounts, and others for
Ostentation. And almost all Histories do swarm with Examples of this kind.

XI. NOW, I say, if Nature, thus Rude, thus Illiterate, thus Barbarous and
unprovided, thus insensible of true Virtue or of Excellent Things, could in
patience and firmness of the Mind, so highly excel; What should not true Virtue
do? That Divine Thing, I mean, which holds Conjunction with God above; that is
fortified with the splendid expectation of a blessed Immortality. Can, I say,
this Champion ever give ground? Shall Virtue crouch, where even the barbarous
have scorned to stoop? God forbid! And of Virtue, that is perfect and sincere,
let it never be said! It Is true, there is a Nice Generation of pretenders to
Virtue; such as keep up a general Acquaintance, and fain would be valued on the
score of some Familiarity with her: But if a Storm arise, or any Battles are to
be fought on her account, they are presently Men of another Climate, and their
truest Religion is about Riches, Honor, and sensual Delights.

XII. NOW since we could prove by infinite Examples (if brevity were not in our
Care) that it is not beyond the reach of a considerate Man, to overcome the
greatest difficulties: Let us bend our Souls to the Acquiring this true and
perfect Patience. This is the Virtue, that subdues, and will enable us even to
despise, as well the pleasures of the Body, as all the sorrows that can attend
it. And let no Man fancy to himself, or pretend to others, that he is possessed
of any Virtue at all, till he has attained that Patience, which we here set
forth. For as bare Virtue is a high Reward, yet Happy Immortality is one of the
certain Fruits thereof; So let us retain it immoveably, and let us never
imagine that we have it at all, unless we can hold it fast.

XIII. HERE some may contemptuously ask, Whether or no this our Philosophy be
the shortest way to be Happy? And whether these Rules are the method to enrich
a Man's Family, or to make him a Magistrate? And whether this celebrated Virtue
and good Conscience, do not rather conduct a Man to the Faggot, or to the
Gallows; even as Examples, without Number, do testify, in all Ages, and in
every Climate?

To this we must take leave to Demur, by laying open the true Nature of Virtue.
Which is not a thing calculated for peculiar Places and particular Seasons; but
has a general reference to all Times, and to every Place, to procure us
Felicity in both. It does also, on the other hand, enable us either to resist
Evils; Or, if they prevail, to bear them with Equality, and resignation.

How far Virtue contributes to the getting of Wealth, Honors, and the like, L.
1. c. 1. Srct. 3. L. 3. c. 9. Sect. 2.
has been already shown. I will only add that Honest Poverty is preferable to
ill-gotten Riches: And such (I take it) are manifestly ill-gotten and ill-kept,
wher-ever Virtue has suffered for it, either in the whole, or in its smaller
part. Wherefore let Virtue be your Children's Inheritance: if they have this,
they will never stand in need of superfluous Wealth; and if they have it not,
you ought not to break your Heart to make them Rich.

XIV. As to the Objection, For fear of Burning or the Gallows: take this for
granted, that if you want the Armor of Patience against all Tribulations and
Temptations whatever that may happen, you then carry in your Bosom that Serpent
Cowardice, which will urge you to betray your Prince, your Country, your
Friends, your Religion, and even all together, if it fairly comes in your way.
Whereas if Patience, do but fortify and corroborate your Mind; it will
embolden you to stand in defiance against those mighty Bugbears. You may, in
scorn of them, declare, that the Soul of Man is not to be scorched by Fire, nor
choked by Water; nor can the Butchers chop it into parcels: That Virtue
cannot, even by Violence, be torn from it, or God himself be separated from
Virtue and the Soul.

XV. BESIDES, this also may be reflected on, that our Life is but as a Thing
deposited with us by God. Now if God shall call for his own Pledge, How can we,
with Sense or Honesty, refuse so just and potent a Benefactor, or be unwilling
to restore back what he lent? But this Pledge is always called for, as often as
any Conditions for Life are made us, which cannot consist with that Observance,
which we owe to God and to Virtue.

XVI. LASTLY, Let us take Comfort in this, That God is not usually wanting to
his Children, in their Extremities; that, if the Mind shall retain its
Integrity and persevere to the last, it is scarce in the power of Torment to
interrupt our Happiness. L. 2. c. 10.. 18. L. 3. c. 10.. 8. L. 2. c. 10. 19. L.
3. c. 3.. 10.
For the Soul is then as it were absorp'd with God, and in full prospect of a
blessed Immortality. She knows the Flames and Scourges of this World cannot
disfigure her; For when their worst is done, it is She finally shall Conquer;
That she, as a long Exile, is now solemnly recalled to her Native Country: that
She is remounting to the Region of blessed Souls; and even sees them, as gazing
upon her with joy, and as shouting with Acclamations at her approach.

XVII. O the Joys! O the Triumphs! O what Embraces from that Illustrious
Assembly! What Words, and Welcome, and Elogies, will they bestow, for what she
so direfully suffered, and so bravely overcame, in the defense of Virtue and of
Truth! How will the Mansions above Echo and Rebound, with Hallelujah's of that
Heavenly Quire! Or how rather, will this victorious Soul, enter with Triumph
into those Mansions, where Felicity is never to end! It Is in this Happy
Station, where Love and Friendship are always Young, still Unblemished, and
evermore Sincere. Here Holy Angels, and all those Resplendent Beings, which are
above, do not only behold the Beauties of each other, but Communicate, and
even Discourse, by some unspeakable Way: But this is sure, that Truth shines
out in its utmost Purity, and Virtue is bright and manifest in all they say.
Besides, here are no Vicissitudes, all is Peace, all Security, and all things
are Stationary and fixed. In short, here is a Consummation of the Soul's
blessed Estate; And it were impossible to find it elsewhere.

XVIII. AND how could this otherwise be, since the Mind of Man is as the Image
of God, drawn and descending from him. And being drawn from God; it covets
Heaven, as desirous to return from whence it came. All Inclinations toward the
Earth savor of the Body; But as to the Soul, her Habitation is above, and her
true Country is Heaven. For as Cicero Discourses wisely of this Matter, There
can no Origination of the Soul be found upon Earth. De Consolatione.


XIX. WHEREFORE let us admire that Quickening Life; which, when freed from our
Earthly Tabernable, will touch and penetrate our Souls with Joy! O that happy
State of victorious Virtue, attended and surrounded with Triumphs and Content!
And ever Happy be that Death and Torment, which shall conduct the firm and
unshaken Soul, to Pleasures that are Ineffable.

XX. HERE, we confess, are great things spoken; and so perhaps through this
whole Work: Yet we suppose they are not greater, than what belongs to the true
and genuine Description of Moral Philosophy. They are not beyond the Compass
and Meaning of Right Reason; nor exceed the Professions and Memorials of the
most Excellent of the Heathens.

XXI. HOWEVER, That Religion may not be defrauded of her due Honor, I do here
also profess, testify, and declare, that I think nothing is found in the
Writings of the Philosophers, or commemorated as the Deeds and Sayings of
Renowned Heathens; But all their Flights and Raptures (whether about God, or
the Soul, or Virtue) are owing, either to the very Doctrine, or to the Ancient
Cabala or Tradition of the most Primitive Church of God, Or else to the Eternal
Son, that Logos, or WORD of God; Who has, in all Ages past, endowed every Man
with some Sense of Honesty; Tho some Men have always been more Burning, and
more Shining Lights, than the rest.

For this WORD is that True Light, which Enlightneth all Men that come into
this World: even as the Scripture has it. Now that Pythagoras drew his Knowledge
from the Hebrew Fountains, is what all Writers, Sacred and Profane, do
testify and aver. That Plato took from him the principal part of that
Knowledge, touching God, the Soul's Immortality, and the Conduct of Life and
Good Manners, has been doubted by no Man. And that it went from him, into the
Schools of Aristotle, and so derived and diffused, almost into the whole World,
is in like manner attested by all.

XXII. WHEREFORE, as the Virtue, and Wisdom, and Excellency, of so many of the
Old Heathens, does not a little Illustrate the Power and Benignity of the
Divine Providence, and the extent of its Gifts: So can these Men, in no degree,
either obscure, or derogate from, the Glory of the Church. For they, as we
said, did but borrow their precious Things, either from the Church of God, or
from the Divine Logos or WORD. That Word which the old Church (I mean that of
the Jews) did worship when it shined from the Tabernacle: and which the New
Church (I mean that of the Christians) still adores in the Human Nature of the
Messiah, as in the glorious Temple of its Residence. And may it be Worshipped
and Adored for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

